BOSTON MEDICAL LIBRARY 

PURCHASED FROM THE INCOME OF THE 

OLIVER F. DADSWORTH FUND 

+ See Sot en Fee he A 
Bes AMPA ROSCA SF ABVUG i 

4 —_ <p | 
D Ar eer ay oe 
a oe ee. emma ta dace ae rer) ee he SH 1 
+ a 5 ie p - E eet 
Anaan e a a iii 

pep ~~ 4 =o perrie Š $ 

G 

“ 
Prd 4 ; ý 
es E Ra i] 
go N 
md - ; R 
n r Y 
4 
` 
y- $ 
Tá 
i 
D 
í 
tae Sed Laat ay 
a 
‘ t 
Š < JE 
TS 
4 ~E 
¥ . f 
z j = & °. 
es 
2 
n ? A ad 
à ri n = 
ie f r 
* z> E NS 
£ Te nE 
ine Fat 
Dip i EZ 
f A ae 
HNE ae : Ly 
aay A 
p =. pa 
> s ; r 

THE OPUS MAJUS OF 
ROGER BACON 

BACON’S STUDY AT OXFORD 

From a Gough Print 

THE 

OPUS MAJUS 

ROGER BACON 

eA Translation by 
ROBERT BELLE BURKE 

PROFESSOR OF LATIN AND DEAN OF THE COLLEGE 
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 

Vorume II 

PHILADELPHIA 

UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA PRESS g 
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

MCMXXVIII 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

VOLUME II 

BACON’s STUDY AT OXFORD . 

From Gough Prints, Volume 27. Courtesy of the 
Bodleian Library 

SUNOS ES eee yt og Poet teks 
The Seurre Statue at Versailles 

ROGER BACON Oe Ft ea ae T 
A Miniature from MS. Bodl. 211. Courtesy of the 
Bodleian Library 

DOCTORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. . 

From a Miniature in Chants Royaux, Bibliothéque 
Nationale, Paris 

Frontispiece 

facing page 494 

THE OPUS MAJUS OF 
ROGER BACON 

À 
CONCERNING OPTICS, IN THREE PARTS 

The first part treats of matters common to the other two; the second 
deals mainly with direct vision; the third with reflected and 
refracted vision. In Part One there are twelve distinctions. 

FIRST DISTINCTION 

This distinction deals with the properties of this science, with 
the parts of the mind and brain and with the 
organ of vision, in five chapters. 

CHAPTER [| 

Concerning the properties of this science. 

| | AVING explained the fundamental principles of wis- 

dom, both sacred and human, which are found in the 

tongues from which the sciences of the Latins have 
been translated, and likewise in mathematics, I-now wish to 
discuss some principles which belong to optics. If the con- 
sideration just mentioned is noble and pleasing, the one in hand 
is far nobler and more pleasing, since we take especial delight 
in vision, and light and color have an especial beauty beyond 
the other things that are brought to our senses, and not only 
does beauty shine forth, but advantage and a greater necessity 
appear. For Aristotle says in the first book of the Metaphysics 
that vision alone reveals the differences of things; since by 
means of it we search out experimental knowledge of all things 
that are in the heavens and in the earth. For those things that 
are in the heavenly bodies are studied by visual instruments, as 
Ptolemy and the other astronomers teach. So also are those 
things that are generated in the air, like comets, rainbows, and 
the like. For their altitude above the horizon, their size, form, 
number, and all things that are in them, are verified by the 
methods of viewing them with instruments. Our experience of 
things here in the earth we owe to vision, because a blind man 
can have no experience worthy of the name concerning this 

[419] 

Opus Majus 

world. Hearing causes us to believe because we believe our 
teachers, but we cannot try out what we learn except through 
vision. If, moreover, we should adduce taste and touch and 
smell, we assume a knowledge belonging to beasts. For brutes 
are busied with the things pertaining to taste and touch, and 
exercise their sense of smell because of taste and touch, but the 
things are of little value, few in number, and common to us 
and to brutes concerning which these senses give verification, 
and therefore they do not rise to the rank of human wisdom. 
But because of necessity, utility, and difficulty, sciences are 
formed, since art has to do with the difficult and with the good, 
as Aristotle says in the second book of the Ethics. For if what 
is sought is easy, there is no need for the formation of a science. 
Likewise although a matter be difficult yet not useful, no sci- 
ence is developed concerning it, because the labor would be 
foolish and vain. Also unless a subject were very useful and 
possessed many excellent truths, it does not require the forma- 
tion of a separate science, but it suffices that this subject be 
treated in some particular book or chapter along with other 
matters in general science. But concerning vision alone is a 
separate science formed among philosophers, namely, optics, 
and not concerning any other sense. Wherefore there must be 
a special utility in our knowledge through vision which is not 
found in the other senses. What I have now touched upon in 
general, I wish to show in particular by disclosing the basic 
principles of this very beautiful science. It is possible that some 
other science may be more useful, but no other science has so 
much sweetness and beauty of utility. Therefore it is the flower 
of the whole of philosophy and through it, and not without it, 
can the other sciences be known. We must note, moreover, that 
Aristotle first treated this science, of which he says in the sec- 
ond book of the Physics that the subject is placed under another 
head. He also mentions it in his book on Sense and the Sensible, 
and has proved Democritus in error, because he did not name 
refractions and reflections of vision with reference to the optic 
and concave visual nerves. This book has been translated into 
Latin. After him Alhazen treats the subject more fully in a 
book which is extant. Alkindi also has arranged some data 
more fully, likewise authors of books on vision and mirrors. 

[ 420 ] 

Optical Science 

CHAPTER II 

Concerning the internal faculties of the sensitive soul, which 
are imagination and the common sense (sensus communis). 

SINCE the optic, that is, the concave nerves causing vision have 
their origin in the brain, and writers on optics ascribe to a 
distinct function through the medium of vision the formation 
of judgments concerning twenty species of visible things, 
which will be considered later, and since it is not known 
whether that distinct function is among the functions of the 
soul, the organs of which are distinct in the brain, and since 
many other things to be treated of later suppose a definition of 
the functions of the sensitive soul, therefore we must begin 
with the parts of the brain and the functions of the soul, in 
order that we may discover those things that are necessary 
for vision. Writers on optics give us a means to this end by 
showing how the visual nerves descend from the membranes 
of the brain and from the lining of the cranium, but no one 
explains all things necessary in this matter. I say, then, as all 
writers on the subjects of nature, all physicians and authorities 
on optics agree, that the brain is enfolded by a double mem- 
brane, one of which is called the pia mater, which enfolds the 
brain by direct contact; and the other, the dura mater, which . 
adheres to the concave side of the bone of the head called the 
cranium. For this latter membrane is harder, so that it may 
resist the bone, and the other is softer and tenderer owing to the 
` softness of the brain, the substance of which is like marrow and 
ointment, with phlegm as the chief constituent, and with three 
distinctions, which are called chambers, cells, parts, and divi- 
sions. In the first cell there are two faculties: the one in the 
anterior part is the common sense, as Avicenna states in the 
first book on the Soul, which is like a fountain with respect to 
_ the particular senses, and like the center with respect to the 
lines extending from that same point to the circumference, ac- 
cording to Aristotle in the second book on the Soul. This com- 
mon sense judges concerning each particular sensation. For 
the judgment is not completed in regard to what is seen before 
the form comes to the common sense, and the same is true in 
regard to what is heard and to the other senses, as is clear from 

[ 421 ] 

Opus Majus 

the end of the work on Sense and the Sensible, and in the 
second book on the Soul. This common sense forms a judgment 
concerning difference of impressions on the senses, as, for ex- 
ample, that in milk whiteness is different from sweetness, a dis- 
tinction which sight cannot make, nor taste, because they do 
not distinguish things in other categories, as Aristotle main- 
tains in the second book on the Soul. It judges concerning the 
operations of the particular senses, for vision does not perceive 
that it sees, nor hearing that it hears, but another faculty does, 
namely, the common sense, as Aristotle maintains in the sec- 
ond book on Sleep and Waking. But the final action of this 
faculty is to receive the forms coming from the particular 
senses and to complete a judgment concerning them. But it 
does not retain these impressions, owing to the excessive slip- 
periness of its own organ, according to the statement of Avi- 
cenna in the first book on the Soul. Therefore there must be 
another faculty of the soul in the back part of the first cell, 
the function of which is to retain the forms coming from the 
particular senses, owing to its tempered moistness and dryness, 
which is called imagination and is the coffer and repository 
of the common sense. Avicenna cites as an example a seal, the 
image of which water readily receives, but does not retain 
owing to its superabundant moistness; wax, however, retains 
the image very well, owing to its tempered moistness with © 
dryness. Wherefore he says that it is one thing to receive and 
another to retain, as is clear from these examples. Such is the 
case in the organ of the common sense and of imagination. The 
whole faculty, however, composed of these two, namely, that 
which occupies the whole first cell, is called phantasia or the 
virtus phantastica. For according to the second book on the 
Soul and that on Sleep and Waking and the book on Sense and 
the Sensible, it is evident that phantasia and the common sense 
are the same according to subject but differ according to being, 
as Aristotle says, and that phantasia and imagination are the 
same according to subject but differ according to being. Where- 
fore phantasia includes both faculties and does not differ from 
them except as the whole from the part. Therefore since the 
common sense receives the form, and imagination retains it, a 
complete judgment follows regarding the thing, a ieee 
formed by phantasia. 

[ 422 ] 

Optical Science 

CHAPTER III 

Concerning the attributes that are apprehended by special senses, by 
the common sense and by imagination. 

WE must note that imagination and the common sense and any 
particular sense form judgments of themselves only concerning 
twenty-nine properties; as sight concerning light and color; 
touch concerning heat and cold, moistness and dryness; smell 
concerning odors; taste concerning savor. These are the nine 
special properties that belong to their own senses, as I have 
named them, of which no other particular sense can form a 
judgment. There are, moreover, twenty other properties, 
namely, distance, position, figure, magnitude, continuity, dis- 
creetness or separation, number, motion, rest, roughness, 
smoothness, transparency, thickness, shadow, darkness, beauty, 
ugliness, also similarity and difference in all these things and 
in all things composed of them. Besides these qualities there 
are some that are placed under one or more of these qualities, 
as order under position, and writing and painting under figure 
and order. Further examples are straightness and crookedness, 
and concavity and convexity, which are placed under figure; 
multitude and fewness, which are placed under number; 
equality, augmentation, and diminution, which are placed 
under similarity and difference; eagerness, laughter, and sad- 
ness, which are apprehended from the figure and form of the 
face; lamenting, which is apprehended from the form of the 
face together with the shedding of tears; and moistness and 
dryness, which are placed under motion and rest, since from 
the sense of vision moistness is not apprehended except from 
the liquidity of the moist body and from the motion of one part 
of it before another, and since dryness is apprehended from 
the retention of the parts of the dry body and from the absence 
of liquidity. Here, however, we must consider that Aristotle 
maintains in the second book on Generation that moist and 
dry are in one way primary attributes which naturally belong 
to the elements, and that through these attributes spring the 
non-elemental moistness and dryness, which are reduced to 
the primary attributes and are caused by them. Concerning, 
then, these primary attributes it has been stated that they are 

[ 423] 

Opus Majus 

proper objects of sense and perceptible by touch alone. We are 
speaking, however, concerning the others. For primary moist- 
ness is that which passes over easily into all forms, possessing 
no definite bounds of its own, but conforming readily to the 
limits of something else, as in the case-of air particularly and 
next in order in the case of water. Dry is the opposite, par- 
ticularly in the case of earth, secondarily in the case of fire. 
But here moistness is used in the sense of liquid and slippery, 
and dry in the sense of arid and coagulated. The same is true 
concerning many other attributes, which are reduced to the 
forms and principal modes enumerated above belonging to 
visible things. All these matters are explained in the first book 
of Ptolemy on Optics and in the second book of Alhazen on 
Aspects, and in other authors on optics. There are, moreover, 
common qualities, some of which Aristotle defines in the sec- 
ond book on the Soul and in the beginning of his work on Sense 
and the Sensible, as, for example, magnitude, figure, motion, 
rest, and number. These are not the only common qualities but 
also all those mentioned before, although most writers on the 
subjects of nature do not consider this fact, because they are 
not expert in the science of optics. For common properties are 
not so called because they are perceived by the common sense, 
but because they are determined by all the special senses or by 
several of them, and particularly by sight and touch, since 
Ptolemy states in his second book on Optics that touch and 
sight participate in all these twenty. These twenty-nine, with 
those that are reduced to them, are apprehended by the special 
senses, and by the common sense, and by imagination, and these 
faculties of the soul cannot judge of themselves concerning 
other qualities except by accident. 

CHAPTER IV 

Concerning the investigation of the estimative, 
memorative, and cogitative faculties. 

But there are other sensibles per se, for animals use sense 
alone, since they do not possess intellect. The sheep, even if 
it has never seen a wolf, flees from it at once; and every animal 
experiences fear at the roaring of a lion, although it has never 

[ 424] 

Optical Science 

heard a lion before nor seen one. The same is true in regard to 
many things that are hurtful and contrary to the constitution or 
complexion of animals. The same principle holds good as re- 
gards what is useful and in conformity with their natures. For 
although a lamb may never have seen another lamb before, it 
runs to one and willingly remains with it, and the same is true 
concerning other animals. Brutes, therefore, have some per- 
ception in things advantageous and in things harmful. There 
is then something sensibly in them besides the twenty-nine 
properties mentioned above and besides those that are reduced 
to them. For there must be something more active and produc- 
tive of change in the sentient body than light and color, because 
it not only causes apprehension but also a state of fear or love 
or flight or delay. This is the property of the complexion be- 
longing to each object by which it is assimilated to others in a 
nature special or general. Through this quality things agree, 
are strengthened and invigorated, or differ and oppose one 
another and are mutually harmful. Wherefore not only do light 
and color produce their forms and impressions, but to a far 
greater degree do the properties of complexions, nay, the very 
natures of things as regards their substance, agreeing or dis- 
agreeing with one another, produce strong impressions, which 
change greatly the sensitive soul, so that it is moved to states 
of fear, horror, flight, or the opposites. These forms or im- 
pressions coming from things, although they change and alter 
special senses and the common sense and imagination, just as 
they do the air through which they pass, yet no one of those 
faculties of the soul judges concerning these impressions, but 
of necessity a far nobler and more powerful faculty of the 
sensitive soul does, which is called estimation or the estimative 
faculty, as Avicenna states in the first book on the Soul, a fac- 
ulty which he says perceives the insensible forms connected 
with sensible matter. Sensible matter is spoken of here as that 
which is apprehended by the special senses and by the common 
sense, as are the aforesaid twenty-nine. We call insensible form 
that which is not taken cognizance of by those senses of them- 
selves, since they are commonly called senses, although other 
faculties of the sensitive soul may equally well be called senses, 
should we wish so to name them, because they are parts of the 

sensitive soul. For every part of the sensitive soul can be called 

[425 ] 

Opus Majus 

a sense, because it is in truth a sense, and a sensitive faculty. The 
statement, therefore, that qualities belonging to complexions 
are not apprehended by a sense must be understood as apply- 
ing to a special sense and the common sense and imagination ; 
but they can readily be apprehended by estimation, which al- 
though not called a sense is, however, a part of the sensitive 
soul. 

But estimation does not retain a form, although it receives 
it like the common sense, and it therefore requires another 
faculty in the remotest part of the posterior cell to retain forms 
coming to the estimative faculty and to be its storehouse and 
repository, just as imagination is the storehouse of the common 
sense. This is the memorative faculty, as Avicenna states in the 
first book on the Soul. Cogitation or the cogitative faculty is 
in the middle cell and is the mistress of the sensitive faculties. 
It takes the place of reason in brutes, and is therefore called 
the logical, that is, the rational faculty, not because it em- 
ploys reason, but because it is the ultimate perfection of brutes, 
just as reason is in man, and because the rational soul in man 
is united directly with it. By this faculty the spider weaves its 
geometrical web, and the bee makes its hexagonal house, choos- 
ing one of the figures that fill out space, and the swallow its 
nest. The same is true of all the works of brutes that are simi- 
lar to human art. Man by means of this faculty sees wonderful 
things in dreams, and all the faculties both posterior and 
anterior of the sensitive soul serve and obey it, because they all 
exist on account of it. For the forms or species that are in the 
imagination multiply themselves into the cogitative faculty, 
although they exist in the imagination according to their 
nature primarily because of phantasia, which uses those forms; 
but the cogitative faculty holds those forms in a nobler way, 
and the forms of the estimative and memorative faculties exist 
in the cogitative faculty in accordance with a nature nobler 
than that existing in those faculties, and therefore the cogita- 
tive faculty uses all the other faculties as its instruments. In 
man there is in addition from without and from creation the 
rational soul, which is united with the cogitative faculty pri- 
marily and immediately, and uses this faculty chiefly as its own 
special instrument. Species are formed in the rational soul by 
this faculty. Wherefore when this faculty is impaired the judg- 

[ 426 ] 

Optical Science 

ment of reason is especially perverted, and when it is in a 
healthy condition the intellect functions in a sound and rational 
way. 

CHAPTER V 

An exposition of authorities at variance regarding 
the faculties mentioned. 

BuT the Latin text of Aristotle does not disclose to us this divi- 
sion, for there is no mention expressly made except in regard to 
the common sense, imagination, and memory. But since the 
text of Aristotle owing to faulty translation cannot be under- 
stood in this part of his work, and the same difficulty is found 
in other passages, and since Avicenna was the perfect imitator 
and expositor of Aristotle in nearly every respect, and was the 
greatest philosopher subsequent to him, as the Commentator 
states in the chapter on the Rainbow, we must for this reason 
hold to the opinion of Avicenna, which is clear and perfect, 
although the translators of the works of Avicenna, as in his 
book on the Soul, and in that on Animals, and in his books on 
Medicine, have translated differently and have changed words, 
so that Avicenna’s meaning has not been translated to the same 
purport throughout, since in his book on Animals we find that 
the estimative faculty takes the place of reason in brutes, and 
so too we sometimes find elsewhere contradiction with respect 
to the aforesaid matters; but the fact is of little moment that 
different translators use different words, and sometimes in 
part of a subject show some diversity. But we must hold to his 
view as expressed in his book on the Soul, because he there dis- 
cusses the faculties of the soul as his principal topic, but else- 
where his mention of this subject is rather incidental. More- 
over, that work has been translated far better than his other 
books, a fact that is evident, since it has few or no words be- 
longing to other tongues, while his other books have them in 
countless numbers. If one really considers what has been said 
above, he must assume that there are three faculties wholly 
different, according to the three cells. For a diversity of ob- 
jects shows us a diversity of faculties. For there are two kinds 
of properties, one external, as the twenty-nine mentioned 

[ 427] 

Opus Majus 

above, the other internal hidden from external sense, as the 
quality of a harmful or useful complexion, or rather the essen- 
tial nature itself whether useful or harmful. There must then 
for this reason be two kinds of senses, one containing the special 
senses and the common sense and the imagination, which are 
influenced by the first class of qualities; and the other contain- 
ing the estimative faculty and memory, which are referred to 
the second class of qualities. But the cogitative faculty, owing 
to the excellence of its functions as compared with other fac- 
ulties, is distinguished from them. In the generally accepted 
translation of Aristotle the whole faculty is called memory, 
which has the power of retaining forms, and therefore not only 
the storehouse of the common sense, but also that of the estima- 
tive faculty, is called memory. Therefore what is here called 
imagination is comprehended under memory in the translation 
of Aristotle that is in common use. But without doubt memory 
must be a double faculty with two quite distinct parts, so that 
one shall be the storehouse of the common sense and the other 
that of the estimative faculty ; and these will differ in species, 
subject, organ, and operation. Moreover, although these fac- 
ulties have been placed in the brain, we must understand that 
the marrow-like substance of the brain is not itself sensitive, 
as Avicenna teaches in the tenth book on Animals, respectfully 
correcting Aristotle on this point. 

For the marrow in other parts of the body is not sensitive, 
and therefore it is not so here. But it is the container and store- 
house of the sensitive faculties, containing slender nerves in 
which sense and sensible forms are located. But in order that 
all doubt may be removed, we must consider that the sensitive 
soul has a twofold organ or subject; one is basic and the seat 
of life, namely, the heart, according to Aristotle and Avicenna 
in the books on Animals; the other is that which is first changed 
by the forms of qualities, and in which the operations of the 
senses are more manifest and distinguished, namely, the brain. 
For if the head is injured an evident injury is suffered by the 
sensitive faculties, and an injury to the head is more evident 
to us than one to the heart, and frequently occurs. For this 
reason in accordance with the more obvious consideration we 
place the sensitive faculties in the head; and this is the opinion 
of physicians who do not think that the origin of the faculties 

[ 428 ] 

Optical Science 

is in the heart. But Avicenna in the first book on the Art of 
Medicine says that, although the opinion of physicians is the 
more obvious to the sense, yet the opinion of the Philosopher is 
the truer one, since all the nerves and veins and all the faculties 
of the soul have their origin first of all in the heart, as Aristotle 
` proves in the twelfth book on Animals, and Avicenna in the 
third book on the same subject. 

[ 429 J 

SECOND DISTINCTION 

Containing three chapters. The first deals with the 
nerves leading to the eye. f 

CHAPTER I 

LEARLY, therefore, in order that there may be no 
@ scruple of doubt in what follows, the.structure of the 

eye must be studied, because without this nothing can 
be known concerning the method of vision. But some writers 
say less, some more, and in certain things they ate at variance. 
For authors on perspective more commonly pass over these 
matters, assuming a knowledge of the natural philosophers 
and of the writers on medicine, as though every one who reads - 
the science of perspective has already consulted the writers on 
medicine and on nature. Therefore their discussion is in itself 
obscure, nor can we understand it unless we have recourse to 
the fuller treatment of the subject by the writers on medicine 
and on natural philosophy. For this reason something more 
must be said here on this topic than is found in the writers on 
perspective. Although it may be too difficult to attest these 
matters, and to explain those that are attested, yet I hope that 
these facts can be made clear by certain authors. But that I 
may not draw upon sources of individual opinions to too great 
an extent, I shall confine my description of the structure of the 
eye mainly to three authorities—Alhazen in his first book on 
Perspective, Constantinus in his book on the Eye, and “Avi- 
cenna in his books; for these writers are sufficient and they 
treat more definitely the matters in which we are interested. 
I cannot, however, give the exact words of each, because they 
are sometimes at variance owing to faulty translation, but from 
them all I shall form a single statement of the truth. All, then, 
are agreed that there are two parts in the anterior cavity of 
the brain, which are called ventricles, or concavities, or cells. 
These ventricles cannot be organs of the common sense and of 
the imagination, of which mention was made previously. For 
those faculties are arranged anteriorly and posteriorly, while 
these ventricles are placed on the right and on the left, as Con- 
stantinus states. For the entire brain cell can be divided into an 

[ 430] 

Optical Science 

anterior part and a posterior part, as was stated above. There 
is, however, a division according to right and left. The anterior 
part of it, namely, the place of the common sense, has a right 
and left, where are the two ventricles in a measure distinct. 
_ From the pia mater, which covers both ventricles, comes a 
double nerve, one from the right ventricle, and the other from 
the left, and these are the optic nerves, that is, the concave ones, 
according to the authors mentioned. The hollow does not begin 
at the middle of the anterior part of the brain, because there 
is located the organ of smell. This is a single nerve with two 
small bits of flesh on the sides like the tips of the teats, as 
Avicenna teaenes in the tenth book on Animals. But according 
` to Avicenna, and the author* on Perspective, and Constantinus, 
these visual nerves of which we are speaking come out at the 
bottom of the ventricles of the anterior part. This is the ex- 
planation of Constantinus, who teaches us to examine the 
heads of large animals, when they are killed not in the summer 
or in the heat, and we shall find a small opening in the skull 
through which the nerve passes, and then we should examine 
the membrane of the pia mater cautiously lest it be broken, 
and we shall find that a nerve comes out at the bottom of the 
anterior part of the brain. But the two nerves, as we have 
stated, from the two directions right and left, meet, according 
to all authorities, and after meeting again are divided. It was, 
_ moreover, better that they should meet in the opening than 
before it or after it. For in either of these cases they would 
make two openings in the bone of the head, but it is better that 
the nerve-should pass through one opening than through two. 
The bone is firmer the less it is perforated. Therefore, since 
nature acts in the better way possible, the junction will be in 
the opening of the skull, at which place they are again divided. 
The nerve that comes from the right goes to the left eye and 
the one from the left to the right eye, so that there is a direct 
extension of the nerves from their origin to the eyes. For if the 
nerve coming from the right part of the anterior cell of the 
brain passed to the right eye, there would be an angle in the 
common nerve where they meet and the nerve would be bent 
and would not extend directly to the eye. But this would hinder 
vision, because vision always selects straight lines as far as 

* Alhazen. 

[431] 

Opus Majus 

possible. Moreover, since the bone of the eye is concave with 
an opening toward the head, the nerve enters the opening of 
the eye and spreads out in the hollow of the bone like the 
utensil with which wine is put in jars. Let, 
then, abc be the skull, and d be the right 
part of the anterior cavity of the brain, 
and e the left, enveloped by the pia mater, 
from the bottom of which let two nerves 
come forth on the right and left, meeting 
in the opening in the skull, and afterwards 
dividing, so that the nerve coming from 
the right goes to the left eye, which is f, 
and the nerve from the left to the right 
eye, which is g, and let them enter the 
Fic. 24. openings of the concave bones, so that they 
spread out in that hollow, as is shown in 

the figure. But we must understand that just as the two nerves 
are derived from the pia mater, so are they also derived from 
the dura mater, and similarly from the lining of the skull, in 
which externally it is wrapped, and these three nerves are con- 
cave and meet in the opening, and one nerve is formed with 
three nerve coats, and this nerve so formed goes to each eye, and 
each eye has naturally a position similar with respect to the 
meeting of these nerves in the opening and at an equal distance 
from it, so that vision may be completed with greater certainty. 

CHAPTER II 

Concerning the coats of the eye formed from 
the three nerves mentioned. 

THE eye, therefore, has three coats or membranes, and three 
humors, and a web like that of a spider. Its first coat is formed 
from the interior coat of the nerve, which comes from the pia 
mater, according to all authorities, and spreads out from the 
end of the nerve where it enters the opening in the bone, and 
is ramified like a concave net in its first part. It is therefore 
called rete or retina, according to Avicenna in the third book 
on Medicine and according to Constantinus, and is supplied 

[ 432]. 

= 

Optical Science 

with veins, arteries, and slender nerves. Its second part is 
thicker, as Avicenna says, and spreads out spherically up to 
the fore part of the eye with an opening in the middle of its 
own fore part, in order that the impressions of light and color 
and other visible things may be able to pass through the middle 
of the eye to the nerve coming from the brain. For this opening 
is placed directly opposite the extremity of the nerve at which 
the retina expands, and therefore in this whole coat Alhazen 
states there are two openings, one in front and the other be- 
hind, which is the extremity of the concave nerve. This second 
part is called the uvea, since it is similar to a grape [uva], 
owing to the fact that it has an opening in its anterior part 
like that left in a grape when its stalk is removed, as Avicenna 
says in the third book on Medicine. From the coat of the nerve 
coming from the dura mater, the second coat of the eye is ex- 
panded, according to all authorities. This coat has two parts. 
For the first part is composed of veins, nerves, and arteries, and 
is called secundina, because it is similar to the after-birth 
[secundinae]|; and the second part spreads as far as the an- 
terior of the eye, and there part of it is apparent, namely, the 
portion of a sphere, which forms a circle above the extremity 
of the uvea, and is like transparent horn and is therefore called 
cornea. It is composed, as Avicenna says in the book mentioned, 
of four thin rindlike coats, and they are like rinds, so that if 
one of them should be stripped off, the others would not be 
injured because of it. The result is that this coat is strong be- 
cause of the injuries and attacks coming from the air, and yet 
it is very transparent, so that the large number of its coats does 
not hinder the passage of the impressions of visible things. 
The third coat of the eye is formed from that third skin of 
the nerve that comes from the membrane of the skull, and its 
first part is joined to the bone of the eye, and is, in fact, hard 
and solid, and for this reason is called sclerotic, but the re- 
maining part extends to the cornea. For this coat is not a com- 
plete one but lacks a portion of the sphere, and is filled with 
fat and white flesh, as we see externally in eyes, and it is called 
consolidativa or conjunctiva. We must bear in mind that in one 
way there are said to be only three coats, but in another way 
six; and both views are true and rational. For if we consider 
the-coats as whole ones, theré are only three. If, however, we 

[ 433] 

Opus Majus 

consider the parts behind as distinct from the parts in the front 
„both in name and fact, there are six. -For-three-parts~are pos- 

“terior and three are anterior. Some also have maintained that 

they are fewer, and that, too, with elaborate argument; but 
we should not pay attention to them, because their interpreta- 
tion is forced and deviates from sound reason. Some also have 
maintained that there are seven coats; but this is false, because 
they reckoned as a coat the spider-web structure, although it 
is not. Those who say that there are three coats call the whole 
first coat the uvea, and the whole second coat the cornea, and 
the whole third one the consolidativa. Hence authors on per- 
spective call the whole first coat the uvea, and so I wish chiefly 
to employ the term in describing the method of vision. There- 
fore Alhazen says that the uvea has two openings, one anterior, 
and the other posterior, which is the opening of the nerve, at 
which the expansion of the concavity of the uvea begins, 
whence the extremity of the nerve with the whole cavity fol- 
lowing as far as the anterior opening is the uvea in fact. 

CHAPTER II] 
Concerning the humors of the eye and the weblike structure. 

FAS WE contains in itself three humors and one web. For 
from the anterior part of that coat there begins a web small 
and fine like the web of a spider, and in this is contained a 
body that is called glaciale, crystallinum, or grandinosum [like 
ice, crystal, or hail], and this body is formed directly above 
the extremity of the nerve. But it has two parts; one is interior 
at the extremity of the nerve and is similar to melted glass, and 
on this account is called the vitreous humor. The other part is 
anterior and is like ice and hail and crystal, is whiter than the- 
vitreous humor, and is called anterior glacialis, not having any 
other name of its own in the author* on Perspective. But it is 
called in other authors the humorlike crystal, ice, or hail, be- 
cause it is similar to them, and the whole body contained be- 
neath the web is so called from this part. Then toward the an- 
terior part of the eye outside of the web a humor like the white 
* Alhazen. 

C434] 

Optical Science 

of egg fills the anterior cavity of the uvea, and on one side 
touches the anterior part of the glacialis, and on another side 
enters the opening of the uvea, and reaches to the cornea, so 
that the spherical convexity of this humor touches the concave 
figure of the cornea, and is called humor albugineus. There will 
then be the cornea, the humor albugineus, the humor glacialis, 
and the humor vitreus, and the extremity of the nerve, so 
that consequently impressions of things will pass through the 
medium of them all to the brain, JAvicenna says in the fourth 
book on Animals that the retina conveys nourishment as a mat- 
ter of_fact to the parts of the eye, and contains the vitreous 
humor, as Constantinus states, and the author on Perspective 
agrees, ‘maintaining that Fhe lower part of the uvea contains 
the vitreous humor, and 4 the end of it carries blood in its 
veins and arteries well digested, with which the vitreous humor 
is formed and nourished, in order that the vitreous may be 
able to nourish the crystalline rae For, as Avicenna says 
in the third book on Medicine, the vitreous humor is the nour- 
ishment of the crystalline humor. Constantinus also makes this 
statement. Hence [siner the crystalline humor is quite white 
and clear, blood is fot suitable for it as direct nourishment, but 
it needs a nourishment intermediate between blood and the 
crystalline humor, and of this kind is the vitreous humor, whi 

is whiter than blood, and less white than the crystalline humor. 
- Avicenna says that the humor albugineus is the overflow of the 
crystalline humor, and therefore is opposite in position as re- 
gards its nourishment, which is the vitreous humor, and for 
this reason the crystalline humor is between these. The vitreous 
humor fills the whole cavity of the nerve as far as the common 
section, and is thicker than the glacial humor. Each, however, 
is transparent, so that the impressions of objects may pass 
through in them) The crystalline humor is called the pupil, and 
in it is the visua power just as in a subject that at first is 
changed, although not fadically, since the common nerve is the 
radical organ, and there vision is completed, as far as the visual 
power can, as what follows will show. 

[ 435 J 

THIRD DISTINCTION 

In three chapters. The first is on the sphericity and central points of 
the vitreous humor and of the glacial humor, of the cornea, 
of the humor albugineus, and of the uvea. 

CHAPTER | 

E must consider next the form of the eye and of its 

W parts, and the location of the centers of its coats 
and humors: for these facts are quite necessary ; 

without them the method of vision is not understood. The 
whole eye, then, approaches the form of a sphere, and the coats 
likewise and the humors owing to the admirable qualities of 
the spherical form, because it is less subject to obstacles than 
a figure with angles, and is simpler than other figures and is 
more spacious than other isoperimetric figures, as Alhazen, 
the author on Perspective, states. But in what precedes these 
properties and others were touched upon. The anterior glacial 
humor is the portion of a sphere different from the sphere of 
which the vitreous humor is a portion; for they are different 
bodies and of different transparency. Moreover, the anterior 
glacial humor is the portion of a larger sphere than is that of 
which the vitreous humor is a portion. Hence the bodies are 
not complete spheres, but are portions of different spheres, and 
therefore since these are intersecting spheres, they must have 
different centers. Since the cavity of the vitreous humor is 
toward the glacial humor, its center is beyond the center of the 
eye toward the anterior of the eye. Similarly the center of the 
anterior glacialis is in the depth of the eye. These centers are, 
however, on the same straight line that enters through the 
anterior opening of the uvea and through the opening that is 
at the extremity of the nerve, where the retina begins to ex- 
pand. For these bodies are so arranged, according to the au- 
thors on Perspective, that from the opening of the bone, where 
the nerve enters, the nerve extends for some distance and is 
constantly more dilated, until it comes to the circumference of 
the whole glacialis, and is consolidated with its circumference. 
Then above the extremity of the nerve the whole’ glacialis is 
placed and is contained in the inferior part of the uvea, which 

[ 4361] 

Optical Science 

Alhazen calls the point of the cavity of the uvea, in the last 
part of which is the opening that is the extremity of the nerve, 
where the uvea begins. But the middle of the whole glacialis, 
namely, the vitreous humor, is in the orifice of the opening. 
For the extremity of the nerve contains the middle of the 
sphere of the whole glacialis, as Alhazen says, and this middle 
is the vitreous humor; and the uvea is consolidated with the 
circumference of the glacial sphere. The humor albugineus 
contained in the uvea touches the sphere of the anterior gla- 
cialis, and it fills the opening up to its contact with the cornea, 
not so as to touch the cornea in a point, but by the junction of 
surfaces, just as an interior sphere is contained by an exterior 
one. But since the convex surface of the cornea is continuous 
with the surface of the whole eye, and with the whole eye, as 
Alhazen states, they must have the same center. Since, more- 
over, the concave surface of the cornea is equidistant from the 
exterior convex surface, both surfaces of the cornea and the 
whole eye must have the same center, according to the book 
of Theodosius on Spheres: for equidistant spheres, one con- 
taining and the other contained, have the same center, for ex- 
ample, the spheres of the universe, as the starry heaven, and 
the sphere of fire, and similarly in the others; for the center 
of the universe is the center of them all. Since, moreover, the 
concave surface of the cornea and the convex surface of the 
humor albugineus, which is in the opening, are like an interior 
and an exterior sphere, the convex surface of the humor albu- 
gineus must have the same center with the aforesaid. But since 
the concave surface of the cornea does not touch the uvea in a 
point, nor is united to it as an exterior sphere to an interior one, 
but is united to it on the circumference of its opening, the cor- 
nea must cut the uvea, and therefore they will have different 
centers. Since the cornea is a larger sphere than the uvea, be- 
cause it is continuous with the surface of the whole eye, and 
the uvea is contained below the sphericity of the cornea, the 
center of the cornea, therefore, must be further in the depth of 
the eye, as is clear to the sense in the case of spherical bodies so 
united. This fact is shown by Theodosius on Spheres, and 
Alhazen so states it. 

te 

[ 437 J 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER II 
In which is explained a dificult doubt regarding the aforesaid. 

BUT then there is serious doubt as to what fills the space be- 
tween these bodies, where the smaller sphere deviates from the 
larger, and many for this reason think that the humor albu- 
gineus spreads itself below the cavity of the cornea, where the 
uvea is separated from it. But the objection is made that since 
the humor albugineus is concentric with the cornea, it will be 
contained in the cavity of the cornea, like a sphere joining it 
or equidistant; but it is not equidistant, since it touches it; 
therefore it will join this in its cavity, and will fill the space 
that is between the uvea and the cornea. But opposed to this 
statement is the fact that the author on Perspective does not 
so state it, but always says that it is within the uvea. The ob- 
jections, therefore, are removed by the fact that the parts of 
the eye are not complete spheres, but portions of spheres, as 
is clear in regard to the parts of the glacialis and so, too, in 
regard to the others that precede these and serve them princi- 
pally, as are the anterior of the cornea, and the humor albu- 
gineus in the opening of the uvea, and the anterior of the uvea. 
Hence we must take into account here only the sphericity of 
the portions; and therefore when mention is made of the 
sphericity of the cornea the statement has reference only to 
that portion which is necessary for vision, namely, that which 
is in the anterior part of the eye, but elsewhere is not spherical. 
Moreover, the uvea, although in the upper part spherical, is 
not so in the lower part; similarly the humor albugineus does 
not have a sphericity concentric with the cornea, except in the 
opening of the uvea, where it is joined to the cornea, for below 
the uvea it has concentricity with the uvea. Moreover, since 
such is the case, the humor albugineus cannot flow between the 
cornea and the uvea. For if the bodies were of complete 
_ sphericity, this result would follow, but such is not the case. 
But where the cornea and uvea are apart the consolidativa 
spreads itself, and fills up whatever there is to be filled between 
the consolidativa and the cornea, or the cornea and uvea giving 
up their complete sphericity dilate, and externally unite or in- 
ternally or in both ways, and fill all that should be filled. 

[ 438 7] 

Optical Science 

Moreover, since the anterior glacialis in its convexity cuts the 
uvea, similarly its center must be different from that of the uvea 
and farther within the depth of the eye: and since the whole 
eye, and the cornea, and the humor albugineus have a different 
center from the uvea and in the depth of the eye, just like the 
anterior glacialis, and these are required, that vision may take 
place in the glacialis, it is better, as Alhazen says, that the 
anterior glacialis should have the same center with them. 
Therefore the whole eye, the cornea, the humor albugineus, 
‘and anterior glacialis are concentric. But concerning the an- 
terior glacialis it will be more definitely shown in what follows 
that it must have the same center as the cornea and the whole 
eye, when refraction in the vitreous humor is pointed out. In 
the meantime let what has been said suffice. 

CHAPTER III 
Concerning the center and sphericity of the consolidativa. 

THE consolidativa is thought to have a different center from 
all these farther back in the depth of the eye. But the author 
on Perspective does not say this, but merely states in regard to 
the uvea and the vitreous humor that neither mutually nor with 
the others have they the same center, and in arguing that the 
center of the cornea and the center of the uvea are not the same 
he says that the sphere of the uvea is not in the middle of the 
consolidativa, but extends forward to a part of the visible sur- 
face of the eye itself, and the visible surface of the eye is a part 
of a larger sphere than the sphere of the uvea, wherefore the 
center of this visible surface will be farther back in the depth 
of the eye than the center of the uvea. But the surface of the 
cornea and that of the visible eye, as he assumes here and later 
explains, are the same. Therefore the center of the uvea and 
that of the cornea are not the same. From this it is argued by 
- some that the center of the concave surface of the consolidativa 
and that of the cornea are the same, because through the eleva- 
tion of the uvea from the middle of the consolidativa it is 
shown that the uvea has a different center from that of the 
cornea and of the whole eye. But it is to be noted that the ex- 
terior surface of the consolidativa is not concentric with the 

[ 439 J 

Opus Majus 

interior surface, as is evident; nor, moreover, is the interior 
surface completely spherical, because it fills the space where 
the cornea and the uvea are separated, for which reason it 
loses its true sphericity, and goes farther into the eye in that 
part than elsewhere, and therefore the cornea and the interior 
consolidativa are not concentric. But-if both spheres, namely, 
the cornea and the consolidativa, were complete, the cornea 
would lie in the cavity of the consolidativa, and the interior of 
the consolidativa and the exterior of the cornea would be con- 
centric. Moreover, since the exterior and interior surfaces of 
the consolidativa are not concentric, the exterior of the cornea 
and the exterior of the consolidativa will not be concentric. 
Since also the consolidativa does not have perfect sphericity 
on the exterior, as Alhazen states, for it tends in its anterior 
toward pointedness and therefore does not strictly have a 
center from which all lines drawn to the circumference are 
equal, for this reason neither on the outside nor on the inside is 
the body really spherical, and therefore a center is not assigned 
to it by Alhazen. It can, however, have a point similar to a 
center farther back in the depth of the eye than the center of 
any other part, as will be shown in the figure. If, however, we 
wish to remove all contention, we can say that the exterior 
surface of the consolidativa is not wholly spherical, just like 
that of the whole eye, because it is somewhat pointed in the 
anterior part, and thus the whole eye will not have the center 
of a sphere, nor will the exterior surface of the consolidativa. 
If the interior surface of the consolidativa were spherical, it 
would not fill the space that had to be filled between the cornea 
and the uvea. But either the cornea contracts itself at the sur- 
face of the uvea, and is deepened by losing its true sphericity, 
except in the anterior part that is opposite the opening, or the 
uvea elevates itself and passes into a protuberant form, exter- 
nally losing its true sphericity. But although the centers are 
different in the parts of the eye, yet all are in the same line, 
which is perpendicular to the whole eye and to all its parts. 
This line passes through the middle of the opening of the uvea, 
and through the middle of the opening in the extremity of the 
nerve, on which the eye is formed. This line is the axis of the 
eye, by which the eye sees with certainty and by which it passes 
over the separate points of a visible object, so that it may make 

[ 440 J 

Optical Science 

certain of each in succession, although it grasps at the same 
time and at once with full certainty a visible object or a part of 
a visible object. For since this line is perpendicular to the eye 
and to all its parts, an impression coming along it is strongest, 
because approach along the perpendicular is the strongest, as 
was demonstrated in what was said on the multiplication of 
species. This arrangement is a necessary one, in order that the 
eye may grasp most strongly and with the utmost certainty 
what it should. 

I shall draw, therefore, a figure in which all these matters 
are made clear as far as is possible on a surface, but the full 
demonstration would require a body fashioned like the eye in 
all the particulars aforesaid. The eye of a cow, pig, and other 
animals can be used for illustration, if any one wishes to ex- 
periment. I consider this figure better than the one that follows, 
although the following one is that of the ancients. For it is im- 
possible that the center of the vitreous humor should be below 
the sphere of the anterior glacialis, because in that case right 
will appear left and the reverse, as will be shown below: nor 
yet on the surface of its body, because in that case an impres- 
sion on the right would go too far to the right, and one on the 
left too far to the left, and they would never meet in the com- 
mon nerve, wherefore the center will lie outside toward the 
anterior part of the eye. Since, moreover, the opening of the 
uvea is small, and the anterior glacial opening is less, since it 
is farther in, concentric with the humor albugineus in the open- 
ing, the vitreous must cut a very small portion from the gla- 
cialis, cfd in the figure, so that it can scarcely be drawn by the 
hand of man, for to this portion corresponds mo, the opening of 
the uvea, which is here larger than the opening of the uvea in 
the eye of any man of this day. The size of the opening is de- 
termined by the boundary lines of the visual pyramid, which 
is abl. For let al be the base of the pyramid, which is the visible 
object, the impression of which penetrates the cornea under 
the pyramidal form and enters the opening, and which tends 
naturally to the center of the eye, and would go to it if it were 
not met first by a denser body by which it is bent, namely, the 
vitreous humor, chd. For this reason, therefore, I have so 
placed the center of the vitreous humor and have so drawn its 
sphere; and it is evident that its sphere is less than the sphere 

[441] 

Opus Majus 

of the anterior glacialis. But in the eye there are not whole 
spheres, but only small portions of them, like the portion of 
the sphere of the anterior glacialis, cfd, and the portion of the 
vitreous humor, chd; I have completed, however, the spheres 
in the figure to show the centers and the portions. The uvea, 
moreover, is drawn in a complete sphere, except in its opening, 
mo, and yet it is not in the eye completely spherical, as has been 

CENTRUM OCULI, CORNEAI 

Ate! ONENETAN ERORIS T 
GLACIALIS». j 

FIG. 25. 

stated, but is so in its anterior part, in which is the opening, 
because sphericity is not required for vision except in that 
place; elsewhere it is of irregular form, in order that a void 
may not exist between the uvea and the cornea; and the lines 
c and d, which are drawn toward the interior of the eye, are in 
the sides of the nerve of the uvea, and between these lines is 
the opening of the uvea, which accordingly is toward the in- 
terior of the eye. Above this opening the vitreous humor is 
formed, as is apparent; for the aperture of these lines termi- 
nates at the extremities of the portion of the vitreous humor, 

[ 442] 

Optical Science 

and its distance is between c and d, and this distance between 
the sides of the nerve is filled with the vitreous humor as far 
as the common nerve in the surface of the brain. This nerve, 
however, in which is this path of the vitreous humor, spreads 
and expands in the circuit of the humor vitreus, glacialis, and 
albugineus, as far as the anterior opening of the uvea, mo, 
which is opposite to its own interior opening, which is cd. Then 
follows the cornea, and then the consolidativa, as indicated in 
the figure. 

[ 443 J 

FOURTH DISTINCTION 

In four chapters. The first chapter is on the properties of the 
cornea, the humor albugineus, and the uvea. 

CHAPTER I 

HE coats and humors, according to Alhazen, have. 

their admirable qualities, from which follow thé 
benefits of vision, as he himself shows. The first 

function of the cornea is the closing of the opening in the uvea, 
. preventing the escape of the humor albugineus ; it is, more- 
` ever, transparent, so that ,the impressions [species] of light 
and color may pass through it, as was verified before in the 
multiplication of species. It has strength, moreover, so that it 
is not quickly destroyed. Since it is exposed to the air, and 
could easily be destroyed by smoke and dust and the like, it 
has for this reason four coats, as explained above. The humor 
albugineus is transparent, so_ that impressions may pass 
through it and beyond. It possesses moisture, in order that it 
may always keep moist the humor glacialis and the spiderlike 

. web, which is very thin and for this reason could be destroyed 
by excessive dryness. The uvea is usually black, in order that 
the humor albugineus and tne glacialis may be obscured, so 
ythec feet.: impressions of light afid color may appear in it, 
since feeble light is very apparent in dark places, and is con- 
cealed in places full of light. It is somewhat strong, in order 
that it may retain the humor albugineus and prevent any of- 
it from exuding. It is also thick so as to be obscure. In the eyes 
of human beings, however, it is sometimes found to be gray, 
and frequently so in the eyes of horses. This is due to the fact 
that the natural heat was not able sufficiently to assimilate the 
substance of the uvea and of the humors, and for this reason 
they are somewhat white, because the weak action of the 
assimilating heat in moisture is the cause of whiteness. Or it 
sometimes happens from the complete assimilation of the mois- 
- ture and the victory of the dryness, as is evident in the leaves 
of the trees in autumn. This grayness either can be due to the 
uvea, for if the uvea is gray, the eye is gray; if black, the eye 
is black. Or the grayness can be caused by the humors, since 

: [ 4441] 

mas 

i Optical Science 

jè 
if the moistures are placed near the exterior, and the crystalline 
is of large size, and the albugineous is moderate-sized, the eye 
will be gray, unless the opposite happens from the coat. If the 
moistures are dark, and the crystalline lies toward the interior 
of the eye and is small, and the albugineous is large, so that it 
causes darkness, just like very deep water submerging and 
covering things, the eye will be black. Aristotle held this view, 
and Avicenna in the nineteenth book on Animals. 

CHAPTER I] 

Concerning the properties of the anterior glacialis. g 
tee anterior glacialis has many properties. For the E and 
chief of these is the fact that in it alone is the visual power, 
according to Alhazen and the other authorities. For if it is 
injured, even though the other parts are whole, vision is de- 
stroyed, and if it is unharmed and injury happens to the others, 
provided they retain their transparent quality, vision is not de- 
stroyed ; for while the transparent quality through the glacialis 
remains continuous with the transparent quality of the air, vi- 
“sion is not destroyed, provided the anterior glacialis itself is un- - 

`- , injured. Moreover, the anterior glacialis is moist, so that it may 

_— 

more quickly respond to the impfession of light and color. for 
very dry substances do not ‘easily receive impressigis, anu it 
is of delicate structure, since such a struéture in a ‘body causes 
delicacy of perception. It is somewhat transparent, in order 
` that it may receive the forms of light and color, and that they 
` may pass through it to.the common nerve; and it is somewhat 
thick, so that it may retain in it impressions for some time, in 
order that they may become apparent to the visual power and 
permit the exercise of judgment. For if the transparent quality . 
were too great, the impressions would pass through, and would 
not remain so that a judgment could be formed. Hence it must 
be somewhat thick, in order that it may experience a feeling 
from the impressions [species] that is a kind of pain. For we 
. observe that strong lights and color narrow vision and injure 
it, and inflict pain. But every action of light is of one nature 
and of color likewise, except that one is stronger, another 
weaker. Therefore vision always experiences a feeling that 

[445 1 

Opus Majus 

is a kind of pain, although it does not always perceive this, that 
is, when the impressions are moderate. But a painful feeli..g 
would not exist in a body unless it be fairly dense, because if 
it were of too great rarity the impression would not remain 
until it could cause the action of pain. Its surface forms part 
of a larger sphere than that of the vitreous, so that its surface 
is equidistant from the anterior surface of vision, that they may 
have the same center, which is the center of the whole eye and 
of the cornea and of the humor élbugineus. These bodies aid 
it mainly in the act of vision, and more so than the uvea. The 
surface or portion of the anterior glacialis is less than half of 
its sphere, for otherwise it would not follow that its center is 
ne within the depth of the eye, as has been assumed. 

2 

CHAPTER II] 

On the properties of the vitreous, the weblike struc- 
ture, the optic nerve, and the consolidativa. 

THE vitreous humor is thicker than the anterior glacialis, + 
since the ray that is not perpendicular must be refracted be- 
tween the perpendicular drawn from the point of refraction: 
and the direct path. Concerning this refraction sufficient men> 
tion was made in a preceding part on the multiplication: of 
light. Unless refraction took place thus, vision would never be 
completed, as will be explained below. The color of the vitreous 
is whiter than that of blood,‘and not so white as the anterior 
glacialis, because the vitreous is its nourishment, as explained 
above. It is the portion of a smaller sphere, so that the center 
of this sphere is different from that of the anterior glacialis, 
since this is necessary owing to the refraction noted above. Its 
noblest property is the fact that the perception that is in the 
anterior glacialis is continued in it through the whale optic 
nerve to the point of ultimate perception, which is in the an- 
terior part of the.brain, as Alhazen says. These two humors 
are wrapped around hy a web, since humors unless retained 
would fłow somewhere and would not retain one shape. This 
web is very thin, so as not to hide the ray, and is spherical, be- # 
cause it contains the portion of a sphere, althouzh there are 
other reasons for this, as for the whole eye and its »arts. The 

C446] 

Optical Science 

nerve, moreover, as Alhazen says, on which the eye is formed 
is*€ntirely the optic, so that the impression may be transmitted 
in it to the brain, and the impression of the visible object and 
the natural heat due it and the force of first perception may 
come freely to the eye, and therefore the term optic is the same 
as concave. The consolidativa is exterior, so as to assemble and 
preserve all the parts; and is somewhat moist, in order that 
it may adapt itself better to the positions of the coats in it, be- 
cause more quickly and easily they assume the form of their 
position in it owing to its softness than if it were hard; and in 
addition it is moist, so that dryness may not quickly happen in 
the coats. It is somewhat firm and strong, so as to preserve the 
positions and forms of the coats, in order that they may not be 
altered quickly; and it is white, that by its means the form of 
the face may be beautiful. 

R 

CHAPTER IV PT 
Concerning ihe eyelids, the lashes, and the whole eye. 

ue eyelids are to protect the eye during sleep and to enable 
the eye to rest when fatigued by a strong impression: Andal- © 
‘tholigh the impressions are moderate even, the eye needs the’ 
means ‘of closing furnished by the eyelids, in order that it may 
not work continuously. In a similar way smoke and dust and 
other things harm the vision, for whieh reason it needs a means 
of closing, and therefore the lids have a quick motion, in order 
that they may swiftly close dver the eye when harmful things 
approach. The lashes are to moderate the light when vision 
takes place, and for this reasoit when looking one unites them 
and draws them together, so as to look from a narrow opening 
when the strong light would harm him. Creative goodness has 
supplied two eyes, so that if accident. or injury should happen 
to one of them,.the-second might remain. Another purpose is 
to add beauty to the form of the face. Both eyes, moreover, are 
alike in their arrangements, in their coats, and in the forms of 
their coats, and in the position of each coat with respect to the 
whole eye; and both have a similar position with respect to 
the common ferve and the brain. Moreover, although the gen- 
eral reasohs for the roundness of the eyes and of their parts 

[ 447] 

Opus Majus 

were given above in the properties of the sphere, yet it was 
especially necessary that they should be round for two rea- 
sons, namely, owing to the swift motion of this form, enabling 
the vision to pass at our will from one visible object to another, 
and from one part of the same visible.object to another part, 
in order that anything may be perceived with full certainty by 
a swift motion of this kind. But of all figures the sphere is best 
adapted to motion. It was necessary also that the eyes should 
be round and the parts likewise, for if the surface of the eye 
were plane, the impression [species] of an object larger than 
the eye could not fall perpendicularly on it, because perpen- 
dicular lines to a plane tend to different points and at right 
angles in each case, as 
g shown in the figure. For 
the lines can fall per- 
pendicularly on the eye 
fg that come from the 
a a C è visible object cd, which is 
FIG. 26. equal to the eye, but from 
the points a and 6 the ray 
cannot come perpendicularly, but at oblique angles. But sen- 
sible action, and such as is required in seeing, does not take 
place except when the ray falls perpendicularly on the vision. 
Since, therefore, the eye sees large bodies, as almost a fourth 
part of the heavens in one view, it is evident that the eye can- 
not be of a plane figure nor of any other figure than that of a 
sphere, since on a small sphere perpendiculars infinite in num- 
ber coming from a large body can fall, and they tend to the 
center of the sphere, and thus a large body can be seen by a 
small eye, as is shown in the figure. 

[ 448 1 

FIFTH DISTINCTION 

In three chapters. The first chapter shows that impressions 
[species] of light and color are required for perception. 

CHAPTER | 
N S we now understand those things that need explanation 

on account of the mode of our vision, we must pass on 

to a consideration of the mode itself and how vision 
takes place. First we must determine what is required for recti- 
linear vision. The first requisite here considered is, that vision 
needs the impression of a visible object, for without this there 
can be no vision. Accordingly Aristotle says in the second book 
on the Soul that in every case the sense receives the impressions 
of sensible things, so that there may be an act of sensation. 
Moreover, the passive must resemble the active through the 
active; but vision is a passive force, and for this reason must 
resemble the active, which is the visible object. But there is 
no similitude of the active except the impression, as all know. 
Moreover, an object makes an impression [species] every- 
where along all diameters. But when there is an obstacle be- 
tween the impression of the object and vision, vision does not 
take place. But when every impediment is removed, so that the 
impression comes to the eye, the object is seen. Wherefore 
vision must happen by means of an impression; but especially 
by means of the impression of light and color. For it is evident 
that colors have their effect on vision from the fact that when 
one views a thick growth of vegetation on which the light of 
the sun falls, and continues gazing at it, if he then removes his 
vision and turns it to a dark place, he will find in that dark 
place the form of that light tinged from the green of the 
vegetation. And if under this condition he looks at visible 
objects that are white in the shadow, and in a place where the 
light is weak, he will find the colors of the objects mixed with 
green. If, moreover, he closes his eye and looks in it, he will 
find in his own eye the form of the light with green. In the 
same way he will find a change of this kind if he looks at the 
color blue or purple, or at any other strong color, as any one 
can prove by experiment. Therefore color must have an effect 

[ 449 ] 

Opus Majus 

on vision. But light more so, since in accordance with the di- 
versity of light falling on the vision and on visible objects is the 
diversity of the image in individual objects. For a very bright 
light hides other visible objects, and even injures and op- 
presses vision and weakens the action of sight. But a very weak 
light does not change vision as it should, nor does it reveal 
objects. A moderate light greatly strengthens vision in its 
action and reveals objects sufficiently. Wherefore the species 
of light is especially essential for vision. And again we see 
that in accordance with the diversity of the fall of the same 
light on the same object the aspect is changed, and the color 
appears different to the vision, as in the case of the dove’s neck 
when it turns the neck in different positions to the light, and 
so too in the case of the peacock’s tail. In the same manner 
many things, as, for example, the scales of fish, or decayed oak, 
and certain worms, and the bird that is called noctiluca [shin- 
ing by night]; when the light shines on them, their light is 
hidden and a color is seen; but when they are in darkness, their 
light is apparent. It is clear, then, that the species of light is 
especially essential in vision. Without contradiction we find 
by experiment that without light nothing is seen; for the ex- 
trinsic light of the sun, or of the stars, or of a fire must be 
present in the air, or the light belonging to the eye and multi- 
plied by it, as is the case in the eye of the cat. Wherefore the 
species of light must always be necessary for vision. 

CHAPTER II 

Showing that vision is not completed in the eye, 
but in the common nerve. 

WE must understand that vision is not completed in the eyes, 
according to the teaching of the authors on Perspective. For 
two different species come to the eyes, and a difference in the 
species causes a difference in the judgment, since by the differ- — 
' ent species will one object be judged to be two. A similar re- 
sult follows through a difference in the one judging. For in 
two eyes there are different judgments. Therefore one object 
as viewed will be considered as quite different. Therefore there 
must be something sentient besides the eyes, in which vision is 

[ 450] 

Optical Science 

completed and of which the eyes are the instruments that give 
it the visible species. This is the common nerve in the surface 
of the brain, where the two nerves coming from the two parts 
of the anterior brain meet, and after meeting are divided and 
extend to the eyes. Therefore the visual faculty is located 
there, as in a fountain, and since in this case the fontal faculty 
is a single one, to which the faculties of the eyes are continued 
through the medium of optic nerves, an object can appear as 
single, as far as concerns this cause. But it is, moreover, neces- 
Sary that the two species coming from the eyes should meet 
at one place in the common nerve, and that one of these should 
_ be more intense and fuller than the other. For naturally the 
two forms of the same species mingle in the same matter and 
in the same place, and therefore are not distinguished, but 
become one form after they come to one place, and then since 
the judging faculty is single and the species single, a single 
judgment is made regarding one object. A proof of this is the 
fact that when the species do not come from the two eyes to one 
place in the common nerve, one object is seen as two. This is 
evident when the natural position of the eyes is changed, as 
happens if the finger is placed below one of the eyes or if the 
eye is twisted somewhat from its place, both species do not 
then come to one place in the common nerve, and one object 
is seen as two. This happens in the case of him who does not 
have the position of his eyes similar with respect to the com- 
mon nerve, and for this reason the species of his eyes, unless 
he takes diligent care and rectifies their position, will come to 
different places in the common nerve, and therefore one thing 
frequently appears to be two. But naturally eyes that are well 
formed and healthy have a position similar with respect to 
the common nerve, and therefore the two species come to the 
same place in it and become one, so that thus through one 
species and one perception one judgment is formed regarding 
a single object. Experience teaches that when the common 
nerve is injured vision is destroyed in the eyes, and that the 
faculty is not destroyed in the common nerve owing to an in- 
jury to the eyes. When the common nerve is cured, vision is 
restored in healthy eyes; and when the eyes become well, 
vision is again restored, because the faculty in the common 
nerve was preserved, and is not destroyed in the common nerve. 

[451] 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER III 
On the ultimate perception. 

BuT since Alhazen says that this ultimate perception is in the 
anterior part of the brain, some one might think that it is the 
common sense and the imagination or phantasy which are in 
the anterior brain, as was stated above: especially as it was 
there said that a judgment concerning any sensible object is 
not completed before the impression [species] reaches the 
common sense. But it is necessary to state that the ultimate per- 
ception can be the origin of all the senses, and in this significa- 
tion we are not speaking here of the ultimate perception: for 
this is the common sense in the anterior part of the brain. The 
ultimate perception is taken otherwise in the case of the special 
sensations of seeing, hearing, smelling, or the others, when 
some particular sense is mentioned; and thus the ultimate per- 
ception is the common nerve in vision with respect to the two 
eyes, which are the instruments that are first affected by a 
visible object. The same is true of the small pieces of flesh 
similar to the nipples of the breasts; for they are the instru- 
ments that are first affected by an odor, and the nerve to which 
they are continued in the anterior part of the brain is the radi- 
cal and original instrument of the sense of smell. As to his 
statement that the ultimate perception is in the anterior part 
of the brain, we must note that this anterior part of the brain 
is not taken as the first cell of the brain, but as the place near 
it, namely, in the opening in the skull where the nerves meet; 
for since it is before and near the brain it is called the anterior 
part of the brain. The same is true regarding the olfactory 
process; for it begins at the middle of the anterior brain and 
extends between the two nipples [olfactory bulbs] near the 
brain, and closer than the visual nerve, because it is very neces- 
sary for an animal that the brain be strengthened by odor. This 
is especially true in the case of man, because he has a larger 
brain in comparison with his body than any other animal, as 
Aristotle says in the book on Animals. 

Thus it is manifest that the eyes not only judge concerning a 
visible object, but that the judgment is begun in them and is 
completed by the ultimate perception, which is the visual fac- 

C4521 

Optical Science 

ulty with its source in the common nerve. In a similar way it 
is evident that the eyes perceive and not only the common 
nerve. But since the eyes are adjusted to the radical faculty, 
and from it flow the forces to the eyes, and the sensitive force 
is continued through the whole nerve from the common nerve 
to the eyes, as Alhazen says, therefore the visual act is a single 
and undivided one, which is performed by the eyes and the 
common nerve. And although he says that the eye is the in- 
strument of the ultimate perception and is the medium be- 
tween it and the visible object, yet the eye of necessity has 
judgment and the power of sight, although its judgment is 
incomplete. For the angle by which the size of an object is 
known does not exceed the glacialis, and the arrangement of 
the object seen is made to accord with the object itself on the 
surface of the glacialis. It is by this arrangement that the ob- 
ject is distinguished and known. This is the statement that is 
forthwith made. 

[453 J] 

SIXTH DISTINCTION 

On the removal of difficulties in the theory of vision, in four chapters. 

CHAPTER Í 

In which is removed chiefly the dificulty that seems 
to arise from the smaliness of the pupil. 

E must consider, then, as was verified in what pre- 

\ \ j cedes, that the natural action is completed by a pyra- 
mid whose vertex is in the patient [object receiving 

the action] and whose base is the surface of the agent. For thus 
does the force come from the whole agent opposite to the pa- 
tient, as has been stated before, so that the action may be 
vigorous and complete; and therefore in vision there is the 
requirement that the impression [species] should come from 
the whole surface of the agent. But although in the natural 
change produced in the objects acted upon it is required that 
separate pyramids come to the individual parts of the body 
acted upon, because each point of this body must be affected, 
yet in the change produced the chief requirement is that one 
pyramid come from the agent, and the vertex fall on the eye. 
This pyramid falls perpendicularly on the eye, so that all of 
its lines are perpendicular to the eye. For the chief requirement 
is that vision should perceive distinctly the object itself both 
with certainty and sufficiency, and this can be done by means 
of one pyramid in which there are as many lines as there are 
parts or points in the body seen. Along these lines the separate 
impressions come from the individual parts to the anterior 
glacialis, in which is the visual force. And those lines will ter- 
minate at the individual parts of the glacialis, so that the im- 
pressions of the parts of the thing seen are arranged on the 
surface of the perceiving member just as the parts are arranged 
in the thing itself, so that the judgment in regard to the sepa- 
rate parts may be distinct and not confused. Those lines, more- 
over, are perpendicular to the eye, in order that stronger 
impressions may come, so that it may be possible to see with 
perfect vision and judge concerning the thing as it really is. 
For the eye either does not judge at all, or forms an imperfect 

C454] 

Optical Science 

judgment by means of those lines alone that are not perpen- 
dicular, owing to the weakness of the impression coming by 
their means, although those lines converging with the per- 
pendiculars will act more fully in securing a perception of a 
visible object, as will be shown below. The requirement of 
perpendicularity in lines and species for effective action has 
been expained at sufficient length in what precedes on the mul- 
tiplication of species. 

But we must now verify the fact that on the surface of the 
glacialis, although it be small, the distinction of any visible 
object whatsoever can be made by means of the arrangement 
of the species coming from such objects, since the species of a 
thing, whatever be its size, can be arranged in order in a very 
small space, because there are as many parts in a very small 
body as there are in a very large one, since every body and 
every quantity is infinitely divisible, as all philosophy pro- 
claims. Aristotle proves in the sixth book of the Physics that 
there is no division of a quantity into indi- 

+ 5 ; Siig a b 
visibles, nor is a quantity composed of indi- 
visibles, and therefore there are as many parts 
in a grain of millet as in the diameter of the e d 
world, as is shown in the figure. If a triangle 
or pyramid has a large base, abc, and a very 
short line, ed, subtends its vertex, it is evident C 
that from any point of the line ab a line can be FIG. 27. 
drawn to c, likewise from its other points and 
from all its parts, because an infinite number of lines can ter- 
minate at a point. This fact is well established. If, therefore, all 
those lines extend to c, then they pass through the points of the 
line de; since, therefore, they do not meet be- g 
fore c, they will pass through different points 
in the line de, because if all or some of these 

lines passed through the same point, the lines Z 
would meet before c, but it has been assumed ia 
that they do not meet. For if there were a 

meeting of all the lines or of some of them in Fic. 28. 

some point of the line de, then without doubt 

after the meeting they would separate one from another to in- 
finity, and would never meet in c, as is evident to the sense in 
this shorter pyramid, fgh. Since, therefore, the species of an 

C455 1 

Opus Majus 

object seen, of whatever size it may be, can be arranged on the 
surface of the glacialis owing to the divisibility of quantity 
which continues to infinity, and which assumes as many parts 
in a small body as in a large one, no confusion happens when a 
large species comes to the small surface of the glacialis. 

CHAPTER II 

In which there is removed a second difficulty due to the meeting 
of obligue rays with the perpendicular ones. 

BUT we must remove another difficulty that can be imagined 
from another source. For from any part of an object seen come 
forth species in infinite number, as explained in the laws of 
multiplications. Therefore to any part of the glacialis there 
comes the species from the whole object, and separate pyra- 
mids, the vertices of which are in any point of the eye and of 
the cornea and of the opening of the uvea, and the base of all 
these pyramids is the object seen. Therefore any point of the 
cornea and of the opening of the uvea will have species of all 
the parts confused in it; wherefore the judgment will become 
confused. We must not say that any point of the eye is infi- 
nitely divisible, in order that we may fall into the sophistry 
given above, since we here accept a point of the pupil or a 
part as the least sensible portion in the division of the parts of 
the perceiving member in accordance with the division of the 
parts of the thing seen. And therefore, excluding this sophistry, 
we can say that although in reality the vertex of one pyramid 
from the whole thing comes to every point of the eye and the 
cornea, and that although the species of all parts are there 
mingled, yet to one point of the eye or cornea and opening of 
the uvea a species does not come perpendicularly except from 
one point of the thing seen, although to the same point an in- 
finite number of species come falling obliquely at unequal 
angles. Therefore since the body of the eye is denser than the 
air, according to the laws of refraction determined above, all 
lines falling obliquely are refracted at the surface of the cor- 
nea. And since the species is weakened by falling at oblique 
angles and likewise by refraction, and since the species falling 

[ 456] 

Optical Science 

perpendicularly is the strong one, therefore the perpendicular 
species conceals all the oblique ones, just as a larger and 
stronger light hides many weak lights, as, for example, the 
light of the sun hides the countless lights of the stars, whence 
to the point b there comes a perpen- 
dicular from c itself, and to the same & 
comes ab not perpendicular, since it 
does not fall to the center of the eye, 
and therefore the species of a itself is 
concealed, although from the point 6 
the species of a itself may be able to 
come to the glacialis by the refracted 
line 6d; and therefore the judgment is a 

in accordance with the perpendiculars. 

And since perpendicular species are FIG. 29. 
distinct and arranged on the surface of 

the vision, therefore a distinction takes place. The pyramid, 
therefore, coming perpendicularly produces both a strong vi- 
sion, so that by reason of its strength forms falling obliquely are 
hidden, and nevertheless a distinct vision, so that it excludes the 
confusion that seems to happen from an infinite number of rays 
falling obliquely which meet each point of thé pupil. This 
pyramid is called the visual and the radiant one, by which vision 
is chiefly caused. 

I say this because rays coming from a point of an object 
from which a perpendicular ray comes to a point of the eye, al- 
though they do not fall to that point directly, but to other 
points, yet can extend from the other points to which they fall, 
by refraction in the coats of the eye, to the same place in the 
glacialis and the common nerve to which the perpendicular 
species comes from the same point in the object, from which 
those oblique rays come; so that there is a fuller vision of any 
part of a visible object, since it is seen by means of its own 
direct rays and by means of the refracted ones. But concerning 
this matter mention will be made in what is to be said in re- 
gard to refraction. Moreover, for another reason I have said 
that vision takes place chiefly by means of the radiant pyramid; 
for since this pyramid alone is perpendicular to the eye, and 
falls to the opening of the uvea, and is directly opposite to the 
center of the eye, it produces for this reason a good vision and 

C4571 

¢ a 

Opus Majus 

the principal one; and yet species can come outside of this 
pyramid to the eye which will fall not perpendicularly on the 
cornea, and will all be refracted, so that in this way vision is 
produced by them; but the vision will be weak, because things 
seen not perpendicularly are not clearly apparent to the eye. 
Therefore we can here consider two pyramids: namely, the 
principal one, which falls to the opening of the uvea, or the 
greater one, composed of this pyramid and of the rays coming 
from either side of the opening on the cornea. This whole pyra- 
mid so formed is not called the visual pyramid, or the radiant 
pyramid, although the eye sees by means of it, but it sees 
principally and clearly all that falls under the visible pyramid, 
and other things obliquely and weakly, namely, those things 
that fall outside this pyramid. Hence a thing can be so large 
that some part of it will fall in the visual pyramid and be well 
seen, and other parts on the sides will fall without the pyramid 
on the eye, and will be seen imperfectly. Or it may happen that 
a thing of moderate size falls in the visual pyramid and other 
different things will be seen on the sides. Or it may happen 
that several small objects will fall in the visible pyramid and 
others fall in like fashion at the side. But that which falls in 
the visible pyramid and nothing else will always be seen prin- 
cipally and clearly. But with greatest clearness will that be 
seen at which the axis of the visual pyramid terminates. For 
that axis is perpendicular to all the coats and humors, and 
passes through all the centers; and therefore the species which 
comes along it is strongest and fullest, and causes certainty of 
vision. But a discussion of this matter will be given below. 

CHAPTER III 

In which a third dificulty due to the mixing of 
Species in the air is removed. 

BUT up to the present time there is no small doubt in regard to 
the removal of the third difficulty, which requires full discus- 
sion in the treatise on the generation, multiplication, corrup- 
tion, and action of species. Without this treatise perspective 
cannot be understood. But, however, this doubt ought here to 

C458] 

Optical Science 

be set forth owing to the requirement of vision somewhat more 
briefly, that it may not increase too greatly our confusion in 
the mode of our vision. For as a matter of fact the species of 
colors mingle at every point of the medium, since from extreme 
colors an intermediate is formed, and from two species of the 
same specific nature one is formed. For opposites, that is, ex- 
tremes, according to the statement of Aristotle in the tenth 
book of the Metaphysics, produce an intermediate, as, for ex- 
ample, white and black; and two white colors blend into one 
when they are in the same-subject; for in the same place and 
subject they cannot be distinguished, but become one. But what 
is true of colors is also true of the species of colors, for the 
species is of the same nature as that which produces it, and 
therefore any species of color is of some genus of color, since 
the species of white cannot be derived from substance or from 
any predicable [of substance] other than quality; nor of this, 
from any genus other than color; nor of this, from any species, 
however specialized, other than white, not from black, say, or 
from green. Hence it remains true of white [as formerly of 
color] that any particular species of it, being like white, will 
be an individual case within the special class [of colors] to be 
called white. From which follows that just as in the same sub- 
ject white is commixed with black, so species of white with 
species of black. And if this is true, then a mixed species comes 
perpendicularly from every point of the air to the eye, and the 
whole radiant pyramid will be mixed from its point of min- 
gling in the air, and this is a necessary conclusion. 

Many philosophers hold that in this view there is difficulty, 
and say that species have a spiritual existence in the medium 
and in the sense, and Aristotle and Averroés maintain this in 
the second book on the Soul. And because they have a spiritual 
existence and not a material one they therefore do not observe 
the laws of material forms, and for this reason do not mix, 
because due to a material existence material forms mix. 
Therefore they maintain that different species of light in the 
medium and countless sources of light are found at the same 
point of the air and are distinguished, so too the species of 
color and all similar species of things, and for this reason 
vision is able to see things distinctly. This error is a very 
serious one, for it contains many false and absurd things, and 

[459] 

Opus Majus 

arises from the fact that they believe that they must maintain 
the distinction of vision, which they think cannot exist unless 
the species are wholly distinct in the air. First, then, I shall 
preserve the distinction of vision, so that it may be seen that it 
is not necessary to err in this way. Then I shall remove the 
error more easily, and I shall explain the authors who seem to 
be at variance. 

I say, therefore, that species have a material and natural 
existence in the medium and in the sense; and that opposite 
species mingle in a real mixture, as, for example, the species 
of white and black and of intermediate colors, and that the 
species of two white colors and of two lights become one, and 
the same is true of the other species of the same categorical 
species. A mixed species will come to the eye from the place 
where the species mix, and the whole pyramid will be mixed. 
But the species of a visible object has a principal and primary 
multiplication, but the others have an accidental. Moreover, 
the principal or primary multiplication is straight, refracted, 
and reflected, and comes from the agent, as we have shown 
above. But the accidental or secondary does not come from the 
agent, but from the principal species; just as is the case with 
light which comes to the corners of a house from a ray of 
the sun through a window; and this is so weak that it has no 
comparison with the principal one, nor does it direct the eye 
to the object from which the multiplication comes. Hence a 
man in the corner of the house with the secondary species of 
the solar light in his eye does not see the sun but the ray fall- 
ing through the window. If, however, he applies his eye to 
the principal ray, he will see the sun distinctly. I say, therefore, 
that just as the perpendicular ray hides all the oblique rays that 
terminate with it, so the principal ray hides all the accidental 
rays. Hence at the point d there is a real mixture of the white, 
black, and red, and from this point comes a mixed species to 
the eye along the line de. But in the line de there is no prin- 
cipal multiplication except from the visible point b itself, nor is 
there one from a or c, but merely an accidental and secondary 
one; because a multiplication similar to a and c does not come 
except from their species, not from the points themselves. But 
the principal multiplication hides all accidental ones, just as 
the perpendicular ray hides all oblique ones conterminous with 

[ 460 |] 

Optical Science 

it. Thus the whole pyramid is mixed everywhere, but no mix- 
ture as regards the principal multiplication comes to the eye. 
This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that when differ- 
ent colors have the same principal 
multiplication, a mixed color ap- 
pears to the eye; as when glass or 
crystal or some other transparent 
colored body is placed before the 
vision, and another dense body is 
behind the transparent one in a 
direct line with it and the vision, the 
species of both bodies enter the 
sight in the same place as regards 
the principal multiplication, and 
therefore a mixed color appears. 
Therefore, on the contrary, a single 
color will appear, when one color 
multiplies itself along the principal 
line, and another accidentally, al- 
though in the same place. If, there- 
fore, philosophers should consider 
this distinction of vision, they would FIG. 30. 
never maintain that species do not 
mix in a medium, because owing to the distinction of vision, 
which they do not know how to preserve, they fall into that 
error. And if it should be said that just as those species mingle 
in a mixture of principal multiplications at any point in the 
air, so do they also in the eye; therefore there will then be com- 
plete confusion, because a mixture will take place there real in 
character and principal as regards multiplications; the reply 
to all this must be that a real and principal mixture can take 
place at any point of the eye; but only one species at one point 
will be perpendicular, which falls to the center of the eye, and 
all others will be oblique, as are ah, cg, and therefore will be 
hidden, and a judgment will not be formed concerning these but 
concerning the perpendicular one, which is be, and by means of 
it concerning the thing itself, which is b. 

aren Nigreno Rusepo 

[ 461 ] 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER IV 

In which a real mixture of species is proved at any point of the 
medium, with the removal of cavilings to the contrary. 

BUT when they say that species has a spiritual existence in a 
medium, this use of the word spiritual is not in accordance with 
its proper and primary signification, from spirit, as we say 
that God and angel and soul are spiritual things; because it 
is plain that the species of corporeal things are not thus spirit- 
ual. Therefore of necessity they will have a corporeal existence, 
because body and soul are opposed without an intermediate. 
And if they have a corporeal existence, they also have a mate- 
rial one, and therefore they must obey the laws of material and 
corporeal things, and therefore they must mix when they are 
contrary, and become one when they are of the same categorical 
species. And this is again apparent, since species is the simili- 
tude of a corporeal thing and not of a spiritual; therefore it 
will have a corporeal existence. Likewise it is in a corporeal 
and material medium, and everything that is received in an- 
other is modified by the condition of the recipient, as the book 
on Causes states, also Boetius in the fifth book on Consolation. 
Therefore it must have a corporeal existence in a corporeal 
medium. Moreover, it produces a corporeal result, as, for ex- 
ample, the species of heat warms bodies, and dries them out, 
and causes them to putrefy, and the same is true of other 
species. Therefore since this produces heat, properly speaking, 
and through the medium of heat produces other results, species 
must be a corporeal thing, because properly speaking a spirit- 
ual thing does not cause a corporeal action. And in particular 
there is the additional reason that the species is of the same 
essence as the complete effect of the agent, and it becomes that 
when the agent affects strongly the patient [thing acted on]. 
Since at first, when wood becomes warm, while it still remains 
wood it has the species of fire, and later the action becomes 
stronger, and the species is changed into complete fire, when 
the fire has destroyed the specific nature of the wood, and flame 
is produced and charcoal. The species does not, therefore, differ 
from the charcoal and the flame, except as the incomplete 
differs from the complete, the embryo from the child, and the 

[ 462 ] 

Optical Science 

child from the man. But it is agreed that the complete is mate- 
rial; therefore also the incomplete, wheresoever we observe 
these things, because the incomplete becomes complete. It is 
manifest, therefore, that the species of corporeal and material 
things will have always a material and corporeal existence, 
whence it is madness to think otherwise. 

When, therefore, Aristotle and Averroés say that the species 
has a spiritual existence in the medium and in the sense, it is 
evident that spiritual is not taken from spirit nor is the word 
‘used in its proper sense. Therefore it is used equivocally and 
improperly, and this is the truth. For it is taken in the sense of 
imperceptible; for since everything really spiritual, as, for ex- 
ample, God, angel, and soul, is imperceptible and does not fall 
under the sense, we therefore convert the terms and call that 
which is imperceptible spiritual. But this is homonymous, and 
outside the true and proper meaning of a spiritual thing. Hence 
the species of things do not fall per se under the strong and dis- 
tinguishing sense; for since nothing is visible per se unless it 
be dense, because this alone can terminate vision, light or the 
species of color in transparent air is not visible per se, but be- 
comes so per accidens, because no doubt there is something 
denser than the air, at which vision terminates, and thus per- 
ceives that there is a transparent quality in the medium, at 
which ‘vision is not terminated, and consequently the clearness 
of light is apparent in it. And similarly when a ray falls 
through a window, it is seen per accidens owing to the fixed 
shape of the window, by which the light is shaped, and owing 
to the opaque places everywhere, so that thus an opposite 
placed beside its contrary becomes more easily apparent. 
Similarly when a solar ray passes through glass or through 
a highly colored cloth, the species of the color is apparent on 
an opaque body. But this takes place doubly per accidens, 
both because of the excessive clearness of light with respect 
to color and with respect to an opaque body, which intercepts 
the light. And in the bodies of the stars the species of the 
solar light is seen, not because of this light, but owing to 
the density of the body of the star, a density that terminates 
vision; and a dense body is the cause of illumination, as was 
noted above. In these cases, therefore, the species is seen per 
accidens, and likewise at times because of excessive weakness 

[ 463 J 

Opus Majus 

of vision and because of negligence in looking, as in certain 
cases will be explained below. And since it is only per accidens 
(as from defect of vision or negligence in looking) that species 
can sometimes, as it were, by chance be perceived in a measure, 
they are not for this reason said to be visible and perceptible 
in the simple and absolute use of the word. The same principle 
applies to the species of objects perceived by taste, smell, and 
the other senses; perception of them is gained neither per se 
nor per accidens, and therefore the species are imperceptible. 
And because they are imperceptible they are called spiritual ; 
but this spirituality does not contradict corporeality nor mate- 
riality in material and corporeal things. 

That, moreover, species do unite into one, and that one species 
is really formed from several, is shown by Alhazen the author 
on Perspective and by Ptolemy, who makes these statements, 
and by what has been said concerning the first part of the act of 
perception. For in it the two species coming from the eyes must 
become one, so that the object seen may appear as one and not as 
two. Alhazen says in the first book that lights mix in the me- 
dium; and Ptolemy in his third book clearly teaches a mixing of 
the species. But as to the fact that Alhazen wishes to prove by 
experiment that lights do not mix in the air, when three candles 
are placed opposite an opening; for then the lights appear dis- 
tinct beyond the opening, and therefore also in the opening, as 
he seems to say ; we must state that in one way there is under- 
stood to be a real mixing, and in another way there is said to 
be a distinction. For in fact they do mix in the opening: but 
since light travels along a straight path, while it is being multi- 
plied in the same medium, therefore the light of each candle, 
just as it passed along different straight lines before the open- 
ing, so must it continue to do beyond the opening as regards the 
principal multiplication, and therefore the primary and prin- 
cipal paths are divided beyond the opening just as they were 
before it. But an accidental multiplication of the two candles 
occurs with the principal multiplication of the third candle, 
and thus there is a mixing beyond the opening. But since an 
accidental multiplication is not taken into account with a prin- 
cipal one, nor does vision form a judgment in regard to the 
former, because it is hidden by the principal one, therefore no 
confusion is apparent to us, nor is there a mixing in the places 

[ 464 ] 

Optical Science 

where the lights of the candles fall. There is then a mixing in 
the case of the lights, namely, of the accidental light with the 
principal; and the author [Alhazen] says that there is no ap- 
pearance of mixing, because it is hidden, and he says that there 
is no mixing of the principal multiplications in the places where 
they fall; and I grant this; and yet there is a mixing there, 
which I mentioned in regard to the opening. I say that light 
considered without restriction as it is in the opening must 
mingle in a natural mixing and become one undivided light, 
and he does not deny this. But if we consider the lights as re- 
gards their relation to the straight principal paths divided after 
the opening, just as they were before it, they are thus said to 
be divided and not to mix. Hence speaking without restriction 
they do mix, but with respect to the different principal paths, 
into which it is stated that they must be now distributed in the 
opening, they are divided and distinct. But distinct existence 
in this way is not understood in the ordinary sense of the term, 
nor is it opposed to a real mixing without restriction, because 
this has to do with effect and not with mode of existence; for 
they are said to be distinct in the opening solely because they 
make after the opening distinct paths, just as the sun is said 
to be hot because it produces heat, not because it is formed by 
heat. Whenever, therefore, any of the sacred writers, or of the 
philosophers, or of the men of science in the past say that the 
species of light and color or other species at the same time are 
distinct in a medium, this statement must not be understood 
without qualification, but it is made because the species make 
distinct principal paths beyond the place of mixing, just as 
they did before it. 

[ 465 J 

SEVENTH DISTINCTION 

In four chapters. First there is removed the error of vision which 
would result if the vitreous and the lens [glacialis] 
were of the same nature. 

CHAPTER Í 
l AVING removed the difficulty in seeing, we must now 

show how other inconsistencies may be avoided. For 

if the rays of the visual pyramid meet at the center 

of the anterior glacialis, they must be mutually divided, and 
what was right would become left and the reverse, and what 
is above would be below, and thus the whole arrangement of 
the visible object will be changed, as is easily apparent in the 
figure: and thus the species of the right part of the object will 
not come to its place, but to the opposite side, and the same is 
true with regard to the left, and with 
regard to other differences of positions. 
In order, therefore, that this error may 
be avoided and the species of the right 
part may pass to its own side, and the 
left to its side, and so too of other posi- 
tions, there must be something else be- 
tween the anterior of the glacialis and 
its center to prevent a meeting of this 
kind. Therefore nature has contrived to 
place the vitreous humor before the cen- 
ter of the glacialis, which has a different 
FIG. 31. transparency and a different center, so 

that refraction takes place in it, in order 

that the rays of the pyramid may be diverted from meeting in 
the center of the anterior glacialis. Since, therefore, all rays 
of the radiant pyramid except the axis, which passes through 
all the centers, are falling at oblique angles on the vitreous 
humor, which is of a different transparency, all those rays must 
be refracted on its surface, as was shown above in refractions. 
Since, moreover, the vitreous humor is denser than the anterior 
glacialis, it follows, therefore, that refraction takes place be- 
tween the straight path and the perpendicular drawn at the 

L466] 

DEXTRUM SINISTRUM 

Optical Science 

point of refraction, as has been shown in the multiplication of 
species. Wherefore of necessity the ray mg, when it reaches 
the point q on the surface of the vitreous humor, which is gdf, 
does not pass by the straight path to a, center of the anterior 
glacialis, which is ghf, but will be refracted at the point q, be- 
tween the straight path, which is ga, and the perpendicular 
drawn from the point of refraction, which is q, into the vitreous 
humor. This perpendicular is d/; for bl goes to the center of 
the vitreous humor, which is 6. Thus the right species will 
always go according to its own direc- 
tion until it comes to a point of the 
common nerve, which is c, and will 
not go to the left. In the same way 
the ray pu will not pass to a, the cen- 
ter of the anterior glacialis, but will 
be refracted between the straight 
path, which is wa, and the perpen- 
dicular 6s drawn from the point of 
refraction, which is u, and thus the 
ray pu will pass to a point of the 
common nerve at c, and will always 
be to the left. The same is true of the 
species coming from all other parts, 
because they will always travel along 
the paths that are due to them, and 
through the location they should 
have, so that no error may happen. 
Since the nerve is filled by a similar 
vitreous humor as far as the common 
nerve, there is, therefore, no other refraction, but the species 
travels uniformly without refraction, nor does it change its 
straight path in any manner except in accordance with the tor- 
tuosity of the nerve. And in this fact we must wonder at the 
power of the soul’s force, in that it causes the species to follow 
the tortuosity of the nerve, so that it flows along a tortuous line, 
not along a straight one, as it does in the inanimate bodies of 
the world. For while it is in an inanimate medium it always 
travels along straight paths, as stated above: but owing to the 
necessity and nobility of the processes of the soul, species in 
an animated medium keeps to the path of the medium and 

[ 467] 

Q 

FIG. 32. 

Opus Majus 

disregards the common laws of natural multiplications, re- 
joicing in the special privilege of the soul. Thus, therefore, we 
must consider that the species of the thing seen is necessary to 
vision, and we must also consider how it falls upon the vision 
and all its parts. 

CHAPTER II 

In which it is shown that the species or force of the eye radiates 
to the visible object because of the act of seeing. 

WE must now consider whether the species of vision is neces- 
sary for the act of seeing. It is clear, moreover, that a species 
is produced by vision just as by other things, because accidental 
qualities and substance inferior to vision are able to produce 
their own forces; much more therefore has vision this power. 
This fact is evident also for this reason, because the eye is seen 
by itself, as by means of a mirror, and can be seen by another. 
But nothing is seen except by means of a species coming from 
the object seen. But whether this species, or force of vision, or 
visual rays come from the eye to the thing seen has always been 
a doubtful matter with scientists. But Aristotle settles this ques- 
tion on his own authority in the ninth book of the De Ani- 
malibus, saying that vision is nothing else than the visual force 
touching the object seen. Ptolemy also in his book on Optics, 
that is, on vision or in his theory of perspective, previous to 
the teaching of Alhazen, which Alhazen expounded as re- 
ceived from Ptolemy, maintains throughout his whole work 
that visual rays come from the eye to the object seen. Tideus 
also in his book on Aspects affirms this, and states that sight 
never determines the distance between itself and the object 
seen, nor the size of the object seen, nor the position and situa- 
tion of it, unless the visual rays pass to the object seen and rest 
upon it, and grasp its surface and contain its extremities. This 
likewise Jacobus Alkindi asserts in his Science of Optics, also 
Euclid and all other authorities. If we wish, moreover, to con- 
firm this by the sacred writers, we shall state that they agree 
in this view, Augustine in particular; for he maintains in the 
sixth book on Music that the species of vision comes and is 
propagated in the air to the object. Hence just as an inanimate 

[ 468 |] 

Optical Science 

object produces its own inanimate species, so does an animate 
thing produce a species that has in a measure the force of the 
soul [anima]. For just as an inanimate thing has.a relation- 
ship to its species, which is similar to it, so is an animate thing 
related to a species similar to it. A medium, however, which is 
inanimate will not because of this fact be animate, but will be 
made like an animate one through its likeness now received. 

CHAPTER III 
In which objections are removed. 

IF, moreover, Alhazen, and Avicenna in the third book on the 
Soul, and Averroés in his work on Sense and the Sensible are 
cited as opposed to this view, I reply that they are not opposed 
to the generation of the species of vision, nor to the part it 
plays in producing sight; but they are opposed to those who 
have maintained that some material substance as a visible or 
similar species is extended from the sight to the object, in order 
that vision may perceive the object itself, and that.it may seize 
upon the species of the object seen and carry it back to the 
sight. For this was the opinion of some of the ancients in this 
matter, who did not yet possess definite knowledge of vision. 
We must state, then, that the philosophers mentioned above, 
Alhazen, Avicenna, and Averroés, are opposed only to this 
view, as is evident from their text. But nevertheless the ma- 
jority is imbued with the contrary notion, owing to a passage 
of Aristotle in the Topics, because what one hears from his 
youth he accepts as a matter of habit, so that he is unwilling 
to receive anything else. For Aristotle in the book of the 
Topics, since he is giving the art of proof for every problem, 
states examples, which are the arguments of philosophers on 
matters concerning which there was doubt and which are 
discussed in common among them, as is evident from that 
book. Therefore that famous instance, that vision is the result 
of internal reception and not of external transmission, he cites 
in accordance with well-known opinions. For the Stoics held 
this view, as is shown by Boetius in the fifth book on Consola- 
tion in that verse, “Quondam porticus attulit obscuros nimium 

[ 469 ] 

Opus Majus 

senes, etc.” And in the book of the Priores he says that we do 
not always cite examples because they are true, but that he 
may assent who learns. Aristotle, therefore, does not assert 
that vision is not the result of external transmission, but makes 
the statement in accordance with the general opinion, and as 
an example, not as a truth. As to the fact, also, that in the 
second book on the Soul he strives to show that in general 
sensation belongs to the class of passive faculties and does not 
teach that sensation is active, we must state that this was_neces- 
sary owing to the position of his master Plato and of many 
Platonists. For it was the common belief among them that 
vision was only active, and that it emitted a visible species for 
viewing all visible objects, whence according to them vision 
sends suddenly to the stars a visible species which views them 
and returns to the sight their species. Therefore Aristotle, who 
wished to verify all things as far as the possibilities of his 
age permitted, rejects both opinions regarding vision; namely, 
that of the Stoics, who maintained that it is passive only, and 
that of the Platonists, who held, and erroneously so, that it 
was only or principally active. But one of these views, namely, 
that of the Stoics, he refutes in his book on Animals, and the 
other, that of the Platonists, in his book on the Soul, just as 
it suited his purpose. But those versed in the philosophy of 
Aristotle and particularly in perspective think that vision is 
active and passive. For it receives the species of the thing seen, 
and exerts its own force in the medium as far as the visible 
object. Since the multiplication of species is instantaneous for 
every distance, as most people reckon, or rather it does require 
time, but an insensible amount, this time escapes perception 
owing to its brevity. 

CHAPTER IV 
In which the true theory is given. ~ 

THE reason for this position is that everything in nature com- 
pletes its action through its own force and species alone, as, 
for example, the sun and the other celestial bodies through’ 
their forces sent to the things of the world cause the generation 
and corruption of things; and in a similar manner inferior 

[ 470] 

Optical Science 

things, as, for example, fire by its own force dries and con- 
sumes and does many things. Therefore vision must perform 
the act of seeing by its own force. But the act of seeing is the 
perception of a visible object at a distance, and therefore vision 
perceives what is visible by its own force multiplied to the 
object. Moreover, the species of the things of the world are not 
fitted by nature to effect the complete act of vision at once be- 
cause of its nobleness. Hence these must be aided and excited 
by the species of the eye, which travels in the locality of the 
‘visual pyramid, and changes the medium and ennobles it, and 
renders it analogous to vision, and so prepares the passage of 
the species itself of the visible object, and, moreover, ennobles 
it, so that it is quite similar and analogous to the nobility of 
the animate body, which is the eye. But since this theory is 
doubtful to many, therefore besides the verifications now given 
I shall adduce diverse true and certain experiences, as they 
shall appear in different places below in regard to other con- 
clusions, which necessarily accompany this view of the sub- 
ject. Concerning the multiplication of this species, moreover, 
we are to understand that it lies in the same place as the species 
of the thing seen between the sight and the thing seen, and 
takes place along the pyramid whose vertex is in the eye and 
base in the thing seen. And as the species of an object in the 
same medium travels in a straight path and is refracted in 
different ways when it meets a medium of another transpar- 
ency, and is reflected when it meets the obstacle of a dense 
body; so is it also true of the species of vision that it travels 
altogether along the path of the species itself of the visible 
object. And although the species of the eye lies in the form of 
a pyramid, whose vertex is in the eye and whose base rests on 
all parts of the object seen, yet from the surface of the gla- 
cialis there are pyramids in an infinite number, all of which 
have one base, and the vertices of these pyramids fall upon 
the separate points of the thing seen, so that thus all parts of 
the visible object are seen with such intensity as is possible. 
Nevertheless one pyramid is the principal one, namely, that 
one whose axis is the line passing through the center of all 
parts of the eye, which is the axis of the whole eye; for that 
pyramid attests all things, as was stated above and will be ex- 

plained more fully. 

[471] 

aS 

Opus Majus 

Although the species of visible things, as those of light and 
of color, mix in a medium, that is, several lights unite to form 
one, and several colors mix, as has been stated, and this species 
of an object and the species of vision lie in the same undivided 
place; yet is there no confusion of these species, or mixing, nor 
is one thing formed out of them, since they are not of the same 
species or of the same genus; because the pupil does not have 
color, nor do color and light have the force of the soul. More- 
over, the species of the eye is the species of an animate sub- 
stance, in which the force of the soul holds sway, and therefore 
it bears no comparison to the species of an inanimate thing, so 
that one thing should result from them, just as there is no such 
result from whiteness and sweetness in milk; and much less so 
in the case in point, because there is a much greater distinction 
between the animate and the inanimate, than between the two 
inanimate. 

C472] 

EIGHTH DISTINCTION 

In which we are shown that besides species there are nine conditions 
required for vision. The distinction contains three chap- 
ters. In the first it is shown that light and a 
proper distance are required for vision. 

CHAPTER | 
: N FTER these things we must consider that besides species 

nine things are required for vision, as the authors on 

Perspective show. One of these is light, because noth- 
ing is seen without light. For light in the first place is the 
visible thing, then color and the rest of the twenty things which 
I enumerated before, and all other things are seen with the par- 
ticipation of these, but no one of them is seen unless it is bathed 
in light. The reason for this is thought to be found in several 
ways, namely, either because color does not have a real exist- 
ence in darkness, according to Avicenna in the third book on 
the Soul, or if it has, it is not able to produce its species in 
darkness, according to Alhazen, or if it can, it will not affect 
vision, nor will it change it, so that an act of vision takes place, 
according to the same Alhazen. The first supposition Ptolemy 
proves false in the second book on Perspective as follows: For 
if such were the case, any two things having the same position 
with respect to light and vision would seem of like color, the 
reverse of which we see in different things quite generally, and 
in the same thing at different times, as in the chameleon, which 
changes its color in accordance with the difference of those 
things that approach it, and in the case of him who turns red 
from shame and becomes pale from fear; although the thing 
always has the same position with respect to the light. The sec- 
ond supposition is shown to be false by comparison with every 
other active thing that produces species in darkness and in 
light. The third supposition is the true one, and with reason, 
because the first and principal visible thing is light, and there- 
fore nothing can be seen without its help; just as in the other 
senses we smell nothing without the aid of the sense of smell, 
nor do we touch without the aid of the first four qualities, 
which are hot, cold, moist, dry. 

C473] 

Opus Majus 

The second thing that is required for vision is distance. For 
in general a sensible object placed on the organ of sense is not 
perceived, as Aristotle states in the second book on the Soul. 
The reason for this is that every sense acts by external trans- 
mission, that is, by emitting from itself its own force into the 
medium, so that the sensible species is returned more fitted to 
the sense, and receives a nobler essence from the species of the 
sense, so that it may be more conformed to the sense. More- 
over, we find this in all the senses. For we have shown this 
above in regard to vision; and the like is true in the other two 
senses that have an extrinsic medium, namely, the sense of 
smell and hearing, since Aristotle says in the nineteenth book 
on Animals that forces are produced by the sense of smell and 
by hearing, just as water from canals. Similarly also regarding 
the senses that do not have an extrinsic medium, but an in- 
trinsic one, namely, touch and taste. For concerning touch 
Aristotle says in the second book on Animals that its medium 
is flesh and its instrument is nerve. But in the twelfth book on 
Animals he maintains that the flesh perceives in touch, just as 
the eye in vision. Avicenna, moreover, in the first, second, and 
third books on Animals maintains that the skin and the flesh 
perceive. Therefore the sensitive force which is in the nerve 
scatters its force in the medium of touch, which is the flesh and 
the skin. But taste is a kind of touch, as Aristotle says in the 
second book on the Soul, and has an intrinsic medium, as 
touch has. Therefore the force of taste, which is in the nerve, 
emits its species into the flesh and skin of the tongue, nay, 
what is more, into the palate and other parts of the mouth, so 
that in a measure those parts seem to perceive the savor. 

To what distance we can see on a plain of the earth’s surface 
and on mountains the author on Twilights shows, saying that 
we see on a terrestrial plain about three miles; and on a very 
high mountain, the greatest height of which is eight miles, we 
shall see even on a plain of the earth’s surface only about 250 
miles; and the gibbosity of the earth restricting vision causes 
this. 

[ 4741] 

Optical Science 

CHAPTER I] 

Concerning the third condition which requires that the 
visible object confront the eye. 

THE third condition is that the visible object confront the eye. 
For this is required in vision effected along straight lines, the 
kind of vision here under consideration, although by reflection 
and refraction a thing can be seen without confronting the 
eye. But this is a remarkable fact, since we hear and smell in 
all directions, and feel in front of us the heat of a fire placed 
behind us, if it is large and strong; and vision, which is a 
nobler sense, does not act in this way. Moreover, the cause of 
this thing is quite hidden and still strange and unperceived by 
scientists. For Aristotle in his book of Problems should have 
informed us in regard to this matter, for he touches upon it 
there among his other secret problems. But either a bad trans- 
lation or error in the Greek edition, or some other reason hin- 
ders us in this particular. 

It is certain, however, that we hear in every direction sounds 
without refraction and without reflection, as, for example, one 
speaking hears his own voice; but it is impossible that this hap- 
pens by an accidental multiplication, because an accidental 
species does not cause us to perceive an object, as has been ex- 
plained above. Nor does it take place by refraction, since there 
is only one medium; nor is there present a dense body, from 
which reflection takes place; wherefore the action must be 
along straight lines produced to the ear, therefore there must 
be a real sound and not merely the species of sound opposite the 
ear, and there must be a multiplication into it; but the first 
sound cannot strike the ear. Therefore a real sound must be 
produced opposite the ear; and the way in which this is true I 
shall describe. For sound is produced because parts of the 
object struck go out of their natural position, where there fol- 
lows a trembling of the parts in every direction along with 
some rarefaction, because the motion of rarefaction is from the 
center to the circumference, and just as there is generated the 
first sound with the first tremor, so is there a second sound with 
the second tremor in a second portion of the air, and a third 
sound with the third tremor in a third portion of the air, and 

[475] 

Opus Majus 

so on. Moreover, because these tremors are violent and espe- 
cially so in the air, which is easily moved, and when it is put 
in violent motion retains the impression of the motion, there- 
fore the second sound and successive ones for a good distance 
are not merely the species of sound, but a real sound possessing 
at any rate more than the species. Moreover, since this is a fact, 
for this reason a sound similar to the voice multiplied from 
the mouth to the surface of the ear can be generated by tremors 
of this kind in the air produced in every direction to the ear, 
not by an accidental generation but by a principal one, since 
the reason for this is found in the tremor mentioned, which 
causes the air to vibrate to the ear, and produces a real sound 
in it, and in every direction. Moreover, a sound made in the 
ear or near it, and in a straight line with it, is not the species of 
a species, but is sound itself produced by the tremor. Moreover, 
a proof that sound in the parts of the medium of the air from 
the first place of its production is not merely the species of the 
sound, but has more of the nature of the object, is the fact that 
sound is more violent than other sense perception, because 
sound suddenly confuses the hearing and destroys it, when it 
is very loud. 

Odor not only produces a species, but from the odorous body 
a vapor goes forth, which is a subtle body diffusing itself 
everywhere in the air, and when it comes opposite to the nos- 
trils it multiplies its species to the organ of smell, and therefore 
that vapor has real odor, just like the first odorous body: and 
for this reason not only the species, but the real odor is found 
here in the opening of the nostrils, not, however, the first odor, 
but the second, which is in the vapor. 

Now the four qualities, as stated above in the laws of mul- 
tiplications, are able to complete their species like the four ele- 
ments, because of the necessity of generation. For we see that 
fire not only generates its species, but also a real and perfect 
fire, in flame and charcoal; and thus the heat of fire, having 

s more than does mere species, is able to generate real 
RES heat, and this can take place everywhere in the air. 
Therefore it can reach to the opposite part of an 
animal which is not exposed to the fire, namely, when 
it comes outside the shadow of the fire, which the 
Fic. 33. exposed object makes as far as the point a, and 

C476] 

Optical Science 

then is able to produce a species on the surface of the object 
not exposed to the fire by the line ab. But cases of this kind do 
not happen in those things ordinarily seen, and therefore an 
object must confront the sight. 

CHAPTER III 
Concerning the sensible magnitude of the visible object. 

THE fourth condition required for vision is that the object be 
of a magnitude perceptible by the sense. For the object can be 
so small that it will not be visible. The reason for this is that 
the species coming from the parts of the visible object must be 
arranged distinctly on the surface of the lens, and in addition 
sensibly as regards the sentient faculty. But when the object 
is too small, the species coming from the individual parts of 
the object to the parts of the sentient organ, although distin- 
guished according to the position of its magnitude, as its sur- 
face is infinitely divisible, are not, however, distinguished as 
regards sensation, but are confused because of too great 
proximity on the small part of the sentient organ which the 
visual pyramid occupies. 

Joined, moreover, to this consideration is that of the maxi- 
mum magnitude that we can see by means of the visual pyra- 
mid. This question is one of great doubt, namely, How much 
in extreme magnitude can be seen by the eye? Men versed in 
the problems of perspective estimate that the eye on the surface 
of the earth, as we now see, cannot see a fourth part of the 
heavens by means of the radiant pyramid. But if the eye were 
at the center of the earth, it would see a fourth part of the 
heavens under that pyramid; since they maintain that the 
pyramid contains in the eye a right angle, because by that 
angle is subtended the side of a square that can be described 
in the sphere of the uvea, namely, because the portion of the 
uvea in which the opening is can take the side of a square, and 
to the side of a square a right angle corresponds. Since this 
is a fact according to the opinion of those men, they think that 
in the portion seen of the heavens the side of a square can be 
contained, and for this reason the whole fourth part would be 

[4771] 

Opus Majus 

seen if the eye were at the center of the earth. But if this be a 

fact, then without doubt a fourth part cannot be seen by an eye 

that is on the surface of the earth, by the twentieth proposition 

of the Elements of Euclid. For according to 

this proposition, if from the extremities of 

the base of a triangle two lines are drawn be- 

neath the triangle they will contain a larger 

angle, as is evident in the figure. Therefore 

the vertex of a pyramid coming on a fourth 

part of the heavens to an eye on the surface 

of the earth would contain an obtuse angle. 

Fic. 34. Since, therefore, the angle of the pyramid 

according to these men is a right angle, the 

pyramid itself will not have a quarter of the heavens as a base, 

since the eye is on the surface of the earth, but will have less 
than a fourth. 

But the supposition that the radiant pyramid contains a 
right angle has neither authority nor experience nor proof up 
to the present time, and therefore is rejected with the same 
facility with which it is proved. Moreover, the reason for this 
assigned in the side of a square described in the sphere of the 
uvea cannot stand; because the sphere of the uvea and the 
anterior glacialis are not concentric, and therefore a right 
angle in the sphere of the glacialis will not correspond to the 
side of the square in the sphere of the uvea, nor will the por- 
tions of the glacialis and the uvea be similar, and therefore the 
portion of the sky will not be similar to the portion of the uvea 
in which the side of the square is drawn; which, however, 
would be necessary. Moreover, I am here calling portions simi- 
lar which have portions proportional with respect to their 
spheres when they are cut by the same diameters of the earth, 
as is evident in the figure. For let the sphere of the heavens be 
act, the sphere of the glacialis concentric with it do, and let the 
sphere of the uvea, whose center is different toward the an- 
terior of the eye, namely ¢, be efg. It is evident, therefore, that 
ac, a fourth of the heavens, and do, a fourth of the glacialis, 
are similar, and will have the same right angle, namely, ohd, 
but eg, the fourth of the uvea, does not have that angle, since 
it faces the angle ghe, which is part of the right angle ohd, 
but the portion is larger than that fourth is, namely, ef. There- 

C478] 

Optical Science 

fore the side of the square described in a quarter of the uvea 
cannot face the right angle of the pyramid and of the gla- 
cialis, and therefore the angle of the pyramid cannot bè closed 
by that side. But if it should be so closed, it will be acute, not 
right, as is evident to the sense in the angle ghe, since it is part 

l 

C 

FIG. 35. 

of the right angle fhd and ohd, which are identical. But 
it would be better to say that the portion of the anterior gla- 
cialis is a fourth of the sphere; for thus the angle of the pyra- 
mid would be a right angle, because that whole portion, how- 
ever small it may be, is occupied by the angle of the pyramid, 
because it as a whole is the organ of vision, and not merely 
some part of it. Then, moreover, the side of the square de- 
scribed in the glacialis is subtended by the right angle of the 
pyramid; and similarly in the portion of the albugineous humor, 
which is in the opening of the uvea; and in the same way in 
the portion of the cornea, for they will then be fourths of their 
spheres, because they are concentric with the glacialis. More- 
over, since the heavens would be concentric with them, if the 
center of the eye were at the center of the earth, the fourth 
part of the heavens would then correspond to them, together 
with the side of the square described in it, and thus a fourth 
part of the heavens would be seen. But there has been no 

C479] 

Opus Majus 

verification of the statement that the portion of the anterior 
glacialis is a fourth of its sphere, and therefore we have no 
proof that an eye at the center of the earth would see a fourth 
of the heavens, nor by this method or proof can we be certain 
that an eye on the surface of the earth will see less than a 
fourth, nor how much less. 

But experiment proves that the eye cannot see a fourth part 
of the heavens on the surface of the earth. For if one views a 
star that is above his head, and stands in a level space, he will 
not be able to see as far as the earth, however much he tries; 
but a fourth part of the heavens extends from the zenith to the 
earth. Therefore he will not see a fourth part. But he will see, 
however, a little less, since if on fixing his eye he bends his 
head a little he will see the earth, and he will not see the star. 
There is no other reason for this than the arrangement of the 
eye, because the pupil is so situated, and the opening of the 
uvea so arranged, that he cannot see more. This is manifest, 
because one person owing to the ar- 
rangement of his eye will see more of 
the quarter and another will see less. 
For he who has the opening of the 
uvea small, and the pupil deep set will 
see less of this fourth, and where the 
arrangement is the opposite, one will 
see more, as is shown in the figure; so 
that if the pupil is at the point a and 
the chord of the opening is dc, one will 
see less than if the pupil is at d, be- 

Fic. 36. cause the lines db and dc diverge more 

than ab and ac. Similarly, if the open- 

ing is greater with nearness of pupil more will be seen, as is 

evident by the lines df and dg, which separate more widely; 

and this is the definite reason in this case. Therefore those sup- 
positions given above have no basis in fact. 

[ 480 ] 

NINTH DISTINCTION 

In four chapters. The first deals with the density 
and rarity of the object. 

CHAPTER | 

HE fifth condition is that the visible object, which we 
commonly call the object of vision, must exceed the 
density of the air and of the heavens, as Alhazen 

shows. For this reason we see clearly water, because it is denser 
than air, and vapors, and clouds, and glasses and transparent 
objects of this kind, which have little density as compared 
with those things that have perfect density. But, however, we 
should know that Ptolemy says in the second book of the Per- 
spective that we see the air or the celestial transparent body 
far off and within a considerable distance although not within 
a distance near at hand; for much of a transparent body is 
accumulated in a great distance and has the same effect on 
vision as that which is perfectly dense within a small distance. 
Much, therefore, of a transparent object accumulated in a great 
distance becomes shaded, just as we see in the case of deep 
water, through the medium of which we cannot see the ground 
as we can through water not too deep. For the parts of deep 
water cast forward a shadow on those that succeed them, and 
a darkness is produced that absorbs the quality of the rarity, 
so that in this way the whole body of water appears like some 
dense body, and the same is true of the air or celestial trans- 
parent medium at a distance, for which reason it is rendered 
visible, but not so at close range. 

But there is also another reason, namely, that vision is ter- 
minated at a distant transparent object. For as Alhazen says 
in the seventh book, the rarity of bodies in the world is limited, 
and for this reason all of them have some density and rarity, 
although not very perceptible especially when near; for the 
species of vision is emitted from the sight to the visible object, 
and is weakened in distance, so that although on account of its 
strength it penetrates the air near at hand, but does not pene- 
trate, however, the transparent celestial medium at a distance; 
and therefore vision is terminated at it. But Avicenna says in 

[ 481 ] 

Opus Majus 

the third book on the Soul that that is really visible which 
terminates vision, and therefore this transparent celestial 
medium is really visible at a distance. I offer an example in 
the case of air filled with vapor and cloud in winter, which is 
seen at a distance but not near at hand, and when the air filled 
with vapor is uniform in density and rarity. But from.a great 
distance it is seen because it can terminate the species of vision 
and resist it; and thus it becomes visible, a visibility it cannot 
have near at hand owing to the strength of the species of vision. 
Nor is there deception of vision, because that air filled with 
vapor becomes an object of vision. The explanation of this ac- 
cording to Avicenna lies in the fact that it is able to terminate 
vision. Likewise I say here that air, or the sphere of fire, or 
the heavens, near and remote, is of similar rarity as far as 
perception is concerned; but it has, however, some density of 
its own nature, and this density is able in a great distance to 
terminate the species of vision, which it cannot do in a short 
distance, and therefore it will be quite visible at a distance, but 
not near at hand. Alhazen’s statement, therefore, that a visible 
object must exceed the density of the air, and the fact that he 
calls air wholly transparent as far as the stars, are to be under- 
stood in the case of the usual visible objects which can be seen 
within the required distance and strength of vision. Why a 
color appears approaching black, namely, blue, is explained in 
the same way as in the case of deep water, where in a like 
manner that color appears owing to shadows projected by 
particles. Darkness is caused by these shadows, which is simi- 
lar to blackness. This is what takes place in the air or medium 
between us and the last heaven. If some celestial body were a 
dense body, we could then say that that body would be visible 
chiefly because it terminates vision, and that the whole trans- 
parent medium between the object and the eye would not be 
perceived, except for the fact that vision perceives that it is 
not terminated before its species reaches that dense body. More- 
over, it is thought by learned astronomers, who are ignorant 
of theology, that the starry heaven is everywhere dense. But 
there is another view, namely, that that which is seen beyond 
is the heaven of water. For it has a color like the water of the 
sea, and we see that heaven through the medium of all the 
eight heavens that are on this side of it. For there is no doubt 

[ 482 ] 

Optical Science 

in the minds of theologians and those philosophizing in ac- 
cordance with theology that the ninth heaven is of water; and 
then beyond it is the tenth. But concerning these the discussion 
belongs elsewhere. 

But an objection is raised in regard to the ray or luminous air 
falling through a window that it is quite visible, and yet that 
portion of the air is rare, and rarer than that outside the path 
of the light, because light rarefies air as it generates heat; for 
heat is not generated except from rarefaction. Here, moreover, 
some have attempted to show that density is not required in 
luminous bodies, whence they judge that the stars are not dense, 
nor are the spheres. But owing to the excessive brilliancy of the 
light they say that vision cannot penetrate them, but is beaten 
back or fails from the excess of splendor. But the example of 
the ray falling through the window is clearly explained, as 
stated above. For it is not of itself a visible object nor does it 
terminate vision, but the dense body surrounding it terminates 
vision, and not the ray; for if there were not a dense body be- 
yond it, it would not be seen, just as the luminous air outside is 
not seen, unless it be terminated by the density of some portion 
of the heavens. The air in the window is rendered more per- 
ceptible, because its shape is determined by the parts of the 
window and by the ground on which it falls. It is not, therefore, 
a visible object except in a secondary and not a primary sense, 
nor is this of which we are speaking here a visible object, which, 
namely, has the power of itself by means of the necessary dis- 
tance to terminate vision. Moreover, just as the wrong under- 
standing of this example is now removed, so must we now have 
the right view regarding that which they attempt to prove by 
the example just quoted in regard to luminous bodies. For after 
the antecedent is shown to be false, we need not believe the con- 
sequent. We have stated above in the sections on mathematics 
that the spheres are not luminous, but that a star is so solely on 
account of its density, as Averroés says, and as was stated in 
that place. Moreover, although too great brilliancy confuses 
vision, as is evident when we gaze on the sun in its full strength, 
yet this does not exclude density in the sun, because density is 
the cause of illumination, as Averroés states, and the moon and 
the fixed stars when viewed do not confuse vision from exces- 

[ 483 J 

er, 

Opus Majus 

sive splendor. Therefore vision would penetrate them, unless 
their bodies possessed density. 

Now from this chapter it is clear to him who gives it due 
consideration that vision must take place by means of its species 
emitted to the visible object. For if a single continuous trans- 
parent medium in extreme distance terminates vision, and does 
not terminate it owing to a perfect density, which independ- 
ently is perceptible in every distance, but terminates it be- 
cause of the weakness of the species of vision, which fails at 
a too great distance, then vision must be produced by sending 
forth its species; that is, by emitting its species owing to the 
act of seeing. 

CHAPTER I] 
Concerning the rarity of the medium. 

THE sixth condition required for vision is rarity of the medium. 
For if a dense body is placed between the sight and the visible 
object, the species cannot pass through from one side to the 
other, and thus of necessity vision is cut off. But some, possess- 
ing an excellent understanding of many things in the science of 
Perspective, raise an objection in regard to a flame placed be- 
tween the sight and a visible object impeding vision; and the 
flame, as they say, is a very rare body, because Alhazen says in 
the third book that the rarity of flame deviates from the mean. 
Therefore a rare body hinders vision more than a dense one. 
This, however, is a great error, for of necessity flame is denser 
than air, because Aristotle says in the second book on Genera- 
tion that flame is a glowing terrestrial vapor; and therefore the 
deviation of rarity from the mean can be understood, either 
through a change to an extreme deficiency, or to an extreme 
excess, because the mean is midway between the two, just as 
liberality is between prodigality and avarice. And therefore 
just as avarice deviates from the mean of liberality through a 
lack of this quality, so does flame deviate from the mean of 
rarity by a lack of it, not by an excess. This, moreover, is Al- 
hazen’s meaning, for he so explains himself in what follows. If 
then an objection be raised regarding the lynx, which sees 
through the middle of a wall, as Boetius in the third book on 

[ 4841] 

Optical Science 

Consolation imputes to Aristotle, we reply that although this 
be true of the sight of the lynx, it is not true, however, of human 
vision with which the science of Perspective deals. For we are 
here discussing the latter vision. 

But if we assume that there is a vacuum between heaven and 
earth, there would be neither a dense body nor a rare one. And 
yet Democritus thought that an eye on the earth could see an 
ant in the heavens, as Aristotle states in the second book on 
the Soul. Moreover, vacuum does not possess some nature by 

‘which it should impede species, or resist it, because no form of 

nature exists in a vacuum, as Aristotle says in the fourth book 
of the Physics. Therefore species will not pass through from 
heaven to the eye, and thus we should see the stars without a 
rare medium and without a dense one. But we must here state 
that we should not see anything if there were a vacuum. But 
this would not be due to some nature hindering species, and re- 
sisting it, but because of the lack of a nature suitable for the 
multiplication of species; for species is a natural thing, and 
therefore needs a natural medium; but in a vacuum nature does 
not exist. For vacuum rightly conceived of is merely a mathe- 
matical quantity extended in the three dimensions, existing per 
se without heat and cold, soft and hard, rare and dense, and 
without any natural quality, merely occupying space, as the 
philosophers maintained before Aristotle, not only within the 
heavens, but beyond. 

The seventh condition required for vision is a sensible time. 
For Aristotle says in his book on Memory and Reminiscence 
that our whole intellect is concerned with continuity and time; 
much more so, therefore, is sensation. For the action of the in- 
tellect is spiritual, and the act of sensation is corporeal. But if 
a thing is brought suddenly before the eyes it is not seen dis- 
tinctly and perfectly, and therefore a sensible time is required 
for vision in which the judgment of vision may be made. 
Whence Ptolemy in the second book of the Optics says that 
things which pass through the visual pyramid are thought to 
move swiftly, like the embers of fire and things passing through 
holes and narrow places, to which the vision penetrates. For 
since they pass through the pyramid in a short time, they are 
thought to move swiftly. But such is not the case. 

[ 485 J 

w 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER III 

Showing that the species of vision and of the visible are 
produced in time. 

Bur here a very great doubt arises in regard to the species of 
sight and of the visible object, whether they are produced sud- 
denly and instantaneously, or in time; and if in time, whether 
they require a sensible and perceptible time or not. Alkindus, 
moreover, tries to show in his book De Aspectibus that the ray 
passes through in a wholly indivisible instant, and cites in sup- 
port of his view quite a curious and probable reason, when he 
says, “If the species, as for example the light of the sun when 
it rises, is produced in a particle of time in the first section of 
the air, then if the time is doubled in the second section of the 
air, and tripled in the third, and so when the light reaches the 
west, there would result a time made up of many parts which 
would be large in comparison with the first particle of time; 
and although the first particle would be imperceptible, yet the 
whole time owing to its magnitude incomparable, as it were, 
with respect to the first particle, will be perceptible.” Aristotle, 
moreover, says in the second book on the Soul that although in 
a small distance the multiplication of light might be able to 
escape our sense, yet it would not be able to do so in so great 
a distance as that which separates east and west. Therefore, if 
the species required time this would be perceptible to the sense. 
Therefore the species will not be produced in time but instan- 
taneously. Aristotle says in the book De Sensu et Sensato that 
the explanation in regard to light differs from that in regard to 
other things of perception, and in regard to these others he 
teaches that their multiplications take place in time. Therefore 
the multiplication of light is instantaneous. 

All authorities make this statement except Alhazen, who at- 
tempts to prove this view false in the second book, arguing as 
follows: “Let us take the last instant at which the light is at 
the terminus a quo and the first at which it is at the terminus 
ad quem.” Since therefore the instants are different, as he 
strives to prove by experiment, there will be a time between 
them; and he says that every change takes place in time, but 
the medium and the eye are changed by species. But these rea- 

[ 486 | 

Optical Science 

sons of Alhazen do not have any weight, because the first is 
explained elsewhere. For it is not necessary to give always a 
last instant of an existing thing at the terminus a quo, just as 
universally happens in the generation of permanent things, but 
it is necessary to give the first instant of the terminus ad quem, 
as Aristotle teaches in the eighth book of the Physics. Whence 
when Socrates becomes white from non-white, it cannot be said 
now at last is he not white, taking now as an instant, but now 
first is he white ; for he is not white during the whole time meas- 
uring the change, and he becomes white at the end of this time, 
namely, at the instant which is its terminus, as Aristotle teaches, 
and as is certain, although it is too difficult to understand 
unless well explained ; but this is required elsewhere. His second 
reason has no weight; for all holding the opposite view say 
that the multiplication of light is not a successive and temporal 
change. 

A sound argument, however, for the view of Alhazen can be 
drawn from the statements which he makes in the seventh 
book. For he there teaches that from the same terminus the 
perpendicular ray reaches more quickly the terminus of the 
space than the ray that is not perpendicular. But quicker and 
slower belong only to time, as Aristotle says in the fourth and 
in the sixth book of the Physics. And this is demonstrated with- 
out possible contradiction. For no finite force acts instantane- 
ously, as Aristotle says in the sixth book of the Physics; and he 
proves this, because in that case a greater force would act in 
less than instantaneous time, which is impossible. But the force 
of the eye, and of its species, and of everything created is finite. 
Therefore no force can act instantaneously. Moreover, in the 
eighth book of Physics at the end he maintains that a finite force 
and an infinite one cannot act in the same and equal period of 
time, since in that case they could have equal results, and thus 
in turn the forces themselves would be equal. But it is the prop- 
erty of an infinite force to act instantaneously. Therefore a 
finite force cannot produce any result in an instant, wherefore 
it must require time. Moreover, an instant has the same relation 
to time as a point to a line. Therefore, interchanging terms, 
an instant has the same relation to a point as time has to a line; 
but the passage through a point is in an instant. Therefore the 
passage through the whole line is in time. Therefore species 

[ 487] 

Opus Majus 

passing through linear space, however small, will pass through 
in time. Moreover, before and after in space are the cause of 
before and after in making translation over space and in dura- 
tion of time, as Aristotle says in the fourth book of the Physics. 
Therefore since space through which species is carried has a 
before and after, passage of the ray must have a before and af- 
ter both in itself and in duration; but before and after in dura- 
tion exist only in time, since this condition cannot exist in an 
instant. If, moreover, it be said that this is true of those things 
that have a corporeal existence in a medium, not concerning 
those things that have a spiritual existence, as it is assumed 
here, evidently the objection has no weight, owing to what has 
already been said. Again if it be said that this is true in regard 
to those things that are measured by parts of space, but that 
species is not so measured, as they assume, this objection also 
has no weight, because that second statement is not made except 
on account of a spiritual existence. Since, therefore, the species 
of a corporeal thing has a really corporeal existence in a me- 
dium, and is a real corporeal thing, as was previously shown, 
it must of necessity be dimensional, and therefore fitted to the 
dimensions of the medium. 

But if at the same instant it were throughout the whole me- 
dium, it would then be at the terminus a quo, and at the middle 
point of the space, and at the terminus ad quem, namely, at one 
and the same time. But this is in many ways impossible. For, in 
the first place, it follows from this that'a created thing would 
be at one and the same time in several places, and by this rea- 
soning if in several places, then also in an infinite number, as 
has already been shown in the chapter on matter. It would 
therefore have an infinite power and would be God, or equal to 
God. In the second place, the argument is drawn from this that 
while the thing is at the terminus a quo it is wholly quiescent, 
nor does it suffer change in any way; and when it is at the 
terminus ad quem the change has already been effected, and the 
change takes place between these termini. Therefore at the 
same instant the species would be quiescent before its passage, 
and the change would be effected, and would take place actually 
through the whole space. Therefore at the same time it would be 
changed, and would not be changed, which are contradictory, 

[ 488 ] 

Optical Science 

as Aristotle argues reducing the matter to an impossibility in 
another case in the sixth book of the Physics. 

But there is still another reason for this, namely, since the 
multiplication of light does not depend on some other motion, 
we may assume, therefore, that the heavens are at rest and that 
there is no motion, for in a stationary heavens the multiplication 
of light can take place excellently, and will be accomplished at 
the end of the world, if the heavens shall be stationary, as is 
assumed. If, therefore, the multiplication of light is instan- 
taneous, and not in time, there will be an instant without time; 
because time does not exist without motion. But it is impossible 
that there should be an instant without time, just as there cannot 
be a point without a line. It remains, then, that light is multi- 
plied in time, and likewise all species of a visible thing and of 
vision. But nevertheless the multiplication does not occupy a 
sensible time and one perceptible by vision, but an imperceptible 
one, since any one has experience that he himself does not per- 
ceive the time in which light travels from east to west. 

CHAPTER IV 
Concerning the removal of objections to the truth. 

MOREOVER, to this statement made by Jacobus Alkindi we must 
reply that, just as the first period of the time is imperceptible, 
so also is the double of it, and the triple, and the thousandth 
multiple: whence the whole time is imperceptible, although it 
has many parts which taken together make an imperceptible 
whole, for this motion of the species is of such great velocity 
that it can traverse in an imperceptible time a very great dis- 
tance. Aristotle’s statement is true according to his understand- 
ing of it, for he is arguing in that place against Empedocles, 
„who maintained that light is a body and the flow of a body, just 
as water flows from a spring; and it is not possible that a body 
should change its position wholly from east to west, so that it 
would not be perceived owing to the great distance. But the 
species is not a body, nor is it changed as regards itself as a 
whole from one place to another, but that which is produced in 
the first part of the air is not separated from that part, since 
form cannot be separated from the matter in which it is, unless 

[ 489 J 

Opus Majus 

it be soul, but the species forms a likeness to itself in the second 
position of the air, and so on. Therefore it is not a motion as re- 
gards place, but is a propagation multiplied through the differ- 
ent parts of the medium; nor is it a body which is there gen- 
erated, but a corporeal form, without, however, dimensions per 
se, but it is produced subject to the dimensions of the air; and 
it is not produced by a flow from a luminous body, but by a re- 
newing from the potency of the matter of the air, as we stated 
above when the question was discussed in regard to the genera- 
tion of species. Moreover, if we inquire still more carefully why 
we do not perceive this generation of light take place succes- 
sively in the particles of the air, the answer can be given that 
light in the air is not an object, but a species with a weak and in 
a manner imperceptible existence as regards itself, and its sub- 
ject between the east and the west is imperceptible, namely, the 
air itself, and for this reason the sense is not able to perceive a 
successive generation of this kind. 

Moreover, as regards Aristotle’s statement that there is a dif- 
ference between the transmission of light and that of the other 
sensory impressions, we must say that many are deceived in this 
particular; for his statement is true, but this difference is not 
to be understood as consisting in the fact that light is trans- 
mitted instantaneously and the other impressions require time; 
nay, we must understand that, although light has a succession 
in its transit, it does not, however, have so great a one as sound 
and odor, of which he is speaking in this place. For sound has 
the motion of the displacement of the parts of the body struck 
from its natural position, and the motion of the following 
tremor, and the motion of rarefaction in every direction, as was 
stated before, and as is evident from the second book on the 
Soul; and these are the three local motions of the particles of 
the air, as well as of the body struck, no one of which motions 
takes place because of the multiplication of light. For although 
the air must be rarefied for light to produce heat, yet rarefaction 
is not necessary because of the multiplication of light itself, 
since in celestial spaces light is multiplied, where rarefaction 
and the generation of heat are not possible. Since, therefore, 
there is no succession on the part of light except the succession 
itself in multiplication, but in the multiplication of sound a 
threefold temporal succession takes place, no one of which is 

[ 490 |] 

Optical Science 

present in the multiplication of light, for this reason there is a 
great difference between light and sound. However, the multi- 
plication of both as regards itself is successive and requires 
time. 

Likewise, in the case of odor the transmission is quite differ- 
ent from that of light, and yet the species of both will require 
time for transmission, for in odor there is a minute evaporation 
of vapor, which is, in fact, a body diffused in the air to the 
sense besides the species, which is similarly produced. There is 
‘also a strong attraction of the nostrils for this kind of vapor and 
of species, so that sensation may be produced, as Avicenna 
shows in the third book on the Soul and as we know by experi- 
ence. This results in the removal of the covering that is over 
the organ of smell, according to Aristotle in the second book on 
the Soul. Therefore in the sense of smell there is a twofold 
local motion, one from the resolution of the vapor, and the 
other from its attraction, besides a succession in the multiplica- 
tion of the species. But in vision nothing is found except a suc- 
cession of the multiplication. The fact that there is a difference 
in the transmission of light, sound, and odor can be set forth in 
another way, for light travels far more quickly in the air than 
the other two. We note in the case of one at a distance striking 
with a hammer or a staff that we see the stroke delivered before 
we hear the sound produced. For we perceive with our vision 
a second stroke, before the sound of the first stroke reaches the 
hearing. The same is true of a flash of lightning, which we see 
before we hear the sound of the thunder, although the sound is 
produced in the cloud before the flash, because the flash is pro- 
duced in the cloud from the bursting of the cloud by the kindled 
vapor. Therefore his statement that there is a difference in the 
transmission of light and of the other sensory impressions can 
be understood, because this difference is not one of instantane- 
ousness and time, but of less time and more time. For all au- 
thors, whether sacred or others, who state that light is multi- 
plied instantaneously, are to be understood in regard to a 
divisible instant, which is imperceptible time, and not in regard 
| to a real instant, which is the indivisible terminus of time, just 
as the point is of the line. If, therefore, the vision of the species 
and the visible multiplication take place in imperceptible time, 
how was it said above that vision will take place in a perceptible 

[ 491 J] 

Opus Majus 

time? It is evident that besides the multiplication there is a 
judgment of vision in regard to the object seen, and this judg- 
ment must be known to the sense; wherefore the judgment must 
be made in a perceptible time. 

The eighth condition required for vision is a healthy state of 
the eye together with its natural arrangement; for an eye that 
is torn out, or blind, or much injured, or clouded from some 
flowing humor, or from a resolution of vapors confusing the 
pupil cannot judge regarding objects, as is evident, and there- 
fore need not be considered here. For if anything need be said 
further on this point, it will be explained in what follows. Con- 
cerning position, which is the final condition in vision, an ex- 
planation cannot be given here, because it coincides with other 
matters of which mention must be made later. 

[ 492 J 

TENTH DISTINCTION 

In three chapters. The first shows with greater precision than 
above what things are perceived per se and 
what per accidens. 

CHAPTER [I 

AVING stated these eight conditions without which 
vision cannot function, we must consider of what 
things vision takes cognizance, and in what ways they 

are perceived and certified to, and how and why vision errs in 
taking cognizance of visible objects, although vision has been 
produced by direct rays. We must note, then, that when these 
nine conditions are present in just degree, that is, they neither 
exceed nor fall below what is required, a reliable vision is as- 
sured. When, therefore, they differ from the due measure either 
by excess or deficiency, error is present in vision. Moreover, the 
twenty-two qualities enumerated above, as light, color, remote- 
ness, etc., are determined by vision ; and besides this, vision per- 
ceives man and horse and the other things of this world. For 
by light and color these twenty things are recognized. Then 
through the medium of light and color and those twenty quali- 
ties other things are known, as is possible for the sense, for the 
particular senses are not able to certify regarding all things; but 
those twenty-two the particular sense and the common sense 
and imagination are able to comprehend without error, pro- 
vided the eight conditions previously mentioned are present 
in proper measure. Those qualities, moreover, are called the 
sensibles per se, certainty in regard to which can be secured 
from the senses; but the sensibles per accidens are those that 
cannot be apprehended in this way. 

Although we previously touched upon these sensibles per se 
and per accidens, yet in order that no mistake may be made they 
must be explained more fully. I say, then, that the sensibles per 
accidens are twofold : certain can be determined by other fac- 
ulties of the sensitive soul, as, for example, by the estimative 
and memorative faculties, as previously stated; certain, how- 
ever, are called sensibles per accidens with respect to particular 
senses and the common sense and imagination, since such senses 

[ 493 J 

Opus Majus 

do not perceive things of this kind independently, but because 
they are found in the same things together with their own 
sensibles per se. As, for example, since enmity with respect to a 
lamb is present at the same time with the form and color of a 
wolf, the lamb in looking at a wolf saw something hostile and 
colored, but the eye per se forms no judgment concerning the 
hostile object, but judges it such, because it is found in connec- 
tion with the colored object. Moreover, since a particular sense 
and the common sense are commonly called senses, for this rea- 
son the sensibles in regard to which they certify are called sen- 
sibles per se, and those concerning which they do not certify are 
called sensibles per accidens, although some of them can be rec- 
ognized by other inner faculties of the soul. For the estimative, 
cogitative, and memorative faculties are not called senses in the 
ordinary meaning of the term, although they are parts of the 
sensitive soul, and therefore the sensibles determined by them 
are called sensibles per accidens, because the sensibles are re- 
ferred to the particular senses and the common sense. 

But there are other sensibles besides those that are recognized 
by the faculties of the sensitive soul. As, for example, when I 
see a strange man I cannot perceive by the sense whose son he 
is, nor at what hour or in what place he was born, or what name 
he bears, Peter or Robert; and there are countless things of this 
kind that are accidental to each person, in regard to which no 
faculty of the sensitive soul can inform us, nor can one know 
the truth except through information given. And yet on looking 
at that man vision falls upon all his qualities. For if he be the 
son of Robert, and a Frenchman, and born in Paris during the 
first hour of the night, in looking at him the eye sees Peter, a 
Parisian, born in the first hour of the night, son of Robert, be- 
cause these things are coincident with his color, and form, and 
other visible characteristics. In like manner the natural sub- 
stances of things, both in things animate and inanimate, are 
not perceptible by some faculty of the sensitive soul except per 
accidens. Those things are excepted that are harmful or useful, 
which the estimative faculty grasps, and sense, however, falls 
upon this per accidens. Hence when I see a man I see substance 
and an animated object, and therefore vision falls in a measure 
on his natural substance, and on his soul also, which is a spirit- 
ual thing; but this is surely per accidens. Moreover, the sensi- 

[ 494 1 

LOUIS Ix 

From the Seurre Statue at Versailles 

Optical Science 

bles belonging to one sense are sensibles per accidens of other 
senses, whence hot and cold, moist and dry, odor, sound, savor, 
are sensibles per accidens with respect to vision, and thus the 
_ sensibles belonging to each sense are sensibles per accidens with 

respect to other senses. Sensibles, then, per se, as has been said, 
are twofold: certain are proper, namely, nine, and certain are 
common, namely, twenty, because they can be perceived in com- 
mon by several senses, especially by sight and touch. For as 
Ptolemy says in the second book all things that vision perceives 
touch discerns, except light and color; and all things of which 
touch certifies can be certified to by vision, except four proper 
sensibles, namely, hot, cold, moist, and dry. 

CHAPTER II 
Concerning those things that produce species in vision. 

MOREOVER, that we may know how sensibles of this kind are 
recognized per se, we must know in the first place whether all 
things propagate their species to the sense. The determination 
of this is difficult, but Ptolemy in the second book of the Optics 
settles this question with the statement that only light and color 
propagate their species to the eye. This view Alhazen main- 
tains in the fourth book; whence other things are not active 
upon the sense or upon the medium. The reason why they are 
not active is that they are all magnitudes or properties of mag- 
nitudes, as is evident, and magnitude is not active, because it is 
a quality of matter which is not active but passive, as Aristotle 
states in the first book on Generation, and Avicenna agrees with 
him in the second book on the Soul. For the medium or instru- 
ment that takes up the sound is soundless, and the instrument 
that takes up color is colorless, as he states. Therefore his opin- 
ion is that the medium and the senses do not have to have the 
natures of the sensibles whose species they must take up, in 
order that they may judge concerning the sensibles perceived 
by means of these species. Whence the humor glacialis does not 
possess some nature of light or color to the degree possessed by 
objects outside it. For although the eye has light, this is in re- 
spect to the perception of color, not in respect to light, because 
the object acted upon does not possess in actuality but in po- 

[ 495 ] 

Opus Majus 

tentiality the ability to become like the agent. Nor does the an- 
terior glacialis possess some degree of color, by which it may 
be made really like colored objects outside itself, of which it 
has to form judgments, although the eye has in its humors and 
coats some weak substance of color, by means of which imagi- 
nary colors sometimes appear, as will be explained when we con- 
sider the iris. But the eye does possess form and magnitude and 
corporeality, and other common sensibles that are appropriate 
to it, and therefore it is not fitted naturally to receive the species 
of these things, nor are they themselves active. And although 
Aristotle says in the second book on the Soul that the final per- 
fection of every sense consists in its organ being the medium of 
sensibles, yet that degree of mediumship does not exist in 
things pertaining to the senses; since if it did exist and its 
species were produced on the sense, the sense would not judge 
concerning that mediumship, and therefore vision would not 
be able to receive the species of things so as to judge by means 
of these species concerning things whose natures are similar in 
vision. When, therefore, the objection is made that these are 
sensibles per se, that they therefore act on the sense, just like 
proper ones; we must reply that they are not called sensibles 
per se because of their action on the sense, but because the sense 
is able to certify concerning them. And if the objection should 
be made that vision will not certify concerning them, since they 
do not propagate their species to vision, we must reply that such 
is the case; for its own species is not required in all things, but 
the species of vision is sufficient along with the species of light 
and color and with certain other considerations. When these 
have all been combined certainty can be secured, as will be ex- 
plained later. If it be said that authors on perspective state fre- 
quently that shape and quality and the like of the thing seen are 
arranged on the surface of the sentient member, and that they 
cannot reach there except through their species, we must reply 
that the statement is not their own, or has not been correctly 
translated; for they do not mean to say more than that from 
the whole magnitude and form the species of light and color 
come which are arranged on the surface of the sentient member, 
and this suffices. 

When it was stated above that we see the air or the heavens 
at a distance, and that it is certain that in the water of a river 

[ 496 ] 

Optical Science 

or in some other body of water that has great width the heavens 
are seen by reflection, just like an object in a mirror; and an 
object in a mirror is seen by this means, because its species is 
reflected from the mirror to the vision; some one might then 
say that the celestial transparency of air at a distance produces 
a species by means of which it may be seen in water. But we 
must state that no species of the thing seen exists there, but 
the species of vision, which in the air without water is multi- 
plied along a straight line to the celestial transparency at a dis- 
‘tance, and apprehends that transparency with the aid of the 
species of light illuminating that transparency; and when it is 
seen by means of water reflexively, the species of vision is re- 
flected from the water to the air seen at a distance, and the 
species of the thing is not reflected. Hence not everything that 
is seen by reflection is seen by means of its own species. But this 
happens as in the case of several familiar visible objects, but 
this must not be understood generally, because I can see water 
by means of a mirror, but the species of water is not propagated 
there, but the species of vision is, and this is the case here. 

CHAPTER III 
Distinguishing three universal modes of perception through vision. 

IN the next place, we should know that besides the particular 
modes of perceiving the sensibles per se, there are three uni- 
versal modes, according to the authors of Perspective. But in 
particular Alhazen explains these modes and he does so ade- 
quately, except that sometimes an inept translation of words 
occurs. There is, then, first an impression by the sense alone 
without any faculty of the soul, and it is thus that light and 
color in general are perceived. For vision is able to decide that 
there is color or light without error when it beholds an object, 
provided the eight aforesaid qualities are in their proper pro- 
portion; and therefore these two are perceived by the intuition 
alone of the sense. But the species and modes of color and of 
light cannot be so easily recognized; for if a strange color ap- 
pears which we have not seen before, we will not know what 
species of color it is. Likewise if we see some bright object in 
the air, which has a light different from other objects with 

[ 497 1] 

Opus Majus 

which we are familiar, as, for example, a star with a train or 
some other object, and we have not seen it before, we cannot 
decide by the vision what that light is. Likewise if we have seen 
some color before, and later have forgotten it, then when it 
again appears to the sight we can judge it a color, but we will 
not perceive what color it is. Likewise when in infancy we saw 
the full moon we did not perceive whether it was the light of 
the sun or of the moon until we became accustomed to it and 
the fact became fixed in our minds that such a light belongs to 
the moon, not to the sun. This is also true of the stars, because 
many men at some time or other see Jupiter, or Venus, or Mer- 
cury, and because of the beauty of these stars they look at them 
with pleasure, and they are then told by astronomers that the 
light of one particular star is of this kind, and the light of still 
another is of that kind, and they are made sensible of the dif- 
ference. But after time has passed, when on another occasion 
they see one of those stars, they do not distinguish whether the 
light is that of Mercury or of Venus or of some other star, be- 
cause they have forgotten the impression of the particular light 
of each of those stars seen formerly, but they recognize the 
lights of these stars by means of a second perception which is by 
similitude, according to Alhazen. This mode of cognition con- 
cerns not only color and light, but all things in which we dis- 
tinguish the universal from the particular, and particulars from 
one another. For example, when I see a man whom I have seen 
before, if I have the impression that I have seen him before, I 
recognize then not only a man in general, but that particular in- 
dividual whom I distinguish from others by means of this kind 
of cognition. If, however, I have forgotten, I see a man, but I 
do not know who he is. 

We must bear in mind, however, that when the statement was 
made that vision perceives color or light as a universal by the 
sense alone, and not as a particular, the particular is excluded 
which is lower in the line of predication, as, for example, the 
species of color. Again, particulars designated by the species 
of something are excluded, as the light of the sun, and the light 
of the moon, because perchance light does not have species but 
modes, because all lights of stars have their origin in the rising 
sun. But the indefinite particular is not excluded, for it is as 
general as its own universal and is convertible with it, as some 

[ 498 | 

Optical Science 

color, some light, some man, some ox. Therefore the recognition 
of universals from one another and from particulars, and par- 
ticulars from one another by a comparison of a thing seen with 
the same thing seen before, by recollecting that it was seen be- 
fore and known to the beholder, produces here a second mode 
of comprehension through vision. 

But there is still a third perception, which cannot take place 
by the sense alone, and does not depend on a comparison with 
previous vision, but without limitation considers the thing 
present. For its perception several things are required, and the 
process is like a kind of reasoning. As, for example, when one 
holds in his hand a transparent stone, and does not perceive its 
transparency, but if he exposes it to the air, and if there is some 
opaque body behind it at the required distance and if the light 
is sufficient, he will see the light and the opaque body beyond 
the stone; and then, since he is not able through the medium of 
the stone to see the object that is behind it, unless the stone be 
transparent, he reasons that it is clear and transparent. But in 
ordinary things we employ this perception instantaneously, and 
we do not perceive that we are reasoning, although we are 
doing so. For a man reasons naturally without difficulty and 
labor; as, for example, when a boy is offered two apples, one of 
which is finer in appearance than the other, he chooses the finer 
one, but for no other reason than because it looks finer to him, 
and for this reason should be chosen rather than the other. 
Whence he follows this reasoning; that which is finer in ap- 
pearance in so far is better, and what is better is rather to be 
chosen, therefore the finer in appearance should be chosen; and 

yet he does not perceive that he is reasoning, because of the 
swiftness of the reasoning process innate in man, as Alhazen 
teaches. 

And now in metaphysical and logical terms I have estab- 
lished the view of Alhazen, and I have proved that our knowl- 
edge of the science of reasoning, which is logic, is derived from 
nature, but we are ignorant of the proper terms at the begin- 
ning, and these through their zeal for discovery the first authors 
on logic have found, but we learn them by study. Because of 
these terms the formal subject of logic exists, not because of the 
potency of the science itself, because this is innate in every one, 
as Alhazen here maintains and I have proved elsewhere. Thus 

[ 499 ] 

Opus Majus 

are comprehended the twenty common sensibles, with their 
species, for they could not be determined except through this 
perception, and it is evident that the sense alone is not able to 
determine in these two modes; and this is called the sense alone 
when vision is in the pupil and in the common nerve reaching to 
the common sense. For unless imagination and the memory of 
the previous sight of an object be present, there will be no com- 
prehension in the second mode. But imagination and memory 
are beyond the common sense. The third mode is still further 
removed from the sense pure and simple, because in this mode 
more things are taken into consideration than in the second 
mode, and there is more recourse to reason because of the proc- 
ess of ratiocination. But these modes do not have names prop- 
erly translated. The first Alhazen calls perception by the sense 
pure and simple. The second he chiefly calls perception by sci- 
ence. The third he calls perception by syllogism, because of the 
mode of reasoning. But these names are not proper, because the 
faculties of the sensitive soul have these cognitions, for which 
neither science, nor syllogism is needed as they are generally 
accepted. But concerning this we shall learn more definitely 
when we inquire what are the faculties of the soul which form 
these judgments through the mediumship of vision. This can- 
not be accomplished before it becomes more apparent, in the 
case of examples from different kinds of visibles, how they are 
determined. 

[ 500] 

SECOND PART OF PERSPECTIVE 

FIRST DISTINCTION 

Here begins the second part of this treatise, which is on the particular 
modes and causes of vision along a straight line in the main. It 
has three distinctions. The first is on vision as determined by the 
structure of the eye and is in three chapters. The first chapter is 
on those things that men see at a distance and on what they see 
near at hand, 

CHAPTER I 

INCE, moreover, the knowledge of opposites is the same, 

as Aristotle says in the Topics, and in the first book on 

the Soul asserts that that which is straight is the test of 
itself and of that which is not straight, because by the privation 
of health sickness is perceived, therefore I shall designate par- 
ticular modes of determining visibles at the same time with the 
defects of vision and with its errors, so that at once the defect 
itself and the error may be apparent by the determination of 
the contrary truth. In the first place, then, we must give an ex- 
planation of vision in relation to those things that relate to the 
structure of the eye. Those whose eyes are deep-set for this rea- 
son must see further than those whose eyes are prominent. The 
first reason for this is the greater strength that a deep-seated 
eye has owing to its greater proximity to the common nerve in 
which is located the visual force, as in a fountain. The second 
reason is because a deep-set eye is more protected from ills and 
is more remote from injuries than a prominent eye, and there- 
fore is stronger. The third reason is because the visual force is 
more concentrated and unified, while it is more covered within 
the concavity of the bone, so that it thus takes a narrower and 
straighter path to the object seen, and is less scattered and 
dilated, so that it thus falls into the position of the visual pyra- 
mid. For this reason when a man wishes to view something at a 
distance with care, he applies the hollow of his hand to the bone 
of the eye, in order that the visual force may be more concen- 
trated and less dispersed. A proof of this is the fact that the 
eyes of animals, as in the case of fish, which do not have the pro- 

[501 ] 

We, 

Opus Majus 

tection of eyelashes, do not see well at a distance, since the 
visual force is dispersed and dilated too much, since the eye 
does not have anything surrounding and confining it. Aristotle 
takes this view in the nineteenth book on Animals, and it is 
supported by experience. For a man in a well or in some other 
deep place will be able to see stars by day which he will not see 
at the surface of the well, as Pliny states in the second book of 
the Natural Philosophy, and experience teaches this. One cause 
of this is owing to the narrowness of the path, because the visual 
force is compressed for a long time, so that it proceeds more 
directly to the place of the stars that are above the well, and 
this is because of the covering that it has in the depth of the 
well. Thus the eye deep-set in the head in the same way is able 
to see better for this reason, which will be touched upon below. 
Ptolemy expressly states this in the second book of the Optics 
in these words, “Those who have deep-set eyes see further” ; 
the reason for this is the visual force which is produced because 
of the compression, that is, the concentration and unification, 
and because of the narrowness of the place. For when it issues 
from narrow places, the vision is extended and elongated, be- 
cause the force of the eye of necessity is more concentrated and 
compressed into a smaller place, and for this reason is stronger ; 
because every united force is of 
stronger action. Its compression is 
evident in the figure. If bc is the 
opening of the uvea, and a is the 
pupil of some eye deeper-set, it is evi- 
y b dent that its force falls between the 
lines e and f; but if it were at d, the 
force would pass through the gh 
\y lines, which are more divergent. 
K Some with considerable grasp of this 
FIG. 37. science of perspective reject the rea- 
son which Ptolemy and Aristotle as- 
sign and which experience teaches, alleging certain conclusions 
which are rightly shattered by so weighty an authority and by 
the force of experience. I make this statement, because it is not 
necessary in this place to dissolve all doubts that can be urged 
against the truth, for an infinite number can be adduced against 
any truth whatever. 

a 

h 

[ 502 ] 

— se we 

Optical Science 

But besides this explanation from concavity, another can be 
given regarding the humors of the eye and depends on the 
small amount of the albugineous humor; for when this is plenti- 
ful it has the same effect on the glacialis as upon one who looks 
into a large, deep body of water, the large amount of which so 
shortens vision that it cannot see farther. Avicenna is of this 
opinion in the nineteenth book on Animals; and Averroés in his 
book on Sense and the Sensible cites as a reason for far vision 
the protection of the eyelashes, saying that the eyelashes pre- 
serve and guard the eyes from heat and cold and from many 
impediments, and that for this reason there is greater strength 
in eyes possessing eyelashes, which have far vision. He cites the 
case of many animals that see farther than man, because they 
have thicker eyelashes. 

We must next consider why many old people, when they 
wish to see things distinctly, as in reading letters, see better at a 
distance than when the object is near. For they hold objects that 
they wish to examine further from them. The reason for this 
Ptolemy explains in the second book of the Perspective, for their 
eyes abound in moisture; for old people have much superfluous 
accidental moisture. When therefore the moisture is scanty the 
vision passing through it is immediately set free from it, and 

is thus able quickly to see distinctly an object appearing close’ 

at hand; but when there is an abundance of accidental moisture 
the eye is confused, and is not so quickly freed on account of 
the quantity of the moisture. For this reason an object must be 
further removed from the eyes before it is seen distinctly; for 
this moisture, which flows in the eye and on the surface of the 
cornea and the eyelashes, not only occupies the body of the eye, 
but renders moist the air near the eye; and therefore from a 
point close at hand such eyes cannot see, but the vision must be 
freed from that moisture and must pass through a longer dis- 
tance. The first explanation touched upon the cause of vision at 
a distance through the natural moisture of the eye; here we are 
talking about the accidental superfluous moisture. But we are 
speaking here of vision at a distance in a different sense from 
that in the former case; for what we here term near and far 
is contained there under one of those terms, namely, under the 
term near, because remoteness is there taken as great distance, 
and here we are speaking of distance and a discriminated per- 

[ 503 1 

aR 

Opus Majus 

ception which always takes place near at hand. But there can 
be greater proximity or remoteness, which are degrees in 
proximity opposed to the remoteness of which we were speaking 
in what precedes. 

CHAPTER I] 

In this chapter the causes are given for clear or 
distinct vision in darkness and in light. 

SINCE mention has been made of the discrimination of vision, 
because it is one thing to see a long distance, another thing to 
. discern, we must consider what are required for discrimination 
and distinctness of vision as regards the structure of the eye. 
Without doubt the humor glacialis must be of good size, so that 
on it the parts of the object can be clearly and sensibly distin- 
guished. For if it is small, the species of the parts of the object 
seen will occupy positions too close and greater confusion will 
be caused. Moreover, it must be pure, and likewise the humor 
albugineus; for impressions and spots are quickly detected in 
a clean thing, as is evident in the case of spots on a clean rag, 
and therefore the species of things impressed on the eye will 
appear better and more clearly if the humors are pure and 
cleansed. But the humor albugineus must be of proper size; 
for otherwise it will be like deep water with respect to the 
humor glacialis, as has been said, and ‘the vision will be ob- 
scured. Moreover, the weblike structure and the cornea are 
thin and fine and quite pervious, in order that they may not 
cause a shadow on the glacialis. Moreover, they must not be 
wrinkled, but they must have a smooth and expanded surface, 
since if they have wrinkles they cause a shadow; and this is 
the reason why old people are deprived of a distinct and dis- 
criminated vision, since the weblike structure and the cornea 
have wrinkles in aged people, just like the skin of their whole 
body. 

Not only must we consider keenness of vision in seeing for a 
greater distance, and discrimination in vision through the na- 
ture of the structure of the eyes; but we must take up this ques- 
tion why some eyes see in the dark and in the twilight and in 

[ 504] 

Optical Science 

little light better than in the full light, and other eyes the 
reverse. Without doubt those that have a great deal of the 
humor albugineus need much light before it becomes clear; 
particularly if it is thick, and especially impure; and therefore 
such eyes do not see well at night with insufficient light. There 
is the same result if the humor glacialis is large and thick and 
impure, and if the weblike structure and the cornea are thick 
and wrinkled: for the action of light must be full and vigorous 
in order that these may be rendered clear, and in the day and in 
full light such eyes see well, and not otherwise. But those that 
have a scanty but clear and pure moisture in the humors, and 
have the web and the cornea quite transparent and without 
wrinkle, are not able to see in the strong light; because a strong 
light confuses such an eye from its excessive clarity, and to such 
a degree takes possession of the vision with the glare of light, 
that as regards external visible things the eye is unable to make 
distinction in them. As, for example, a man that has stood ina 
strong light, on turning to dark places is unable to discern ob- 
jects in these places owing to the strong species of light that acts 
to excess in his eyes; for a more vigorous excitation of the mind 
always obscures weaker ones. Therefore men with eyes of this 
kind see well in the twilight and by the light of a candle at 
night and by the light of the stars. For all that has been said 
in regard to distinctness of vision and vision in the dark and in 
the light we have the authority of Aristotle and of Avicenna in 
their books noted above. 

Concerning vision, however, in the dark and in the light an- 
other reason can be given, namely, when the eye has a great 
deal of light of its own; for the eye in man, in the horse, in the 
cat, and in many other animals shines of itself, as is apparent 
when a man in the dark moves the eye from its position by the 
finger. But some people have more light, some less; and those 
having much are able to see in dim light and in the dark, if the 
other causes affecting the humors and the web and the cornea 
are present which I have mentioned. But those having a small 
amount of light do not possess this power ; especially if the other 
causes affecting the humors and the web and the cornea are not 

present. 

[ 505 ] 

Opus Majus 

_ CHAPTER III 

Concerning various errors of vision owing to the 
structure and complexion of the eye. 

THE fact that the object seen appears single results from ex- 
cellence in the structure of the eye; when, namely, the pupils 
have the same position with respect to the common nerve; since 
in that case the species come from the two eyes to the same 
place in the common nerve, and a single judgment is formed. 
When, however, nature is at fault, as happens in the case of 
one who squints, since the glacialis of one eye does not have a 
position similar to the glacialis in the other, the species natu- _ 
rally come to different places in the common nerve, and for this 
reason the man who squints must spend much effort in reducing 
the eyes to a similar position, so as to avoid error and grasp 
the unity of the object. Moreover, although the eye is correct in 
structure, nevertheless manifold difficulties arise from exces- 
sive heat or cold, as men frequently stand in hot places, for ex- 
ample, smiths, bakers, cooks, and the like; for the eye is resolved 
and destroyed by intense heat and loses its natural arrange- 
ment, and the judgment of sight is hindered. Likewise, as 
Averroés says in his book on Sense and the Sensible, hindrance 
to vision is caused when the organ is cooled by things in which 
intense cooling is inherent. For the eye is weakened and ob- 
scured in places where there is much snow or much water, and 
for this reason the shores of the sea appear confused and lack- 
ing in light, and so likewise the regions of snow. 

So likewise the eye loses its natural formation in those suf- 
fering from strong drink, infirmity, and anger. For this reason 
an object appears double to the intoxicated and the infirm, and 
the thing seen seems to vacillate and be moved, because exces- 
sive moisture of the vapors ascending to the eyes of those ener- 
vated by the power of wine or of the warm humor dominant 
in the condition of disease, disturbs the eyes and`causes them to 
be displaced from their natural position, as in the case of an 
angered man. For the heat ascends around the heart, and in- 
flames the blood, and resolves the vapors, which easily rise to 
the eyes and penetrate owing to their channels, and displace 
the eyes from their natural position, so that the species cannot 

[ 506 ] 

Optical Science 

be formed in one place on the common nerve, nor in one place 
on the glacialis of the same eye, according to Averroés in the 
passage mentioned. For because of the movement and ebullition 
of the vapors the species is formed in different parts, like the 
species of the sun and of the moon in agitated water, and while 
it is being formed in one part it is not yet obliterated from an- 
other, and for this reason two species appear, just as the species 
of the sun and of the moon in agitated water appears double to 
i en ANS a 

Likewise from suffering in the head a resolution of vapors to 

_the eye sometimes happens, by which the vision is deranged, as 

in dimness of vision and in vertigo, and then the object seen is 
thought to be displaced, as Ptolemy explains in the second book 
of his Optics. This aids in understanding the cause of scintilla- 
tion, and in this way one thing appears two and the object seen 

“appears to move. Avicenna says in the third book on the Soul 

that, when some one of the causes is present that have been de- 
scribed in the books on Physics, which deranges circularly the 
spirit that is in the anterior ventricle of the brain; and when the 
visual force has given to it the impression received, the species 
does not remain fixed in one place, but is displaced circularly in 
accordance with the motion of the resolved spirit, and in this 
way the object will seem to be moved circularly. Moreover, Avi- 
cenna in the third book on the Soul gives three causes affecting 
the structure of the common nerve and of the eye that result in 
an object appearing double. For the vitreous humor, which ex- 
tends from the eye to the common nerve, and the visual force, 
which flows from the common sense to the common nerve and 
to the eye, are thin bodies and very mobile, and for this reason 
easily changed from their position, and this displacement can 
take place either to the right and left, or before and behind. But 
if they waver to the right and left, in that case the two species 
coming from the two eyes cannot be formed in the same place 

on the common nerve, but one falls to the right, and the other 

to the left, and thus two appear, and of necessity one thing ap- 
pears two. Likewise if they waver forward and backward, one 
species will be formed more in the front and the other more be- 
hind, and therefore two separate species will appear. When 
both motions occur, there will be a movement of the species, 

[ 507 J 

i 

wt. 

Opus Majus 

like a vertigo, and the object will appear to waver in accordance 
with the two positions. 

The third cause he assigns to the uvea, which easily receives 
motion. For by the movement of the nervous spirits and by 
much intense heat it can be disturbed within, and by the effort 
of the eye is dilated, and by its own nerve of which it is com- 
posed it can be dilated or contracted as that nerve is contracted 
or distended. It can also be disturbed externally from many 
causes, as, for example, when the finger compresses the uvea or 
the same thing happens in other ways, and by these disturb- 
ances the opening is sometimes changed in a straight line, some- 
times obliquely, and this variation can take place in one eye 
and will not happen in the other, or will take place in both 
eyes at the same time, but in different ways. Therefore the spe- 
cies itself will be diversified in both eyes and consequently in 
the common nerve, so that the object and the species appears 
larger or smaller, and thus one species will have a larger place 
in the common nerve than the other, and therefore an object 
that is single will appear double. 

Besides all that has been said regarding the fact that one ob- 
ject appears as two, there are still several natural cases with 
their causes. It sometimes happens, then, that extraneous humor 
coagulates below the uvea between the glacialis and the open- 
ing; and sometimes this happens from above downward as re- 
gards length, sometimes crosswise as regards width, sometimes 
circularly ; and in this way a division of the glacialis is made, 
so that it views the same object through ‘its two different parts, 
and therefore one object appears to it as two. Physicians touch 
upon this cause in their books and teach the cure, as is shown 
by Avicenna in the care of the eye. But if this cause did not 
exist it is thought that deception in this regard can take place. 
It is believed, in fact, that the appearance of two objects can be 
produced otherwise from the fact that vision is produced by 
external transmission, and because species can be seen in some 
manner. For there are many men to whom a single object when 
seen appears double, and this is not owing to a difference in 
their eyes, since it occurs if they look at the same thing with 
one eye. Therefore with one eye they see two objects when all 
the causes already mentioned have been excluded. Wherefore 
this cannot take place except for the reason that the species of 

[ 508 J 

Optical Science 

the object, while it is near the object, is stronger and has more 
of the nature of the object, and therefore is more sensible than 
when multiplied at a greater distance. When, therefore, a man 
has weak eyes, the faculty of vision not only is weak as regards 
itself, but more weakened from distance will stop at the species 
of the object near the object, and the species will take the place 
of the object, so that the weakened faculty is terminated at the 
species, just as the vision weakened from distance is terminated 
at vapor. But a strong eye penetrates the air in which the spe- 
cies is near the object, and the species is hidden because of the 
strength of vision, just as vapor in the air near the eye is hidden 
and penetrated because of the vigor of the eye. This will fre- 
quently happen to people with weak eyes, particularly when 
they look carelessly. Sometimes also people with good eyes in 
some way or other have this experience, namely, when they are 
very careless in looking and half close the eye, and both they 
themselves and the object seen are in dark places and at times 
of mists, as at twilight. 

This must be the reason, or it is because one eye has two 
pupils. Although this is possible, I have not met with such a 
case. For Solinus in his book on the Wonders of the World 
makes mention regarding a certain region in which women 
usually had two pupils. Pliny, also, in the sixth book shows that 
throughout different parts of the world there are people with 
double pupils in their eyes. When this happens one object can 
appear double. 

[ 509 J 

SECOND DISTINCTION 

Concerning the method of direct vision as regards the species 
of sight and of the object seen; in four chapters. 

CHAPTER Í 

HE causes of vision as regards the species of vision and 

of the objects visible must be considered next. It is 

now easy to give the reason why the eye sees from the 

outside air charged with vapor and cloud, and when the eye is 
in such air does not see or perceive the vapors and clouds. For 
this point has been touched upon incidentally above, but must 
now be considered in relation to its principal cause. For the 
strength and weakness of the visual ray must be the cause of 
this; for when it is near such air and in it the visual force is 
strong from its proximity to the eye, because of its strength it 
can penetrate the denser air, and nothing is seen or perceived 
by the vision, except that which can terminate the vision, as has 
been stated before. Therefore the air charged with vapor is not 
perceived in this case. But when the eye is at a distance from air 
so charged, the species of the eye weakened finds resistance and 
is terminated, and therefore is able to see a cloud at a distance. 
From this experiment it is evident that vision is the result of 
external transmission. For if the species of the object seen were 
alone responsible, no explanation of this vision could be given. 
We must consider species not only as regards itself, but as re- 
gards position, without which the species cannot be formed or 
formed distinctly, unless position be carefully noted. We must 
state, then, that one eye produces its species to the object seen, 
and the object seen produces its species to the eye in the same 
place, whence they have a common axis, which is perpendicu- 
lar to all parts of the eye, because it passes through the center 
of all the parts. Therefore since the perpendicular approach 
is strong and potent, the eye judges most vigorously by means 
of the species of the part that comes along this line, and grasps 
this part with final certitude, as far as one eye can grasp it. 
Therefore it is said in the book on Vision that no visible object 
is seen at the same moment in its entirety, and this must be 
understood of final certitude, but one part only on which the 
axis mentioned falls. Nevertheless with the same look the whole 

[510] 

Optical Science 

object is seen which is the base of the visual pyramid, and more 
as has been stated, and therefore several things are seen at the 
same time. But except for complete certitude both the parts on 
both sides nearer the end of the axis are seen more clearly, and 
those more remote are seen less clearly. When, however, the 
eye is moved, so that it may make sure of the separate parts 
seen, the axis passes over these parts, and certifies them suc- 
cessively one after another. 

Since naturally the two eyes have a similar position with re- 
spect to the common nerve, the axes of 
the eyes will have a uniform position 
for every point on which they fall, and 
they will fall necessarily on the same 
point of the object, and then that point 
will be seen better and with more cer- 
tainty by the two eyes than by one. 
We are to understand, moreover, that 
from the common nerve an imaginary 
straight line is directed between the two Fic. 38. 
eyes to the object seen, meeting the 
axes of the eyes in the same part of the object seen, and this line 
is the common axis, and that point on which these three axes 
fall is seen with final certitude, as is shown in the figure, and 
other parts of the object are seen with more or less distinctness 
according to the different positions they occupy with respect to 
this axis. For point a is seen most dis- 
tinctly, because the three axes are con- 
current at it, and b and c are seen more 
distinctly than e and d. 

But that part is most distinctly seen to 
which, when the axes terminate, its own 
species is perpendicular, for then the 
strength of the impression is double. For 
this reason a is seen more distinctly by 
means of the axes than c and 8, for the FIG. 39. 
species of vision of a itself is perpendicu- 
lar to it, as is clear. The species on 6 and c is not a perpendicular 
species in this way, for b and c are perpendicular to the eye but 
not perpendicular at the points 6 and c. But the species of a it- 
self is perpendicular to itself and to the eye. 

[sid 

Ocu.us DEXTER OcuLus SINISTER 

b æ c 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER II 

In which is shown by two different experiments and by different 
figures how one object is seen as two. 

BUT not only for the reasons mentioned in the preceding dis- 
tinction is one object seen as two, but for many other reasons. 
This experience happens more frequently and clearly when one 
or both eyes are moved from their position, as, for example, 
when a man without definite purpose revolves one of his eyes 
from its natural position, or when he places his finger on the 
eye and displaces it. For then the two species come to different 
places on the common nerve and one object appears to be two. 
It happens also that an object appears double at a great distance 
from the axes because of the sensible difference of angle, which 
the species forms in the eyes, as is 

% b shown in the figure. For let mc be 

the object seen, and a and @ the eyes, 
and ac and bc the axes fixed on the 
point c, which is seen by them with 
final certitude; then some part can 
A x be so far removed from the axes, as 
FIG. 40. the point m, that it will be seen 

double because of the sensible dif- 

ference in the angle that it forms in the eyes, since mac is far 
larger in the eye a than mbc in the eye 0; and therefore both 
species, because of this difference, cannot come to the same 
part of the common nerve, but the larger angle must occupy 
a larger part of the common nerve, and for this reason m ap- 
pears double to the sight. Not only does this happen when 
the point seen falls to the right and to the left of the axes, as 
represented in the figure, but when it is at some distance to 
the right with respect to one of the axes and to the left with 
respect to the other, namely, when it falls between the inter- 
section of the axes or beyond it, as is shown in the figure. For 
if the axes of the eyes a and % are fixed attentively on the part 
o of the visible object mon, then the visible object & below the 
intersection of the axes will appear double, and h visible beyond 
the intersection will likewise appear double necessarily. For an 
experimenter can prove this by taking a stick the width of a 

[512] 

Optical Science 

palm, and the length of four, five, or six, with a smooth surface. 
Let him also take three different visible objects, formed out of 
either wax or wood as large as the last joint of the little finger 
in the shape of a pyramid, and let them be of 
different colors for greater distinctness, and be 
arranged in the order kok, so that there be a 
sensible distance between them. The middle 
one of these should be in the middle of the 
board and one of the others at the remoter end 
of the board, and the third one midway between 
the middle object to be viewed and the eye. The 
board at the end toward the eye should be some- Fic. 41. 
what concave, in order that it may be applied 

easily to the eyes, and that the board may be applied easily at 
the end of the nose toward the eyes. The eyes must then fix their 
axes on the middle object, which will be seen as one, and both 
of the other two will appear double, for k and / will appear as 
four and o will be seen as one. 

CHAPTER II] 

In which a figure is arranged for these two errors by means of one 
experiment together with a consideration of sev- 
eral disappearing images. 

By means of the same board, if it has sufficient width, an ex- 
periment can be made in regard to the first of these errors. Let, 
then, one figure suffice for both errors and let it be similar to 
the figure here given. For a, c, and b will be seen as they are, 
provided the eyes are focused rightly, so that the extremities 
of the visual pyramids may fall on c and b, and the axes on a. 
But if other objects, or those same objects, namely, a, b, c, are 
arranged on the longer diameter /d, so that c is placed in the 
position m, and 0 in the position n, m and z will be seen as four; 
and just as c will be seen as one, when it is on the shorter and 
transverse diameter, so also will Z}, which is not too far distant 
from it and from the axes; but f, which is quite a distance out 
of line, will be seen as two, as was noted in the first error. For 
it will be seen by the eye p under the angle fpk, which is less 

[513 ] 

Opus Majus 

than a right angle, and it is seen by the eye k under the angle 
fkp, which is a right angle, and therefore it must appear as two 
owing to the difference in angle. An experimenter can make 
many experiments in this matter without 
the board. For he can at night raise a 
finger between himself and a candle. If 
then he fixes the axes on the candle, the 
one finger will appear as two. In these 
cases we must bear in mind that if the 
right eye be closed, the left image will dis- 
appear, and when the left eye is closed the 
right image will vanish. The blessed Au- 
gustine expressed wonder at this, and 
writes in the eleventh book on the Trinity, 
second chapter, that it would be a lengthy 
matter to give the reason for this phe- 
nomenon. It is, in fact, a lengthy matter 
for one ignorant of perspective, since he 
Fic. 42. must first learn this science. Likewise it is 
a lengthy matter to reach the reason for 
this thing, since the teacher must give careful consideration 
to those things that have been written in this fifth part of this 
plea, and especially to those things that are said and written 
in this chapter on the causes of vision as regards the species. It 
is certain, then, that when the axes of the eye are fixed on the 
visible object a, the visual force nevertheless tends to the visible 
object m, but the species coming from the 
right eye tends to the left, if it proceeds fur- 
ther, and likewise the species of the left eye 
tends to the right, for these species intersect 
at the point m, and separate in such a way 
that the right species passes to the left side, 
and the left one to the right side, as is clear 
to the sense. Since, then, m appears double, 
FIG. 43. the image corresponding to the right eye 
must be beyond m to the left, because the 
species of the right eye tends in that direction. Therefore when 
the right eye is closed, the left image must vanish; and the rea- 
soning is similar with regard to the left eye and the right image, 
_ as the figure shows. 

DEXTER SINISTER 

C514] 

Optical Science 

And yet the right image will not always disappear when the 
left eye is closed, nor the left image on closing the right eye; but 
it easily happens that when the right eye is closed the right 
image disappears, and when the left eye is closed the left image 
disappears, as any one can prove in the case of the fixed stars in 
summer at twilight before the darkness of night, and the same 
experiment could be made on far distant fires. 

CHAPTER IV 

Concerning the fact that an objectappears double owing to the elonga- 
tion of all particular axes from the common axis, with an exposi- 
tion of all the ways in which an object can be placed and a state- 
ment of the cause of good or bad vision in all those positions. 

Nor only is there a difference in false vision, because there is a 
difference of position of the object seen with respect to the axes, 
as has been said, but the axes themselves can diverge too far 
from the common axis, as is shown in the figure. For the angle 
abd in eye O is far greater than 

angle acd in eye c, and for this 

reason there will be an error, 

and a will appear double, at @ 
which the axes da and ca ter- - 
minate, and this happens be- 
cause they diverge from the 
common axis ed. This takes b 

place when the eyes turn their FIG. 44. 

axes from the common axis in 

the direction of one eye, and the other eye follows as far as it 
can turn, and therefore the axes are not terminated at d, nor are 
bd and cd the axes, but da and ca, for the axes are thus turned 
and bent from their natural position. They can terminate also at 
the same point of the object of vision, but in a different position 
with respect to the common nerve; and in this case that point 
appears double, as is evident by elevating one eye from its right 
position or both eyes. From these oblique positions it is clearly 
evident that, whether the axes deviate too far from the common 
axis, or the object of vision or part of the object of vision is too 

[515] 

Opus Majus 

far from the axes of the eyes, the object will be seen imper- 
fectly, and this happens either in one eye or in both, or there 
may also be a displacement of the ends of the object from the 
position in front of the face. The object directly opposite the 
face, on which object the special axis and the common axis are 
concurrent, will be seen with final certainty. If, in fact, the ob- 
ject is near the axes, it will be sufficiently visible in the same 
direction; and in this way the vision of the same thing will be 
lessened up to a position of such great obliquity that one object 
will appear as two, just as we have stated before. The reason 
for all these things, according to Alhazen in the third book, 
and according to Ptolemy likewise in the third book, is that 
when the object is seen in front of the face, or near it, the species 
of the object comes to the surface of the glacialis under a large 
angle and occupies a large part of the pupil, in which the parts 
can sensibly be distinguished; but when the obliquity is great 
the species comes under a small angle to the organ of sense and 
occupies a small part of it, so that the species of the parts of the 
object of vision are crowded together without affecting the 
sense, and are collected in a confused manner, and therefore no 
definite judgment is formed concerning them. All these matters 
are evident, which must be known in regard to position with 
respect to the eye. For any one can easily distinguish now the 
differences of position. For there is the position in front of the 
face when the object is placed before the eye or the eyes, and 
one end is not raised nor does the other deviate. There is also the 
oblique position through the raising of one end and the depres- 
sion of the other; and this is called the oblique position. More- 
over, in the position in front of the face there is the position of 
one part with respect to the axes, and the other parts deviate 
more; and likewise in the oblique position certain parts are 
more remote from the axis, certain parts nearer to it. We 
have stated how comprehension and error occur in all similar 
cases. A position, however, that is outside not only the visual, 
but the whole pyramid, excludes vision entirely.” 

[ 516] 

THIRD DISTINCTION 

In which consideration is given to the triple mode of vision in ref- 
erence to the eight conditions of vision mentioned previously. T he 
distinction contains eight chapters, in the first of which examples 
are given in regard to perception through sense alone. 

CHAPTER | 
] | AVING determined these matters in regard to the eye 

and the position of the species, we must now consider 

further concerning the triple mode of vision in ref- 
erence to the eight necessary conditions without which vision 
is not possible. Light, then, and color are perceived through 
sense only, and no error is made in regard to them when these 
eight conditions are fulfilled without excess or defect; under 
these conditions light is seen as it is and color is seen as it is. 
When, however, these conditions are in excess or defect, error 
or defect in vision occurs. For the light of the stars is not seen 
by day, when the solar light in full strength comes to the eye, 
because that light is in excess with respect to the eye and the 
light of the stars; as, for example, when a man is at the surface 
of a well the principal solar light comes to his eyes excelling the 
principal light of the stars. But if he descended to the bottom 
of the well he would see the stars that were over his head, not 
only for the reason touched upon previously, but because the 
solar light would be tempered, since only the accidental light 
of the sun would come to the eye and no principal ray, and 
therefore the stars would be seen by means of their principal 
rays and would not be hidden. 

But in regard to the Galaxy it is strange that it cannot be 
visible in the celestial sphere, or in the sphere of air, but only in 
the sphere of fire. Now the Galaxy is in one sense a circle in the 
celestial sphere, which is called the Milky Way, consisting of 
many small stars clustered, and this part of the heavens produces, 
according to Aristotle in the first book of the Meteorologics, the 
impression of continuous light through the meeting of the solar - 
light with the lights of small stars of this kind, and this impres- 
sion is called likewise galaxy. Hence the term is used in two 
senses, for cause and effect: and the light appears as continuous 

[5171] 

Opus Majus 

and lengthened out, although the stars are distinct. But distance 
causes this, as would be the case if one looked from a distance 
at a pot perforated in many adjacent parts, in which fire is 
contained. For owing to the distance the fire would appear con- 
tinuous to him because of the proximity of the holes, a prox- 
imity that vision would not discern because of the great dis- 
tance. This impression, however, the eye would not perceive in 
the celestial sphere, although this light passes through this 
sphere, nor in the air, although it passes through the air like- 
wise. But in fire it is perceptible, because the celestial sphere is 
of such excessive rarity that light cannot be incorporated in it 
so as to be visible. But air is of greater density than is here re- 
quired. For since this impression is weak owing to the weak- 
ness of the lights of the small stars, it can quickly be lost in the 
darkness of the place, nor does it suffice to clear away the 
shadows of the denser air. But in the highest part of the sphere 
of fire the Galaxy can be visible to the eye, because it is prop- 
erly proportioned for visibility because of its mean between the 
excessive rarity of the transparent heaven and the greater 
density in the air than visibility of this kind requires. There- 
fore in fire it can be visible, as Aristotle states, although he does 
offer too little explanation regarding the cause. But the light 
of the other larger fixed stars and likewise of the planets has 
so much strength that it is not dimmed in the air, nor in the 
sphere of fire, nor in the celestial sphere, and therefore uni- 
formly lights up the whole medium, namely, the spheres of the 
heavens and of fire and of air; and therefore vision does not 
perceive in some part a difference in the incorporation of their 
light. For this reason there is not some distinct impression of 
visibility by means of the lights falling from other stars than 
that received from the stars of the Galaxy, wherefore philoso- 
phers make no mention of some other impression, which is pure 
light, differing from that which is called Galaxy. Thus it is 
manifest that Galaxy cannot be visible in the sphere of air nor 
of the heaven, owing to the medium’s lack of the proper density. 
In the air because of the lack of sufficient rarity, in the heaven 
because of its excess. We must note, however, that a considera- 
tion of refractions in the sphere of fire is important for our con- 
ception of the Galaxy; for all rays that fall at oblique angles 

[518] 

Optical Science 

on the surface of fire are refracted. But of this the explana- 
tion is to be sought elsewhere. 

It is likewise strange that the light of dawn appears to us at 
that time and not earlier; for the whole heaven is illumined 
except in the shadow of the earth. I am here calling the whole 
world heaven from which outside the shadow of the earth the 
air is illumined, and the sphere of fire and the celestial spheres. 
We see clearly the stars at night in every part of the horizon; 
therefore it seems that we should likewise see the spheres of 
the heavens and of fire and of air illumined outside the shadow. 
For between us and the stars the air is of necessity illumined, 
also the sphere of fire and the spheres of the heavens, not only 
by the light of the stars, but also by that of the sun, which 
crosses in the air through the sides of the shadow, and therefore 
just as at dawn we see the air illumined, so is it probable that 
the illumined air should be seen earlier. But excessive distance 
together with excessive rarity solves this problem. For the 
stars are dense bodies and have much fixed light of their own, 
and from both these causes can be seen by means of their species 
diffused in the shadow to the eye. But the illumined parts of 
the spheres, and the sphere of fire and the air outside the 
shadow are bodies of too great rarity, and do not have any 
fixed light, but merely light passing through them, and for 
this reason the light is weak and they are far distant. For these 
reasons they cannot be seen by night, because the species com- 
ing from them into the shadow is too weak and cannot affect 
the eye. But when the sun approaches its rising, and this is when 
it is in the eighteenth degree of the circle of its depression be- 
low the horizon, as Ptolemy shows in the Almagest, its rays fall 
in the air nearer to us and enter the top of the shadow and its 
sides, and in this way the nearer illumined air can cause a 
stronger species to reach the eye, and it begins to be visible and 
becomes more so as the nearer air is illumined. There is the 
added reason, moreover, that the nearer air is denser, and espe- 
cially so when the light comes to air full of vapor, the greatest 
altitude of which is fifty-one miles and some fraction of a mile, 
as is shown in the book on Twilights. Owing to this density 
more light is retained in such dense air, just as in the case of 
the stars, and therefore a stronger species reaches the eye. 
These facts show us that the dawn is not caused by the refrac- 

[519 ] 

Opus Majus 

tion or reflection of light in the clouds, as those who are in- 
formed know, but it is caused by the accidental species of the 
sun, which comes to us from its rays passing through air filled 
with vapor and cloud, just as the accidental species from a 
ray of the sun falling through a window comes through the 
whole house. 

It happens also that a small light or a luminous body of small 
size appears sometimes to be of great extent in the case of cer- 
tain things because of their sensible distance and because of the 
rapidity of motion in shooting stars, as Ptolemy states in the 
second book of the Perspective. For fiery impressions in the 
air from ignited vapors like stars, which are called in Arabic 
Assub, ascending and descending, are bodies of small size. But 
on account of distance and rapidity of motion they appear to 
possess a long light. A similar phenomenon is found in the case 
of sparks ascending rapidly from a fire; for the rapidity of their 
motion frequently causes them to appear extended at great 
length, when they are, however, of small size. 

Color, like light, is perceived by the sense only: and if those 
nine conditions, concerning which we have stated that they are 
necessary for vision, are fulfilled without excess or defect, 
vision will perceive color correctly. If, however, these condi- 
tions are in excess or defect, vision will not perceive it correctly. 
As, for example, if a colored body is sufficiently dense to 
terminate vision, the color seen will be judged to belong to that 
body. But if it is not sufficiently dense, as in the case of a crystal, 
behind which a colored body when placed will appear as the 
color of the crystal, although it is not. Moreover, when the 
eye has looked at strong colors and then turns to light places, 
the species of the strong color will remain in the eye for a time, 
and at first the color will appear to it red, then purple, and 
afterwards black, and so vanishes, as Aristotle states in the sec- 
ond book on Sleep and Waking. The error is due to an excess 
of light changing in this way the judgment of color. Ptolemy, 
moreover, in the second book of the Perspective shows that 
different colors appear as one for two reasons. The first reason is 
because in an object of different colors one appears, owing to 
excessive distance, so that the angle containing the whole object 
has not the suitable size. When the separate angles, which con- 
tain the different colors, are not perceived, from the compres- 

[ 520 ] 

Optical Science 

sion of the parts that are not discerned, it results that the color 
of the whole object is one differing from those of the separate 
parts. The second reason is found in the motion of a swift body, 
as in that of a hoop with several colors, in which one and the 
same ray does not pause on one and the same color, since the 
color recedes from it because of the speed of its motion; and so 
the same ray falling on all the colors is not able to distin- 
guish between the first and the last, nor between those that are 
in the whole hoop, but they appear as one, and it seems that 
‘that color is as it were a mixture of them all. Moreover, con- 
cerning these matters there are an infinite number of examples, 
and some have been placed at the beginning and in different 
places; and therefore I pass them by. 

CHAPTER II 
Concerning perception through knowledge. 

THE things that are perceived through knowledge are distinc- 
tions of one universal from another, of one particular from an- 
other, or of a universal from a particular, as we have stated; 
whence the difference and discrimination of visible objects are 
considered in this perception, and this perception in the first 
place and per se applies to light and color, since they are espe- 
cially objects of sense. When, therefore, the moon is outside the 
shadow of the earth it has a clear and white light; when it is 
in the upper part of the shadow it has a reddish light; but when 
it is in the lower part the light is not visible; when, moreover, 
it is in conjunction with the sun at new moon its light does not 
appear. Therefore vision perceives these differences, but the 
sense alone is not able to make certain of this matter, but after 
it has seen these differences many times and has viewed the 
moon, it can recognize that which appears at such a time or 
under such and such circumstances and what is not visible under 
others. The explanation of this matter is, however, difficult, yet 
it is certain that the light of the moon is caused by the sun, in 
the same way as the light of all the stars, as has been stated 
above. But as Ptolemy says in the second book of the Optics, 
when the moon is in conjunction with the sun that which pre- 
vents the illumination of the moon toward us is its proximity, 

[521 ] 

oe 

Opus Majus 

since almost half of the lunar body is opposite to us, because the 
other part is illumined. Therefore the solar rays cannot reach 
the part toward us; nor can the principal rays reach this part, 
as is evident; but they are far divergent and separated. There- 
fore the accidental rays are not sufficient to light up the moon. 
But when it is in the shadow, the earth, which hides the moon 
from the sun, is far removed from the moon, and for this rea- 
son the principal solar rays are much more convergent owing 
to the narrowness of the shadow in its upper part; and for this 
reason the accidental rays are able to come from near at hand 
in great force to the body of the moon, and therefore light it 
up. But since accidental rays are weaker in their action than 
principal rays they do not clearly nor fully illumine the moon, 
and therefore it is somewhat reddish or pale, shading to red, 
and it is redder when it falls less into the thick part of the 
shadow, and paler the more it falls into the shadow. And yet the 
moon can enter the thick part of the shadow and descend in its 
own eccentric toward the earth, because the accidental rays 
are not able to light it up, owing to the great divergence of the 
principal rays of the sun itself, and the whole moon remains in 
shadow, just as at conjunction, because the moon does not have 
light of itself, but is a dense body. 

Similarly an example can be cited in regard to color. For if 
the eye views a body of a single color through the medium of a 
very thin parti-colored cloth, if the apertures of the cloth are 
large it will see the color of the body as it is; but if they are 
small and fine, the color of the object placed behind it will 
appear mixed, and therefore from the differences in the rarity 
of the medium through which it is viewed the color will appear 
different, and in this way there will be an error in knowledge. 
The reason for this is in doubt. For it is evident that the colors 
of the parts of the body do not come to the vision except through 
the apertures of the cloth between the threads, and the colors 
of the threads come according to their lines and peculiar twists 
to points different from those to which the species of the colors 
of the parts of the body placed behind the cloth come. Where- 
fore the colors of the parts of this body are formed at points on 
the eye different from those at which the colors of the threads 
are formed. For this reason it does not seem that the color will 
be mixed. But we must state that such is the case. For when the 

C522] 

Optical Science 

apertures are minute, the colors passing through them are very 
near to the threads, and for this reason the colors of the threads 
and the colors passing through them are very close and touch 
at points at an insensible distance apart. Since this is the case, 
the difference of these colors will not be perceived, and hence 
a mixed color will appear to the eye. 

CHAPTER III 

OF those things that are perceived through reasoning likewise 
notable examples can be given. First among these is distance or 
remoteness. In regard to this the first consideration is that ex- 
cessive distance hinders vision, because the same object at a 
distance makes a small angle, which when near would make a 
large one, as is evident in the figure. Since from the small size 
of the angle it results that a small part of the pupil is occupied, 
the object cannot sensibly be distin- 

guished as it should in the eye, and for 

this reason the object is imperfectly per- 

ceived because of excessive distance. 

Distance is perceived and determined, 

if it is moderate by a continuous series 

of sensible objects lying between the eye 

and the remote object. As, for example, 

when a person is near a wall and sees Fic. 45. 
another wall beyond the first more ele-' 

vated than it and quite a distance from it, he cannot judge of 
the distance between them because there are no bodies in a con- 
tinuous series between them, or he cannot perceive these bodies 
because of the interposition of the first wall beneath which he 
is standing. 

Hence it happens that when we are not near high mountains, 
but are in level country, we cannot judge of the height of 
clouds; nay, we reckon that they are more remote from us 
than they are, because there are not sensible bodies lying be- 
tween us and them, but the air only, which is not sensible to us, 
and for this reason we cannot judge of the height of the clouds 
under these circumstances. But when we are near high moun- 
tains, although mountains are not very high with a maximum 

[523] 

Opus Majus 

height of about eight miles, we shall see clouds on the tops of 
the mountains and the summits higher than the clouds. From 
this fact Alhazen concludes in the second book that the clouds 
are not of great height, although vapors easily rise fifty-one 
miles, as is shown in the book on Twilights. But not all vapors 
form clouds, for only aqueous vapors do so; and not all vapors 
are the substance of clouds, but terrestrial vapors rise higher 
although they are heavier, because dryness brings out the full 
effect of heat and a dry substance retains heat well after it has 
been received, as, for example, stone retains heat better than 
wood. Hence it happens that a stronger and more abundant 
heat of the sun is retained in terrestrial vapors than in aqueous, 
and for this reason they rise higher. Now, moreover, that no 
objection might be raised in regard to the height of clouds by 
means of the contrary statement in the book on Twilights, I 
have made mention of this book. 

Distance, then, is judged when there is a series of objects be- 
tween the eye and the object of vision, and this is true in the 
case of moderate distance, and when the eye has viewed those 
objects and has made certain of their measurements. But if any 
one of these conditions is not fulfilled, distance will not be de- 
termined. Moreover, a moderate distance with respect to vision, 
that is, one whose extent is determined by vision, is a distance 
at the end of which no part with an extent sensible with respect 
to the whole distance is hidden from vision. A moderate dis- 
tance with respect to the object of vision, in which vision per- 
ceives one part of the object of vision, is a distance at the end 
of which no part of that object of vision bearing a sensible pro- 
portional relationship to the size of the object of vision is hid- 
den from vision. But a distance which is excessive with respect 
to vision is that at the end of which an extent bearing a sensible 
proportional relationship to that whole distance is hidden from 
vision. And a distance excessive with reference to the object of 
vision is one that hides from vision parts in proportional rela- 
tionship sensible with reference to the whole. Therefore an 
error is made in the determination of distance owing to exces- 
sive remoteness of objects from the eye. For in this way trees 
at a great distance, although they are quite far apart, appear 
continuous or to be near one another. For this reason also the 
planets will be judged to be in the same surface as fixed stars 

[ 5241] 

Optical Science 

because of the immense distance of the stars from the eye, al- 
though the planets are a very great distance from the fixed stars. 
Moreover, a figure of many equal sides placed directly opposite 
the eye looks like a circular figure, and the circle looks like a 
straight line, and a sphere will be judged to be a plane figure. 
For owing to excessive distance the angles of the figure, al- 
though they are sensible with respect to the whole at the re- 
quired distance, yet when they are at an excessive distance will 
be hidden from vision with respect to the whole, and therefore 
an angular object will be judged to be round, because when 
such an angle is hidden, the figure appears round. Likewise 
when the gibbosity of the arc of a circle is presented to the sight, 
although the middle of the gibbosity of the circle is nearer the 
sight than the ends of the arc at the diameter, yet this nearness 
is not apparent to the sight because of the excessive distance; 
and for this reason the approach of the part nearer the sight is 
hidden, and the gibbosity itself is removed in the judgment of 
vision; wherefore the curved line will appear straight. This is 
the reason why, when the moon is in its first or third quarter, the 
line of the circular base of the luminous solar pyramid envelop- 
ing the body of the moon appears to be a straight line, when at 
other times it appears to be curved. A sphere will appear as a 
plane surface for the same reason. The nearness of its convex 
surface exceeds imperceptibly the nearness of the limits of that 
convex surface because of the excessive distance. Therefore 
both sun and moon appear to be plane surfaces although they 
are spheres. 

CHAPTER IV > 

Concerning the shape of the moon as regards its different 
phases; also some additional matters at the end. 

By what has already been said the reason can be shown for the 
difference in the form of the lunar light as it fills and wanes. 
For sometimes the base of the pyramid of solar light enveloping 
the body of the moon appears to be a curved line, as, for ex- 
ample, before the seventh day and after it, but on the seventh it 
appears to be a straight line. The reason for this Aristotle in 
the second book of the Heavens and the World and Averroés 

[525] 

Opus Majus 

hide by imperfect and cursory statements; and the book of the 
Problems of Aristotle in Latin by the obscurity of its transla- 
tion leaves us in doubt. For it is quite strange why the same 
curved line appears sometimes straight, sometimes curved, 
from the same distance. For if in accordance with the reason 
given in regard to excessive distance the curved line should ap- 
pear straight, how then can it many times, nay, through almost 
the whole lunar month, appear curved, and only twice be 
judged straight? 

Let us then withdraw from the realm of sense and deal with 
the real fact that the moon is a spherical body, and in the first 
place let us suppose that it is situated near us at a moderate dis- 
tance, and the sun likewise, yet so situated that they have the 
same relation to each other, and that they have their motions 
as in the heavens, and that they bear the same relation to our 
vision as when they are in the heavens, except that the distance 
is not excessive. Then here we shall see two pyramids; one is 
the visual, whose base is the portion of the moon’s surface ex- 
posed to us, and the other is the luminous solar pyramid, whose 
principal base is the surface of the sun. Since this pyramid is 
cut off, because the surface of the moon meets it before it can 
reach its own vertex, it must have there a secondary base, al- 
though much smaller than the first, and the greater portion of 
the moon is presented to the sun. But before the part of the 
moon presented to our sight begins to be illuminated at any 
point, namely, while the sun and moon are in conjunction, the 
base of the pyramid of solar light does not include any part of 
the base of the visual pyramid. But as soon as the moon is free 
from its conjunction, so that some part of its illuminated portion 
is exposed to us, the base of the solar pyramid occupies that part 
of the base of the visual pyramid, and therefore their circles at 
once intersect at two points, and include within themselves the 
illuminated part. And as the portion of the base of the solar 
pyramid cuts more of the base of the visual pyramid, so does 
the light increase in the portion exposed to us. The circle, there- 
fore, of the base of the solar pyramid at a moderate distance 
will always appear as a curved line and never as a straight one; 
because excessive distance alone causes it sometimes to appear 
as a straight line. But at an excessive distance, just as is now the 
case, it must frequently appear curved. For the circles on a 

[ 526] 

Optical Science 

sphere are to be understood in two senses, namely, parallel cir- 
cles like the equator on the celestial sphere and the tropics and 
other circles parallel to the equator on both sides of it; and 
there are other circles intersecting one another and equidistant 
circles of this kind, as, for example, those passing through the 
poles of the sphere like the colures on the celestial sphere, and 
all are great circles on the sphere. Of the former one alone is 
a great circle, namely, the largest of the parallel circles, as, for 
example, the equator in the heavens; for those circles alone are 
great circles on a sphere that pass through the center of the 
sphere and divide the sphere into two equal parts. 

Let us, then, consider the sphere of the body of the moon, 
restricting ourselves to that portion exposed to us in such a way 
that we have a clear notion of the largest of the parallel circles, 
which divides the body of the moon into two equal parts, also 
after it the other parallels, as many as we desire, whose pole 
is the lunar pole toward us. Let us also have a clear notion of 
the great circles intersecting one another at the poles of the 
lunar sphere. This one of these circles, however, is sufficient 
for our purpose, whose gibbosity is directly exposed to our 
sight, and which cuts the moon into two parts east and west 
and passes through the pole nearer us and through the other 
pole on the opposite side. Let us call this the colure. It is cer- 
tain, then, that excessive distance hides the gibbosity of this 
colure, as stated above. Hence of necessity this curved line ap- 
pears to be straight. But no distance can hide the gibbosities of 
the parallels, since the whole circumference of each of these has 
the same position with reference to the eye, and one part of 
the circumference is not nearer the sight than any other part, 
so that it is visible to the sight at every distance, and therefore 
no part of these circles can be hidden. For this reason they are 
always visible in their circumference and revolution, just as we 
see in the case of the circular line which is the circumference of 
the base of the visual pyramid. For that circle is one of these 
parallels and the largest of those that can be exposed to our 
vision, and it is evident that the vision of each one judges this 
to be a perfect circle; and it would do so in regard to all the 
parallels that might be marked in the portion exposed to us, 
but no one of these has been marked so far as the moon in itself 
is considered. The visual pyramid, however, marks one parallel, 

[527] 

Ye 

Opus Majus 

which is the circumference of its base, and the solar pyramid 
marks another parallel, which similarly is the circumference of 
its base. When, moreover, this circumference of the base of 
the solar pyramid touches the portion of the moon exposed to 
us, its gibbosity of necessity is directed toward the sun, as we 
see by the eye. The reason for this is found in the fact that it is 
a portion of a circle which is almost a great circle on the sphere; 
for it is a part of one of the parallels described around the por- 
tion of the lunar sphere exposed to us, and this parallel is 
greater than any other that can be described there. But it is not 
a large circle cutting the lunar sphere into equal parts, because 
half of the lunar sphere is not visible to us, but a portion slightly 
less than half, as we are now assuming, and as what follows will 
explain in the proper place. Since, however, the arc of the solar 
pyramid is almost a portion of a great circle, its concavity in the 
portion of the moon visible to us cannot lie toward the sun. For 
if it were the arc of a very small circle, its concavity could lie 
toward the sun, as is evident. The gibbosity of that arc will lie 
toward the sun at new moon; and when it first touches the cir- 
cumference of the base of the visual pyramid, the arc of the 
visual pyramid and the arc of the solar pyramid are equal, and 
lie together and terminate at the ends of the chord of the visible 
portion of the moon itself. But when the solar pyramid occupies 
some part of the portion of the moon exposed to us, the arc of 
the solar pyramid leaves the arc of the base of the visual pyra- 
mid, always, however, conterminal with it, and they separate, 
each containing the illuminated portion, and they intersect at 
the ends of the chord of the portion of the moon exposed to us; 
and then the arc of the solar pyramid is like the arc of a parallel 
almost the size of a great circle. Moreover, we must imagine 
that it was at first on the circumference of the base of the visual 
pyramid, and afterwards was continuously moved from it 
toward the colure of which mention was made before, which 
passes through the poles of the moon, namely, through that 
pole exposed to us and through the one opposite to it, dividing 
the moon into two halves, as if it were moved through a quarter 
of the moon from the circumference of the base of the visual 
pyramid, until it becomes the colure. When, therefore, it be- 
comes the colure, its gibbosity is of necessity concealed from 
us because of the excessive distance, and the circle will appear 

C528] 

Optical Science 

as a straight line. But not before; since it was always previously 
the arc of a parallel, and parts of the circumference of parallels 
have the same position with respect to the eye. For no part 
comes nearer to the eye than any other part, as has been noted 
before. 

Wherefore, from the first illumination of the moon until the 
portion of the base of the pyramid comes to the position of the 
colure, it will always be in the form of an arc, both actually 
and according to the judgment of the sight. But when on the 
seventh day it reaches the position of the colure, it appears to 
the sight of necessity in a straight line, the diameter, as it were, 
of the surface of the moon which appears to us plane. Then when 
it is in the other half of the moon, it again becomes curved, be- 
cause it is now assuming the nature of a parallel. Since, more- 
over, it is the arc of a parallel almost a great circle, its concavity 
must be toward the sun. For in that half of the moon so large 
a parallel could not be drawn, whose gibbosity is toward the 
sun, for it might easily be possible in the case of a small parallel, 
as is evident to one considering the matter. If, then, that arc 
of the pyramid be moved until it lies on the arc of the base of 
the visual pyramid, and the whole circumference of that paral- 
lel lie on the whole base of the visual pyramid, the whole sur- 
face of the moon exposed to us will of necessity be illuminated 
and the same will be the base of both pyramids, and the moon 
will then be full. Then, owing to the varied position of the sun 
with respect to the moon, the arc of the base of the solar pyra- 
mid begins to recede from the base of the visual pyramid, and 
the moon begins to wane in light, just as in the period of new 
moon it increased, so that the base of the solar pyramid always 
appears as a curved line because of the explanation in regard to 
the parallel, until the base of the solar pyramid arrives at the 
position of the colure on the twenty-first day, and then it again 
appears as a straight line, just as it did on the seventh day. 
Thus, therefore, can the form of the lunar light through its 
varied phases be understood by means of an excessive distance 
of this kind and by means of the explanations of the circles. 

Therefore it is evidently impossible that the heaven is a plane 
figure, although the vision so judges it, or at least judges that 
it approaches closely to a plane figure. For just as we have 
here said, the angles of a polygonal figure of equal sides appear 

[ 529 1] 

Opus Majus 

in consequence of excessive distance to have rotundity. For little 
by little the angles disappear, because they have no relationship 
to excessive distance, nor does the access of the angle to the 
eye exceed sensibly the part of a circle inscribed in such a figure, 
or of an inscribed sphere, because the size of the angle is small 
or not sensible at all in respect to such great remoteness. Not 
only is this statement made by Alhazen in his third book, but 
the same author maintains this in his book on Vision, when he 
says, in the tenth proposition, “Rectangular magnitudes seen 
from a distance appear circumferences.” But since rectangular 
figures of this kind must also be equilateral, another translation 
substitutes for the above, “Squares because of distance appear 
round,” and not only squares, but every equilateral figure, be- 
cause the same explanation applies to them all. But in regard 
to other polygons, in which circles and spheres cannot be in- 
scribed, the statement is not true, because there can be a sensible 
access of the angle to the eye although the distance be great. I 
have added this for the understanding of this occultation. If, 
then, the angles of an equilateral body little by little disappear, 
until the body appears round, so that such a body does not dis- 
appear at one and the same time owing to the flattening of its 
angles, a round body, because it does not have angles, will at 
once wholly disappear, and at a great distance will appear to 
be a plane figure. Therefore if the heaven were extended to the 
east and west in a plane figure, the stars would disappear all 
together at the same moment at their setting, since they are of 
spherical figure. But we see the reverse, because part after part 
sets and disappears, and in like manner rises. Wherefore this 
cannot happen in a plane distance and therefore the heaven is 
not a plane extension but a curved one. 

CHAPTER V 
Concerning the comprehension of magnitudes. 

As the comprehension of distance has been explained as a rea- 
soning process, so too with magnitude. Both the author of the 
book on Vision and many others thought that magnitude was 
appreciated by the size of the angle at the eye, whence at the 
beginning of that book it is assumed that objects seen under a 

C530] 

Optical Science 

larger angle appear larger, and under a smaller angle smaller, 
and things seen under equal angles appear equal. But this does 
not suffice, as Alhazen shows by examples; 

since if in a circle different diameters are 

marked, as ab, cd, it is evident to the sense 

that ab is seen under a much smaller angle, 

and yet the diameters are equal. Similarly 

in regard to the sides of a square, for the 

side ab makes a much smaller angle at the 

eye than dc, and yet the sides are equal, ¢ 

and the vision perceives that sides of this 

kind are equal; and in like measure the 

vision judges that the diameters of the 1 
same circle or of equal circles are equal at : 

a moderate distance. Therefore compre- h 

hension of the size of the angle does not FIG. 46. 
suffice. Moreover, if an object is seen at a 

lesser distance and at a greater, provided that the excess is 
moderate, the angle will vary sensibly. But the vision will not 
judge that the object seen is greater and smaller; so that if 
the eye be placed at the vertex of a shorter pyramid, the angle in 
it will be greater than at the vertex of a longer pyramid, by the 
twenty-first proposition of the first book of Euclid. And if the 
distance be trebled, namely, so that the first distance is one cubit, 
the second two, and the third three, there will be an extraneous 

difference of angle, and yet it will be judged to be of the same ` 

size. Since, then, this is a fact, 
there can be no determination 
of the magnitude of an object 
in accordance with the size of 
the angle. But it is necessary 
that the angle be considered 
and the length of the pyramid, FIG. 47. 

and that the base of the pyra- 

mid, which is the object of vision, be compared with these. 
The length of the pyramid is apprehended by the perception 
of the size of intermediate bodies, as was stated previously in 
regard to distance. This is done in the case of objects familiar 
to the eye and at a moderate distance by comparison and sud- 

[531 J] 

Yes 

Opus Majus 

den reference to some definite measure ready to the memory, 
like the size of the man measuring as regards himself as a 
whole or a part, and all these things are determined by the 
visual axis passing over visible objects. 

But error occurs in apprehension of magnitude when the dis- 
tance is excessive, since it will appear much less than it really 
is. The reason for this is found in the excessive distance, which 
hides from the vision parts proportional to the whole in a sensi- 
ble relationship; and when the occultation of parts perceptible 
to the sense shall have taken place, the angles in which they fall 
are not perceived, although they are proportional to the total 
angle. Hence when the axis passes over the object of vision, the 
lines from it and many parts are hidden, whence the total ap- 
pearance is rendered smaller. And also owing to the smallness 
of the angle, perceived with difficulty, the species will not be 
well arranged on the sensible part of the perceptive member, 
and therefore the size will not be clearly judged. 

CHAPTER VI 

IN regard to spherical bodies, like stars and other objects, it is 
not possible for the eye to see one half, but the eye of necessity 
sees a smaller portion. For the rays of the extremities of the 
object meet at the eye; but rays that would come from the per- 
imeter of half of a sphere would touch the ends of a diameter, 
by the nineteenth proposition of the third book of the Elements, 
and would make right angles with the ends of the diameter, as 
is shown in that proposition. Therefore it remains that they will 
not meet by being produced. 

That stars for a constant reason seem larger at rising and 
setting than when at the meridian, is stated by Ptolemy in the 
third and in the fifth book, and by Alhazen in the seventh. It 
can be explained owing to the fact that the vision judges the 
sky as though it were a plane figure extended above the head 
to the east and to the west, when the eye looks toward either of 
these. But what is seen near the head seems nearer, and there- 
fore a star when it is at the meridian seems to be nearer, and 
therefore when on the horizon it seems to be more distant. But 
what seems to be more distant seems to be larger, since it is seen 

[ 532] 

Optical Science 

under the same angle, just as a matter of fact what is more 
distant is larger since it is seen under the same angle with a 
smaller object. As, for example, ab is more distant from the 
eye, and is larger than cd, and cd than ef. Therefore it remains 
that stars appear of larger size on the horizon 
than at the meridian. And this is manifest in 
another way. The remoteness of these stars 
when they are on the horizon is apprehended 
by the interposition of the earth; but they can- 
hot be so apprehended when they are at the 
meridian, because of the imperceptibility of 
the air. Therefore since the remoteness of 
these is more perceptible when they are on the 
horizon than when at the meridian, it follows 
that they seem at that time more distant than when they are at 
the meridian. Therefore as before they will appear larger. 

The perception of motion and rest, which is said to be the re- 
sult of reasoning, can also be explained. Motion is apprehended 
by a comparison of the object moved with another object in re- 
spect to which it changes its position. Hence vision does not 
apprehend motion except when it perceives a thing in two places 
and in different positions; and the position of the object of 
vision is not changed without involving time. Wherefore mo- 
tion is not apprehended except in a perceptible lapse of time. 
Rest likewise is apprehended by vision from the perception of 
the object of vision in the same place and in the same position 
in a perceptible lapse of time. Vision errs frequently in the per- 
ception of motion and rest. For sometimes when the clouds are 
in motion the motion is thought to be that of the moon, and this 
error results from excessive distance; for it does not occur 
when the distance is moderate. Hence we see that a pole fas- 
tened in water is continuously at rest, and we perceive the mo- 
tion of the water passing by. The error mentioned above in the 
motion of the moon occurs when the clouds are numerous and 
continuous, since motion is not perceived except by the ap- 
proach of one thing to another or the recession. When, however, 
the clouds are few and divided, we can discern their motion by 
their successive approach to a star and their recession from it. 
Therefore, on the other hand, when the heaven is covered by 
clouds, because of their continuousness and multitude we do 

[ 533] 

a 

Fic. 48. 

Opus Majus 

not discern motion in them; and yet we see that the moon is 
moving very rapidly, because it is passing swiftly through the 
different parts of the cloud, not only owing to its own proper 
motion, but also owing to the motion of the clouds. When an 
observer walks in the direction in which the moon lies or other 
stars, it seems to him that the stars move before him in the 
direction in which he is going; since at the end of his motion 
he judges the star to be as far off and to hold the same relative 
position as at the beginning of his walk. Owing to these im- 
pressions the faculty, distinctive through the medium of vision, 
concludes that the star moves before the face of the observer in 
the direction in which the observer is walking; and likewise if 
he flees in the opposite direction it will seem to him that the 
star is following him. Just as if he should see a man ahead of 
him, who always keeps the same relative position, they of 
necessity must be advancing with an equal motion in the same 
direction, and therefore the observer reasons that the stars are 
moving in his direction, either preceding or following. For his 
position with respect to the star is the same as far as the judg- 
ment of vision is concerned. 

The reason for this is the excessive distance between him 
and the star, because of which he does not perceive that by his 
motion he is departing from the star or approaching it, and 
therefore he judges that he always keeps the same relative posi- 
tion. In the same way it happens that when the sun is in the 
south and a man is going to the east, it always seems that 
the sun is in line with him; and if many men stand in the same 
east and west line, although they be far apart, yet the sun ap- 
pears directly in front of each one of them. This effect is caused 
by the excessive distance and the magnitude of the sun. More- 
over, the shadows of these men seem to be parallel; and like- 
wise the rays of the sun coming to them seem to be parallel, al- 
though they meet at the center of the sun; but owing to the 
excessive distance their meeting is not perceived, and therefore 
the rays seem to be parallel and the shadows likewise. When, 
moreover, one views the planets, although they are moving 
swiftly in the heavens westward, he judges that they are at 
rest and does not perceive their motion. The cause of this is 
found in the fact that, owing to the excessive distance, the vision 
does not perceive their approach or recession with respect to 

[5341 

Optical Science 

some fixed object, nor does it perceive a difference in position. 
Therefore the visual ray is judged to be unmoved, retaining the 
same position with respect to the object, and therefore the vision 
judges that the object is at rest. 

Moreover, when one turns frequently in a circle, on coming 
to rest he thinks that vision and other objects are moving in a 
circle, since after the observer has been set in motion the visual 
faculty is moved within. And although the observer comes to 
rest, the visual faculty will not immediately do so, but its mo- 
tion will continue in the observer after he has come to rest; be- 
cause the humors of the eye are easily moved, and when motion 
has been imparted to them they readily retain it, just like water 
and the visual rays also, which are bodies of fine texture, easily 
moved and capable of continuing an imparted motion. For they 
belong to the class of evaporations and resolutions, and there- 
fore the vision continues its motion within after the observer 
himself has come to rest. Since his vision is in motion, he thinks 
that the objects of vision are in motion, as Aristotle states in 
the second book of the Heavens and the World, and Averroés 
and Ptolemy in the second book and Alhazen in the third book 
of the Perspective. Moreover, when a man is on a moving ship, 
trees and other objects on the bank seem to him to be moving, 
and this is owing to the motion of the visual faculty. Those ob- 
jects in particular seem to move that are far from the axes; for 
if the axes are carefully directed to an object near the water, it 
does not seem to move. 

CHAPTER VII 
Concerning scintillation. 

CONNECTED with these matters is a difficulty very philosophic 
in character, but more insoluble than any other except the rain- 
bow. Every night we can view objects in which a doubt of this 
kind is present. Hence we see nothing so frequently of whose 
cause we know less: it is the scintillation of the stars. The fixed 
stars sometimes manifestly scintillate, and sometimes they do 
not. The planets, however, according to Aristotle do not scin- 
tillate. Scintillation is a certain tremor of the star and an ap- 
parent motion, and this occurs particularly when the stars are 

[535 

Opus Majus 

in the east or in the west, as Aristotle maintains in his second 
book on the Heavens and the World, because they then seem 
most remote, as we have stated, and therefore the vision is less 
certain in regard to them. For Aristotle in the first book of the 
Posteriores and in the second of the Heavens and the World 
says that the reason for this is owing to the distance of the fixed 
stars. Hence, since the planets are near, they do not scintillate, 
as he states. He says, moreover, that this is not a phenomenon 
in the stars, but is seen only because of the revolution and 
tremor of the vision, because, as he states, the planets are near, 
and for this reason the vision has power over them. But the 
vision, when directed to the fixed stars, quivers because of the 
distance: because the tremor of vision causes an apparent mo- 
tion of the star itself, for it makes no difference whether the 
vision is moved or the object of vision. This is the opinion of 
Aristotle, as we clearly infer from several translations and 
especially from that purer one that has been made directly from 
the Greek. 

But although he says without reservation that the planets do 
not scintillate, he, however, maintains in the second book of 
the Heavens and the World that the sun in a manner has a 
tremor, and especially so when it is at rising and near it. The 
reason for this is found in the fact that this tremor is not the 
motion of scintillation but a weaker motion than that. For a 
stronger tremor is necessary for scintillation, nor does it occur 
except on the horizon or near it; but scintillating stars have a 
tremor everywhere. Venus and Mercury near the point of their 
rising and setting seem to have a slight tremor, as experience 
shows, but it is not reckoned a scintillation, because it is slight 
and does not occur except in those places. Hence this tremor in 
the sun and in these planets contains no proof with regard to 
the scintillation in the fixed stars, nor does it occur everywhere 
in the heavens as it does in the case of the fixed stars; and 
therefore those tremors are not reckoned among scintillations. 
But since the longer orbit of Saturn is of equal remoteness with 
the fixed stars, Saturn, when he is at his longer distance, will 
scintillate, owing to the distance, just like the fixed stars: this, 
however, we do not see. It can be stated, moreover, that since 
the diameter of Saturn is 29,250 miles, as is evident from the 
previous statements in those matters touched upon regarding 

[ 536] 

Optical Science 

arithmetic, he is nearer to us by this number of miles than the 
fixed stars, and therefore his distance is not so great. 

Moreover, a light intense and quite perceptible is required 
in the object of vision to the end that it may scintillate, because 
it seems to project darts of light. Hence Averroés says that the 
sun has that motion of which mention was made above, more 
than other planets, owing to the brilliancy of its light. If it be 
said that not all the fixed stars scintillate, although they are 
more distant than the planets, we must answer that those stars 
that are larger and have more light scintillate more than other 
stars. Hence for scintillation a sufficient brilliancy is required, 
because a manifest and sensible image is present in scintillation. 
If, then, the objection be raised that the light of the sun and of 
the stars is stronger and more brilliant when they are at the 
meridian than when they are on the horizon, because then the 
rays of the stars fall more at right angles, why at that time is 
the tremor more apparent in them, if brilliancy of this kind is 
required and is conducive to scintillation? We must reply that 
as a lessened brilliancy is not sufficient for scintillation, so an 
excessive brilliancy confuses and absorbs the eye to such an ex- 
tent that the tremor is not perceived. 

The fact that stars appear to be more distant on the horizon 
than at the meridian causes the vision to err in its perception 
of ithe visible object; for since it erroneously judges the star to 
be more distant when it is on the horizon, it makes a greater 
effort to see the star, and from the effort there results a stronger 
movement and straining of the eye. For in consequence of the 
great effort the eye is compressed, and the coats and humors 
recede from their natural position, and yet they immediately 
return to the same position, and therefore straining and tremor 
occur. Nature, moreover, always returns to the place that is 
injured or in need, and sends more abundantly spirits and sup- 
plies of heat, and therefore in an effort of this kind on the part 
of the eye spirit and natural heat are released from the com- 
mon nerve, and an excess of this kind stirs up the humors and 
causes them to recede from their natural position, to which they 
immediately return again. Thus a tremor of the eye occurs and 
consequently a tremor apparently in the object of vision. Ptol- 
emy assigns this cause in the second book of the Perspective. 
Also since the vision estimates the sun and stars to be more dis- - 

[537] 

Opus Majus 

tant when they are on the horizon, it therefore makes more 
effort and is strained. And according to this the precise reason 
can be found why the brilliant planets, especially the sun and 
moon, Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter, do not scintillate; because 
the vision easily determines them and reckons consequently that 
they are nearer, according to the statement of Ptolemy in the 
second book of the Optics, because brilliant objects, like the 
sun and moon, are reckoned near; those, however, that are less 
luminous are not reckoned so. Alhazen, moreover, says in the 
third book that a strong color, although it be more remote, yet 
appears nearer, because it easily affects the sight; and since 
this is a fact, the vision does not make an effort in regard to 
planets of this kind, and therefore is not strained. Moreover, as 
a matter of fact they are nearer than the fixed stars, and there- 
fore a weaker species comes to the sight from the fixed stars, 
and the species of vision is weakened in consequence of the 
distance, and for this reason makes more effort in regard to the 
fixed stars. 

But if it be said that the eye puts forth more effort in behold- 
ing small stars than larger ones, and that therefore strain will 
occur more quickly; we must reply that another cause, which 
relates to brilliancy, is lacking in them. And if it be said that 
this effort depends upon a man’s choice, and therefore depends 
upon his will, for which reason this effort is under his control; 
that he can therefore make an equal effort on a large star as on 
a small one, on a planet as on a fixed star, and on a star on the 
horizon as on one at the meridian, wherefore an effort of this 
kind does not have any bearing in this matter, we must reply 
that it does. For it is the habit of vision to put forth more or 
less effort according to the distance of the visible object, and 
according to the weakness of vision itself, and according to 
the lack of visibility in the object. Moreover, in this matter 
vision is trained and practiced, and habit is a second nature, as 
Aristotle says, and especially so in vision, as the authors on 
Perspective teach. Hence one does not perceive that he sees by 
reflection and refraction, but thinks that he sees by means of 
straight lines only, because he has been accustomed to see by 
straight lines, as will be stated below. Therefore the effort of 
vision is not under the control of the rational soul, just as the 
other judgments of habit are not so controlled, although here 

C538] 

Optical Science 

some strive by a sophistry of this kind to disprove this effort of 
vision and certain other natural phenomena habitual and simi- 
lar to vision. If it be objected that vision does not judge concern- 
ing the distance of the planets and the stars, for by reasoning 
alone do we comprehend the distances of the stars, and that there- 
fore vision will judge equally concerning the fixed stars and the 
planets as far as concerns the phenomena of visible things that 
rest upon distance; we must reply that such is not the case. For 
although vision cannot determine the distance of the stars, be- 
cause bodies do not exist in continued succession between the 
stars, yet owing to the greater impression made by the more 
brilliant planets, as has been said, they appear nearer, although 
vision cannot state how much nearer they are. And again be- 
cause it receives a weaker species from the fixed stars than from 
the planets, since species is weakened by distance, vision puts 
forth more effort in regard to the species of the fixed stars than 
in regard to the species of the planets, and similarly the species 
of vision is weakened by distance, and therefore it is not so 
active when it comes to a very distant object of vision, and for 
this reason puts forth more effort and a strain takes place in it 
and greater movement. 

If it be objected that just as vision is weakened_by distance, 
and fails and strains and relaxes again, so it fails in consequence 
of the density of the medium to secure a true comprehension of 
the object of vision. Therefore if we assume a density of 
medium proportional to the distance of scintillating stars they 
would scintillate. This is not believed to be true. Averroés re- 
plies to this in the second book of the Heavens and the World ;* 
for he well maintains that density of medium would tend to 
produce scintillation and tremor, saying that if the sun quivers 
only at setting and rising, it is because of the density of the 
medium. If, however, the sun does so everywhere, then it is 
because of the strength of the light, which is stronger than in 
the other planets. He maintains, therefore, that density of the 
medium tends to produce tremor. Therefore although this is 
generally denied, yet this is not improbable; and therefore stars 
scintillate more at rising and setting, not only for the reason 
stated above, but because of the thickness of the medium 

* Bacon evidently intends this to be the conclusion of the condition stated at 
the beginning of this paragraph. 

C539] 

Opus Majus 

charged with vapor, since a multitude of vapors abounds in 
the medium around those hours, because the sun raises at that 
time the vapors, and does not consume them as at midday ; be- 
cause the solar rays are weak at sunrise and sunset, since the 
rays fall at oblique angles to the horizon, as has been explained 
in what precedes. 

But if the thickness of the medium does not do this, yet the 
motion of the medium can have this effect, as Averroés shows 
in the same passage. For the medium is in continuous motion, 
and therefore the species of an object while it falls in one part 
remains in this part after it has moved from its position, until 
a remaining part succeeds to the place of the first part, and 
therefore each has a species of the visible object, and they pro- 
duce species similar to themselves in the same eye, and in dif- 
ferent parts of it, and in the common nerve; as Averroés like- 
wise shows in his book on Sense and the Sensible by an example 
in regard to the species of the sun falling on moving water. For 
the species does not disappear immediately from the part 
moved, but remains in it for a time, until a remaining part 
comes into its place, and then both produce a species in parts 
of the same eye and optic nerve, and in this way the same object 
seems to have a change of position continuously, and*therefore 
to tremble. Moreover, Ptolemy approves of this view in the sec- 
ond book of the Optics, giving this example in regard to mov- 
ing water and a moving medium. 

Averroés, moreover, offers a third reason because of inter- 
mittent vision, giving the example of a man who looks at an 
object in one place, and if he moves his eye by pressing it with 
his finger, he will see the object in another place because of the 
motion of the eye, since the species of the object is not fixed in 
one definite place, but is in several places. And likewise if a 
man looks at an object under a condition of frequent change, 
namely, now with one eye now with the other, or with one eye 
frequently closed, provided it be opened and closed continu- 
ously, the object seems as though it were in different places; 
and so subject to a tremor, as it were, and to a change from 
place to place. The eye, moreover, does this when the distance 
between it and the object is great; for one frequently closes his 
eyes and opens them. Although the eyelids may be open, the 
visual faculty in the pupil and nerve is fatigued from the strain, 

C540] 

Optical Science 

and the act of seeing at all or at least distinctly is interrupted; 
and therefore the species of a distant object is not fixed on the 
sight, because the object is thought to move to and fro. 

If it be said that when the air is set in vigorous motion by the 
wind there would be greater and more violent scintillation, our 
reply must be that, just as the necessary brilliancy, neither too 
much nor too little, is required for scintillation, as was stated 
above (and just as a certain distance likewise is required: for 
stars might be so far distant that they would not scintillate, and 
just as some have so little light that they do not scintillate) ; so 
may we speak concerning the motion of the medium. For the 
motion of the air, which is caused by the motion of the heaven 
and of the vapors, a motion that is continuously found in it, 
is sufficient for scintillation; and this is fixed for the scintilla- 
tion of the stars, so that a greater motion is not required, nor 
does a lesser one suffice. If it be said also that species multiplies 
itself in straight lines in the same medium, nor does it depart 
from a straight direction because of the motion of the medium, 
because its path does not vary except by refraction and reflec- 
tion, which do not occur in the motion of the same medium, and 
therefore the species will not be produced in different places 
but only in one place, and thus it will not have a different posi- 
tion in the eye; we must reply that it is true that species always 
keeps the same direction in the same medium, and multiplies 
itself directly in one path and one place. But, however, since 
the different parts fall successively in the same place, and the 
first part having the species retains it after it leaves the direc- 
tion of the species, and another part comes into the place of 
propagation of the species before the species disappears from 
the first part, therefore the two parts having different positions 
produce species in different parts of the eye and cause the phe- 
nomenon that has been mentioned. If, however, it be said that 
the rays of all stars and planets pass thus through a tremulous 
medium, we must reply that the other reasons relating to strain 
of the eye and brilliancy of the object of vision are missing, as 
is manifest from the solutions of the objections offered. 

From all these statements the reason for scintillation can be 
gathered, although with difficulty, owing to the various objec- 
tions occurring. For on the part of the eye there must be effort 
owing to which the eye is strained. For because of this effort an 

C541] 

Opus Majus 

excessive freeing takes place of spirits and forms of heat, which 
compel the humors of the eye to leave their natural position, 
and nevertheless from its effort there result a compression and 
constriction of the eye, in consequence of which the parts of the 
eye do not retain their position. Again in the third place there 
arises from this an interruption of vision, because of which the 
visible object appears to change its position, as has been ex- 
plained by Averroés. These three things, then, result from eye- 
strain, which is caused not only by the weakness of the visual 
power and of the species, owing to the actual distance, but be- 
cause of the judgment of the apparent distance; and therefore 
vision makes a greater effort on the fixed stars than on the bril- 
liant planets, which it judges to be near because of their ex- 
cessive brilliancy. But not only is this effort required, but also 
sufficient brilliancy on the part of the scintillating body, be- 
cause a scintillating body seems to scatter darts of light, and 
for this reason Saturn and small stars do not scintillate. There 
must likewise be a tremor of the medium, as has been stated, 
and all these conditions are required for scintillation, owing 
to the distance of the object of vision, because an object placed 
at the required distance does not scintillate ; and for this reason 
Aristotle ascribes the phenomenon chiefly to distance, although 
many attendant conditions must be considered. In this way 
scintillation in the heavenly bodies is to be understood, of which 
Aristotle speaks, although there is a special kind of scintillation 
in these things here below, of which mention will be made 
later on. . 

CHAPTER VIII 

AND now at the conclusion of this discussion in regard to the 
way in which we see in straight lines owing to the three methods 
of vision, by the sense alone, by recollection [scientia], and by 
a syllogistic process, there is rightly a doubt, which faculty of 
the soul it is, that in recollection and the syllogistic process acts 
in regard to things made visible through the medium of the 
visual sense. If we accept the terms recollection and the syllo- 
gistic process in the sense in which they are used in matters per- 
taining to logic, nature, and metaphysics, in accordance with 

[ 542] 

Optical Science 

the general practice of philosophers, this faculty must be the 
rational soul; because the syllogistic process and recollection 
pertain to it alone, as these terms are accepted in the sciences 
mentioned. Alhazen calls this part of the soul the distinctive 
faculty, which according to him reasons and understands; for 
sometimes these terms and ones like them are found, so that it 
would seem according to their literal meaning that the faculty 
is the discerning and rational soul. 

But it is well known that a dog recognizes a man seen pre- 
viously when it sees him again. Moreover, the ape and many 
other animals act in this way, and distinguish between the ob- 
jects of vision of which they have a recollection, and they recog- 
nize one universal from another, as a man from a dog or a 
tree, and they distinguish individuals of the same species; and 
therefore the perception which writers on perspective call per- 
ception through recollection belongs to animals as well as to 
men. Therefore this faculty must be a function of sensitive life. 
But likewise it is manifest that the same holds true for the per- 
ception that is termed perception through the syllogistic proc- 
ess ; for motion is recognized through it; as, for example, a dog, 
when someone raises a stick to strike it, flees; which it would 
not do if it did not perceive that the stick is changing its posi- 
tion with respect to itself and is approaching it. Similarly when 
an animal, for example, a dog, cat, wolf, or some other animal, 
holds an animal on which it feeds, while the prey is still, the 
plunderer stands motionless; but when the captured animal 
flees, the plunderer follows until it seizes its victim if it can. It 
would not do this except for the reason that it perceives that 
the position of the prey has changed with reference to itself, and 
therefore it perceives motion and rest and distance. We must 
grant that animals have some perceptions of this kind by a cer- 
tain natural purpose and instinct without deliberation, and the 
faculty that acts is cogitative, which is mistress of the faculties 
and employs the other faculties of the soul. For there is here re- 
quired a recollection of this kind of objects of vision for the 
distinction of the universals and particulars, and this recollec- 
tion belongs to the imagination itself, as was previously stated, 
if it is exercised with respect to light and color and the twenty 
common sensibles, since imagination is the storehouse of the 
species coming from them. If, however, it deals with the things 

[543 1] 

Opus Majus 

pertaining to the estimative faculty and the memory, that par- 
ticular kind of memory serves here in recalling them. For al- 
though the lamb flees from the wolf that it has not seen, yet 
if it has seen the wolf it flees more quickly and carefully when 
it sees him a second time. And thus a distinction is made 
through the cogitative faculty by means of memory, which is 
the storehouse of intentions apart from the senses with regard 
to sensible matter, as was explained before. Therefore the per- 
ception by which things seen previously are distinguished from 
other things is present in animals. Wherefore there is here a 
double use of the term; or rather there is a fault in the transla- 
tion, which does not have a proper word for this kind of per- 
ception. Likewise there is ambiguity, because the term syllo- 
gism should be limited to its ordinary use. For without doubt 
in no way can the fact be hidden that animals perceive the dis- 
tance of objects, and motion, and rest, although in regard to 
other common sensibles such is not the case. 

But as regards formal reasoning we must consider that the 
arrangement of the reasoning in a logical figure and the dis- 
tinction of the conclusion from the premises pertain only to the 
rational soul. But a certain gathering together of several facts 
into one in consequence of a natural purpose and instinct, the 
several facts resembling premises and the resultant one a con- 
clusion, because it is gathered from them, can be found in ani- 
mals. For we see angered apes prepare plots against men and 
coordinate many things, so that they may secure their revenge, 
and therefore they assemble into one that which they draw 
from many sources. We see also spiders arrange their web, not 
haphazard fashion, but in various geometrical forms, so that 
flies may be caught easily by them. The wolf eats earth, so that 
he may be heavier when he seizes a horse or bull or stag by 
the nose, in order that by reason of the weight of the earth he 
may weigh down the animal and hold it. I have seen, moreover, 
a mouser that wanted some fish swimming in a large stone 
vessel; and when it was unable to catch them because of the 
water, it drew out the stopper and let the water out until the 
vessel became dry, in order that it might capture the fish in a 
dry place. It therefore conceived of several acts, in order that 
it might secure the end it had in view. The bee makes all its 
houses hexagonal, selecting one of the figures that fill up space, 

C544] 

Optical Science 

so that no vacant space may be left between the houses; and it 
does not wish that there should be this space, lest the honey or 
the young should fall outside of the hives and perish. With 
this end in view, then, resembling a conclusion it assembles in 
its mental process many facts which resemble premises. This 
is true also of a host of facts, in which animals think of many 
things in their order with respect to an object that they have in 
mind, just as if they were drawing for themselves a conclusion 
from the premises. But they do not arrange the course of their 
reasoning in form and logical figure, nor from their delibera- 
tion do they distinguish the last from the first. Nor are they 
conscious that they are following a course of reasoning of this 
kind, because their reasoning takes place thus from intuition 
alone and natural instinct. This course of reasoning is similar 
to argument and syllogism, and for this reason authors on 
Perspective call it argument and syllogism. And assuredly they 
call this kind of reasoning syllogistic more appropriately than 
they call the distinction of universals and particulars seen pre- 
viously the cogitative faculty through knowledge. 

[545 J 

Part THREE OF PERSPECTIVE 

FIRST DISTINCTION 

In which the author considers reflected and refracted vision, dividing 
the subject into three distinctions. The first one is on re- 
flected vision and contains six chapters. The first 
chapter is on reflection in general. 

CHAPTER | 
N FTER our discussion of vision in straight lines we must 

now speak of vision in other ways, namely, in reflected 
and refracted lines. Since, moreover, what has been 
- said concerning the parts of the soul and the structure of the 
eye, and the path of the species in the coats and humors of the 
eye to the common nerve, and concerning the triple mode of 
perceiving sensibles by the sense alone, by syllogistic reason- 
ing, and by recollection [scientia], is common to vision effected 
by straight lines, by reflected lines, and by refracted lines, less 
need be said in regard to these matters. First, then, as regards 
the reflection of vision we must recollect that as far as concerns 
the judgment of the human vision a dense body can impede 
wholly the species, as a wall and dense bodies of this kind; or 
in part, as water, glass, and crystal. For every dense body in 
so far as it is dense reflects species, not because violence is done 
to the species, but because the species takes the opportunity from 
a dense body impeding its passage to multiply itself by another 
path open to it. A dense body may be rough or smooth. The 
parts of a rough body are unsymmetrical, and therefore each 
part makes its own proper reflection. For this reason the parts 
dissipate the whole species, nor can it as a whole reach the eye, 
and therefore there cannot be a sensible reflection or a repre- 
sentation of the object of vision. But owing to the equality and 
smoothness of the surface of a polished body, as in mirrors, all 
the parts are symmetrically arranged for a single action, and 
the species comes back whole and sensible to the eye, and the 
image is manifest; not, however, such a perfect one as when 
the eye sees by means of a straight line, because reflection 

C546] 

Optical Science 

weakens the species, as has been stated in the book on Multipli- 
cations. 

Since, if the species passed through the medium of the 
mirror, it would make the angle a equal to the 
angle of incidence, which is 4, by the fifteenth 
proposition of the first book of the Elements of 

Euclid, which states that the opposite angles dla 
are equal, the angle of reflection, namely, d, 
must be equal to the angle of incidence, since the A 

ray forms an angle on this side of the mirror 
like the one formed below it. This, moreover, 
is proved in a simple manner, as follows: Let 
abc be a plane mirror, d the visible object, e the Fic. 49. 
eye, and let ab and bc be equal, da and ec be 

perpendicular and equal, let db be the radius of incidence, be be 
the radius of reflexion ; then since ce and cb are equal to ad and 
ab, and the angles contained within the sides are equal, since 
they are right angles, it follows by the d 

fourth proposition of the first book of the A 
Elements that the remaining correspond- 
ing angles are equal, namely g and f, 
which is the proposition. If, therefore, 
the triangles are equal, the proposition “% b 
is evident. If, however, one triangle is FIG. 50. 
larger than the other the angles of inci- 

dence and reflection are still the same, and are unchanged, and 
therefore the proposition will always hold. But the author of 
the book on Mirrors supposes that the triangles are similar, and 
therefore ab will be to cb as da to ec, and therefore the angles 
g and f are equal. 

By this means also we show that the law holds with regard 
to convex and concave mirrors. For a and 6 make equal angles 
with a plane mirror, which is dc, but the angles of contact 
[tangency] are equal. Therefore if these angles are taken from 
those formed with the plane mirror, the angles that are left, 
namely, f and g, will be equal, which we wish to prove. In the 
same way we prove the law in regard to the convex mirror. 
For a and b make equal angles with the plane mirror gf. There- 
fore if to these angles are added the angles of contact, which 
are always equal, the angles ahd and bhc will be equal, which 

C547] 

Opus Majus 

is the proposition. The proof is given in this way in the book 
on Mirrors, and in the book of Alkindi on Aspects. 

a 

FIG. 51. FIG. 52. 

CHAPTER [I 

In the next place, we must bear in mind carefully that the 
mirror contains nothing nor is anything seen in it, as is gen- 
erally thought. But the object opposite it from which the species 
comes is seen, as Alhazen shows in many ways in the fourth 
book. For as the end of the straight line oa, since vision is ef- 
fected by means of this line, is a visible object it- 

self, so must the end of the reflected line, namely, 

o oda, be a. Moreover, the species is not seen except 
by accident, as has been explained above. We 
might also assume that the same conditions would 
hold with regard to the species as with regard to a 
spot impressed on the mirror or with regard to 
some part of the mirror that has been marked, on 
which the species would be impressed, but which 
would not of necessity have a determined posi- 
Fic. 53. tion, in order that one might see the spot on the 
mirror or some part of the mirror that had been 

marked. Therefore in vision effected by means of reflection a 
determined position of the eye is not required. This reasoning, 
however, is false. For unless the eye is at o, it will not see any- 
thing by reflection at o. For if this reflected species were any- 
where else, it would not reach the eye, owing to the equality of 
the angles of incidence and reflection. This, then, can be shown 
in many ways, but since all having a knowledge of perspective 
are in agreement on this point, we need not dwell upon it fur- 

[548] 

Ss 

Optical Science 

ther. Many truths become manifest to the student in conse- 
quence of this fact; for, in the first place, it follows that the 
species is not fixed in the substance of the mirror, nor is it im- 
pressed upon the mirror, as is generally supposed, but merely 
passes by means of the surface of the mirror in the opposite 
direction in accordance with the equality of the angles of inci- 
dence and reflection. 

Moreover, since this is the case, if the light coming from the 
moon and the stars were the light of the sun reflected from 
their surfaces, as the rank and file of philosophers think, in 
seeing the moon and a star we should see the sun. This, there- 
fore, is evidently false not only because of the equality of the 
angles of incidence and reflection, as has been shown in what 
precedes, according to Averroés in the second book of the 
Heavens and the World, but for the reason now given. In the 
same way it follows that a comet is not the reflection of the 
solar light from the surface of a star, as many have maintained 
that the tail following the comet is nothing else than the light 
of the sun reflected from the surface of a star to us, or that the 
light coming to us from a comet is the light of the sun reflected 
from the surface of some star. But this is a false notion. For 
in that case in seeing a comet we should see the sun, which is 
not true. Moreover, since the rainbow is merely the image of 
the sun reflected from a moist cloud, as all agree and as the 
fact is established, in accordance with the proof given below 
in the section on Experimental Science, then in seeing the cloud 
we should see the sun and nothing else; but this, however, 
seems absurd, since our vision judges that it beholds colors and 
a colored bow. But the sun does not possess such a figure nor 
such colors. But we shall make sure of this matter later on in 
a broader discussion. 

Moreover, in addition to these facts we must note that the 
object does not appear to the vision by reflection in its own posi- 
tion, because vision is accustomed to see by means of straight 
lines at their extremities, and for this reason vision does not 
perceive the bending of reflection; and therefore it judges that 
the object is always in the visual ray, and the place of the image, 
which we call the appearance of the object, is at some point of 
this ray. This result is due to the fact that vision is caused by 
external propagation, and for this reason the vision judges that 

C549] 

Opus Majus 

the object is in the direction of the species of the eye. But it is 
not always, however, in the same place, but as in many instances 
is at the intersection of the visual ray with the cathetus, which 
is the perpendicular drawn from the object to the mirror. Some- 
times it is not at that intersection, but in the visual ray alone, 
because it can be equidistant from the cathetus, as in the case 
of a concave mirror, as we shall explain. When it intersects the 
cathetus, the intersection takes place in many ways. For some- 
times they meet behind the head, sometimes in the eye, some- 
times on the surface of the mirror, sometimes beyond the mir- 
ror, and this last in several ways. For it happens sometimes that 
the object appears as much beyond the mirror as it is distant 
from the mirror, and this diversity happens owing to the dif- 
ference in mirrors. Therefore we must now take up this ques- 
tion. 

CHAPTER III 

Mirrors, then, are of seven kinds, in which, according to au- 
thors on Perspective, vision differs; namely, spherical, conical, 
cylindrical, polished on the outside and on the inside. These 
make six; the seventh is the plane mirror. For each of the first 
three classes can be concave, that is, polished on the inside, or 
convex, that is, polished on the outside, making six in number; 
the plane mirror has only one structure. In the case of these 
mirrors, then, I wish, following the views of authors on Per- 
spective and particularly of Ptolemy and Alhazen, to consider 
as briefly as I can the modes of vision according to the diversity 
of mirrors. 

In plane mirrors, then, very little error occurs, because the 
objects appear in their proper form and size. For the position 
alone is altered, since the right appears on the left and the re- 
verse and the top at the bottom, whence towers appear inverted 
in the water, since the reflection takes place from the plane sur- 
face of the water. There is, however, an error in plane mirrors 
that is common in all mirrors, namely, the object does not ap- 
pear in its own place, nor is the place of the image there. When, 
moreover, we speak of the place of the image, we mean the ap- 
pearance of the object, for this is all that we mean by the term. 

[550] 

Optical Science 

Neither the object, then, in these mirrors nor the place of the 
image appears in the place of the object, but always in the visual 
ray, for the two reasons given. But in plane mirrors the image 
is determined at the intersection of the visual ray with the 
cathetus, namely, as far beyond the mirror as the object of 
vision is distant from the mirror. This law does not hold in the 
case of other mirrors. It can be shown by proof. For let a be the 
object of vision, o the eye, ad the cathetus, od the visual ray. I 
say that dd is equal to ab itself. But bd is the distance of the 
image of the object from the surface of the 

mirror, and ad is the distance of the object from q 
the same surface of the mirror; it appears, how- 

ever, as far beyond the mirror as it is distant 

from the mirror. For the angles e and f, since 

they are right angles, are equal, and g and h 

are equal, by the fifteenth proposition of the 
first book of the Elements of Euclid, and 4 and 

c are equal, because they are the. angles of inci- 

dence and reflection. Therefore it is evident that 

c and g will be equal. Since, then, the angles 

e and g of the triangle egd are equal to the © u 
angles f and c of the triangle acf, and the in- FIG. 54. 
cluded side is common to both triangles, it is 

evident by the twenty-sixth proposition of the first book of 
Euclid that these triangles are equal in all their parts. There- 
fore the sides ab and éd will be equal. Wherefore vision judges 
that the object is as far beyond the mirror continuously and in 
a straight line as it is in front of it in the case of plane mirrors. 
By this and previous statements the error of many is removed, 
who believed that the species of the object was there in reality 
and that it diffused itself through the medium of the mirror and 
appeared there. But no visual species exists in the mirror, as 
has been stated, nor does it enter the mirror, so that vision 
should be effected by means of an entry of this kind, but it 
merely passes by means of the surface of the mirror to the end 
of the reflection in the opposite direction, according to the 
equality of the angles of incidence and reflection. Hence the 
place of the image does not seem to be at the intersection of 
the visual ray with the cathetus because of the reality of its 
existence in that place, but by reason merely of its appearance. 

[5511] 

Opus Majus 

In spherical mirrors polished on the outside [convex] also 
according to the judgment of the vision the object appears at 
the intersection of the visual ray with a line drawn from the 
object to the center of the sphere. This intersection can be 
beyond the mirror, or within, or on the surface of the mirror. 
The same holds true in the cylindrical and conical mirrors. All 
the errors, moreover, that are in plane mirrors, occur in con- 
vex mirrors also, and more, since in these the object of vision 
frequently appears less than it is; sometimes, however, equal 
or greater, but very rarely. But the image appears less, because 
the width of the surface of the mirror is less, from which the 
rays intersecting at the eye are reflected, than it is in plane mir- 
rors; for the rays reflected from a convex mirror are more 
dispersed than those from a plane mirror. Therefore that the 
rays may pass to the sight just as from a plane mirror, the re- 
flection must be from a shorter surface than from a plane 
mirror. The representation, moreover, of the image follows the 
condition of the reflecting surface. In these mirrors, therefore, 
hardly anything appears as it is, the arrangement of the parts 
excepted, which is the same in the mirror as in the object. In 
these mirrors that which is straight appears curved; for since 
the reflection of the outer rays is on a convex surface, the ter- 
mini are more distant from the center of the eye than the ex- 
tremities of the median ray, and that which happens in the 
turning is judged to be present in the object. Very rarely, how- 
ever, does it happen that what is rectilinear appears so. It does 
so when the sight is in the surface in which the line seen and 
the center of the sphere lie. The mathematical proof of this fact 
is too lengthy to be given here. Again we must note that in 
convex mirrors the distance of the image from the mirror is 
less than that of the object of vision, while in plane mirrors it 
is equal. The reason for this is found in the fact that in convex 
mirrors the ray intersects more quickly with the cathetus than 
in plane mirrors, as is evident to the inquirer. 

In cylindrical mirrors polished on the outside the same error 
is present as in convex spherical mirrors, and more in addition. 
For in these an object seen at a distance appears smaller than 
in convex spherical mirrors. The reason for this is apparent if 
one considers the difference between the surfaces of the former 
and the latter. In these mirrors, then, very large objects appear 

[5521 

Optical Science 

very small, and rectilinear objects appear much more curved 
than in convex spherical mirrors. But we must note that in 
these mirrors the reflection sometimes takes place from the 
length of the cylinder, as when a line seen is equidistant from 
the axis of the cylinder, and in this case the reflection is the 
same as in plane mirrors, with this exception, that, since the 
line from which the reflection takes place has breadth, it ap- 
pears somewhat curved. Sometimes the reflection is from the 
cross direction of the cylinder, and in this case the image is 
very much distorted and very much shortened. Sometimes the 
reflection takes place from a midway position, or from one ap- 
proaching more nearly the length or breadth. Images will be 
formed in accordance with these several positions. 

In conical mirrors polished on the outside, likewise, the same 
errors occur as in convex spherical mirrors, because the image 
is smaller than the object of vision, and what is rectilinear 
appears curved, and the reflection differs in these as in cylin- 
drical mirrors, because the reflection takes place from the 
length of the cone, or from its width, or from a position be- 
tween. Moreover, in these the shape appears conical. For in 
general it is true that the species comprehended by reflection is 
assimilated to the shape of the surface of the mirror. In these, 
also, the further an object is distant from the mirror the smaller 
it looks, and the nearer it approaches the larger it appears. 

CHAPTER IV 

AMONG all mirrors the greatest deception is in the concave 
spherical ones; for the deception in regard to size occurs in 
these as in the others, since sometimes it is greater, sometimes 
less, sometimes equal ; and besides this there is a deception in re- 
gard to number, since sometimes one object appears to be two, 
sometimes three, sometimes four, according to different posi- 
tions, so that this number it is impossible to exceed. Moreover, 
in these a disarrangement of parts is apparent, since the object 
appears sometimes erect, sometimes inverted; and thus it is 
manifest that in these mirrors nothing appears except with de- 
ception. In concave mirrors, however, straight lines appear 
sometimes straight, sometimes convex, sometimes concave; and 

[553] 

Opus Majus 

convex lines appear sometimes convex, sometimes concave ; and 
sometimes concave lines are apprehended as convex, as is 
proved in the sixth book of Alhazen, seventh chapter; and this 
happens in accordance with a difference of position with respect 
to the mirror. In these mirrors, then, sometimes the cathetus is 
equidistant from the visual ray, and in this case the place of 
the image is the same as the point of reflection, and this is true 
because it is a point of divisible reflection, and if we consider 
one part, the image should appear beyond the mirror, but if 
we consider the other, it should appear this side of the mirror, 
as will be evident. But since the figure is one and continuous, 
the whole appears at a distance midway between the two, 
namely, at the point itself of reflection. But when the cathetus 
and the visual ray intersect, the object appears at their intersec- 
tion, and this occurs in several ways, according to difference of 
position. For sometimes 
the place of the image is 
in the mirror, some- 
times beyond it, some- 
times this side of it; and 
this is either between 
the sight and the mir- 
ror, or in the center it- 
self of vision, sometimes 
behind the eye. 

All these facts are 
made evident in the 
figure given below. For 
the form ¢ is reflected 
from e to a by the ray 
ea, equidistant from the 
perpendicular ¢d, and 
appears at e; and m is 
reflected from x to a, 
and intersects the per- 

FIG. 55. pendicular ml; and k 

is reflected from the 

point c to the eye a, and appears at s; and q falls to g, and 
is reflected to a; it intersects, moreover, the cathetus behind 
the eye, namely, at o; and z falls to e, and is reflected to the 

[5541] 

Optical Science 

eye. But the ray ae nowhere intersects the cathetus drawn from 
the point z through d, except in the center itself of the eye, 
whence z appears there. In all these different images nowhere 
is any one of them really perceived unless its position is be- 
yond the mirror, or between the sight and the mirror. Hence 
those that appear in the center of the eye or behind the head 
appear as things not determined by vision. For vision is not 
constructed by nature to perceive the position of forms unless 
they are in front of the eye. When, moreover, the eye is at the 
center of a concave mirror, it is the only thing visible to itself ; 
for no form is reflected to the center except that which comes 
from the center. The perpendicular, in fact, returns upon itself. 
If, however, the eye is placed on the periphery or outside it, 
the eye is not visible to itself, but the reflection is in the opposite 
direction. If, however, the eye is placed below the periphery, 
no one of the objects that are in the semidiameter in which it 
lies, is visible. If, however, some visible object is placed at the 
center, it cannot be seen by reflection, for its species is not re- 
flected except upon itself. In regard to the number of images we 
must note that when the eye is so placed that from four parts 
of the mirror the reflection of the form of the same object is 
made, and there is an intersection in different places of each of 
the rays with the cathetus, there will be four images. When the 
reflection is from three parts of the mirror there will be three 
images; when from two parts, there will be two images; when 
from one part, there will be one image, as is very accurately 
stated in the fifth book, part second. And note that all proofs 
dealing with places of reflection seek to answer the question, 
where the angle of incidence can be equal to the angle of re- 
flection, and as many images appear at the same time as there 
are points of this kind under the same position and with respect 
to the same eye; if, however, the rays in different places inter- 
sect the perpendicular at a sensible distance. For when the dis- 
tance of the point seen is greater from one eye than from the 
other, the positions of the images will be different with respect 
to either eye, but the difference is imperceptible, and for this 
reason the two appear as one. 

We must note that distance and proximity are reflected in 
different ways from concave mirrors; as is evident from the 

[555 

Opus Majus 

eleventh proposition on Mirrors. For the visible object, ed, falls 
to the mirror by the rays intersecting at z, for although reflec- 
tion is made from every point, yet only those intersecting each 
other meet at such a distance in the eye. For the visible object 
kn, which is within the confluence of the rays, appears other- 
wise than it is; be- 
cause, in general, 
height and depth that 
are within the conflu- 
ence of the rays ap- 
pear inverted; but ob- 
jects outside of the 
confluence appear 
erect, as they are, ac- 
cording to the state- 
ment of that proposi- 
tion. This is evident, 
because the ray ba, 
which is more ele- 
vated, is reflected to e, 
which is higher in the 
object seen and inter- 
sects the cathetus at a 
higher point, because 
atl; and bg, which isa 
lower ray, is reflected 
to the point d in the 
visible object ed, and 
meets the cathetus at a 
FIG. 56. lower point, namely, 

at m, whence the object 

appears as it is. But the lower ray bg is reflected to k, which is 
higher in the visible object kx, and the ray ba to n, whence k 
necessarily appears at f, and v at c, and thus the object is in- 
verted. This proof follows closely the first statement of the first 
book on vision, “Under more elevated rays objects of vision ap- 
pear more elevated, under lower rays they appear lower.” But, 
however, we must bear in mind that the demonstration in the 
book on Mirrors has an inaccurate figure, since the catheti 

[556] 

Optical Science 

should fall to the center of the sphere, which rule is not there 
observed, and here therefore I give the correct figure. 

In cylindrical mirrors polished within the same phenomena 
occur as in concave mirrors, both in the size of the object of 
vision and in the number of images, since in the inversion of 
what is seen there is also a reflection in different ways in these 
mirrors, as in exterior cylindrical mirrors, from their length, 
width, and midway position; and moreover, the images are 
diversified and the positions of the images are varied, accord- 
ing to difference of position with respect to the cylinder, just as 
in concave spherical mirrors. In concave conical mirrors similar 
phenomena occur as in concave cylindrical and spherical mir- 
rors; the reflection varies also in these, as in conical mirrors 
polished on the outside, from the length, breadth, and middle 
position ; and similarly are the images diversified in figure and 
size. 

CHAPTER V 

In addition to the reflections already mentioned we can give 
some fine examples in natural objects. For although it has often 
been said that in consequence of the difference in the angle at 
which light and reflection fall from colors and objects upon 
the eye is there a difference in color and in the shining back of 
the light in bright objects, we must understand that this is 
owing to the incidence and reflection at different angles. For 
the action of light is stronger when it falls and is reflected at 
right angles, and it is weaker when it falls at angles less than 
right angles, and it is much weaker when it falls at very acute 
angles. Thus light falling in different ways can either make 
clear, or hide, or soften the intensity of color, or augment it in 
various ways, as is evident in the pigeon’s neck and the pea- 
cock’s tail, and in many other things. I do not say, however, that 
there are not real colors in the peacock’s tail and in the pigeon’s 
neck, although some deny it, especially in the case of the pi- 
geon’s neck; for the figure formed by colors in the peacock’s 
tail manifestly contains a certain color, but because of the 
tenuity of the feathers in the pigeon’s neck, since they have no 

[5571 

Opus Majus 

thickness, and because of their great proximity, we do not per- 
ceive the real colors that are in them. I do not, however, deny 
that owing to the different incidence of the light at various 
angles those colors are now more manifest, now more hidden, 
now brighter and livelier, now obscured and weakened. This 
is the case also in the colors of the rainbow; for in reality they 
exist only in appearance, as the incidence of light at fixed 
angles produces them. The rainbow is caused by reflection not 
by refraction, since it varies according to the view of the ob- 
server, as Experimental Science will show. 

Drunken men and those weak in health, according to Aris- 
totle in the third book of the Meteorologics, and according to 
Seneca in the book on the Rainbow, see themselves, and it 
seems to them that they see themselves walking in advance. In 
explanation of this Seneca says that the species coming from 
them, that is, their visual powers, are weak, and therefore the 
air, although not dense, is able to resist the species and reflect 
it back to the sight, and for this reason the species is formed in 
the air in front of them and returns to the eyes and to the 
whole body. Hence they see themselves just as they would in 
a mirror. Here alone is vision effected by the species of the eye, 
and not by the species of the object of vision, except that the eye 
together with the whole body is seen, and the species of the eye 
is reflected to all the anterior parts of the body, and the man is 
seen in front of himself, because the position of the image is in 
front of the man at the intersection of the visual ray with the 
cathetus. But that this vision is effected only by the species of 
the eye is evident, because the species of other parts of the body 
and of the clothes are strong, so that they penetrate the air, 
which reflects the weak species of the eye. It is thus evident that 
the sight produces from itself its own species. This vision is 
weak because it is effected through the species of the eye alone; 
and the species of vision is weaker and grows so more quickly 
than that of the other part of the eye, because the eye possesses 
a more tenuous and weaker substance. If it be said, then, that 
the visual rays could be reflected when they are directed 
toward the heavens and fail in the profundity of the air or of 
the transparent sky, as was said before, and similarly in deep 
water, and that a man would then see himself when he views 

[558] 

Optical Science 

that deep water from a distance, which is not true; we must 
reply that this does not happen unless the air near these per- 
sons be somewhat dense, which can happen in the case of 
drunken men, owing to the moisture from the vapors of the 
wine that are set free, and in the case of the infirm, owing to 
the vapors always released near them from disease. Hence evil 
and foul vapors are always near these people in the air, by 
which the air near them is tainted and rendered dense, so that 
in their vicinity it acts like a mirror, which would not happen 
in another more remote part of the air. Likewise the air near 
the ground is made dense by vapors arising from the earth and 
from the water; and therefore from both causes of density the 
air near at hand can have the quality of a mirror. Therefore 
owing to this difformity in parts of the air it happens that one 
part has the quality of a mirror and another part does not have 
it with respect to the eyes of drunken men and of those in weak 
health. But the strong eye looking in water finds it of uniform 
density. The same is true in the sphere of the heavens at a dis- 
tance; and vision does not find there a denser part that might 
have the quality of a mirror, nay, it always finds it rarer, and 
therefore the species is multiplied until it fails without reflec- 
tion. But if it be said that a strong eye finds vapors in the air 
and parts of clouds, so that reflection might take place, we must 
reply that it passes through vapors because of its strength and 
also through the light and thin clouds; but it does not pass 
through thick clouds. One does not, however, see himself be- 
cause of the distance of the mirror and because of the lack of a 
perfect polish; for they do not possess polished and regular 
surfaces at all. Distance, however, is the chief obstacle, just as 
if a large mirror were placed at a distance of one league or two 
or three, however large it might be, a man would not on this 
account see himself; and therefore he could not see himself by 
means of the clouds, since they are distant from us about fifty 
miles, as is shown in the book on Twilights. 

The vision of drunken men and of those in weak health can 
be explained in another way, namely, by direct vision. For their 
- species are in the air in front of them, and because the visual 
- faculty is weak it therefore ends at once and the species in the 
air is like an object, just as we stated before in regard to the 

[5591] 

Ye 

Opus Majus 

weak eye which sees sometimes the species along with the ob- 
ject so that one object appears to be two, errors which do not 
happen in the case of a strong eye for the reason given there. 

When the eye views a candle and lowers the eyelashes, it sees 
the candle project rays in the form of a radiant pyramid whose 
vertex is in the candle, and the dispersion of the rays is quite 
sensible to the eye. The reason for this is found in the fact that 
the rays of the candle fall on the lids and the lashes are pol- 
ished, possessing the property of a mirror, and a reflection for 
this reason takes place from them to the eye, when they are so 
inclined that the eye is able to receive the rays reflected at 
angles equal to those of incidence. Therefore this phenomenon 
does not occur in any position at all of the lashes, but only in 
one determined. 

When a man views something bright and polished, like a 
metal cross on a campanile or lofty tower, he will see a body 
of this kind scintillate strongly when the rays of the sun or 
moon fall on it and are reflected to the sight. The reason of this 
is the sensible variation of the angle owing to the motion of 
the star. For although on account of the distance of the star 
from us we do not perceive its motion, yet owing to the mod- 
erateness of the distance of such a scintillating body we are able 
to judge in regard to the fall of the light at different angles 
owing to the motion of the star, and therefore it seems to pro- 
ject rays according to the different positions and to scintillate. 
For if we should imagine a wheel whose center is the center of 
the world, and the circumference is the revolving heaven, then 
although the radii extended from the center to the circum- 
ference, that is, branches or rods fastened at the center and ex- 
tended to the circumference, would not seem to move near the 
circumference owing to distance from the sight, they would, 
however, be seen to move perceptibly about the center by an 
eye placed near it. Therefore similarly the rays of the sun fall- 
ing on an object here below will make a sensible variation in 
the angle, although the motion in the sun would not be ap- 
parent to us. This is the new kind of scintillation, which I 
promised in what precedes that I would mention. 

[ 560 

Optical Science 

CHAPTER VI 

IT is generally known among students of perspective that when 
a mirror is placed in a vessel containing water and a double 
image appears in it, one will be that of the sun, and the other 
that of some star situated near the sun. But it cannot be a fixed 
star because the sun hides these, nor is it one of the planets, 
since the planets are distant sometimes more, sometimes less. 
But the images always have a uniform distance. Moreover, the 
phenomenon happens in the light of the moon as well as in that 
of the sun; likewise in the light of a candle; which they neglect 
to try. Wherefore it is not a star which appears, but it is the 
double image of the sun or moon or candle reflected from the 
double mirror. For the surface of the water is like that of a 
mirror, and by it one image is formed and the other is formed 
by the mirror. It is thought that the image formed by the water 
is larger and more perceptible, since the ray that forms the 
other image is much weakened because it is first refracted at 
the surface of the water, then it is reflected from the mirror, 
and thirdly is refracted at the surface of the air. But reflection 
and refraction greatly weaken the species, so that it is not able 
sufficiently to represent the object; and for this reason the for- 
mer image is weaker and smaller and less perceptible. But this 
reasoning yields to mine that the greater image is made by re- 
flection from the mirror; because the mirror is dense and has 
lead as one of its parts, which impedes the passage of the spe- 
cies; and for this reason the mirror has the means of receiving 
the image and returning it. For water owing to its rarity has 
less of the quality of a mirror, and therefore gives back a weak 
image. Now as to the objections raised in regard to the refrac- 
tions, we must state that the weakening which happens through 
them does not make the image less than that formed by the 
water, but less than it would be if the mirror were in a dry place 
outside the water. 

It is generally believed that it is absolutely true that in a 
broken mirror as many images appear as there are broken parts. 
But this is not the case except when the broken parts do not keep 
the same position but have a different one. For if they retain the 
same position that they had in the unbroken mirror, only one 
image will appear, because the species coming is made one and 

[561 ] 

Opus Majus 

remains one whether the mirror be whole or broken, provided 
the parts retain their same position; because there is one point 
of reflection, and there is one place on which it falls. When, 
however, the parts of a broken mirror are placed differently, 
the species necessarily are counted, because in its changed 
position the points of reflection are different and in different 
places, and therefore different images appear. 

[ 562 ] 

SECOND DISTINCTION 

Of the third part, which is on refracted vision, in four chapters. 
The first chapter treats of vision by refraction in general. 

CHAPTER I 
| AVING showed how vision is effected by straight and 

reflected lines, we must now show, in the third place, 

how it is effected by refracted lines. Although this is 
more difficult than the aforesaid subjects, yet we now are in a 
position to understand by means of what has been said, because 
this topic has many points of agreement with the others, as was 
stated in that part which deals with direct vision. We have seen 
how all rays must be refracted in the vitreous humor except 
the axis of the pyramid of rays, which passes through the cen- 
ters of the coats and humors, and that no ray of the visual pyra- 
mid is refracted at the cornea, or at the albugineous humor, or 
at the anterior of the glacialis, since the whole pyramid falls 
perpendicularly to those three bodies. And the rays would pass 
to their center if the vitreous humor were not before that point, 
and therefore the vertex of the pyramid is of necessity cut off 
and the pyramid is shortened and 
truncated. But many objects can be q pt 3 
seen besides those from which this 
pyramid comes; but not by means 
of rays reflected on the eye, since in 
that case they would recede from 
it; and therefore they must be seen 
by means of refracted rays. For let 
ac be the anterior glacialis and bd 
the cornea, and feo the pyramid of 
rays, then the ray pn comes from a 
visible object outside of the visual 
pyramid. This ray does not fall per- 
pendicularly on the cornea, nor does 
it enter the opening of the uvea, or, 
if it were to enter, it would not pass to the glacialis, but would 
cross beyond to the side of the eye, to the point /, for example. 
Therefore, since the visual force exists only in the glacialis, p 
will not be seen by means of the ray pl; but since the cornea is 

[ 563 J 

Fic. 57. 

Opus Majus 

denser than the air, and the ray pn does not fall perpendicularly 
on the cornea, although it falls inside of the pyramid before it 
comes to the cornea, it must be refracted in its progress. Simi- 
larly if from a point outside of the pyramid of rays a ray falls 
on the cornea, and outside of the visual pyramid, as gd, it will 
not pass to s, but will be refracted at the point d in the surface 
of the cornea, between the straight path ds and the perpen- 
dicular do, to the point z in the glacialis. And so p will be seen 
between the straight path, which is n} and the perpendicular no 
to be drawn from the point of refraction, and the refracted ray 
will go to the point & in the glacialis, and in this way p will be 
seen by the refracted ray, namely, pk. And for this reason it is 
less clearly seen than objects that are in the base of the pyramid, 
since they are seen by straight and perpendicular rays. The 
same holds true in regard to the visible point q, as is evident 
from the figure. 

Similarly whatever is seen by straight and reflected rays, is 
of necessity seen at the same time by means of refracted rays, 
and thus it is seen with greater certainty, because it is seen in 
two ways; and in this manner are the excellence and certainty 
of vision rendered complete. For point p is seen by the per- 
pendicular ray ~g, which goes 
to the center o, and nevertheless 
it is seen by means of pe. For pa 
does not go to d, but is refracted 
at point a of the cornea, between 
the straight path ad, and the 
perpendicular ao, to the point e 
in the surface of the glacialis. 

Moreover, p is seen not only 
by one refracted ray, but by an 
infinite number. For from # it- 
self an infinite number of 
oblique rays can be drawn to 
the surface of the cornea, and» 
each of these will be refracted 
and will fall into the opening, so that it will come to some 
point of the glacialis, as is evident in the case of the ray pb; 
for it does not pass to c, but is refracted at the point b of the 
cornea between the straight path, which is bc, and the per- 

C564] 

Pp 

FIG. 58. 

Optical Science 

pendicular, which is ġo, so that it passes to the point f of the 
glacialis; and the same is true of an infinite number of rays. 
Therefore vision is much improved and perfected by countless 
refracted rays of this kind, in which every visible object is seen, 
except that which is seen by the perpendicular ray. Moreover, 
_ we understand that anything that is opposite the opening can 
be seen by refraction and will not be seen by the straight rays, 
namely, when some obstacle of small breadth is interposed; as, 
for instance, a small straw, standing opposite the eye between 
it and some visible object, hinders the passage of the species of 
some part of it in a straight line. Then oblique rays will fall on 
the cornea from that object; since besides the one perpendicular 
which would fall if the obstacle were not there, an infinite num- 
ber of oblique rays fall, as we have now seen. Therefore the 
object will be seen by refracted rays only and not by straight 
rays, as is evident by experience if one holds between his eye 
and some object a straw or a needle; and particularly can one 
try this with a candle. 

CHAPTER II 

Concerning the differences in the appearance of the position 
of the image by refraction in planes. 

WE must understand that vision by refraction is at the intersec- 
tion of the visual ray with the cathetus, as has been stated in 
regard to reflection. But this can take 
place in various wonderful ways. To 
the end that we may understand all iF 
the different appearances of this kind, Sustiuus 
we must consider how differences of. 
this kind occur in plane, concave, or 

convex bodies. The variation is also Vil Corpus 
dependent on the position of the eye, 

whether it be in a rarer or denser 
medium and the object of vision con- 
versely. If the eye is in a transparent 
rarer medium and between the eye 
and the object of vision there is a 
denser medium, like water of a plane FIG. 59. 

[565 ] 

Densius 

Opus Majus 

surface, or crystal, or glass, and other transparent substances 
of this kind, then the object appears far larger than it is; for 
it is seen under a larger angle and appears much nearer 
than if the medium were uniform. The proof of this fact is 
evident in this figure. For the visible object f will be seen at 
d, where the visual ray ad intersects the cathetus f4; and 
similarly g will appear at c, where the visual ray ac intersects 
the cathetus gm, and therefore the whole object gf will appear 
in the position cd nearer the eye, and will be seen under a larger 
angle, than if the body were one. For under the angle oap it 
will be seen through these two bodies, 
but under the angle gaf it would be 

Ocutus 
a 

AX 

Corpus 
DeNsius 

RES v 

seen through one medium without re- 
fraction. If, however, the eye is in a 
denser medium, and the object of vi- 
sion is a rarer one, then the converse 
is true. For the object will appear 
smaller, not only because it will be 

seen under a smaller angle, but also 
because it will appear more remote. 
For o will be seen at 4, and f at & 
beyond the object of vision, so that of 
h will appear at kA, for the visual ray 

ab intersects at # the cathetus Ac, and 

the visual ray ad intersects at & the 
cathetus pfk; and it is seen under a smaller angle than if it 
were seen through only one medium. For now the whole object 
is seen under the angle dab because of the refraction; and with- 
out refraction it is seen under the larger angle fao. 

IMAGO 

FIG. 60. 

Cuapter III 

Concerning the diversity in the position of the image 
in the case of spherical surfaces. 

Ir, however, the bodies are not plane by means of which the 
eye sees but spherical, there is a great diversity. For either the 
concavity or convexity of the body is toward the eye; if the 
` concavity, then there are four cases. For there are two if the 

[ 566 J 

Optical Science 

eye is in the rarer medium, and two if it is in the denser medium. 
If, therefore, the eye is in the rarer medium, and the concavity 
of the medium is toward the eye, the eye can be between the 
center of the medium and the object of vision, or the center be- 

Ocutus 

tween the eye and the object of vision. The force, moreover, 
would not proceed here from the center of a denser or rarer 
medium, because the center of both is the same, and the con- 
cavity of both is toward the eye, because the center of the con- 
taining and of the contained spheres is the same. I shall, there- 
fore, state all these cases first, and then illustrate them in the 
figures; for it is necessary to do so owing to the brevity of the 
rules in each case and the large size of the figures. All these 
facts are made evident in these figures, which are here given 
in the order of the cases mentioned above. 

If, then, the eye is in the rarer medium and the concavity is 
toward the eye, and the eye is between the center and the object 
of vision, the object will appear nearer than it is. For the visual 
angle will thus be greater than if straight lines should be drawn 
from the eye without refraction to the extremities of the object 

[ 567 J 

Opus Majus 

and under a larger angle, and yet the image is less than the 
object. If, however, the eye is in the rarer medium and the con- 
cavity is toward the eye and the center of the denser body is be- 
tween the eye and the object, the object will still appear nearer. 
But the angle will be less and the image smaller. If, however, 
the eye is in the denser medium, and the concavity toward the 

CENTRUM 

EN 

SUBTILIORI MEOIN 

FIG. 64. 

eye and the eye is between the center of the concave body and 
the object, then the object will appear more remote beyond its 
actual position, and under a smaller angle, and the image will 
be larger. But if the center of the concave body is between the 

QouLuS IN MEDIO SUBTILIORI 

oy 
A y 

DENSIORI 

OCULUS IN MEDIO SUBTILIORI 

FIG. 66. 

C568] 

Optical Science 

eye and the object of vision, the other conditions remaining the 
same, the object of vision will still appear more remote and 
under a larger angle, and the image will be greater. 

If, however, the convexity of the body is toward the eye, 
there will similarly be four cases; for there are two if the eye 
is in the rarer medium, and two if the eye is in the denser 
medium. If, then, the eye is in the rarer medium and the con- 
vexity of the medium in which the object of vision is situated 
is toward the eye, then the object of vision can be between the 
center and the eye, or the center between the eye and the object 
of vision. If the object is between the eye and the center, the 
image will be nearer and larger and the angle greater. But the 

Ocutus IN DENSIOR) 

OcuLUs IN DENSIOR! 

Fic. 67. 

position of the image will be more remote. If, however, the eye 
is in the denser medium, and the object of vision is between the 
eye and the center, the image will be remoter and smaller, and 
will be seen under a smaller angle. But if the eye is in the denser 
medium, and the center is between the eye and the object, the 
image will be nearer and smaller and will be seen under a 
smaller angle, and the size of the angle under which the object 
is seen is perceived to be smaller than it would be if there were 
only one medium. And this is also the case when it contains that 
angle which the lines of the straight path make, and which end 

[ 5691 

No 

Opus Majus 

outside of it at another point; but it is shown to be greater, as 
is evident in the first figure, when the angle converges to an- 
other point within it, but then the angle which the lines of the 
straight path make is less than the angle under which the object 
is seen, and therefore the angle under which the object is seen 
is greater than if there were only one medium. For then is it 
seen under the angle dca, included by straight lines. And in the 
following figure it would be seen under the angle oap, included 
by straight lines, if there were only one medium, and thus under 
a greater angle than is the angle included by the broken lines 
under which the object is seen through the two media. We are 
to understand the matter in this way in all the other following 
figures. 

CHAPTER IV 
Concerning examples regarding refractions of this kind. 

SINCE these figures in regard to the mode of vision by refrac- 
tion have been described, examples can be given in objects of 
vision. First, in regard to a rod, which seems broken when one 
part is in the air and the other part in the water and the eye is 
in the air. For on this point contention is common among phi- 
losophers, when they dispute on any matter, nor is the question 
ever solved by them, since they are ignorant of this third part 
of Perspective. Now since the eye is in the same medium as 
the upper part of the rod, the eye will see it by direct vision, 
just as it is. But since the eye is in a rarer medium with respect 
to the lower part of the rod, which is in the water, the first rule 
given above in regard to a plane medium, or the fifth in regard 
to the denser medium in which the object is situated, whose con- 
vex surface is toward the eye, is applicable here. Nor is the 
force of which we may speak present in the waters to which we 
are accustomed, namely, of rivers and ditches, since although 
water has naturally a convex surface, wherever it is, owing to 
its constant tendency to flow to a lower position, as has been 
stated above, waters familiar to us in streams and fountains 
and other hollows have as far as regards our sense the upper 
surface plane. And however we may speak, the object of vision 
in the water must appear nearer the eye than is its true position, 

[570] 

Optical Science 

and larger, as is shown in both figures. Therefore the part of 
the rod which is in the water will not appear to the sight as 
continuous and in a straight line with the other part, but nearer 
the eye, and therefore the rod of necessity must appear of a 
curved and angular shape, as if it had been broken on entering 
the water, as shown in the figure. For let fb be the rod, a the 
eye, and im the surface of the water; b will send its species to 
c, but will not pass to o by 

a straight path, but willbe f g 

refracted in the rarer me- p 
dium to a, so that the 
straight path is between 
the refracted ray and the 
perpendicular drawn from 
the point of refraction, 
namely, gc. But the object d 
appears at the intersection 

of the visual ray with the 

cathetus. The cathetus is 

bdp, and the visual ray ac 

intersects at the point d of 

the cathetus. Therefore b, 5 b 
the extremity of the rod E 

will be seen at d, and in 

the same way each particle of the section that is in the water will 
be seen in the straight line in which d itself lies. Therefore the 
whole portion that is in the water will appear in the line nd. 
Wherefore the whole rod will be seen in the line fnd, and there- 
fore in the curved line with an angle at , and thus the rod will 
appear to be broken. Moreover, since a man can see in the water, 
if he had the required skill to stay under the water, he could 
see the rod broken at the surface of the air, just as he now sees 
it in the water because of the second rule with its figure re- 
garding a plane body, or because of the third rule with its 
figure, where the eye is in the denser medium whose concavity 
is toward the eye. 

There is a similar occurrence if an object is placed in a vessel 
and the observer steps backward until it is no longer seen; the 
immersed object will be visible again at the same distance be- 
tween it and the observer, if water is poured in, as is stated at 

C571] 

Opus Majus 

the beginning of the book on Mirrors. Any one can try this, al- 
though it seems wonderful or rather not true to those unac- 
quainted with the fact. The reason for this is evident from the 
rules given, namely, the first on plane surfaces and the fifth on 
concave surfaces. For since the eye is in the rarer medium and 
the object in the denser, the object must appear nearer and 
more elevated toward the eye where the intersection of the 
visual ray with the cathetus occurs, and the image will appear 
larger. Wherefore it will seem to the sight that the object placed 

in the vessel is raised from the bottom of the vessel to the sur- 
- face of the water. Nor is another drawing required here than 
the one made in the places mentioned above, and therefore that 
one suffices. j 

If, then, we view the sun or moon and stars at their rising and 
setting through aqueous vapors, as we often do in summer and 
in autumn, we see those luminaries of unusual size, as any one 
experiences. But the reason of such a phenomenon is found in 
the first rule with its figure, where the eye is in the rarer me- 
dium and the object is in the denser, whose concavity is toward 
the eye, and the eye is between the center and the object of 
vision. For vapors of this kind are spherical and concentric 
with the world, because they recede equally from the center; 
and therefore their concavity will be toward the eye, and the 
eye will be between them and their center, which is the center 
of the world. Therefore, as we have shown from that drawing, 
the image of the object is nearer and is seen under a larger 
angle, and therefore the object appears larger and nearer. 

If the objection is raised that the image is smaller than the 
object, for which reason it should appear smaller; we must re- 
ply that the larger size of the angle together with the apparent 
nearness is the prevailing factor in this matter. For a nearer 
object, other things being equal, appears more clearly in respect 
to its size, and particularly so when it is seen under a larger 
angle. If again it be said that the rays of the stars find vapors 
and clouds not only at the horizon and near it, but also toward 
the meridian and at the meridian, but the sun when it is near 
the meridian or at the meridian does not appear of unusual size; 
therefore it should not near its rising and setting.* Probably 
some trained in the science of perspective have judged that 

“* This sentence is incomplete in the text. 

[5721] 

Optical Science 

vapors are not the cause of this phenomenon, owing to this ob- 
jection. But they have been deceived, because they cannot give 
another reason; for that reason which was given above in re- 
gard to the size of the stars at the horizon is applicable at all 
times, but this appearance of size is temporary, not constant, 
and therefore has a temporary cause. Moreover, we see, when 
the air is serene and dry in the east or west lacking vapors, that 
the stars have their accustomed magnitudes; but when the air 
is charged with vapors the appearance of unusual size occurs 
at this time. It is therefore evident that vapors are the cause. 
But the objection is removed by the fact that the rays of the 
stars near their rising and setting fall entirely at oblique angles 
and therefore are refracted at the surface of the air according 
to the tenor of the rule mentioned. But when the star approaches 
the meridian the rays approach right angles in their direction, 
for which reason they are not so much refracted as when the 
star is at its rising. If it be objected that all rays of planets are 
refracted about the tropic of Cancer, as has been previously ex- 
plained, because they do not fall to the center of the world, but 
toward the horizon, the fact must be conceded. But, however, 
they are far less refracted and they approach nearer to the per- 
pendicular when the star is near the meridian; and therefore, 
although at that time it appears of larger size owing to vapors, 
it is not, however, of the unusual size of which we are here 
speaking. But the larger size of the angle of refraction and the 
wider divergence from the direct path cause the object to ap- 
pear larger and nearer. 

If, however, we consider the stars and the media according 
to their natural arrangement, apart from vapors and the re- 
maining reason of constant application, concerning which men- 
tion was made above, the third rule in regard to spherical bodies 
applies, whose convexity is toward the eye and the eye is in the 
denser medium, since it is in an elemental medium, and the 
object is in a rarer medium, namely, in a celestial medium, and 
the eye is between the center and the object of vision. The stars 
will appear smaller than they are and than they would appear 
if there were only one medium, since they are seen under a 
smaller angle, and thus there will be an error of vision in re- 
gard to the stars. If it be said that the image is far larger than 
the object, and therefore it will appear larger: again if it be 

[573] 

Opus Majus 

said that the position of the image is far beyond the object, and 
therefore it will appear to be more distant, and therefore ob- 
jects will appear to be larger, for we have shown above that 
things which seem to be more distant appear larger; we must 
reply to the first objection that the size of the angle is the pre- 
vailing factor in these appearances. Therefore since the star is 
seen under a smaller angle, the magnitude of the image offers 
no difficulty. To the second objection we reply that because of 
the transparency of the clear media, intervening bodies are 
not perceived, and therefore the distance of the image is not 
perceived, because from too remote a point, as has been ex- 
plained previously, distance is not judged by the sight unless 
intervening objects are perceived. Therefore although the posi- 
tion of the image is more remote, and would appear here to the 
vision through an error, yet as a matter of fact the vision does 
not perceive this remoteness, and therefore the object should 
not appear large on this account. 

If a man looks at letters or other small objects through the 
medium of a crystal or of glass or of some other transparent 
body placed above the letters, and it is the smaller part of a 
sphere whose convexity is toward the eye, and the eye is in the 
air, he will see the letters much better and they will appear 
larger to him. For in accordance with the truth of the fifth rule 
regarding a spherical medium beneath which is the object or 
on this side is its center, and whose convexity is toward the eye, 
all conditions are favorable for magnification, since the angle is 
larger under which the object is seen, and the image is larger, 
and the position of the image is nearer, since the object is be- 
tween the eye and the center. Therefore this instrument is use- 
ful to the aged and to those with weak eyes. For they can see a 
letter, no matter how small, sufficiently enlarged. If, however, 
the larger portion of a sphere or the half of it is used, then ac- 
cording to the sixth rule the angle is larger, and the image is 
larger, but it is more remote, because the position of the image 
is beyond the object, since the center of the sphere is between 
the eye and the object of vision. Therefore this instrument is 
not so powerful as it would be if it were the smaller portion of 
a sphere. Moreover, instruments of crystalline bodies of plane 
surface, according to the first rule on plane surfaces, and in- 
struments of concave spherical bodies, according to the first and 

[574] 

Optical Science 

second rules on spherical surfaces, can produce this same effect. 
But among all these instruments the smaller portion of a sphere 
whose convexity is toward the eye is the best magnifier, for the 
three reasons effective at the same time, as I have stated. 

That a candle appears larger at a distance than near at hand, 
provided that the distance is not too great, is due to the fact 
that it is seen not only by direct, but also by refracted rays, and 
the vision does not perceive the refraction, and for this reason 
it judges that it sees by means of 
straight lines where the visual ray in- 
tersects the cathetus drawn from the ob- 
ject. Hence the object of vision seems 
for this reason to be dilated to gr, be- 
cause the points at its extremities are 
seen not only by means of the ray au, 
and by another ray cp, but also by the 
ray ao refracted at the point b on the 
surface of the eye and by the ray cd 
refracted at the point m, and ob, the 
visual ray, intersects at the point g the 
cathetus ca, and the refracted ray dm 
intersects at the point v the cathetus ac, 
and therefore the diameter of the object 
of vision appears to be rg, and con- 
siderably larger than ac. Another rea- 
son, particularly in the case of weak and careless vision, might 
be the fact that the species near the object is strong, and there- 
fore naturally fitted to terminate weak and careless vision, and 
for this reason the size of the object seems greater in accordance 
with the extent of space in which the species appears sensible. 
For this frequently happens to weak eyes, to infirm people, to 
those intoxicated, and to those who look.at the object of vision 
in a negligent and indifferent manner. Other examples can be 
given, in which much scientific knowledge is displayed just as 
in these; but since the present discussion is more in the nature 
of a plea than of a formal treatise, those now given must suffice. 

Fic. 70. 

[575 ] 

LAST DISTINCTION 

Concerning the relation of perspective to theology and to 
practical applications, in four chapters. 

CHAPTER | 

y N Y E have now spoken of the principles of perspective 
as far as they are necessary for scientific knowledge 
and for the understanding of their practical applica- 
tions. I wish now in conclusion to intimate how this science 
possesses an ineffable usefulness in regard to divine truth. First 
we must bear in mind that, since this science attests natural 
phenomena, as is evident by what has been said, and conse- 
quently it is clear that it elucidates and explains the other sci- 
ences, this science must be serviceable to divine truth, because 
it requires a knowledge of the sciences and of temporal matters. 
Moreover, since divine truth unrestrictedly considered must be 
understood and expounded, and since it is ordained for the di- 
rection of this world, this science of perspective is necessary in 
both ways. For in God’s Scripture nothing is so much enlarged 
upon as those things that pertain to the eye and to vision, as is 
evident to one who reads the Scripture through; and therefore 
nothing is more necessary for the natural and spiritual meaning 
than definite knowledge of this science. This fact I wish merely 
to intimate in passing, since it is not necessary to delay at this 
point on many examples of this kind, because when the truth of 
the matters set forth in Scripture is known it is very easy for 
every theologian to draw from them profitably their spiritual 
meaning. For when it is said, “Guard us, Lord, as the pupil of 
thine eye,” it is impossible to know God’s meaning in this 
prayer unless one first considers how the guarding of the eye 
is effected, so that God deems it right to guard us according to 
this similitude. For when something is stated as an example and 
similitude, that which is exemplified cannot be understood un- 
less the meaning of the example is also understood. As, for ex- 
ample, when the Lord says, ‘‘Be wise as serpents,” the Lord 
intended that his disciples should consider the qualities of the 
serpent in which its wisdom consists, and the nature of the dove 
in which the sweetness of simplicity is found. 

[576] 

Optical Science 

But we shall not understand the guarding of the pupil except 
through the science of perspective. For the pupil is the anterior 
glacialis, which is supported by two humors in front of it and 
behind it; and is contained in one web and three coats, and re- 
ceives moreover a constant and unrestricted influx of spirits and 
forces from the plenteous source of supply in the optic com- 
missure; and thus it requires seven things for its protection. 
This, then, is the literal exposition, to which the Psalmist wishes 
the spiritual to be likened when he prays for the guarding of 
the spiritual pupil, that is, of the soul; for the perfect guardian- 
ship of which seven things are necessary, namely, virtue, gift, 
beatitude, spiritual sense, fruits, and revelation according to 
the states of rapture, and in addition the continual influx of the 
gifts of grace from the plenitude of the Crucified. But the prin- 
cipal virtues are seven, namely, three theological, charity, 
faith, and hope, and four cardinal, justice, fortitude, temper- 
ance, and wisdom; by means of which our spiritual pupil must 
be guarded. Moreover, the gifts of the Holy Spirit are seven, 
and the petitions of the Lord’s prayer are confined to seven. 
But the beatitudes are eight, as is evident from the fifth chap- 
ter of Matthew, and therefore we shall add to the seven guar- 
dians of the bodily pupil as an eighth that of the eyelashes, so 
that as many bodily defenders may correspond to the eight 
spiritual ones. Now the spiritual senses are five, and those 
things that are directly allotted to the protection of the pupil 
are five, namely, the web, the albugineous humor, and the three 
coats. For the vitreous humor can in this view of the subject 
be understood with the pupil, because it is continuous with the 
anterior glacialis in the weblike structure. And without ques- 
tion the whole is called the pupil, although more particularly 
the anterior glacialis. Or the five may be designated thus, cross, 
humor, web, coat, and eyelash. For these five are the essential 
guardians, although they are divided in some manner into 
branches, as are the humor and the coat. But there are twelve 
fruits, as the Apostle enumerates in the fifth chapter of the 
Epistle to the Galatians, and therefore if we take the pupil 
strictly as the anterior glacialis, and consider all things remote 
as well as near it that can be found for its protection, we shall 
find twelve, namely, the eight mentioned above, and the eyelids 
and the eyebrows, which have special function in the protection 

ae 

A S 

Opus Majus 

of the eye, as was noted above. And since the visual nerves de- 
scend from the anterior part of the brain, in which are located 
the common sense and the imagination, from which the forces 
and spirit flow to the vision, nor is the act of vision completed 
until the visual species reaches these two, as was explained 
above, there will be in general twelve things allotted to the pro- 
tection of the bodily pupil, just as there are twelve fruits in the 
protection of the spiritual eye. And we have said that there are 
required for vision not only internal reception, but external 
transmission, and coöperation by its own force and species: 
similarly the spiritual vision requires not only that the soul 
should receive from without, namely, from God, graces and 
virtues, but that it should codperate through its own virtue. For 
the exercise and agreement of our free will are required to- 
gether with the grace of God to the end that we may see and 
secure the state of salvation. 

CHAPTER I] 

EIGHT conditions are also required for vision; namely, light, 
distance, and the others already noted, and this is paralleled 
exactly in the spiritual vision by the eight beatitudes. But this 
is also evident in another way; for conditions similar to these 
eight are required for spiritual vision. For just as we see noth- 
ing corporeally without corporeal light, so is it impossible for 
us to see anything spiritually without the spiritual light of the 
divine grace. And just as a moderate distance is required for 
vision, so that a body is not visible if it is too far off or too near, 
the same condition is required for spiritual vision. For remote- 
ness from God through unbelief and a multitude of sins takes 
away: spiritual sight, and so also do an excessive presumption 
of intimacy with God and scrutiny of his majesty. But those 
who with moderation approach his feet exclaiming with the 
apostle, “O depth of the riches of God’s wisdom and knowledge, 
how incomprehensible are his judgments, and how unsearch- 
able are his ways,” will learn from his teaching according to 
the prophet, and “will go gradually from strength to strength, 
until the God of Gods appears in Sion.” And so in regard to 
the other six conditions it is easily evident to one considering 

C578] 

Optical Science 

the subject how their similitudes codperate in the spiritual vi- 
sion ; and therefore I need not dwell upon them individually. 

Moreover, since vision is threefold, namely, by sense alone, 
by memory [scientia], and by reasoning, similarly it is neces- 
sary for man to have threefold vision. For by sense alone we 
perceive few things and imperfectly, as, for example, light and 
color, and we have this perception weakly, namely, whether 
these objects of vision exist or which they are; but by memory 
we perceive of what kind and quality they are, whether the 
light is that of the sun or of the moon, whether the color is 
white or black. But by reasoning we perceive all that pertains 
to light and color in accordance with all of the twenty common 
sensibles. Therefore the first kind of perception is weak, the 
second is more perfect, and the third is the most perfect. The 
conditions are similar in spiritual vision; for what a man knows 
by his own sense alone is little, because he lacks the double per- 
ception in addition to this, namely, that acquired through 
teachers from youth to old age. For we can always learn 
through those wiser than we are. And therefore we lack the 
third kind of perception, which comes through divine illumina- 
tion. 

But in another fashion is vision threefold; namely, direct, 
refracted, and reflected. The first is more perfect than the others, 
the second is less certain, and the third the least certain. For 
this reason we have shown above that action along the straight 
line is the most potent, and that refraction is less weak than re- 
flection. These laws hold in vision as well as in other things; 
and they must be effective in spiritual vision as well as in our 
physical vision. A comparison can be drawn here in many 
ways; for directness of vision belongs to God; deviation from 
the straight line through refraction, which is weaker, befits the 
angelic nature; reflected vision, which is weaker, may be as- 
signed to man. For just as a mirror because of its suitability 
aids vision, and gives to the species an opportunity of multiply- 
ing itself to the eye, so that vision may be effected, so does the 
body animated by the sensitive soul by its own nature and fit- 
ness aid the intellectual soul in its perception, and give it per- 
ception in those matters in which the intellect is dependent on 
the corporeal sense. Therefore the perception of man, however 
perfect it may be, is weaker than the angelic perception for this 

[5791] 

Opus Majus 

reason, and rightly may be called a mirrored perception be- 
cause of the similitude stated. I am speaking of the natural man 
with the exception of the Blessed Virgin, and in accordance 
with the common state of man and of angel. Man has a three- 
fold vision; one perfect, which will come in a state of glory 
after the resurrection; the second in the soul separated from 
the body in heaven until the resurrection, which is weaker; the 
third in this life, which is the weakest, and this is correctly said 
to be by reflection. As the apostle says, “We now see by means 
of a glass darkly, but in glory face to face,” and after the resur- 
rection in perfect directness, and before it in a deviation from 
that directness of vision in our soul. For this reason the soul 
will not enjoy perfect vision until it is united to its own body, 
just as it will not possess other blessings in full measure before 
that time, as theologians are well aware, and because there is 
a certain natural desire in the soul for its own body, which can- 
not be realized except by the resurrection. Moreover, in our 
present state is vision threefold, namely, direct in those that 
are perfect; refracted in those that are imperfect; and in the 
evil and in those who neglect the commandments of God by 
reflection, according to the Apostle James; for it is compared 
to a man beholding his natural face in a glass. 

CHAPTER III 

As the wisdom of God is ordained for the direction of the uni- 
verse, so is this science of vision evidently and beneficially or- 
dained for its beauty. I shall-give some examples both of re- 
fraction and reflection. For by reflection one thing appears to 
be many and infinite in number; for in this way sometimes 
many suns and moons are seen in the sky, as Pliny states in the 
Natural History. This does not happen except when the vapor 
has been arranged like a mirror and is complex and in a differ- 
ent position. And what nature can do, art perfecting nature can 
accomplish in greater measure. Hence mirrors can be so made 
and placed in such a position and arranged, that a single object 
of vision can be multiplied at will. Therefore one man will 
appear many, and a single army will appear to be several. The 
principles relating to this phenomenon have already been 

[ 580] 

Optical Science 

touched upon, one of which concerns the broken mirror, whose 
parts are placed in different positions and produce different 
images according to their number. The other principle con- 
cerns the case of the water and the mirror, from both of which 
a different image is reflected. If, therefore, as many mirrors 
as we wish should be arranged in both these ways it is evident 
that a single object will appear in as many images as we wish, 
and thus to the advantage of the state images of this kind might 
profitably be produced. They might also be used against un- 
believers to inspire terror. Moreover, if one knew that the air 
is dense, so that reflection could be obtained from it, he might 
produce many unusual appearances of this kind. In this way we 
believe that demons show camps and armies and many wonders 
to men ; and by reflected vision all things hidden in secret places 
in cities, armies, and the like can be brought to light. For the 
dragon, which poisons both animals and men and corrupts them 
with its breath, was detected in its lair by the philosopher Soc- 
rates, as the histories bear witness. 

Similarly mirrors might be erected on an elevation opposite 
hostile cities and armies, so that all that was being done by the 
enemy might be visible. This can be done at any distance we 
desire, since, according to the book on Mirrors, one and the 
same object can be seen by means of as many mirrors as we 
wish, if they are placed in the manner required. Therefore they 
can be placed more closely and more remotely, so that we might 
see an object as far off as we pleased. For in this way Julius 
Caesar, when he wished to subdue England, is said to have 
erected very large mirrors, in order that he might see in ad- 
vance from the shore of Gaul the arrangement of the cities and 
camps of England. Mirrors, moreover, can be so arranged that 
as many objects as we desire may be visible and all that is in 
the house or in the street; and any one looking at these objects 
will see them as they really are, and when he hastens to the 
places where they appear, he will find nothing. For the mirrors 
will be concealed in such a manner with respect to the objects, 
that the positions of the images are in view, and the images ap- 
pear in the air at the intersection of the visual rays with the 
catheti, and therefore those looking at them would run up to 
the places where they appear, and would judge that the objects 
are there when there is in reality nothing except an image. And 

[581 J 

Opus Majus 

thus in accordance with such principles as have now been 
touched upon in regard to reflection and in accordance with 
similar ones, not only could results be attained advantageous 
to our friends and terrible for our enemies, but very great com- 
forts can come to us from philosophy, so that every deceit of 
jesters may be dimmed by the beauty of the wonders of science, 
and men may rejoice in the truth, banishing far from them the 
tricks of the magicians. 

CHAPTER IV 

THE wonders of refracted vision are still greater; for it is easily 
shown by the rules stated above that very large objects can be 
made to appear very small, and the reverse, and very distant 
objects will seem very close at hand, and conversely. For we 
can so shape transparent bodies, and arrange them in such a 
way with respect to our sight and objects of vision, that the 
rays will be refracted and bent in any direction we desire, and 
under any angle we wish we shall see the object near or at a 
distance. Thus from an incredible distance we might read the 
smallest letters and number grains of dust and sand owing to 
the magnitude of the angle under which we viewed them, and 
very large bodies close to us we might scarcely see because of 
the smallness of the angle under which we saw them, for dis- 
tance in such vision is not a factor except by accident, but the 
size of the angle is. In this way a child might appear a giant, 
and a man a mountain. He might appear of any size whatever, 
as we might see a man under as large an angle as we see a 
mountain, and close as we wish. Thus a small army might ap- 
pear very large, and situated at a distance might appear close 
at hand, and the reverse. So also we might cause the sun, moon, 
and stars in appearance to descend here below, and similarly to 
appear above the heads of our enemies, and we might cause 
many similar phenomena, so that the mind of a man ignorant 
of the truth could not endure them. 

[ 582 ] 

PART SIX OF THIS PLEA 

Lt is also the sixth part of the Opus Majus, on Experimental Science. 

CHAPTER | 
AVING laid down fundamental principles of the wis- 

dom of the Latins so far as they are found in lan- 

guage, mathematics, and optics, I now wish to unfold 
the principles of experimental science, since without experience 
nothing can be sufficiently known. For there are two modes of 
acquiring knowledge, namely, by reasoning and experience. 
Reasoning draws a conclusion and makes us grant the con- 
clusion, but does not make the conclusion certain, nor does it 
remove doubt so that the mind may rest on the intuition of truth, 
unless the mind discovers it by the path of experience; since 
many have the arguments relating to what can be known, but 
because they lack experience they neglect the arguments, and 
neither avoid what is harmful nor follow what is good. For if 
a man who has never seen fire should prove by adequate rea- 
soning that fire burns and injures things and destroys them, his 
mind would not be satisfied thereby, nor would he avoid fire, 
until he placed his hand or some combustible substance in the 
fire, so that he might prove by experience that which reasoning ~ 
taught. But when he has had actual experience of combustion 
his mind is made certain and rests in the full light of truth. 
Therefore reasoning does not suffice, but experience does. 

This is also evident in mathematics, where proof is most con- 
vincing. But the mind of one who has.the most convincing proof 
in regard to the equilateral triangle will never cleave to the 
conclusion without experience, nor will he heed it, but will dis- 
regard it until experience is offered him by the intersection of 
two circles, from either intersection of which two lines may be 
drawn to the extremities of the given line; but then the man 
accepts the conclusion without any question. Aristotle’s state- 
ment, then, that proof is reasoning that causes us to know is to be 
understood with the proviso that the proof is accompanied by 
its appropriate experience, and is not to be understood of the 
bare proof. His statement also in the first book of the Meta- 

[583 J 

Opus Majus 

physics that those who understand the reason and the cause are 
wiser than those who have empiric knowledge of a fact, is 
spoken of such as know only the bare truth without the cause. 
But I am here speaking of the man who knows the reason and 
the cause through experience. These men are perfect in their 
wisdom, as Aristotle maintains in the sixth book of the Ethics, 
whose simple statements must be accepted as if they offered 
proof, as he states in the same place. 

He therefore who wishes to rejoice without doubt in regard 
to the truths underlying phenomena must know how to devote 
himself to experiment. For authors write many statements, and 
people believe them through reasoning which they formulate 
without experience. Their reasoning is wholly false. For it is 
generally believed that the diamond cannot be broken except 
by goat’s blood, and philosophers and theologians misuse this 
idea. But fracture by means of blood of this kind has never been 
verified, although the effort has been made; and without that 
blood it can be broken easily. For I have seen this with my own 
eyes, and this is necessary, because gems cannot be carved 
except by fragments of this stone. Similarly it is generally be- 
lieved that the castors employed by physicians are the testicles 
of the male animal. But this is not true, because the beaver has 
these under its breast, and both the male and female produce 
testicles of this kind. Besides these castors the male beaver has 
its testicles in their natural place; and therefore what is sub- 
joined is a dreadful lie, namely, that when the hunters pursue 
the beaver, he himself knowing what they are seeking cuts out 
with his teeth these glands. Moreover, it is generally believed 
that hot water freezes more quickly than cold water in vessels, 
and the argument in support of this is advanced that contrary 
is excited by contrary, just like enemies meeting each other. But 
it is certain that cold water freezes more quickly for any one 
who makes the experiment. People attribute this to Aristotle in 
the second book of the Meteorologics; but he certainly does not 
make this statement, but he does make one like it, by which they 
have been deceived, namely, that if cold water and hot water 
are poured on a cold place, as upon ice, the hot water freezes 
more quickly, and this is true. But if hot water and cold are 
placed in two vessels, the cold will freeze more quickly. There- 
fore all things must be verified by experience. 

C 584] 

Experimental Science 

But experience is of two kinds; one is gained through our 
external senses, and in this way we gain our experience of 
those things that are in the heavens by instruments made for 
this purpose, and of those things here below by means attested 
by our vision. Things that do not belong in our part of the 
world we know through other scientists who have had experi- 
ence of them. As, for example, Aristotle on the authority of 
Alexander sent two thousand men through different parts of 
the world to gain experimental knowledge of all things that are 
on the surface of the earth, as Pliny bears witness in his Natural 
History. This experience is both human and philosophical, as 
far as man can act in accordance with the grace given him; but 
this experience does not suffice him, because it does not give 
full attestation in regard to things corporeal owing to its diffi- 
culty, and does not touch at all on things spiritual. It is neces- 
sary, therefore, that the intellect of man should be otherwise 
aided, and for this reason the holy patriarchs and prophets, 
who first gave sciences to the world, received illumination 
within and were not dependent on sense alone. The same is true 
of many believers since the time of Christ. For the grace of 
faith illuminates greatly, as also do divine inspirations, not 
only in things spiritual, but in things corporeal and in the sci- 
ences of philosophy; as Ptolemy states in the Centilogium, 
namely, that there are two roads by which we arrive at the 
knowledge of facts, one through the experience of philosophy, 
the other through divine inspiration, which is far the better 
way, as he says. 

Moreover, there are seven stages of this internal knowledge, 
the first of which is reached through illuminations relating 
purely to the sciences. The second consists in the virtues. For 
the evil man is ignorant, as Aristotle says in the second book 
of the Ethics. Moreover, Algazel says in his Logic that the 
soul disfigured by sins is like a rusty mirror, in which the species 
of objects cannot be seen clearly; but the soul adorned with 
virtues is like a well-polished mirror, in which the forms of ob- 
jects are clearly seen. For this reason true philosophers have 
labored more in morals for the honor of virtue, concluding in 
their own case that they cannot perceive the causes of things 
unless they have souls free from sins. Such is the statement of 
Augustine in regard to Socrates in the eighth book of the City 

[585 J 

Opus Majus 

of God, chapter III. Wherefore the Scripture says, “in a ma- 
levolent soul, etc.” For it is not possible that the soul should 
rest in the light of truth while it is stained with sins, but like 
a parrot or magpie it will repeat the words of another which it 
has learned by long practice. The proof of this is that the beauty 
of truth known in its splendor attracts men to the love of it, but 
the proof of love is the display of a work of love. Therefore he 
who acts contrary to the truth must necessarily be ignorant of 
it, although he may know how to compose very elegant phrases, 
and quote the opinions of other people, like an animal that imi- 
tates the words of human beings, and like an ape that relies on 
the aid of men to perform its part, although it does not under- 
stand their reason. Virtue, therefore, clarifies the mind, so that 
a man comprehends more easily not only moral but scientific 
truths. I have proved this carefully in the case of many pure 
young men, who because of innocency of soul have attained 
greater proficiency than can be stated, when they have had 
sane advice in regard to their study. Of this number is the 
bearer of this present treatise, whose fundamental knowledge 
very few of the Latins have acquired. For since he is quite 
young, about twenty years of age, and very poor, nor has he 
been able to have teachers, nor has he spent one year in learning 
his great store of knowledge, nor is he a man of great genius 
nor of a very retentive memory, there can be no other cause 
except the grace of God, which owing to the purity of his soul 
has granted to him those things that it has as a rule refused to 
show to all other students. For as a spotless virgin he has de- 
parted from me, nor have I found in him any kind of mortal 
sin, although I have examined him carefully, and he has, there- 
fore, a soul so bright and clear that with very little instruction 
he has learned more than can be estimated. And I have striven 
to aid in bringing it about that these two young men should be 
useful vessels in God’s Church, to the end that they may reform 
by the grace of God the whole course of study of the Latins. 
The third stage consists in the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, 
which Isaiah enumerates. The fourth consists in the beatitudes, 
which the Lord defines in the Gospels. The fifth consists in the 
spiritual senses. The sixth consists in fruits, of which is the 
peace of God which passes all understanding. The seventh con- 
sists in raptures and their states according to the different ways 

[ 586 J 

Experimental Science 

in which people are caught up to see many things of which it is 
not lawful for a man to speak. And he who has had diligent 
training in these experiences or in several of them is able to 
assure himself and others not only in regard to things spiritual, 
but also in regard to all human sciences. Therefore since all the 
divisions of speculative philosophy proceed by arguments, 
which are either based on a point from authority or on the 
other points of argumentation except this division which I am 
now examining, we find necessary the science that is called ex- 
perimental. I wish to explain it, as it is useful not only to phi- 
losophy, but to the knowledge of God, and for the direction of 
the whole world; just as in the preceding divisions I showed the 
relationship of the languages and sciences to their end, which 
is the divine wisdom by which all things are disposed. 

CHAPTER [I 

SINCE this Experimental Science is wholly unknown to the rank 
and file of students, I am therefore unable to convince people of 
its utility unless at the same time I disclose its excellence and 
its proper signification. This science alone, therefore, knows 
how to test perfectly what can be done by nature, what by the ef- 
fort of art, what by trickery, what the incantations, conjurations, 
invocations, deprecations, sacrifices, that belong to magic, mean 
and dream of, and what is in them, so that all falsity may be 
removed and the truth alone of art and nature may be retained. 
This science alone teaches us how to view the mad acts of magi- 
cians, that they may be not ratified but shunned, just as logic 
considers sophistical reasoning. 

This science has three leading characteristics with respect to 
other sciences. The first is that it investigates by experiment the 
notable conclusions of all those sciences. For the other sciences 
know how to discover their principles by experiments, but their 
conclusions are reached by reasoning drawn from the principles 
discovered. But if they should have a particular and complete 
experience of their own conclusions, they must have it with 
the aid of this noble science. For it is true that mathematics has 
general experiments as regards its conclusions in its figures and 
calculations, which also are applied to all sciences and to this 

C587] 

Opus Majus 

kind of experiment, because no science can be known without 
mathematics. But if we give our attention to particular and 
complete experiments and such as are attested wholly by the 
proper method, we must employ the principles of this science 
which is called experimental. I give as an example the rainbow 
and phenomena connected with it, of which nature are the circle 
around the sun and the stars, the streak [virga] also lying at 
the side of the sun or of a star, which is apparent to the eye in 
a straight line, and is called by Aristotle in the third book of 
the Meteorologics a perpendicular, but by Seneca a streak, and 
the circle is called a corona, phenomena which frequently have 
the colors of the rainbow. The natural philosopher discusses 
these phenomena, and the writer on Perspective has much to 
add pertaining to the mode of vision that is necessary in this 
case. But neither Aristotle nor Avicenna in their Natural His- 
tories has given us a knowledge of phenomena of this kind, nor 
has Seneca, who composed a special book on them. But Ex- 
perimental Science attests them. 

Let the experimenter first, then, examine visible objects, in 
order that he may find colors arranged as in the phenomena 
mentioned above and also the same figure. For let him take 
hexagonal stones from Ireland or from India, which are called 
rainbows in Solinus on the Wonders of the World, and let him 
hold these in a solar ray falling through the window, so that 
he may find all the colors of the rainbow, arranged as in it, in 
the shadow near the ray. And further let the same experimenter 
turn to a somewhat dark place and apply the stone to one of his 
eyes which is almost closed, and he will see the colors of the 
rainbow clearly arranged just as in the bow. And since many 
employing these stones think that the phenomenon is due to the 
special virtue of those stones and to their hexagonal shape, 
therefore let the experimenter proceed further, and he will find 
this same peculiarity in crystalline stones correctly shaped, and 
in other transparent stones. Moreover, he will find this not only 
in white stones like the Irish crystals, but also in black ones, as 
is evident in the dark crystal and in all stones of similar trans- 
parency. He will find it besides in crystals of a shape differing 
from the hexagonal, provided they have a roughened surface, 
like the Irish crystals, neither altogether smooth, nor rougher 
than they are. Nature produces some that have surfaces like the 

[ 588 7 

ROGER BACON 

From a Fifteenth Century Manuscript in the Bodleian Library 

Experimental Science 

Irish crystals. For a difference in the corrugations causes a dif- 
ference in the colors. And further let him observe rowers, and 
in the drops falling from the raised oars he finds the same colors 
when the solar rays penetrate drops of this kind. The same 
phenomenon is seen in water falling from the wheels of a mill; 
and likewise when one sees on a summer’s morning the drops 
of dew on the grass in meadow or field, he will observe the 
colors. Likewise when it is raining, if he stands in a dark place 
and the rays beyond it pass through the falling rain, the colors 
will appear in the shadow near by; and frequently at night 
colors appear around a candle. Moreover, if a man in summer, 
when he rises from sleep and has his eyes only partly open, sud- 
denly looks at a hole through which a ray of the sun enters, he 
will see colors. Moreover, if seated beyond the sun he draws 
his cap beyond his eyes, he will see colors; and similarly if he 
closes an eye the same thing happens under the shade of the 
eyebrows; and again the same phenomenon appears through 
_ a glass vessel filled with water and placed in the sun’s rays. Or 

similarly if one having water in his mouth sprinkles it vigor- 
ously into the rays and stands at the side of the rays. So, too, 
if rays in the required position pass through an oil lamp hang- 
ing in the air so that the light falls on the surface of the oil, 
colors will be produced. Thus in an infinite number of ways 
colors of this kind appear, which the diligent experimenter 
knows how to discover. 

CHAPTER III 

IN a similar way also he will be able to test the shape in which 
the colors are disposed. For by means of the crystalline stone 
and substances of this kind he will find the shape straight. By 
means of the eyelids and eyebrows and by many other means, 
and also by means of holes in rags, he will discover whole cir- 
cles colored. Similarly in a place where the dewfall is plentiful 
and sufficient to take the whole circle, and if the place where 
the circle of the rainbow should be is dark proportionally, be- 
cause the bow does not appear in the light part, then the circle 
will be complete. Similarly whole circles appear frequently 
around candles, as Aristotle states and we ourselves experience. 

[ 589 J 

Opus Majus 

CHAPTER IV 

SINCE, moreover, we find colors and various figures similar to 
the phenomena in the air, namely, of the iris, corona, and 
streak, we are encouraged and greatly stimulated to grasp the 
truth in those phenomena that occur in the heavens. Further, 
let the experimenter take the required instrument and look 
through the openings of the instrument and find the altitude 
of the sun above the horizon, and keeping the instrument im- 
movable let him turn in the opposite direction and look through 
the openings of the instrument until he sees the summit of the 
bow, and let him note the altitude of the rainbow above the 
horizon; and he will find that the higher the sun’s altitude is, 
the lower is that of the bow, and conversely. By this means he 
knows that the rainbow is always opposite the sun, and that one 
line passes through the center of the sun, and through the 
center of the observer’s eye, and the center of the circle of 
which the bow is an arc to the sun’s nadir, which is the point 
in the heavens opposite the center of the sun. As the extremity 
of this line toward the sun is elevated above the horizon, the 
other is depressed, which passes through the center of the 
bow, and conversely; just like the rule at the back of the 
astrolabe, one of whose ends is depressed as the other is ele- 
vated. The trained experimenter can test until he discovers the 
opposed altitude of the rainbow and of the sun, namely, that 
beyond which there can be no appearance of the rainbow. He 
must then give his attention to the calculation of the altitude of 
the circles. 

We must bear in mind that the horizon is a circle, and that 
at its center an axis is raised in the starry heavens to the zenith 
of the observer’s head, and let a circle pass through that point 
and through two parts of the horizon, as, for example, if we 
desire, through east and west, and let it pass beneath the earth 
to the point opposite the zenith overhead. This circle is the cir- 
cle of the altitude of a fixed star, and it passes through its body, 
for when the star rises above the horizon, we say that it ascends 
according to the degrees of that circle until it reaches the line 
of the meridian. Then the star is at its greatest altitude, and 
this circle intersects the horizon at right angles; and they divide 
each other into equal parts, and each is a great circle of the 

[ 590] 

Experimental Science 

sphere. The altitude, then, of a fixed star above the horizon is 
the arc of this circle intercepted between the star and the limit 
of the horizon. But the altitude of Saturn and of the other 
planets must not be reckoned on a circle intersecting the hori- 
zon, but on a smaller and concentric circle, because the circle 
passing through the body of Saturn or of another lower planet 
does not pass through the extremity of the axis of the horizon, 
but through another point lower in the axis, which is a point 
beneath the zenith overhead, and therefore this circle does not 
pass through the limits of the horizon, which is 
the circle ab, but through the circle concentric 
with it, namely, through the circle cd, and this 
circle of the altitude of Saturn passes through 
the body of Saturn, which in this circle is ele- 
vated above the horizon and depressed beneath 

it. Moreover, the circle of Jupiter passes 

oie b 
through a smaller concentric circle and through 
a point lower in the axis beneath the zenith Fic. 71. 

overhead, and similarly with regard to the 

other planets; so that the lower a body is, so much smaller a 
circle does it have passing through a lower point in the axis of 
the horizon and intersecting a smaller circle concentric with the 
horizon. Although the statement made above is in accordance + 
with the actual fact, yet in ordinary speech we do not distin- 
guish those points in the axis from the zenith overhead, nor 
the circles equidistant from the horizon do we distinguish from 
the horizon itself, but we call them all horizons. We also reckon 
the circles of altitude all equal and regard them as passing 
through the zenith overhead, although they are unequal. And 
although for clearness I thus placed them all in the same sur- 
face, and because this can happen,* yet in many cases it happens 
that they are in different surfaces and intersect one another in 
many ways. 

Further, we must also consider that the visual ray is equi- 
distant from the horizon and the circles concentric with it, and 
that therefore the arc of the circle of the altitude which is be- 
tween the horizon and the visual ray must be noted, which is in 
accordance with the amount of elevation of the body of the ob- 

, 

* The words, “and because this can happen,” seem superfluous, as Bridges 

remarks. 
C591] 

Opus Majus 

server. But the altitude commonly taken of an object is said 
to be the arc of the circle of the altitude intercepted between the 
elevated object and the horizon, yet, strictly speaking, if the 
altitude of an object is taken, it is the arc of the circle of the 
altitude between the object and the visual ray ; because the eye 
is not at the center of the horizon, but is above the center in 
the axis of the horizon; and therefore objects that are in the 
air and in the moon are considered according to an altitude of 
this kind. For they have a difference in aspect because they are 
near the earth, but the sun and the other remoter bodies are 
not affected in this way, owing to their great distance. For the 
amount of elevation of the observer has no sensible difference 
in regard to the remoteness of those bodies, but it bears a con- 
siderable relationship to those that are visible in the air, like 
comets and rainbows. From these statements, then, it is evident 
that the altitude of the rainbow, taken strictly, is the arc of its 
circle of altitude intercepted between the summit of the bow 
and the visual ray parallel to the horizon, which must be known 
because of what follows. 

The experimenter, therefore, taking the altitude of the sun 
and of the rainbow above the horizon will find that the final 
altitude at which the rainbow can appear above the horizon is 
42 degrees, and this is the maximum elevation of the rainbow. 
This elevation contains the arc between the summit of the bow 
and the visual ray, and this is its altitude, strictly speaking, al- 
though besides this there is the arc, which is between the ray 
and the limit of the horizon, or the limits of the circle concentric 
with the horizon, through which the circle of the altitude of the 
bow passes. And the rainbow reaches this maximum elevation 
when the sun is on the horizon, namely, at sunrise or sunset; and 
also when it is near sunrise and sunset below the horizon, not up 
to the end of the evening twilight, nor up to the beginning of the 
morning twilight, but near sunrise and sunset, as has been said. 
Then if moisture is ready in advance higher in the clouds, the 
gibbosity of the rainbow will appear, although the sun is too far 
below the horizon, since his rays can reach vapors high in the 
air, although they cannot reach vapors near the horizon. The 
experimenter, moreover, knows how to make the test, because - 
when the sun is at an altitude of 42 degrees the rainbow does 
not appear in the sky, except that a small portion of its blue 

[ 592] 

Experimental Science 

gibbosity can appear near the horizon, if moisture is already 
present there. When the sun rises higher, the rainbow can no- 
where appear. Therefore Aristotle and Seneca state that in 
summer in the heat of the day the rainbow does not appear. The 
reason for this is because at the latitude of Paris the altitude of 
the sun at noon of the equinox is 41 degrees and 12 minutes, 
the sun at that time being at almost such an altitude that the 
rainbow cannot appear, and therefore a little later it must be 
elevated so much higher that at noon it is more than 42 degrees 
on the circle of altitude above the horizon, and therefore in the 
heat of summer the rainbow does not occur at noon until the sun 
descends to an altitude less than 42 degrees. 

CHAPTER V 

AFTER, therefore, the experimenter discovers this, he must then 
by his experiments learn the size and shape of the rainbow, and 
for this purpose he conceives a cone of which the apex is at the 
eye and the base is the circle of the bow, the portion of which 
appears colored. The axis of the cone is the line mentioned 
above, which passes through the center of the eye and the 
center of the sun and the center of the bow to the nadir of 
the sun. The base of this cone is elevated and depressed ac- 
cording to the elevation and depression of the sun, as we have 
stated in regard to that line, and as it is depressed it sinks 
sometimes to the earth, cutting it and cut by it. This cone can 
be conceived of as not cutting the earth but as wholly elevated 
above the horizon and its whole base above the horizon, and 
this diversity occurs in accordance with the shortness and 
length of the cones. For it can be of such short length that its 
base is above the horizon, and then the whole circle can 
appear colored, as is the case in sprays of the required kind if 
they are near, just as I have explained in falling rain and dew, 
when water is sprinkled by anybody in the required manner, 
and when the water falls from a high place. When, however, 
the cones are extended so far that they touch the earth, the 
limit is reached for the appearance of the circle as a whole. 

If, however, they are lengthened to such an extent that the 
base is cut by the earth, then according to the size of the section 

C 593] 

kida 

Opus Majus 

of the base a portion of the colored circle will appear. And in 
the first place a larger portion can appear when less of the base 
of the cone is cut; and then if half of the circle is cut, the other 
half will appear; and a smaller portion, if more is cut. Thus as 
more or less is cut, and the cone lengthened, a larger or smaller 
portion will appear. Moreover, the cone can be so extended that 
nothing appears; and thus according to the length and short- 
ness of the cones are the bases larger or smaller, and the colored 
circles larger or smaller, and larger or smaller portions cut off, 
and the portions belong to larger or smaller circles, as is now 
evident to any one considering the subject. This appearance of 
circles and of portions of them is considered with reference to 
the shortness and the length of the cone, as I have said, al- 
though we do not consider the elevation and depression of the 
sun. But, however, the whole circle of the rainbow never ap- 
pears in the clouds, but as in many cases a smaller portion, and 
sometimes a semicircle and a larger portion. For the base of 
the cone always cuts the earth in the formation of the rainbow 
in the clouds because of its distance from the eye, and there- 
fore the complete circle is never visible. But when the sun is 
at its rising and the rainbow is elevated above the horizon about 
42 degrees, and the moisture in an infinite number of falling 
drops is already present, the larger portion of the circle ap- 
pears through the space of the arc between the visual ray and 
the horizon; and when the sun is at the altitude of that line* the 
rainbow is then a semicircle; and when the sun rises above that 
line the bow is a smaller portion of the circle. Thus as the sun 
rises higher, the rainbow becomes less and less, because more 
is cut off from its circle by the earth. 

We must consider here, however, that according to Aristotle, 
particularly in the new translation, the smaller portion of the 
circle apparent is the portion of a larger circle, and the larger 
portion is the portion of a smaller circle. Hence when the sun 
is rising, although more than a semicircle appears colored, yet 
it is the portion of a smaller circle than when the sun is at a 
great elevation, nay, at its maximum elevation above the visual 
ray, at which least of the rainbow can appear. Hence when its 
gibbosity alone is visible near the earth, while the sun is at the 
maximum altitude fixed for the formation of the rainbow, that 

* J.e., the visual ray. 

C 594] 

Experimental Science 

small portion is part of the base of a larger circle. For we must 
not think that the cone remains the same and the base the same 
at the elevation and depression of the sun, but we are to under- 
stand that they must be constantly renewed in the conception we 
should have regarding the rainbow, so that the circle is judged 
to be larger when the bow is lower, and smaller when the bow 
is higher. But since a larger portion of the circle of the rainbow 
appears when the sun is rising, according to the amount of 
elevation of the observer, if he should be on a high mountain 
or on a lofty tower he would see a far larger portion according 
to the amount of his total elevation. 

We must also consider that when the sun is just below the 
horizon the rainbow can appear. But it is the smaller portion, 
not the larger nor the semicircular. This result is caused solely 
by the lack of material, for at that time the solar rays do not 
touch the vapors near the earth, but do reach those situated on 
high, and therefore the colored semicircle cannot be completed 
nor a greater portion, but only the crown of the arch, although 
the greater portion of the circle is above the horizon. 

We must understand also that the visual cone and the cone 
of the iris are not the same, although they are equal, and lie 
frequently in the same place. For they say, when the eye is un- 
moved, these cones coincide. When, however, the eye turns to 
the right or left, turns upward or downward, the head remain- 
ing fixed, the visual cone falls in part or in whole outside the 
position of the cone of the rainbow. This is possible because the 
center of the eye during this motion is immovable, through 
which the axis of the cone of the rainbow passes, and therefore 
this cone of the rainbow remains fixed in its position, although 
the visual cone moves and changes as the eye looks lower or 
higher or to the side. And then nothing of the rainbow will be 
visible except as much as contains the base of the visual cone, 
since nothing is seen except that which falls below the visual 
cone; I mean nothing is seen by means of the species coming at 
right angles. The object thus seen is the principal object of 
vision, as in this case is the rainbow (or a part of it as contained 
by the visual cone from its position). In accordance with this 
will the arc of the bow appear larger or smaller. This point 
must be carefully considered, in order that the true explanation 
of the rainbow may be known, and of this I shall speak below. 

C5951 

Opus Majus 

Since we have now explained that, when the altitude of the 
sun is 42 degrees or greater, the rainbow cannot appear, it can 
easily be shown at what time of year and in what localities the 
rainbow can appear at noon. 

CHAPTER VI 

SINCE we have now explained the altitude, magnitude, and di- 
versity in shape of the bow, we can easily show the time and 
place of its formation. For the reason why the bow cannot ap- 
pear in summer in the heat of the day has been given by cal- 
culating the altitude reckoned suitable for its formation. But 
then before noon or after it, while the sun is below 42 degrees, 
the bow can appear. But this can occur in the known climates that 
are called the seven; but it does not necessarily occur in all re- 
gions from the equator to the pole. We must consider, therefore, 
that the greater altitude of the sun above the horizon is at noon, 
and the lesser altitude of the sun in all climates in which the 
sun shines above the horizon, both in winter and in summer, is 
in Capricorn, namely, at the winter solstice; and for this reason 
the days are then shorter. But the rainbow cannot be formed in 
all of these localities when the sun is at the meridian. For in 
the region whose latitude, that is, the distance of the zenith 
overhead from the equator or middle of the world, is 24 de- 
grees and 25 minutes or less, and this is for dwellers near the 
boundary of the second climate, approximately under the tropic 
of Cancer beyond Jerusalem, a rainbow can never occur when the 
sun is at the meridian. For if it could occur, it would take place 
when the sun is at a less altitude above the horizon, and this 
would be when the sun is at the winter solstice, namely, in the 
first degree of Capricorn. But this cannot be, since at that time 
the altitude of the sun is 42 degrees above the horizon, and it 
has been stated that the rainbow cannot appear when the sun is 
42 degrees above the horizon. Moreover, that the altitude of the 
sun in that region near the winter solstice is 42 degrees is evi- 
dent, because it is a fourth part of the heavens from the horizon 
to the zenith overhead, and the zenith overhead is distant from 
the equator 24 degrees and 25 minutes, as has been stated; for 
let this be subtracted from a quarter of the heavens, namely, 

[ 596 1 

Experimental Science 

from 9o degrees, and again let the total declination of the sun 
be subtracted, which is 23 degrees and 35 minutes, which added 
together make 48 degrees, and this being subtracted from 90 
there will remain 42 degrees, the altitude of the head of Capri- 
corn. Therefore when the sun is at this point it will be at noon 
42 degrees above the horizon; wherefore the rainbow cannot 
be formed on that noon. Therefore no rainbow can be formed 
at any noon of the entire year, because both before and after 
the solstice the noon will be of greater altitude. 

But if we travel from that locality northward to a point 
where the latitude of the region is 66 degrees and 25 minutes, 
that is, beyond Scotland, where at the winter solstice there is no 
day, except that suddenly half of the solar body appears above 
the earth, the rainbow can occur in all these regions when the 
sun is at the meridian, and in Capricorn, because the altitude 
of the head of Capricorn is less, and therefore the altitude of 
the sun at noon is less. The bow can appear larger and larger, 
not only on that day at the hour of noon in all regions, but on 
the days near the solstice and as we travel farther and farther 
northward and the latitude of the region becomes greater. But 
the bow can appear while the sun is at the meridian, not only 
while the sun is near Capricorn, but at many other times. Ac- 
cordingly the bow can appear in the seventh climate, where the ` 
latitude is 48 degrees and 42 minutes, from the autumnal to — 
the vernal equinox when the sun is at the meridian. For the 
sun at that time on the meridian does not have in the seventh 
climate an altitude of 42 degrees, not even on the days of the 
equinoxes, since the altitude of the head of Aries and of Libra 
above the horizon is only 42 degrees and 10 minutes, as before 
stated, and this is made evident by subtracting the latitude of 
the region from go. For if 48 degrees and 48 minutes, which 
is the latitude of the region, be subtracted from go, there re- 
main only 41 degrees and 12 minutes, and this is less than 42 
degrees, which is the altitude of the sun at which the bow can- 
not appear. 

If we travel beyond this climate to the north, the bow will 
still be able to appear in the heat of summer, when the sun is 
at the meridian. For the altitude of the head of Aries is small, 
and similarly the altitude of the head of Cancer when the lati- 
tude of the region is 54 degrees or 60, and especially when the 

[5971 

Opus Majus 

latitude is 66 degrees and 25 minutes. For then Capricorn has 
no altitude, because the horizon passes through it, and at the 
solstices for a moment the horizon lies beneath the zodiac, with- 
out declination from it. And since the zodiac moves with the 
heavens, it is suddenly separated from the horizon, and the 
head of Capricorn revolves beneath the horizon through the 
natural day, except that half of the sun appears above the earth. 
Hence it has no altitude above the horizon at the winter sol- 
stice. And at that time the bow can appear when the sun is at 
the meridian, while the half appears above the earth, and the 
bow can be larger than a semicircle. And since the half of the 
sun suddenly sets, the bow for this reason disappears at once. 
Similarly on other days of almost the entire year in that region 
the bow can appear, because the greatest elevation of the sun 
occurs when the sun is in Cancer, but the sun is not elevated at 
that time above the horizon except through its two greatest 
declinations, one of which is 23 degrees and 35 minutes, and 
the other the same, the sum of which is 47 degrees and 10 
minutes. This does not exceed the maximum altitude of the sun 
at which the bow can appear except by 5 degrees and Io min- 
utes. Therefore on a few days as compared with the whole year 
the formation of the bow is prevented when the sun is at the 
meridian. 

But if we advance beyond these localities, the sun will never 
be in the south,* but in the north and east and west only, because 
to dwellers beyond these localities the sun appears in front of 
them toward the pole of the world. This happens sometimes for 
a month without night, sometimes for two months, sometimes 
for more, until the sun is visible for six months to dwellers near 
the pole. Therefore that region whose latitude is 66 degrees 
and 25 minutes is the farthest point at which the bow can ap- 
pear when the sun is at the meridian; just as the first point at 
which it can appear when the sun is at the meridian was found 
to be the locality whose latitude begins to be in excess of 24 
degrees and 25 minutes. 

Thus, then, we must consider at what time, and particularly 
when the sun is at the meridian, and in what climates the bow 
can appear. In these regions the phenomenon can occur in the 
true north, namely, when the sun is at the meridian, and in 

* See Bridges’ note on this passage, Vol. II, page 184. 

C598] 

Experimental Science 

other parts between the east and the north, and between the 
west and the north. In summer, moreover, it can occur in the 
evening between the east and the south, and in the morning in 
the southwest, because at the summer solstice the sun in the 
morning has a considerable declination to the north, and then in 
the locality opposite in the southwest the bow can appear; and 
in the evening the sun has a declination to the north, and there- 
fore the bow can appear in the southeast. But the bow can never 
appear in the true south in these climates from the equator as 
far as latitude 66 degrees and 25 minutes. It can, however, very 
easily occur at noon in localities beyond this latitude, and this 
is true up to the pole, since the sun in those regions is always in 
the north or in the east or in the west; and the bow appears op- 
posite the sun, and it can then appear at every hour of the day. 
For the sun is never elevated above the horizon except by its 
maximum declination of 23 degrees and 35 minutes. For this 
reason the bow can always be visible to these people during the 
day, when the material is prepared. 

From these statements, therefore, it is evident that the bow 
follows the motion of the sun in two ways; in one according to 
the elevation and depression of the sun in its circle of altitude, 
as has been already stated; and in the other according to the 
motion of the sun above the horizon in its daily motion, because . 
the bow always follows the nadir of the sun, and the nadir 
moves continuously in an opposite direction to the sun. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE experimenter further tries to find out whether the bow is 
caused by incident rays or by reflection or by refraction, and 
whether it is an image of the sun, as was assumed in the state- 
ments made on Perspective, and whether there are real colors 
in the cloud itself. He must also inquire regarding the variety 
and cause of its shape; since a statement was made above 
merely in regard to the size of its form, namely, that sometimes 
it is a complete circle, and sometimes the larger portion, and 
sometimes the smaller. But to understand these matters we must 
employ definite experiments. These are of the following kind, 
namely, if the observer of the bow moves in a direction parallel 

[ 599 J 

Opus Majus 

to the bow, it follows him at the side; if, however, he moves 
toward the bow, it recedes; but if he withdraws, the bow fol- 
lows him, and not only with a slow motion, but with the same 
speed with which the observer is moving. Hence if a man runs 
or rides, the bow will seem to travel with an equal speed, as 
one can clearly perceive if houses or woods or other objects are 
in front of him in the vicinity of the bow. For he will see that 
the bow approaches these quite rapidly if they are behind it, 
or withdraws if they are in front of it. 

Likewise by experiment we know that the sun, because of its 
very great distance from us, of which we cannot judge, seems 
always to be at the same distance when one recedes before it; 
and for this reason the sun seems to follow him who recedes, be- 
cause otherwise the distance would not be judged to be the 
same. Similarly when one approaches the sun the sun seems to 
flee before him, because it always appears at the same distance. 
This appearance cannot be preserved unless the eye judges that 
the sun is moving in front of it. Moreover, we see clearly an 
apparent motion of this kind when the sun passes over woods 
or other elevated objects in the air, from which it recedes or to 
which it approaches. Moreover, we know that the sun seems to 
be in the direction of the observer and appears to be moving 
parallel to him because of its excessive distance. For this reason 
the sun always appears opposite the observer of the bow, wher- 
ever he may move in a direction parallel to the bow. As, for 
example, if the sun is in the south and the bow in the north, the 
observer noting their motions eastward sees the sun on one side 
opposite him and the bow on the other, so that a line passes 
from the center of the sun through the center of his eye and 
of the bow; and the motion of the bow varies because the sun 
seems to move in a direction parallel to the observer and to the 
bow. For if the sun were stationary according to the judgment 
of the sight, the bow would move in accordance with the motion 
of the observer, but would pass through more Space than the 
observer and would pass the observer. 

For thus in general it is true that, the visible shies: being at 
rest, if the observer moves, the image will move if the mirror is 
continuous; but if the object of vision moves at the same time 
in the direction of the observer, the motion of the image will 
pass through a space equal only to the motion of the observer. 

[ 600 J 

Experimental Science 

If, however, the visible object is at rest, the image will pass 
through a greater space. For let a be the immovable center of 
the sun, c the center of the bow in the line abc, and let b and c 
move, so that 4 passes to d, and c to f; it is then evident that the 
space cf is greater than bd, and the line ac and the line af are 
not parallel but meet in the direction of a, and diverge in the 
other direction, as is apparent in the figure. But if a moves 
toward g in the direction of d, then 

c will be at 4, and the lines bd, ch, f 

and ag will be equal, and the lines ac 
and gh will be parallel. But the cen- 
ter of the bow is always in a straight 
line with the center of the eye in 
front of it. Wherefore we must as- 
sume that the sun seems to move in 
the direction of the observer, so that 
in this way the bow may seem to ¢ b a 

move in a direction parallel to the be- Fic. 72. 

holder. Moreover, we know that the 

sun is visible to the eye of every one. If a thousand men are ar- 

ranged in a line from east to west their shadows will be sensibly 

parallel, and also the solar rays falling on them. This is because 

we do not perceive the convergence of the solar rays to the cen- 

ter of the sun because of its excessive distance. Moreover, owing 
to this same distance we do not perceive the daily motion of 
the sun in a short time, but the sun seems to us to be stationary 

in the sky. 

From these facts we learn by experiment that there are as 
many bows as there are observers. For if two observers at the 
same time stand and look at the bow in the north, and one of 
them goes westward, the bow will move in a direction parallel 
to him, and if the other goes to the east, the bow will move in 
a direction parallel to him, or if he stands still in the original 
position, the bow will be stationary. It is evident, therefore, 
that there are as many bows as there are observers; and for this 
reason it is impossible for two observers to see one and the same. 
bow, although an ignorant person does not grasp this fact. For 
the shadow of each observer divides the arc of the rainbow into 
two equal parts, and therefore, although the shadows are sen- 
sibly parallel, they do not meet at the middle of the same bow, 

[ 601 ] 

h 

Opus Majus 

and therefore each observer must see his own bow. This is evi- 
dent, because if the two bows move in different and opposite 
directions, they will move in accordance with the motions of 
the observers, and therefore there are as many bows as there 
are observers. 

From these arguments it follows, then, that the bow is seen 
only by reflected rays of the sun, because if it were seen by 
incident rays, the bow would be an object fixed in one place in 
the cloud, which would not vary according to the motion of the 
observers nor according to the number of the observers. For 
when the solar rays pass through a rare cloud, the cloud appears 
to be colored white, and if they pass through a very thick 
cloud, the cloud appears black, and if they pass through one of 
moderate density, it appears to be of some intermediate color. 
But the color of the cloud appears the same to different ob- 
servers, nor does it follow the motion of the observer, because 
it is not seen by reflected rays, but by incident or refracted rays. 
Similarly when a color is produced by incident rays through 
a crystalline stone, refraction takes place in it, but the same 
color in the same position is seen by different observers. It is 
evident, therefore, that the bow is not caused by rays falling 
directly or by refracted rays. Therefore it must be formed by 
reflected rays, because there are only the three kinds of prin- 
cipal rays. Nor will the bow be seen by means of accidental 
rays, since they do not change position unless caused by reflec- 
tion. Hence from the property of reflection the same thing is 
evident; for the place of reflection and of the image changes ac- 
cording to a change in the observer. But this is the case here; 
therefore the bow is caused by reflection. 

Nor can it be said that the substance of the bow remains and 
the position of the image varies in the refraction of the rays, 
since the change of position in the bow will be in accordance 
with a very sensible distance, namely, with a speed equal to 
that of a man running or riding as fast as possible. But the 
position of the image of an object at rest, although it may vary, 
does not vary with the same speed as the bow, because the whole 
change of image is in one common place, and it is therefore 
called a passage of space. Moreover, the image of an object seen 
by refraction does not follow the observer if he recedes, nor 
does it recede if he approaches, nor does it move in a direction 

[ 602 ] 

Experimental Science 

parallel to him; which is evident when we look at a fish at rest 
in water, or a stick fixed in it, or the sun or moon through the 
medium of vapors, or letters through a crystal or glass. But 
the objection may be raised that only the place of the image 
is moved, and the bow can therefore be caused by refraction 
as well as by reflection. But that the only change is in the place 
of the image is evident, because the mirror, namely, the matter 
suitable for the bow, is immovable. But since such is the case, 
although the observer approaches the mirror there is no change 
on this account except in the place of the image, so that the 
visual ray more quickly intercepts the cathetus, and the place of 
reflection will not escape change, especially since the mirror is 
not on the surface, but in the depth of the cloud, since all the 
raindrops have the nature of a mirror, and therefore the place 
of reflection changes position sensibly in accordance with the 
judgment of the sight. 

But on the other hand, since the sun as a matter of fact is at 
the same distance with respect to the mirror, there is no dif- 
ference in the hour of the appearance of the rainbow which we . 
need notice, whether the sun be moving from Cancer toward 
the south or from Capricorn toward the north, because in a 
natural day it does not move through one degree. And there- 
fore in the hour of the appearance of the bow there is not a 
difference of distance of the sun from the cloud that we should 
take into account. Wherefore the sun’s ray will reach the same 
moisture or part of the moisture, namely, the first part or the 
second ; and therefore some definite part, or the whole moisture 
itself, becomes an immovable mirror. And it is not sufficient 
to say that the bow flees before the observer as fast as the sun 
seems to pursue him, although this is true, so that in this way 
the place of the reflection and of the bow would seem to vary, 
because the rays of the sun penetrate the whole of the moist 
matter, and reflection takes place from every raindrop. And on 
this account, unless there were another reason, one bow would 
appear immovable and fixed through the whole of the moisture, 
having a thickness in accordance with the whole of the mois- 
ture. 

Wherefore we must state that the bow does not appear except 
in a definite arrangement of the air as regards a greater and 
lesser lucidity, so that there may be the required illumination 

[ 603 J 

Opus Majus 

in the direction of the eye, and the determined obscurity in the 
locality of the bow, because the object is weak and does not ap- 
pear except in a dark place. When, therefore, the air between 
the eye and the bow is arranged in the required manner, the 
cone extends from the eye, whose base is the circle of the rain- 
bow, and terminates in the moist cloud at the place of the re- 
quired darkness, and the bow appears in that place. But when 
the eye* shifts in the direction of the bow, it now reaches a re- 
moter portion of the air which is brighter, and it approaches 
an earlier position of the bow, so that owing to the nearness of 
the observer the same place with the same arrangement of the 
air is no longer found, but it is brighter than is required for the 
appearance of the bow. For it cannot appear in every arrange- 
ment of position mentioned, since although the moisture reaches 
to the eye, the bow, however, will not be seen except in a place 
of relative darkness. Therefore the base of the cone must fall in 
the cloud farther on in a place of the required obscurity. And 
thus the whole cone changes its position according to the mo- 
tion of the observer, just as if the cone should be carried before 
the face of a man as he walked, whose vertex is fixed in the 
eye and whose body is extended in the air to the place of the 
bow, where, because of its distance from the eye, darkness is 
formed owing to the thickness of the vapors and of the over- 
shadowing cloud. It is like the case of a man beholding a 
cloudy vapor at a distance which he cannot see near at hand, 
for owing to the distance the species of the vision is weakened, 
and can be terminated by the thickness of the vapors, which it 
can penetrate near at hand. For this reason it is evident that 
although reflection takes place everywhere in moisture, yet the 
bow does not appear everywhere, but only in the place deter- 
mined. Thus that first objection is answered. 

The second is cleared away by the same reasoning; for the 
mirror in this case does not remain the same, nor in the same 
place, because of the darkness that is required for the appear- 
ance of the colors, and for this reason the bow appears now in 
one part of the moisture, now in another. 

If it is said that when the observer moves to the east the sun 
moves to the west, therefore the point of reflection will be 
changed according to the motion of the sun, and therefore the 

* See Bridges’ note on this passage, Vol. II, page 180. 
[ 604 ] 

Experimental Science 

bow will approach the sun more than it will the observer, it 
is evident by what has already been said that it will not do so; 
because the motion of the sun to the west in the hour of the ap- 
pearance of the bow is insensible, and therefore it is considered 
stationary, that is, not to be moving westward. 

CHAPTER VIII 

BuT then it is evident that there will be nothing in the locality 
of the bow except the appearance of colors, and the appearance 
will not occur except when the bow is visible. For we have 
stated that the bow changes with a change in the observers. 
But sight does not produce colors. For the vision cannot cause 
colors in a cloud, as is evident; wherefore there will be nothing 
except in appearance. Moreover, vision by reflection has a 
visible object at the end of the reflected visual ray, as explained 
above, and therefore not at the point of reflection or elsewhere; 
because the object of vision is the terminus of reflection and of 
the reflected line, nothing therefore is seen by reflection in the 
cloud. | 
But if it be said that vision is sensibly and-actively excited 
by the bow, and quite lively colors appear in the bow, and for 
this reason there cannot be merely the appearance of colors; 
we must reply that just as there is only the appearance of colors, 
so is there only the appearance of sensation and of lively change 
of vision; since a change of this kind has no other cause than 
defect in vision, as we see in the examples. For when in sum- 
mer one lowers his head to the ground in the morning, in order 
that he may see the drops of dew on the ends of the blades of 
grass, if he views them carelessly or languidly and half closes 
his eyes, he will see in appearance all the colors of the rainbow. 
And similarly in the colored circle around the candle; and 
similarly also when one rises from sleep in summer with his 
eyes scarcely open and full of moisture, and looks at some small 
hole through which a solar ray is passing, the colors will be 
visible to him; and especially to those with weak eyes and to 
those who are nearsighted. Therefore the phenomenon must be 
owing to defect in vision, and for this reason there is an ap- 
pearance only and not a reality. Moreover, this phenomenon is 

[ 605 J 

Opus Majus 

intensified, just as though it existed in the locality of the bow, 
because the visual ray quickly intersects the cathetus, owing 
to the small size of the raindrops; and therefore near the point 
of reflection a phenomenon of this kind occurs, and for this rea- 
son in the matter itself and in the locality of the bow. 

But if it be said that solar rays passing through a crystal pro- 
duce real and fixed colors, which produce a species and have 
objective reality, we must reply that the phenomena are dif- 
ferent. The observer alone produces the bow, nor is there 
anything present except reflection. In the case of the crystal, 
however, there is a natural cause, namely, the ray and the cor- 
rugated stone, which has great diversity of surface, so that ac- 
cording to the angle at which the light falls a diversity of colors 
results. And viewing them does not* cause the colors to be 
present here, for there is color before it is seen here, and it is 
seen by different people in the same place. But in the case of 
the bow the phenomenon is the result of vision, and therefore 
can have no reality but merely appearance. This is evident, 
moreover, by the statements above in regard to the visual cone. 
When this falls as a whole in the position of the cone of the 
bow, the whole bow appears in the size possible for it with ref- 
erence to the altitude and depression of the sun and the ar- 
rangement of its own matter; so that if the sun is on the horizon 
and the matter is prepared, a semicircular bow appears or a 
larger portion of the sphere, provided the whole visual cone 
falls in the position of the cone of the bow. But if the sun is on 
the horizon and the matter is prepared, but the visual cone does 
not fall as a whole in the position of the cone of the bow, only 
so much of the arc of the rainbow will appear as the base of 
the cone of vision cuts off from the place of the bow; therefore 
it is evident that the bow has no existence except in the vision. 

CHAPTER IX 

We must next consider that the bow is the image of the sun, 
and to grasp this idea we must consider the opinions of Seneca 
in his book on the Rainbow, since we must imagine a cloud 
suspended in the air, and rain descending from it. The vertex 

* The sense of the passage seems to require the insertion of the negative. 

[ 606 ] 

Experimental Science 

of the cone falls upon the earth, and the circular base touches 
the concave surface of the cloud. There are, then, raindrops 
of small size in an infinite number, and reflection takes place in 
every direction as from a spherical mirror, and since they de- 
scend without an interval they seem from a distance to be con- 
tinuous, and therefore the image of the sun seems continuous 
and not multiplex in accordance with the multitude of rain- 
drops. There is a similar phenomenon in the circles colored by 
spray. And thus the objection is removed that might be made 
in regard to the multitude of images. But in regard to the shape, 
size, and color there is doubt; and we must state that spherical 
mirrors, and especially small ones, change the size and shape 
of the object of vision in many ways, and render shapes mon- 
strous, and destroy all relationship of the parts of an object to 
one another, as was shown in the section on Perspective. And 
after destroying shape and size, and consequently the proper 
arrangement of qualities, which require shape and the requisite 
size, they are also able to change the color and to cause a color 
to appear from that which is without color, and conversely. 
And because light incorporated in matter resembles color, al- 
though in reality it is not color, as rare clouds appear white 
and thick ones appear black when the rays penetrate them, so 
in this case can the light of the sun falling on mirrors of this . 
kind show what resembles color, especially since there is noth- 
ing present except an appearance, as we have stated. 

CHAPTER X 

IN addition to these matters we must consider the diversity of 
colors. All authorities say it is caused by varieties in the tex- 
ture of the moist cloud, and this is stated in the common text 
of Aristotle. Hence they say that when the substance of the 
cloud is somewhat dense, it seems to be darker; and when it is 
less dense, it seems to be blue; and if it is still less dense, it 
seems to be green; and if less still, it appears wine-colored and 
red; if it is still less dense, it appears grayish and pink; and if 
it is rather rare, it appears to be white. Accordingly the ex- 
ample of Aristotle is given in regard to flame, which, owing 
to the rarity and density of terrestrial smoke, appears bright 

[ 607 ] 

Opus Majus 

and reddish and dark, and it happens so in different ways. But 
that example is not applicable here, as is evident from the ex- 
periment with crystalline stone. For in it colors are produced, 
and there is no difference in the density and rarity of the sub- 
stance, and yet real colors are produced in it. And again, since 
there is no real color in the rainbow, but merely the appear- 
ance, we need only give the cause of the appearance or the ap- 
pearance of the cause. Moreover, in the experiment on sprin- 
kling drops of water nothing is caused by these differences in 
density, nor in the drops of dew on the ends of blades of grass; 
therefore it is evident that this reason of difference in density 
is not the true one. And in this we are not opposing Aristotle, 
since many other false statements are contained in the chapter 
on the rainbow and elsewhere in the current translations, as is 
evident throughout the whole philosophy of the Latins, if any 
one examines the different translations and the Greek original 
from which the Latin version was taken. But the opinion of 
Aristotle has not in all cases been translated, but there has 
been error in the copies of the Greeks and Arabs, or rather 
fault in the translators, no one of whom has perfect knowledge 
of the languages or sciences, as was stated before. 

It is necessary, moreover, that another false statement that 
is found in this chapter on the rainbow should be corrected; 
and therefore we are to have this understanding in regard to 
the false statement already corrected. And that the mind may 
not be in suspense, I say that the statement in the current text 
is false, namely, that the rainbow is caused by the moon only 
twice in fifty years. For whenever the moon is full and is not 
veiled by cloud, and there is moist substance opposite it, the 
bow can appear just as it does through the agency of the sun. 
The experience of any one can prove this, and it has been 
proved by definite experiments. 

CHAPTER XI 

BuT with regard to the shape of the bow there is very great 
difficulty. For some think that it should be formed in the same 
way as the base of the cone of dropping dew. But this is im- 
possible. For in drops of spray it is evident by experiment that 

[ 608 ] 

Experimental Science 

in a mass of spray of irregular shape the form of the rainbow 
appears. Similarly those are in error who say that the bow is 
caused by refraction, so that it has the shape of a pyramid con- 
formed to the curve of the surface of a cone expanded opposite 
the sun, for which reason, according to these thinkers, it is 
thought to be bow-shaped. And because the vertex of the pyra- 
mid mentioned, as they state, is near the earth, and the pyra- 
mid expands in a direction opposite the sun, half or more of 
that figure must fall on the surface of the earth and the remain- 
ing half or less must fall opposite the sun on the cloud. But this 
explanation is not correct, because it has been proved that the 
bow is not the result of refraction, since in the case of spray we 
cannot give a reason of this kind for the shape. For they say that 
the rays are refracted first at the point of contact of the air and 
the cloud, and afterwards at the point of contact of the cloudand 
the higher part of the moisture, so that by these refractions rays 
converge in the lower and denser part of the moisture; for the 
denser part is lower because it is heavier. For there the rays 
refracted as from the vertex of a cone spread out not into a cone, 
as they say, but into a figure conformed to the curve of the sur- 
face of a cone.* It is evident, therefore, that by three refrac- 
tions the rays take this form. But there cannot be three refrac- 
tions in spray formed in the rays, but only one; and yet the 
same shape is found as in the sky; wherefore the cause is not 
a refraction of this kind. 

Lastly, why will the rays not form a cone but a figure con- 
formed to the curve of the surface of a cone? For this will not 
be in accordance with the law of refraction, because refraction 
must form a regular cone, since the refraction of all rays falling 
on one circle of a spherical body is at right angles, and there- 
fore the figure will not be curved more in one part than in an- 
other, but will be wholly regular and uniform. Nor can this 
curvature be caused by the moisture, because the moisture is 
not of such a form, but according to them is a rounded mass 
of conical form composed of an infinite number of drops, and 
therefore there is no explanation of that form in this way. 

Another explanation therefore must be sought; and it can 
be stated that the bow must be in the form of a circular arc. 
For in accordance with differences in the position of an object 

* See Bridges’ note on this passage, Vol. II, page 194. 

[ 609 |] 

o 

Opus Majus 

with respect to light different colors appear, as on the dove’s 
neck. Since, therefore, the same color in one circle of the bow 
appears from one end to the other, all parts must have the same 
position with respect to the solar ray and the eye. But such a 
position of identity cannot exist except in a circular figure be- 
cause of the equal declination of the parts. Moreover, on a vapor 
of spherical shape two kinds of circles can be marked. One kind 
passes through its poles like colures on a sphere; the other kind 
consists of parallel circles intersecting these colures trans- 
versely. The circular path of the colure is always vanishing 
owing to distance, because it does not keep the same position at 
its extremities and in the middle with respect to the eye, but 
the parallels are quite apparent in their circular path because 
of the equality of their position with respect to the eye, as has 
been stated concerning the moon in the section on Perspective. 
Since therefore the circle of the rainbow is one of the parallel 
circles it can be seen in its circular path. 

But if the objection be raised against this view that then not 
only the arc of the cone in its gibbosity would be colored but 
also elsewhere throughout its whole surface, just like the full 
moon, which is fully illuminated on the side turned to us, and 
therefore the whole surface of the base, which is above the 
earth, would be colored. In reply to this objection it can be said 
that drops are not present everywhere from which rays are re- 
flected to the eyes at angles equal to the angles of incidence. For 
this occurs only in the position of a circle, as is apparent in the 
reflections and refractions of the concave mirror and of other 
mirrors; and therefore since there can be four or five circles of 
the rainbow in the drops from which reflections to the eye are 
made at angles equal to the angles of incidence, color can be 
produced in them, and the phenomenon of the rainbow appear. 

CHAPTER XII 

SOME used to think that the moist cloud was colored through- 
out, because there is reflection in all the drops, and the bow is 
caused by reflection; moreover, because in accordance with the 
number of observers and diversity in the position of the same 
observer the bow appears everywhere. But to the first statement 

[ 610] 

Experimental Science 

we must reply that everywhere there are conditions suitable 
for the appearance of the bow, but as an actual fact the bow ap- 
pears only in raindrops from which there is reflection to the 
eye; because there is merely the appearance of colors arising 
from the fantasy and deception of the vision, as has been stated. 
Therefore real color is nowhere present in the moist cloud, nor 
is the appearance of color present except in the drops from 
which reflection comes to the vision. But a reflection comes from 
every drop at the same time, while the eye is in one position, 
because of the equality of the angles of incidence and reflection. 
To the second statement we must reply that we can imagine 
colors appearing everywhere from two causes, in one way be- 
cause the color was fixed, just as in other things; and it would 
produce a species from itself to the eye, and it would then be 
everywhere, and thus wherever there were sprays one would see 
color. But such is not the case here, because there is no real 
color, but only a fantasy of vision; and therefore the cause of 
the appearance is an erroneous judgment of the vision alone. 
Therefore the bow appears only in the place from which reflec- 
tion reaches the eye; and from this cause, not from the first one, 
it changes according to a change in the observer. 

There are five principal colors, namely, white, blue, red, 
green, black. For red is equidistant from the extremes, and is 
midway with respect to white and black. For Aristotle’s state- 
ment in his work De Sensu et Sensato that there are seven colors 
_ is true if we divide blue into several shades, as dark blue and 
purple, and similarly by dividing green into different shades; 
but the five principal colors are distinct by nature. For the num- 

ber five is better than all other numbers, as Aristotle says in the ' 

book of Secrets, and this is true as far as distinguishing defi- 
~ nitely the number of things is concerned, although the number 
three is better as regards the numeral quality found in any- 
thing. For we draw this from nature, as Aristotle says in the 
first book on the Heavens and the World, because in everything 
a trinity exists, as Aristotle there shows, both in the Creator and 
in the creature. Because the number five distinguishes things 
more definitely and better, nature for this reason rather intends 
that there shall be five colors. Therefore these five colors are in 
the rainbow, rather than other colors, in accordance with the 
general arrangement of nature, which carries into effect and 

[ 611 ] 

A 

Opus Majus 

purposes that which is better. The color of blue termed celestial 
is black with a certain sweetness of luster, and is therefore reck- 
oned under black. 

It is thought by scientists that these colors are caused by the 
humors and colors of the eye; for these colors exist merely in 
appearance, and the parts of the eye have some colors naturally, 
although they are weak, in accordance with the existence of 
which the colors appear in the bow. Moreover, there are five 
bodies in the eye, namely, three humors and two coats, the uvea 
and the cornea; the consolidativa takes no part in vision, and 
therefore the five colors appear according to the properties of 
these five parts. Sometimes those bodies do not have distinct 
colors. For they vary in the eyes of different people, and dif- 
ferent bows appear to vary, one in one way, another in another 
in the same hour, also at different times according to the varia- 
tion of the air between the eye and the bow in its arrangement 
of light and dark portions. Moreover, a proof that the colors of 
the bow can appear through the eye is the fact that, when a 
hexagonal stone is placed before the eye in a dark place, colors 
of this kind are formed, and therefore in a similar manner in 
suitable matter in a dark place in the cloud they can at all 
events appear. 

After what has now been said the cause of the corona is more 
easily apparent, and likewise the cause of the phenomenon ap- 
pearing in a rectangular figure, which Seneca calls a rod, and 
Aristotle a perpendicular; for these phenomena are colored and 
others not. Therefore Seneca says, “If you form the vapor 
erect, it is a rod [streak in the heavens]; if you bend it into 
the arc of a circle, it is the rainbow; if you bend it into a com- 
plete circle, it is a corona” ; which Aristotle calls a circle around 
the sun and the moon, and a halo. They state another difference 
also, namely, that the rainbow is formed opposite the sun, the 
streak to the side of the sun, and the corona beneath it. But 
the statements in regard to the circle and corona can be made 
without misrepresentation. Concerning the perpendicular, how- 
ever, and the rod [streak] it is different. For it.is merely a 
small portion of the corona, which by reason of the excessive 
distance seems to be a straight line, when the matter to complete 
the corona is lacking. A mass, moreover, of dense vapor some- 
times forms in the direction of the sun beneath it. This vapor 

[ 612 ] 

Experimental Science 

is denser than the air, and yet is not of excessive density but of 
such density as is required for a phenomenon of this kind. I 
state, then, that when that vapor is denser than the air, and is of 
a nearly spherical form, equidistant from the earth as nearly 
as it can be owing to the nature of a heavy body, all the rays 
proceeding from the point o* beyond the perpendicular od are 
refracted at the surface of the vapor between the straight path 
and the perpendicular drawn from the point of refraction. All 
the rays falling on one circular path around that axis are re- 
fracted at equal angles, because all the angles of incidence are 
equal, as a and f, and the angles of refractions within the body 
are equal, and this is true in regard to all angles of rays falling 
on the circumference, which passes through the points agf, and 
in the same way the rays falling on the circumference passing 
through bg are all refracted at equal angles, because they are 
incident at equal angles, as is evident by geometrical demon- 
stration. The rays, therefore, of a circular path, as oa and of, 
and all rays that in the circumference pass through a and f, fall 
and travel after refraction in the body of the equidistant vapor. 
Then when the air, which is a rarer body, meets the concave 
surface of the vapor, the rays are refracted and deflected from 
the perpendicular drawn from the point of refraction, and meet 
necessarily at a point, as at o. The same is true of those rays that 
fall on another circular path, as ob and cg, and they are con- 
terminous on the same circumference, and they intersect by a- 
second refraction at a remoter point, as at d, because rays fall- 
ing on a larger circular path intersect at a remoter point. And 
thus it is always true of other rays falling on other circum- 
ferences that all the rays of one circular path fall at a point 
different from the point at which the rays of the other circular 
paths meet. And just as the rays of one circular path at their 
entrance into the vapor form a circle on the vapor, so when they 
leave the vapor they pass from a circular base and meet in a 
point of the cone. For all this light coming from a point in the 
sun and passing through the vapor is broken up into an infinite 
number of rays and is like a cylinder in shape, and has a circu- 
lar form at both ends while it is in the vapor. But after it has 
passed out of the vapors the rays are deflected into the form of 
a cone, whose base is at the end of the cylinder of light, and its 

* No figure is given in the MSS. 

[ 613 J 

Opus Majus 

vertex falls on the earth. If, therefore, the eye receives the 
vertex of a cone, it will see the base of this cone, and because 
that denser vapor is of such a density that it is visible, espe- 
cially since it has light in itself, it can be seen beneath the bases 
of the cone, and therefore in a circular form. 

But just as many experiments are needed to determine the na- 
ture of the rainbow both in regard to its color and its shape, so 
too are they required in this investigation, where we must note 
that rays can be considered in two ways, namely, either as com- 
ing from a point and to a circle in the vapor which intersect at 
the vertex of a cone; and other rays that fall from the same 
point and to another circle form another cone, and so on. But 
the vertices of all these cones fall on the axis and the perpen- 
dicular coming from that point from which the refracted rays 
come, and incomplete cones are formed, nor do the rays pass 
to the points of intersection because of the interposition of the 
observer, and therefore no one will see by means of these in- 
complete cones. Wherefore if several people are looking at a 
corona, we must choose one of the two explanations, either that 
from other points of the sun rays come to be refracted into a 
cone, so that to the individual observers rays come from sepa- 
rate points in the sun, or that from the base of a cone whose 
vertex falls on the eye of an observer, other cones formed from 
accidental rays come to the other observers; so that the base of 
the principal cone which comes to the eye of one person is seen 
by others by means of an accidental cone, just as those in a cor- 
ner of a house see by means of accidental rays the light falling 
through a window. But this second explanation cannot be the 
correct one, because a judgment by means of principal rays 
and one by means of accidental rays cannot be equal, but those 
viewing the corona at the same time form equal judgments. 
Moreover, each one judges that the sun is the center of the 
corona; therefore each one sees the sun, but accidental rays do 
not lead the sight to an object but to a species, just as a person 
in a corner of a house cannot see the sun, although he may see 
a ray falling through an opening. It is evident, therefore, that 
to the eye of an observer one cone comes whose rays come from 
a definite point in the sun, so that from one point rays come to 
one eye, and to a second eye from a second point, and to a third 
eye from a third point. But experiment explains all these 

[614] 

Experimental Science 

_ things, just as in the case of the rainbow. Hence reasoning does 
not attest these matters, but experiments on a large scale made 
with instruments and by various necessary means are required. 
Therefore no discussion can give an adequate explanation in 
these matters, for the whole subject is dependent on experiment. 
For this reason I do not think that in this matter I have grasped 
the whole truth, because I have not yet made all the experi- 
ments that are necessary, and because in this work I am pro- 
ceeding by the method of persuasion and of demonstration of 
what is required in the study of science, and not by the method 
of compiling what has been written on this subject. Therefore 
it does not devolve on me to give at this time an attestation pos- 
sible for me, but to treat the subject in the form of a plea for 
the study of science. 

In regard to the circle around a candle it is thought that it 
is formed by the vapors set free from the foods and drinks on 
the table; or that it can appear when the air is moist; or that 
it is produced at a distance from the candle in the vapors of the 
moist eye. Thus, therefore, any scientist will readily admit that 
experiment, not reasoning, determines the conclusions in re- 
gard to these matters. But I now pass to the second prerogative 
of this Experimental Science. 

CHAPTER ON THE SECOND PREROGATIVE OF 
EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE 

THIs mistress of the speculative sciences alone is able to give us 
important truths within the confines of the other sciences, which 
those sciences can learn in no other way. Hence these truths are 
not connected with the discussion of principles but are wholly 
outside of these, although they are within the confines of these 
sciences, since they are neither conclusions nor principles. Clear 
examples in regard to these matters can be given; but in what 
follows the man without experience must not seek a reason in 
order that he may first understand, for he will never have this 
reason except after experiment. Hence in the first place there 
should be readiness to believe, until in the second place experi- 
ment follows, so that in the third reasoning may function. For 
if a man is without experience that a magnet attracts iron, and 

[615 ] 

Opus Majus 

has not heard from others that it attracts, he will never discover 
this fact before an experiment. Therefore in the beginning he 
must believe those who have made the experiment, or who have 
reliable information from experimenters, nor should he reject 
the truth, because he is ignorant of it, and because he does not 
arrive at it by reasoning. I shall state, then, those things that I 
hold to have been proved by experiment. 

Example I 

MATHEMATICAL science can easily produce the spherical astro- 
labe, on which all astronomical phenomena necessary for man 
may be described, according to precise longitudes and latitudes. 
The device of Ptolemy in the eighth book of the Almagest is 
used with reference to circles as well as stars, as I have stated, 
by means of a certain similitude, but the subject is not fully 
explained by that device, for more work is necessary. But that 
this body so made should move naturally with the daily motion 
is not within the power of mathematical science. But the trained 
experimenter can consider the ways of this motion, aroused to 
consider them by many things which follow the celestial mo- 
tion, as, for example, the three elements which rotate circularly 
through the celestial influence, as Alpetragius states in his book 
on Celestial Motions, and Averroés in the first book on the 
Heavens and the World; so also comets, the seas and flowing 
streams, marrows and brains and the substances composing dis- 
eases. Plants also in their parts open and close in accordance 
with the motion of the sun. And many like things are found 
which, according to a local motion of the whole or of parts, 
are moved by the motion of the sun. The scientist, therefore, is 
aroused by the consideration of things of this kind, a considera- 
tion similar in import to that in which he is interested, in order 
that at length he may arrive at his goal. This instrument would 
be worth the treasure of a king, and would supersede all other 
astronomical instruments and clocks, and would be a most won- 
derful instrument of science. But few would know how in a 
clear and useful manner to conceive of such a miracle and of 
similar ones within the confines of mathematical science. 

[ 616] 

Experimental Science 

Example II 

ANOTHER example can be given in the field of medicine in re- 
gard to the prolongation of human life, for which the medical 
art has nothing to offer except the regimen of health. But a far 
longer extension of life is possible. At the beginning of the 
world there was a great prolongation of life, but now it has 
been shortened unduly. Many have thought that the reason for 
this prolongation and shortening of life is found in the influence 
of the heavens. For they considered that the arrangement of the 
heavens was best at the beginning, and that as the world grows 
old all things decay. They think that the stars were created in 
more advantageous positions, in which stars have their digni- 
ties, which are called house, exaltation, triplicity, face, and 
boundary ; and in a better relationship of these to one another 
in accordance with the diversity of aspects or the invisible pro- 
jection of rays. They also think that they have gradually re- 
ceded from this position, and that in accordance with this re- 
cession they impose a shortened span of life up to some fixed 
boundary, at which there will be a state of rest. But this idea 
has many contradictions and difficulties, of which I must now 
speak. 

Whether this shall prove to be true or not, another reason 
must be given, which is ready at hand for us and is plain, which ` 
cannot be contradicted, and which we know by experience. 
Therefore in regard to this we must strive, that the wonderful 
and ineffable utility and splendor of experimental science may 
appear and the pathway may be opened to the greatest secret 
of secrets, which Aristotle has hidden in his book on the Regi- 
men of Life. For although the regimen of health should be ob- 
served in food and drink, in sleep and in wakefulness, in mo- 
tion and in rest, in evacuation and retention, in the nature of 
the air and in the passions of the mind, so that these matters 
should be properly cared for from infancy, no one wishes to 
take thought in regard to them, not even physicians, since we 
see that scarcely one physician in a thousand will give this mat- 
ter even slight attention. Very rarely does it happen that any 
one pays sufficient heed to the rules of health. No one does so 
in his youth, but sometimes one in three thousand thinks of 
these matters when he is old and approaching death, for at that 

LON] 

Opus Majus 

time he fears for himself and thinks of his health. But he can- 
not then apply a remedy because of his weakened powers and 
senses and his lack of experience. Therefore fathers are weak- 
ened and beget weak sons with a liability to premature death. 
Then by neglect of the rules of health the sons weaken them- 
selves, and thus the son’s son has a doubly weakened constitu- 
tion, and in his turn weakens himself by a disregard of these 
rules. Thus a weakened constitution passes from father to sons, 
until a final shortening of life has been reached, as is the case 
in these days. 

Not only is there this accidental cause, but there is also an- 
other, consisting in the disregard of morals. For sins weaken 
the powers of the soul, so that it is incompetent for the natural 
control of the body; and therefore the powers of the body are 
weakened and life is shortened. This weakening passes from 
father to son, and so on. Therefore owing to these two natural 
causes the longevity of man of necessity has not retained its 
natural course from the beginning; but for these two reasons 
the longevity of man has been shortened contrary to nature. 
Moreover, it has been proved that this excessive shortening of 
the span of life has been retarded in many cases, and longevity 
prolonged for many years by secret experiments. Many authors 
write on this topic. Wherefore this excessive shortening of life 
must be accidental with a possible remedy. 

Since I have shown that the cause of a shortening of life of 
this kind is accidental, and therefore that a remedy is possible, 
I now return to this example which I have decided to give in 
the field of medicine, in which the power of medical art fails. 
But the experimental art supplies the defect of medicine in this 
particular. For the art of medicine can give only the proper 
rules of health for all ages. For although noted authors have 
spoken inadequately concerning the proper regimen of the 
aged, it has been possible, however, for medicine to give such 
a regimen. This regimen consists in the proper use of food and 
drink, of motion and rest, of sleep and wakefulness, of elimina- 
tion and retention, of the air, and in the control of the passions 
of the mind. But if from birth a man followed a proper regimen 
to the end of his life, he would reach the limit of life set by 
God and nature, in accordance with the possibility of a proper 
regimen. But since it is impossible for this regimen to be fol- 

[ 618] 

Experimental Science 

lowed by any one, and since few, nay, scarcely any one at all, 
from youth pay any heed to this regimen, and very few old 
people observe it as it is possible, therefore the accidents of old 
age of necessity come before old age and senility, namely, in the 
period of the prime of life, which is the age of human beauty 
and strength. In these times this period of life does not con- 
tinue beyond forty-five or fifty years. 

All these accidents of old age and senility are white hair, 
pallor, wrinkling of the skin, excess of mucus, foul phlegm, in- 
- flammation of the eyes, and general injury to the organs of 
sense, diminution of blood and of the spirits, weakness in mo- 
tion and breathing and in the whole body, failure in both the 
animal and natural powers of the soul, sleeplessness, anger and 
disquietude of mind, and forgetfulness, of which the royal 
Hali says that old age is the home of forgetfulness; and Plato 
that it is the mother of lethargy. Because of the lack of a proper 
regimen of health all these accidents and many more come to 
men in the prime of life, that is, either in greater or lesser de- 
gree, in accordance with the better or worse control they have 
exercised over themselves in the matter of their health, and in 
accordance with a better and stronger constitution and a better 
or worse control exercised over their morals. But the medical 
art does not furnish remedies against this corruption that comes . 
from lack of control and failure in regimen, just as all physi- 
cians expert in their own art know, although medical authors 
confess that remedies are possible, but they do not teach them. 
For these remedies have always been hidden not only from 
physicians, but from the whole rank and file of scientists, and 
have been revealed only to the most noted, whom Aristotle 
mentions in the first book of the Topics in the division of the 
probable. Not only are remedies possible against the condi- 
tions of old age coming at the time of one’s prime and before 
the time of old age, but also if the regimen of old age should 
be completed, the conditions of old age and senility can still be 
retarded, so that they do not arrive at their ordinary time, and 
when they do come they can be mitigated and moderated, so 
that both by retarding and mitigating them life may be pro- 
longed beyond the limit, which according to the full regimen 
of health depends on the six articles mentioned. And there is 
another farther limit, which has been set by God and nature, in 

[ 619 J 

Opus Majus 

accordance with the property of the remedies retarding the 
accidents of old age and senility and mitigating their evil. The 
first limit can be passed but the second cannot be. 

Because of these two limits the Scripture says more than 
once, “Thou hast set its bounds which cannot be passed” ; for it 
is impossible for the ultimate limit to be passed, but the first 
limit can be passed, although it is rarely passed; but the second 
limit cannot be passed. The proper regimen of health, there- 
fore, as far as a man can possess it, would prolong life beyond 
its common accidental limit, which man because of his folly 
does not protect for his own interest; and thus some have lived 
for many years beyond the common limit of life. But a special 
regimen by means of remedies retarding the common limit 
mentioned, which the art of directing the health does not 
exceed, can prolong life much further. What is possible is 
shown by Dioscorides, who says that there may be some medi- 
cine to protect man from the swiftness of old age and from cold 
and from the drying up of his members, so that by its means the 
life of man may be prolonged. In the Tegni near the end Hali 
maintains this. Again he says, “Those who have lived a long 
time have used medicines by which their life has been pro- 
longed.” Avicenna, moreover, speaks in regard to such matters 
as follows in the second book of the Canon, “There is a medi- 
cine that settles and divides every constitution as it should be.” 
But medical authorities have not given those medicines, nor 
have they been stated in their books, since these writers pay 
attention only to the art of caring for the health, and that, too, 
insufficiently as regards the elderly and the aged, as has been 
stated. But learned men devoted to experimental science have 
given thought to these matters, influenced thereto not only by 
their utility but by the action of animals which in many ways 
avoid a premature death, as, for example, the stag, the eagle, 
the snake, and many other animals that prolong their life by 
natural action, as authors state and experience has shown. In- 
fluenced by these examples they believed that God himself 
granted this power to brutes for the instruction of mortal man. 
Therefore they lay in wait for animals, in order that they might 
learn the powers of herbs, stones, metals, and other things, with 
which they improved their bodies in many apparently miracu- 
lous ways, just as we gather with the utmost certainty from the 

[ 620] 

Experimental Science 

books of Pliny, Solinus, Avicenna on Animals, Tullius on the 
Divine Nature, from the philosophy of Artephius, and from 
other books and various authors, and many people have had ex- 
perience in this matter. For in Paris lately there was a scientist 
who sought for snakes and took one and cut it into small por- 
tions, except that the skin of the belly on which it crept re- 
mained intact. This snake crept as it was able to a certain herb 
by the touch of which it was immediately cured. The experi- 
menter collected the herb of wondrous virtue. Since human 
reason is superior to all the wisdom of animals, scientists thus 
encouraged by the examples of animals have thought out better 
and greater means. 

And especially was this wisdom granted to the world through 
the first men, namely, through Adam and his sons, who re- 
ceived from God himself special knowledge on this subject, in 
order that they might prolong their life. We can learn the 
same through Aristotle in the book of Secrets, where he says 
that God most high and glorious has prepared a means and a 
remedy for tempering the humors and preserving health, and 
for acquiring many things with which to combat the ills of old 
age and to retard them, and to mitigate such evils; and has 
revealed these things to his saints and prophets and to certain 
others, as the patriarchs, whom he chose and enlightened with - 
the spirit of divine wisdom, etc. And below he says that there 
is a medicine called the ineffable glory and treasure of philoso- 
phers, which completely rectifies the whole human body. This 
medicine is said to have been discovered by Adam or by Enoch 
and secured through a vision, as he himself states, although it 
has not been fully attested which of these first produced this 
medicine. But these matters and the most secret of secrets of 
this kind have always been hidden from the rank and file of 
philosophers, and particularly so after men began to abuse sci- 
ence, turning to evil what God granted in full measure for the 
safety and advantage of men. 

Many examples, moreover, of these facts are written. Arte- 
phius, who traveled over all the regions of the East in his search 
for knowledge, found Tantalus, teacher of the king of India, 
seated on a golden throne and discoursing on nature and on the 
motions of the heavens. This same Tantalus humbled himself 
and became a pupil of Artephius, who is said in the book of his 

[621.4 

Opus Majus 

own philosophy to have lived actually for many centuries by 
means of secret experiments. Pliny, moreover, in the twenty- 
second book of the Natural History states that a man stood 
in the presence of Augustus, who had prolonged his life beyond 
a hundred years. To the astonishment of the bystanders he was 
strong, robust, and active to such a degree that the emperor in 
wonder asked him what he did so as to live in this way. The man 
replied in a riddle, as Pliny says, that he had applied oil on the 
outside and mead on the inside. Moreover, as stated in the book 
on the Accidents of Old Age, in the time of King William of 
Sicily a man was found who renewed the period of his youth 
in strength and sense and sagacity beyond all human calculation 
for about sixty years, and from a rustic ploughman became a 
messenger of the king. While ploughing he found a golden © 
vessel in the fields hidden in the earth, which contained an 
excellent liquor. Thinking the liquor was dew from the sky he 
drank it and washed his face, and was renewed in mind and 
body beyond measure. And in the book just mentioned it is re- 
corded that a man anointed with an excellent unguent the whole 
surface of his body with the exception of the soles of his feet, 
and lived for several centuries without decay except in his soles, 
which he had neglected to anoint, and for this reason he nearly 
always rode. Moreover, the author of this book bore witness 
that he had seen a man, and had talked with him, who had lived 
for several centuries, because he took a medicine prepared by 
scientists for a great king, who lost hope for himself and wished 
the medicine to be tried on an ignorant person. Thus the man’s 
life was prolonged, and he had official letters from the Pope 
of that time and from others in regard to this fact. ; 

Therefore the excellent experimenter in the book on the 
Regimen of the Aged says that if what is tempered in the fourth 
degree, and what swims in the sea, and what grows in the air, 
and what is cast up by the sea, and a plant of India, and what is 
found in the vitals of a long-lived animal, and the two snakes 
which are the food of Tyrians and Aethiopians, be prepared and 
used in the proper way, and the minera* of the noble animal be 
present, the life of man could be greatly prolonged and the con- 
ditions of old age and senility could be retarded and mitigated. 
But that which is tempered in the fourth degree is gold, as is 

* Old French word meaning mine used here probably in the sense of blood. 

[ 6227] 

Experimental Science 

stated in the book on Spirits and Bodies,* which among all 
things is most friendly to nature. And if by a certain experiment 
gold should be made the best possible, or at any rate far better 
than nature and the art of alchemy can make it, as was the vessel 
found by the rustic, and it should be dissolved in such water as 
the ploughman drank, it would then produce a wonderful ac- 
tion on the body of man. And if there is added that which swims 
in the sea, namely, the pearl, which is a thing most efficacious 
for preserving life, and there is added also the thing that 
grows in the air.j This last is an anthos [flower] and is the 
flower of seadew, which possesses an ineffable virtue against the 
condition of old age. But the dianthos that is put in an electuary 
is not a flower, but is a mixture of leaves and fragments of wood 
and a small portion of flower. For the pure flower should be 
gathered in its proper season, and in many ways it is used in 
foods and drinks and electuaries. To these must be added what 
is cast up by the sea. This last is ambergris, which is spermaceti, 
a thing of wondrous virtue in this matter. The plant of India 
is similar to these, and is the excellent wood of the aloe, fresh 
and not seasoned. To these ingredients there is added that 
which is in the heart of a long-lived animal, namely, the stag. 
This is a bone growing in the stag’s heart, which possesses 
great power against premature old age. The snake which is | 
the food of the Tyrians is the Tyrian snake from which Tyri- 
acat is made, and whose flesh is properly prepared and eaten 
with spices. This is an excellent remedy for the condition of 
old age and for all the corruptions of the constitution, if it is 
taken with things suitable to one’s constitution and condition, 
as we are taught in the book on the Regimen of the Aged. Aris- 
totle, moreover, in the book of Secrets recommends strongly the 
flesh of the Tyrian snake for our ills. The snake that is the food 
of the Aethiopians is the dragon, as David says in the psalm, 
“Thou hast given it as food to the tribes of the Aethiopians.” 
For it is certain that wise men of Aethiopia have come to Italy, 
Spain, France, England, and those lands of the Christians in 
which there are good flying dragons, and by the secret art they 
possess lure the dragons from their caverns. They have saddles 

* J.e., gases and solids. 
+ Bacon does not complete these sentences, but the sense is clear enough. 

_ $ Antidote against poisonous bites. 

[ 623 ] 

Opus Majus 

and bridles in readiness, and they ride on these dragons and 
drive them in the air at high speed, so that the rigidity of their 
flesh may be overcome and its hardness tempered, just as in the 
case of boars and bears and bulls that are driven about by dogs 
and beaten in various ways before they are killed for food. 
After they have domesticated them in this way they have the 
art of preparing their flesh, similar to the art of preparing the 
flesh of the Tyrian snake, and they use the flesh against the 
accidents of old age, and they prolong life and sharpen their 
intellect beyond all conception. For no instruction that can be 
given by man can produce such wisdom as the eating of this 
flesh, as we have learned through men of proved reliability on 
whose word no doubt can be cast. 

If the elements should be prepared and purified in some mix- 
ture, so that there would be no action of one element on another, 
but so that they would be reduced to pure simplicity, the wisest 
have judged that they would have the most perfect medicine. 
For in this way the elements would be equal. Averroés, more- 
over, asserts in opposition to Galienus in the tenth book of the 
Metaphysics that if the mixture was made with an equality of 
the miscibles, the elements would not act or be acted on, nor 
would they be corrupted. Aristotle also maintains this view in 
the fifth book of the Metaphysics, where he has stated definitely 
that no corruption occurs when the active potencies are equal; 
and this is an assured fact. 

For this condition will exist in our bodies after the resurrec- 
tion. For an equality of elements in those bodies excludes cor- 
ruption for ever. For this equality is the ultimate end of the 
natural matter in mixed bodies, because it is the noblest state, 
and therefore in it the appetite of matter would cease, and 
would desire nothing beyond. The body of Adam did not pos- 
sess elements in full equality, and therefore the contrary ele- 
ments in him acted and were acted on, and consequently there 
was waste, and he required nourishment. For this reason he 
was commanded not to eat of the fruit of life. But since the ele- 
ments in him approached equality, there was very little waste in 
him; and hence he was fit for immortality, which he could have 
secured if he had eaten always of the fruit of the tree of life. 
For this fruit is thought to have elements approaching equality ; 
and therefore it was able to continue incorruption in Adam, 

[ 624 ] 

Experimental Science 

which would have happened if he had not sinned. Scientists, 
therefore, have striven to reduce the elements in some form of 
food or drink to an equality or nearly so, and have taught the 
means to this end. But owing to the difficulty of this very great 
experiment, and because few take an interest in experiments, 
since the labor involved is complicated and the expense very 
great, and because men pay no heed to the secrets of nature and 
the possibilities of art, it happens that very few have labored 
on this very great secret of science, and still fewer have reached 
a laudable end. 

Those men, however, of whom mention has been made, who 
prolonged their life for centuries, had a medicine of this kind 
prepared with more or less skill. For Artephius, who, it is 
stated, lived a thousand and twenty-five years, had a better 
medicine than the aged ploughman, in whom his youth was re- 
newed for sixty years. That liquor which the rustic drank is 
thought to have approached an equality of elements far beyond 
ordinary foods and drinks; but yet it was far from possessing 
full equality. For there are many degrees in the approach to 
final equality, which the medicine of Artephius failed to secure, 
as well as that which caused the man to live for five hundred 
years who had the papal letter in attestation of so great a 
miracle, of whom mention was made above. Nor is it strange if 
Aristotle did not live so long, nor Plato, nor many other famous 
philosophers; since in the Categories Aristotle says he was 
ignorant of the quadrature of the circle, which bears no com- 
parison to a secret of this kind. Avicenna, moreover, says in the 
third book of the Physics that he did not yet know the category 
of habit; and now I judge that this is easily learned, and we 
wonder that these men were ignorant of matters so evident. 
For all wisdom is from the Lord God; and therefore sometimes 
to the simple are granted things that the most learned and 
famous cannot know. But medicine cannot give us these things 
nor does it mention them; but the greatness of the secret be- 
longing to an experimental science of this kind has proved 
them. What, then, the remedies are and what things they con- 
tain, are discovered especially in the book of the Secrets of 
Aristotle and in the philosophy of Artephius, and in the book 
on the Conditions of Old Age, and in the treatise on the Regi- 

[ 625 ] 

Opus Majus 
men of the Elderly and the Aged, and in the books of Pliny, 

and elsewhere in many ways. 

Example III 

IN the third place, the dignity of this science can be exemplified 
in alchemy. For that whole art is scarcely so perfected that the 
greater metals may be produced from the lighter ones, as gold 
from lead, and silver from copper. But that art never suffices to 
show the natural and artificial grades of gold and the modes 
of its grades. For experimental science has brought both to 
light, since it has discovered both the four natural grades and 
their seventeen modes and the artificial ones. By experiment it 
can be produced beyond twenty-four. Thus the vessel in which 
the liquor was contained, by means of which the ploughman 
became the messenger of the king, had a purity of gold far be- 
yond the twenty-four, as its test and worth showed. But when 
those twenty-four degrees are found in a mass of gold, the gold 
is the best that can be produced by nature. But when there are 
twenty-four degrees of gold and one part of silver or one de- 
gree, the gold is inferior to the former, and thus the diminution 
of the degrees of the gold goes as far as sixteen, so that there 
are eight grades of gold with an admixture of silver. But the 
mineral power in the belly of the earth is not able sometimes to 
digest matter into the nature of gold, and does what it can by 
digesting it into the form of silver. And that I am not led astray 
in this matter by my imagination is proved by the fact that men 
are found in several parts of the world who are clever at pro- 
ducing those sixteen modes, and have discovered pieces and 
masses of gold in those seventeen modes. They then made a 
mixture of silver and air with gold in the aforesaid modes, so 
that they might have seventeen lumps of gold made artificially, 
by means of which they might learn the natural modes of gold. 
Since this art is not known to the majority of those who are 
eager for gold, many frauds consequently are perpetrated in 
this world, The art of alchemy not only omits these modes, but 
this gold of twenty-four degrees is very rarely found, and with 
the greatest difficulty. There have always been a few who dur- 
ing their life have known this secret of alchemy; and this sci- 

[ 626] 

Experimental Science 

ence does not go beyond that. But experimental science by 
means of Aristotle’s Secrets of Secrets knows how to produce 
gold not only of twenty-four degrees but of thirty and forty 
degrees and of as many degrees as we desire. For this reason 
Aristotle said to Alexander, “I wish to disclose the greatest 
secret” ; and it really is the greatest secret, for not only would 
it procure an advantage for the state and for every one his de- 
sire because of the sufficiency of gold, but what is infinitely 
more, it would prolong life. For that medicine which would 
remove all the impurities and corruptions of a baser metal, so 
that it should become silver and purest gold, is thought by sci- 
entists to be able to remove the corruptions of the human body 
to such an extent that it would prolong life for many ages. This 
is the tempered body of elements, of which I spoke above. 

CHAPTER ON THE THIRD PREROGATIVE OR THE DIGNITY OF THE 
EXPERIMENTAL ART 

BuT there is a third dignity of this science. It arises from those 
properties through which it has no connection with the other 
sciences, but by its own power investigates the secrets of nature. 
This consists in two things; namely, in the knowledge of the 
future, the past, and the present, and in wonderful works by 
which it excels in the power of forming judgments the ordinary 
astronomy dealing with judgments. For Ptolemy in the book 
introductory to the Almagest says that there is a more certain 
road than that through the ordinary astronomy, and this is the 
pathway of experiment, which follows the course of nature, to 
which many of the philosophers who are believers are turning, 
just like Aristotle and a host of the authors of judgments 
formed from the stars, as he himself says, and as we know by 
proper practice, which cannot be gainsaid. This science was dis- 
covered as a complete remedy for human ignorance and inad- 
vertence; for it is difficult to get accurate astronomical instru- 
ments, and it is more difficult to get verified tables, especially 
those in which the motion of the planets is equalized. The use, 
moreover, of these tables is difficult, but still more difficult is 
the use of the instruments. But this science has discovered the 
definitions and the means by which it can answer easily every 

[ 627 ] 

Opus Majus 

question, as far as the power of a single branch of philosophy 
can do so, and by which it can show us the forms of the celestial 
forces, and the influences of the heavenly bodies on this world 
without the difficulty of the ordinary astronomy. This part of 
the science relating to judgments has four principal divisions 
or secret sciences. 

Moreover, certain bear witness that activities of this science 
which display philosophy consist in changing the character of 
a region, so that the habits of its people are changed. One of 
such witnesses was Aristotle himself, the most learned of phi- 
losophers. When Alexander asked him in regard to the nations 
which he had discovered, whether he should exterminate them 
because of the ferocity of their character, or should permit them 
to live, he replied in the book of Secrets, “If you can alter the 
air of those nations, permit them to live; if you cannot, then kill 
them.” For he maintained that the air of these nations could 
be changed advantageously, so that the complexions of their 
bodies would be changed, and then their minds influenced by 
their complexions would choose good morals in accordance 
with the freedom of the will. This is one of the secrets. 

Moreover, certain assert that change is effected by the sun. 
There is, as an illustration, the example of Aristotle when he 
said to Alexander, “Give a hot drink from the seed of a plant 
to whomsoever you wish, and he will obey you for the rest of 
your life.” Some maintain that an army may be stupefied and 
put to flight. Of this number is Aristotle, who says to Alex- 
ander, “Take such a stone, and every army will flee from you.” 
They bear witness that these statements and innumerable others 
of this kind are true, not meaning that violence is done to the 
freedom of the will, since Aristotle, who maintains this view, 
says in the Ethics that the will cannot be coerced. The body, 
moreover, can be changed by the influence of things, and the 
minds of people are then aroused and influenced to desire 
voluntarily that to which they are directed; just as we see in 
the book of Medicine that through potions and many medicines 
people can be changed in body and in the passions of the soul 
and in the inclination of the will. 

There are, moreover, other inventions belonging more to na- 
ture which do not have as their object a marvelous change in 
the will, and they are diversified in character. Some of these 

[ 628 ] 

Experimental Science 

possess an excellence of wisdom with other advantages, as, for 
example, perpetual baths most suitable for human use that do 
not require any artificial renewal ; and ever-burning lamps. For 
we see many things that cannot be impaired by fire, nay, that 
are purified by fire, like the skin of the salamander and many 
other things of this kind, which also can be so prepared that 
they are externally luminous of themselves, and retain the 
power of fire, and give forth flame and light. Moreover, against 
foes of the state they have discovered important arts, so that 
without a sword or any weapon requiring physical contact they 
could destroy all who offer resistance. There are many kinds 
of these inventions. Some of these are perceived by no one of 
the senses, or by smell alone, and of these inventions Aristotle’s 
book explains that of altering the air, but not those of which I 
spoke above. These last are of a different character, since they 
act by means of an infection. There are others also that change 
some one of the senses, and they are diversified in accordance 
with all the senses. 

Certain of these work a change by contact only and thus de- 
stroy life. For malta, which is a kind of bitumen and is plentiful 
in this world, when cast upon an armed man burns him up. The 
Romans suffered severe loss of life from this in their conquests, 
as Pliny states in the second book of the Natural History, and 
as the histories attest. Similarly yellow petroleum, that is, oil 
springing from the rock, burns up whatever it meets if it is 
properly prepared. For a consuming fire is produced by this 
which can be extinguished with difficulty; for water cannot 
put it out. Certain inventions disturb the hearing to such a de- 
gree that, if they are set off suddenly at night with sufficient 
skill, neither city nor army can endure them. No clap of thunder 
could compare with such noises. Certain of these strike such 
terror to the sight that the coruscations of the clouds disturb 
it incomparably less. Gideon is thought to have employed in- 
ventions similar to these in the camp of the Midianites. We 
have an example of this in that toy of children which is made 
in many parts of the world, namely, an instrument as large as 
the human thumb. From the force of the salt called saltpeter so 
horrible a sound is produced at the bursting of so small a thing, 
namely, a small piece of parchment, that we perceive it exceeds 

[ 629 ] 

Opus Majus 

the roar of sharp thunder, and the flash exceeds the greatest 
brilliancy of the lightning accompanying the thunder. 

There are also very many things that slay every poisonous 
animal by the gentlest touch, and if a circle is made around 
these animals with things of this kind the animals cannot get 
out, but die, although they are not touched. But if a man is 
bitten by a poisonous animal, by the application of the powder 
of such things he can be healed, as Bede states in his Ecclesi- 
astical History and as we know by experience. And thus there 
are innumerable things that have strange virtues, whose po- 
tencies we are ignorant of solely from our neglect of experi- 
ment. 

But there are other inventions which do not possess such ad- 
vantage for the state, but are to be looked upon as miracles of 
nature, such as experiments with the magnet, not only on iron, 
but on gold and other metals. Moreover, if the experiment on 
iron were not known, it would be viewed as a great miracle. 
And surely in respect to the action of the magnet on iron there 
are phenomena unknown to those who use the magnet which 
show in a wonderful way the dissolutions of nature. Just as also 
from these the faithful experimenter knows how to experiment 
on the mutual attraction of other things, as, for example, the 
stone that passes to the acid, and bitumen that ignites from fire 
placed at a distance from it, as Pliny states in the second book 
of the Natural History; and certain other things that are 
mutually attracted although locally separated. This is truly 
wonderful beyond all that I have seen and heard. For after I 
saw this, there has been nothing difficult for my intellect to 
believe, provided it had a trustworthy authority. And that this 
fact may not be hidden from your Reverence, this phenomenon 
occurs in the parts of plants divided and locally separated. For 
if a sapling of one year’s growth is taken, which springs forth 
beside the roots of the hazel, and is divided longitudinally, and 
the divided parts separated by the space of a palm or four 
fingers, and one person holds on one side the extremities of the 
two parts, and another similarly on the other side, always with 
an equal and gentle grasp, so that the parts are kept opposite 
each other in the same position they had before the division, 

[ 630 ] 

Experimental Science 

within the space of half a mile* the parts of the twig begin to 
approach each other gradually, but with greater force at the 
end of the experiment, so that at length they meet and are 
united. The ends, however, remain apart, because they are pre- 
vented from meeting owing to the force exerted by those hold- 
ing the parts. This is a very wonderful thing. For this reason 
magicians perform this experiment, repeating different incan- 
tations, and they believe that the phenomenon is caused by vir- 
tue of the incantations. I have disregarded the incantations and 
have discovered the wonderful action of nature, which is similar 
to that of the magnet on iron. For just as the one attracts the 
other because of the similar nature of the iron and the magnet, 
so do the parts in this case. Hence the natural force, which is simi- 
lar in both parts of the twig, causes them to unite. If they were 
arranged in the required way, they would meet at the extremi- 
ties just as in the middle and more quickly, as, for example, if 
the ends were minutely pierced and threads passed through the 
ends, so that they could be suspended in the air without hin- 
drance. This is true not only of hazel saplings but of many - 
others, as in the case of willows and perhaps in that of all sap- 
lings if they were arranged in the required manner. But since 
in such matters the mind thinks more aptly than the pen writes, 
I forbear for the present. I am here merely writing down the 
statements of scientists and noting their achievements. The 
genius of these men I admire more than I understand. 
Concluding thus the subject of this science experimental 
without restriction, I shall now show its advantage to theology, 
as I have done similarly in the case of the other sciences. Since 
I have now shown the intrinsic nature of this science, it is evi- 
dent to all that next to moral philosophy this science is the most 
useful, and it is so in the first place to theology itself in its un- 
restricted sense because of the literal and spiritual meaning in 
which it consists. For I showed above that the literal meaning 
‘consists in expressing the truth in regard to created things by 
means of their definitions and descriptions, and I likewise 
showed that reasoning does not arrive at this truth, but that 
experiment does. Wherefore this science next to moral phi- 
losophy will present the literal truth of Scripture most effec- 
tively, so that through suitable adaptations and similitudes the 

* Time taken to walk half a mile. 

[ 631 ] 

Opus Majus 

spiritual sense may be derived, owing to the peculiar nature of 
the sacred Scripture and in accordance with the methods em- 
ployed by the sacred writers and by all sages. 

Then this science as regards the commonwealth of believers 
is useful, as we saw in its special knowledge of the future, pres- 
ent, and past, and in its display of wonderful works on behalf 
of Church and state, so that all useful activities are promoted 
and the opposite are hindered both in the few and in the multi- 
tude, as was explained. And if we proceed to the conversion of 
unbelievers, it is evidently of service in two main ways with 
numerous subdivisions, since a plea for the faith can be effec- 
tively made through this science, not by arguments but by 
works, which is the more effective way. For to the man who 
denies the truth of the faith because he cannot understand it I 
shall state the mutual attraction of things in nature, just as I 
described it. Likewise I shall tell him that a jar may be broken 
without human force, and the wine contained in it remain mo- 
tionless and without flow for three days; and that gold and 
silver in a pouch, and a sword in its scabbard may be consumed 
without injury to their containers, as Seneca states in the book 
of Natural Questions. I shall tell him, moreover, that the birds 
called kingfisher in the depth of winter compel the stormy sea 
to be calm and restrain itself until they have laid their eggs and 
brought forth their young, as Basil and Ambrose in the Hex- 
aemeron and philosophers and poets state. For these facts and 
similar ones ought to influence a man and urge him to accept 
the divine verities. Since if in the vilest creatures verities are 
found by which the pride of the human intellect ought to be 
subdued so that it may believe them although it does not under- 
stand them, conviction should follow, or injury will be done to 
infallible truth, since a man ought rather to humble his mind 
to the glorious truths of God. Surely there is no comparison. 

But there is still another very useful way; since the forma- 
tion of judgments, as I have said, is a function of this science, 
in regard to what can happen by nature or be effected in art, 
and what not. This science, moreover, knows how to separate 
the illusions of magic and to detect all their errors in incanta- 
tions, invocations, conjurations, sacrifices, and cults. But unbe- 
lievers busy themselves in these mad acts and trust in them, and 
have believed that the Christians used such means in working 

[ 632 1] 

Experimental Science 

their miracles. Wherefore this science is of the greatest ad- 
vantage in persuading men to accept the faith, since this branch 
alone of philosophy happens to proceed in this way, because 
this is the only branch that considers matters of this kind, and 
is able to overcome all falsehood and superstition and error of 
unbelievers in regard to magic, such as incantations and the 
like already mentioned. How far, moreover, it may serve to 
reprobate obstinate unbelievers is already shown by the violent 
means that have just been touched upon, and therefore I pass 
on. 

We must consider, however, that although other sciences do 
many wonders, as in the case of practical geometry, which pro- 
duces mirrors that burn up every opposing object, and so too in 
the other sciences, yet all things of such wonderful utility in 
the state belong chiefly to this science. For this science has the 
same relation to the other sciences as the science of navigation 
to the carpenter’s art and the military art to that of the engi- 
neer. For this science teaches how wonderful instruments may 
be made, and uses them when made, and also considers all 
secret things owing to the advantages they may possess for the 
state and for individuals; and it directs other sciences as its 
handmaids, and therefore the whole power of speculative sci- 
ence is attributed especially to this science. And now the won- 
derful advantage derived from these three sciences in this world 
on behalf of the Church of God against the enemies of the 
faith is manifest, who should be destroyed rather by the dis- 
coveries of science than by the warlike arms of combatants. 
Antichrist will use these means freely and effectively, in order 
that he may crush and confound the power of this world; and 
by these means tyrants in times past brought the world under 
their sway. This has been shown by examples without end. 

But I now cite the one example of Alexander the Great in 
place of all other examples that might be cited, who when he 
set out from Greece to conquer the world had only 32,000 foot 
soldiers and 4500 horsemen, as Orosius states to Augustine in 
his book Ormesta Mundi, bringing war with so small a force 
upon the whole world. It is uncertain which is the more won- 
derful, that he conquered or that he ventured the attack. In his 
first battle with King Darius he overcame 600,000 Persians 
with a loss in his army of 120 horsemen and nine foot soldiers. 

[ 633 JJ 

Opus Majus 

In the second battle he conquered 400,000 men, and of his own 
army 130 foot soldiers and 150 horsemen fell. After this he 
easily subdued the rest of the world, which had become terri- 
fied. But Orosius says that he conquered not less by skill than ~ 
by the valor of the Macedonians. Nor is it to be wondered at, 
since Aristotle was with him in these wars, as we read in the 
life of Aristotle. Seneca, moreover, states in the Natural Ques- 
tions that Alexander conquered the world under the guidance 
of Aristotle and Callisthenes, who were his teachers in all 
knowledge. But Aristotle was his chief teacher; and it is easily 
apparent from what has been said how by the paths of knowl- 
edge Aristotle was able to hand over the world to Alexander. 
Moreover, the Church should consider the employment of these 
inventions against unbelievers and rebels, in order that it may 
spare Christian blood, and especially should it do so because 
of future perils in the times of Antichrist, which with the grace 
of God it would be easy to meet, if prelates and princes pro- 
moted study and investigated the secrets of nature and of art. 

[ 634] 

PART SEVEN OF THIS PLEA 

MORAL PHILOSOPHY: FIRST PART 

HAVE shown in what precedes that the knowledge of lan- 

guages, mathematics, perspective, and experimental sci- 

ence are most useful and necessary in the pursuit of wis- 
dom. Without these branches no one can advance as he should 
in wisdom, taken not only in an unrestricted sense, but also in 
relation to the Church of God and to the other three activities 
already described. I now purpose to disclose the principles of 
a fourth science that is better than all those previously men- 
tioned and nobler. This science is preéminently active, that is, 
formative, and deals with our actions in this life and in the 
other. For all other sciences are called speculative. For al- 
though certain are active and formative, they are concerned 
with the actions of art and nature, not with morals, and they 
investigate the verities of things and of scientific activities 
which have reference to the speculative intellect and are not 
concerned with things pertaining to the active intellect, which 
is called active because it directs action, that.is, good or evil 
action. Hence the term active is here taken in a restricted sense 
as applying to the actions of conduct, in accordance with which 
we are good or evil; although if we take the term active in a 
broad sense for all formative science, many other sciences are 
active. But this science is called in a self-explanatory way ac- 
tive because of the chief actions of man, which relate to virtues 
and vices, and to the felicity and misery of the other life. 

This active science is called the moral science and the civil 
science, which instructs man as to his relations to God, and to 
his neighbor, and to himself, and proves these relations, and 
invites us to them and powerfully influences us thereto. For this 
science is concerned with the salvation of man to be perfected 
through virtue and felicity ; and this science aspires to that sal- 
vation as far as philosophy can. From these general statements 
it is evident that this science is nobler than all the other 
branches of philosophy. For since it is the final inner purpose 
of human wisdom, and since the purpose is the noblest part in 
anything, this science is of necessity the noblest. Similarly this 

[635 J 

Opus Majus 

science alone or in chief measure is concerned with the same 
questions as theology ; because theology considers only the five 
aforesaid, although in a different way, namely, in the faith of 
Christ. This science, moreover, contains a great deal of ex- 
cellent testimony in regard to this same faith; and from afar 
surmises its principal articles to the great aid of the Christian 
faith, as what follows will make clear. But theology is the 
noblest of the sciences; therefore that science which is most 
closely related to it is nobler than the others. But that the very 
great utility of this science may be apparent, we must investi- 
gate its parts, to the end that we may draw what we wish from 
the parts and the whole. 

Since, moreover, moral philosophy is the end of all branches 
of philosophy, the conclusions of the other sciences are the prin- 
ciples in it in accordance with the relationship of preceding 
sciences to those that follow; because the conclusions of pre- 
ceding sciences are naturally assumed in those that follow. For 
this reason it is fitting that these conclusions in preceding sci- 
ences should be carefully proved and attested, so that they 
may be worthy of acceptance in the sciences that follow, as is 
evident from metaphysics. Therefore the principles of moral 
philosophy are attested in preceding sciences; and for this rea- 
son these principles should be drawn from the other sciences, 
not because they belong to these sciences, but because these sci- 
ences have prepared them for their mistress. Hence wherever 
they are found they are to be ascribed to moral philosophy, 
since in substance they relate to morals. And although they may 
be stated in other sciences, this is by grace of moral philosophy. 
Wherefore all such are to be considered in regard to moral phi- 
losophy and ascribed to it. Therefore if we wish to use them as 
they were intended to be used, they must be collected in moral 
science from all the other sciences. Nor is it strange if philoso- 
phers through the whole of speculative philosophy have dif- 
fused ethical principles, because they knew that these related 
to man’s salvation; and therefore in all the sciences they have 
diffused beautiful thoughts, so that men might always be di- 
rected to the blessing of salvation, and that all might know 
that the other sciences are sought after only for the sake of that 
science which is the mistress of human wisdom. Therefore if I 
adduce from other places authorities other than those contained 

[ 636 | 

Moral Philosophy 

in books on morals, we should consider that these ought prop- 
erly to be placed in this science. Nor can we deny that they have 
been written in books of this science, since in Latin we do not 
possess except in parts the philosophy of Aristotle, Avicenna, 
and Averroés, who are the principal authors in this subject. 
For just as theology perceives that truths bringing salvation 
belong to it, wherever it finds them, as I stated at the beginning 
and touched upon later, so also does moral philosophy claim as 
its right whatever it finds written elsewhere pertaining to it. 
This science is called moral science by Aristotle, and by others 
civil science, because it shows the rights of citizens and states. 
And since cities used to bear sway over countries when Rome 
ruled the world, this science is called civil from city [civitas], 
although it formulates the rights of kingdom and empire. 

This science, moreover, in the first place teaches us to lay 
down the laws and obligations of life; in the second place it 
teaches that these are to be believed and approved, and that 
men are to be urged to act and live according to those laws. The 
first part falls under three heads; for first comes naturally 
man’s duty to God and in respect to angelic beings; secondly, 
his duty to his neighbor; and thirdly, his duty to himself, just 
as the Scripture states. For in the first place in the books of 
Moses are the commands and laws in regard to God and divine | 
worship. In the second place are those regarding a man’s rela- _ 
tionship to his neighbor in the same books and in those that fol- 
low. In the third place instruction is given in morals, as in the 
books of Solomon. Similarly in the New Testament these three 
alone are contained. For a man cannot assume other duties. 

Not only on account of the first but of all that follows is it 
necessary that the principles of this science, by which the others 
are verified, should be set forth at the beginning. Certain of 
these principles are purely principles and are capable of being 
expressed only metaphysically. Others, although they are prin- 
ciples with respect to what follows, either are first conclusions 
of this science, or although they rejoice in some privilege of a 
principle, yet because of their very great difficulty, and because 
they meet with less contradiction,* and because of their very 
great utility with regard to what follows, ought to be suffi- 
ciently demonstrated. Just as Aristotle in the beginning of his 

* See Bridges’ note on the meaning, Vol. II, page 226. 

[ 637 ] 

Opus Majus 

natural philosophy proves the first principle of that science, 
namely, that there is motion in opposition to those who main- 
tained that there is only the one immovable. But we must note 
that metaphysics and moral philosophy are very closely allied; 
for each is concerned with God, the angels, life eternal, and 
many questions of this kind, although in different ways. For 
metaphysics through the common principles of all sciences in- 
vestigates qualities metaphysically, and through the corporeal 
investigates the spiritual, and through the created discovers 
the Creator, and through the present life deals with the future 
life, and furnishes much introductory matter to moral philoso- 
phy. Metaphysics inquires into these subjects because of civil 
science, so that we have accordingly the right to unite this 
science with metaphysics, in order that the principles that must 
be explained in metaphysics may be assumed here, lest I should 
confound sciences differing from each other if I try to prove in 
this science what properly belongs to metaphysics. 

I state, therefore, that God must exist just as this fact must be 
proved in metaphysics: second, that God’s existence is naturally 
known to every man; and third, that God is of infinite power 
and of infinite goodness, and coupled with this that he is of in- 
finite substance and essence, so that it follows that he is best, 
wisest, and most powerful. Fourth, that God is one in essence 
and not more than one. Fifth, that not only is God one in es- 
sence but triune in another way, which must in general be ex- 
plained by the metaphysician, but here must be unfolded in 
special doctrinal form. Sixth, that he has created all things and 
rules in the realm of nature. Seventh, that besides corporeal 
things he has created spiritual substances which we call intelli- 
gences and angels; because intelligence is a term denoting a 
nature, but angel is a term denoting an office. This science in- 
quires also how many there are, and what are the activities of 
these intelligences, in accordance with their relation to meta- 
physics, as far as it is possible for them to be known by human 
intelligence. Eighth, that besides angels he has made other 
spiritual substances which are the rational souls in men. Ninth, 
that he has made these immortal. Tenth, that the felicity of the 
other life is the highest good. Eleventh, that man is capable of 
this felicity. Twelfth, that God has the moral direction of the 
human race, just as he directs all else in the realm of nature. 

[ 638 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

Thirteenth, that to those who live aright in accordance with 
God’s direction God promises future felicity, just as Avicenna 
teaches in the tenth book of the Metaphysics, and that to those 
who live an evil life a horrible future unhappiness is due. Four- 
teenth, that worship is due to God with all reverence and devo- 
tion. Fifteenth, that just as a man’s conduct toward God is 
regulated by the reverence required, so is his conduct toward 
his neighbor regulated by justice and peace, and his duty to 
himself by integrity of life. Sixteenth, that a man cannot 
by his own effort know how to please God with the worship re- 
quired, nor how he should conduct ‘himself as regards his 
neighbor and as regards himself, but he requires that the truth 
be revealed to him in these things. Seventeenth, that revelation 
must be made to one only; that this one must be the mediator 
of God and mankind, and the vicar of God on earth, to whom 
the whole human race is subject, and who must be believed 
without contradiction when it has been proved with certainty 
that he is such as has just been described; and he is the law- 
giver and the high priest who in things temporal and spiritual 
has full power, as it were, a human God, as Avicenna says in 
the tenth book of the Metaphysics, whom it is lawful to adore 
after God. = . 
By these principles metaphysics is united with moral philoso- 
phy, and approaches it as its final purpose. Avicenna thus 
beautifully joins them at the end of his Metaphysics. But the 
remaining principles belong to this science and are not to be 
explained in metaphysics, although Avicenna adds a number 
of them. But in the beginning of his book he gives as a reason 
for this the fact that he had not finished his Moral Philosophy 
and did not know whether he would complete it; and there- 
fore he mingled with these principles many which properly be- 
long to moral philosophy, as is evident to the inquirer. After 
these have been considered, the lawgiver at the beginning must 
take up the properties of God in particular, and of angels, and 
the felicity and misery of the other life, and the immortality of 
our bodies after the resurrection, and similar subjects to which 
the metaphysician could not aspire. For he is concerned in all 
these matters chiefly with the question as to existence; because 
it is his special function to make this question clear in regard 
to all matters, because he considers entity and being in their 

[ 639 J 

Opus Majus 

common properties. But other sciences take up the other ques- 
tions involved in things; namely, what each one is, of what 
kind and size, and the like, in accordance with the ten cate- 
gories. The moral philosopher, however, is not to explain all 
the secrets of God and of angels and of other questions; but 
he should explain those things that are needful for the multi- 
tude, and in which all men should agree, lest they fall into 
doubts and heresies, as Avicenna teaches in the Principles of 
Moral Philosophy. 

I say, therefore, that moral philosophy in the first place ex- 
plains the triune nature of God, a truth which the lawgiver 
holds through revelation more than through reason. But reason, 
the source from which philosophers have made many state- 
ments in regard to divine things in particular which transcend 
human reason and fall under revelation, has been touched upon 
already in the section on mathematics. For it was shown there 
how they could possess many noble truths regarding God, 
which were disclosed by a revelation made to them, as the 
apostle says, “For God revealed these things.” But he revealed 
them rather to the patriarchs and prophets, who, it is agreed, 
had a revelation, and from whom the philosophers learned all 
things, as was clearly proved above. For the patriarchs and 
prophets handled divine things by the methods of theology or 
prophecy, but also by those of philosophy, because they dis- 
covered the whole of philosophy, as has been proved in the 
second part of this work. Moreover, the metaphysician was able 
to teach acceptably that God exists, and that he is naturally 
known, and that he is of infinite power, and that he is one, and 
that he is triune. But the mode in which the trinity exists he 
was not able to explain fully; and therefore this must be at- 
tested here. 

There is, then, the blessed Trinity, the Father and the Son 
and the Holy Spirit. For Claudius, one of the expositors of 
Holy Scripture, in that book in which he combats this heresy, 
God feels nothing with a sense of passion but with a feeling of 
compassion, says, “Plato with praiseworthy daring, wonderful 
genius, and immutable purpose sought, found, and proclaimed 
three persons in the Godhead ; God the Father, also the paternal 
mind, art or wisdom, and the mutual love of both.” He not only 
taught that we must believe in one supreme indivisible God- 

[ 640] 

Moral Philosophy 

head in three equal Persons, but he proved that he exists in this 
way. These truths are evident from his book on Divine Things. 
Porphyrius, moreover, as Augustine says in the tenth book on 
the City of God, chapter XXIX, predicated a Father and his 
Son, which he called the paternal intellect and mind, and the 
medium of these, whom, as Augustine says, we think he himself 
calls the Holy Spirit, and following his custom he calls them 
three Gods, where, although he employs his terms loosely, he 
yet perceives the truth to be maintained. Augustine, moreover, 
in the same book, in chapter XXXII,* states that a certain 
Platonic philosopher, whose name he does not mention, recited 
the beginning of the Gospel according to John as far as the 
Incarnation of Christ, in which the distinction in the divine 
Persons is clearly stated. Augustine also in the tenth book on 
the City of God, chapter XXXVI and chapter XXXVII, as- 
serts that Porphyrius states in the first book on the Return of 
the Soul that sins cannot be purged except by the Son of God. 
Aristotle states in the beginning of the Heavens and the World 
that in divine worship our object is to magnify one God through 
the number three, excellent by reason of the properties of the 
things that have been created. And therefore since every crea- 
ture, as is evident from the metaphysics, is a.vestige of the 
Trinity, there must be a Trinity in the Creator. And since Aris- 
totle completed the philosophy of his predecessors as far as his 
times permitted, he must have had a far more definite percep- 
tion concerning the blessed Trinity of Persons, so as to confess 
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. For this reason in 
the law of Aristotle there were three sacrifices and three 
prayers, as Averroés says in his commentary on the beginning 
of the Heavens and the World. This is also made clear by the 
politics of Aristotle, which is the Book of Laws. Avicenna, 
moreover, the chief expositor of Aristotle, maintains in the 
principles of moral philosophy that there is a Holy Spirit. 

But he was able to perceive the truth far more clearly con- 
cerning the Father and the Son, because it is more difficult to 
understand the procession of the Holy Spirit from two distinct 
persons than the generation of one of these from the other. For 
this reason philosophers were more deficient in their compre- 
hension of the Holy Spirit than in their knowledge of the 

* See Bridges’ note, Vol. II, page 230. 

[ 641 J 

Opus Majus 

Father and the Son. And therefore those who were able to gain 
a knowledge of the Holy Spirit knew much more about the 
other Persons. Ethicus the philosopher in his book on Things 
Divine, Human, and Natural, maintains that in God are the 
Father, and the Word of the Father, and the Holy Spirit; and 
that there are three Persons, namely, the Father and the Son 
and the Holy Spirit. This dogma must also be held by reason. 
This reasoning, however, should not have been given before 
those things that have to be expressed concerning God in par- 
ticular, nor before the authorities of the great philosophers, 
which are introduced for this same purpose in this science as in 
a place appropriate for them. 

I say, therefore, that God is of infinite power, and infinite 
power is capable of infinite action; therefore something infinite 
can be made by God, but not anything by substance, because in 
that case there could be a plurality of gods. The contrary to 
this has been demonstrated in the section on mathematics. 
Therefore that which is begotten by God must be God, since it 
has the essential nature of the begetter; yet it is different in 
person. And since that which is begotten has infinite power, 
since it is infinite goodness, it is able to bring forth infinite 
goodness; therefore it is able to bring it forth in another per- 
son. Then, therefore, either the Father brings forth the same 
person ; and in that case the Holy Spirit will proceed from both, 
or he will be brought forth from the Son alone; and then he 
will not appertain to the Father, nor will there be full rela- 
tionship, and in that case there will not be complete accord in 
the divine Persons, which is contrary to reason. Moreover, there 
cannot be parity of love according to this view, because the 
Father would love the Son more than he loves the Holy Spirit, 
because he begets the Son, and does not bring forth the Holy 
Spirit. But since the Holy Spirit is God, because he has the 
divine nature, an infinite love must be due him; and therefore 
the Father will love him just as he does the Son with an infinite 
love. And also since the love of the Father cannot be less than 
an infinite love, because his love is in accordance with his power, 
it remains, then, that the love of the Father for the Holy Spirit 
will be as great as that of the Son for the Holy Spirit. Where- 
fore both the Holy Spirit and the Son must be brought forth 
from the Father. That, moreover, there are not nor can there be 

[ 642 J 

Moral Philosophy 

more persons, cannot and ought not to be explained here, but 
should be assumed, until it is proved in the fourth part of this 
science, on which the full measure of persuasive argument will 
be bestowed. But it was necessary that the trinity of Persons, 
namely, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, should be 
proved and expounded here, because it is the fundamental prin- 
ciple in this science for establishing divine worship and for 
many other things. Nor should it be stated, on the other hand, 
that no science must prove its principles. For how this is to be 
understood has been explained above. But the other questions 
that can be asked in regard to God and in which there should 
be probable doubt, are the conclusions of the fourth part, and 
therefore they will be determined there. 

Not only have the philosophers spoken of God unrestrictedly, 
but of God incarnate, who is the Lord Jesus Christ, and of those 
things that pertain to him. For truths of this nature are neces- 
sary for the human race, and there is no salvation for man 
except through a knowledge of these truths. And therefore it 
was necessary for the salvation of all from the beginning of 
the world that truths of this kind should be known as far as 
suffices for salvation. I state this fact because some men have 
more knowledge, some less, of truths of this kind. It was fitting 
also that philosophers devoted to wisdom should know some- 
thing of this truth, whether they were to be saved or not; so 
that the world might be prepared and made ready for this per- 
fect truth, in order that it might be more easily received when 
the time came. And the plea in regard to it was stated in greater 
fullness in a preceding section, and for this reason a general 
plea suffices here, in order that by experience we may learn that 
the philosophers had knowledge of many remarkable facts in 
regard to Christ and the glorious Virgin. Moreover in the sec- 
tion on astronomy the formal judgment of Albumazar was 
cited from the sixth book of the larger Introduction, where he 
asserts on the authority of all from the beginning of philosophy 
that a Virgin should bring forth a son who would be called 
Jesus Christ. Moreover, in the book of Conjunctions he made 
a similar statement. But this judgment, although it is stated in 
the section on Astronomy and there verified like a conclusion, is 
properly a principle in this science. Hence this science receives 
this noble principle that has been proved in astronomy; and in 

[ 643 J] 

Opus Majus 

this way this science is served, as a mistress by her maidservant. 
The same is true in certain other sciences, aswe note from what 
precedes, and as we shall state below. Porphyrius, moreover, 
said that sins cannot be taken away except by the Son of God, 
as stated above. Moreover, on that statement, “His divinity 
proved from the instruction of Plato’s scholars,” the expositor 
says that in the tomb of Plato a statement written in golden let- 
ters was found on his breast containing these words, “I believe 
in Christ who will be born of a virgin, will suffer for the human 
race and will rise again on the third day.” But the philosopher 
Ethicus also in the book already mentioned says, “The just 
shall deserve to see their Lord Christ and their King and the 
marks and prints of the nails, and the Word of the Father and 
the Beginning, creating all things with him.” The human mind 
can be influenced to accept the truth of the virgin birth, be- 
cause certain animals remaining in a state of virginity conceive 
and bear young, as, for example, vultures and apes, as Am- 
brose states in the Hexaemeron. Moreover, mares in many re- 
gions conceive by virtue of the winds alone, when they desire 
the male, as Pliny* states in the fifth book of the Natural His- 
tory, and Solinus tells us in his book on the Wonders of the 
World. Aristotle maintains in the second book on Vegetation 
that the fruits of the female palms mature from an odor coming 
from the male trees. 

Since a knowledge of Antichrist pertains to the Christian 
faith, because this faith holds that Antichrist will come, whom 
Christ will destroy, therefore the statement has been added to 
the articles of the faith that we believe Antichrist will come. 
Therefore one principle of this science is concerned with the 
coming of Antichrist in confirmation of the things pertaining 
to the Christian faith. Ethicus the philosopher therefore states 
that about the time of Antichrist there will be a race of the 
stock of Gog and Magog opposite the fertile districts of the 
North around the Black Sea, the worst of all the nations, which 
in company with the worst seed of those shut up behind the 
Caspian gates of Alexander will cause a great devastation of 
this world, and will meet Antichrist and will call him God of 
gods. Albumazar also in the book of Conjunctions verifies simi- 
larly this principle, stating and showing that a leader shall 

* Pliny, IV, 22; VIII, 42. 

[ 644 7 

Moral Philosophy 

come with a foul and magical law after the law of Mahomet, 
who shall destroy the other laws for a time. But he shall not 
last long, owing to the magnitude of the evil. This has been 
explained above. Without doubt careful consideration must be 
given to this principle of this science. For the race of the Tar- 
tars has come forth from those places, as we know, since they 
dwelt behind those gates to the northeast, shut up in the moun- 
tains of the Caucasus and of the Caspian, and are leading with 
them peoples who already are masters from the mountains men- 
tioned as far as the confines of Poland, Bohemia, and Hungary, 
countries far this side of the fertile lands of the North. For it 
is true that other races have emigrated from those places and 
have invaded the world to the south as far as the Holy Land, 
just as the Tartars are now doing, as Jerome writes in his letters 
and the histories tell us. Moreover, the race of the Goths and 
of the Vandals which later invaded the South are from the re- 
gions of the North. Therefore the invasion of the Tartars is 
not sufficient to fix the time of the coming of Antichrist, but 
other facts are required, as what follows will explain. 

Another principle concerns the judgment to come. For an 
article of the Christian faith refers to this, in regard to which 
the philosopher Ethicus has said, “The devil, who had been 
established in the beginning and had been the first to fall, will 
be punished before all wicked men and will be shut up in hell. 
Since he shone forth first in the order of creation, and was 
illustrious as a miracle of God’s ways, he will be the first to 
suffer all the penalties in the last terrible judgment to come, 
such as have been appointed for him from the beginning in the 
hollow of the lake, and have been reserved for the judgment 
before the tribunal of the king, in order that the wicked may 
see the very truculent author of their death.” 

Another principle relates to the creation, which, since it re- 
quires proof in metaphysics, is known; therefore it is to be 
touched upon here only as regards morals. Aristotle in his book 
on the Regimen of Kingdoms expressly assumes it and names 
Adam and Enoch, and therefore knew of the first man and the 
beginning of the world. Albumazar, moreover, in his book on 
Conjunctions, doing an excellent service for moral philosophy, 
assumes a first man, namely, Adam, and shows how long was 
the period from him to the deluge, and how long from the 

[ 645 ] 

Opus Majus 

deluge to Christ, and how long from Christ to Mahomet, and 
how long from him to the foul law. Avicenna also explicitly 
assumes the creation. Moreover, Ethicus the philosopher says, 
“First of all God made all creatures, and with a supreme effort 
formed a massive whole, and those things which he made out 
of nothing he amplified in many ways.” Trismegistus also in 
his book on Deity says to Asclepius, “In the Creator are all 
things before he had created them,” so that he is in agreement 
with John the Evangelist who says, “In himself was the life 
of that which was made.” Yet this Trismegistus lived near the 
time of Moses and Joshua, as Augustine states in his book on 
the City of God. 

In regard to the beings first created we find another prin- 
ciple of this science; of this kind are the angels, good and bad. 
In the first place, therefore, because of the motions of the 
heavenly bodies, which they have discovered to be about sixty, 
philosophers have assumed that there are that many good 
angels, because those motions are voluntary and therefore are 
caused by angels. This, moreover, is evident from the Meta- 
physics of Aristotle and of Avicenna. In the second place, they 
have passed on to a further consideration and have found an 
almost infinite number corresponding to us, just as individuals 
in this world below are multiplied under one species, and are 
distinguished from one another in number, as sensible indi- 
viduals, as we find stated in the book on Causes; with a differ- 
ence, however, because the angels are separated from one an- 
other in a way that they do not suffer corruption, but remain 
in a stable being. These individuals, however, that are known 
to us are separated from one another in a way that they finally 
suffer corruption. Moreover, if we wish to wonder further at 
the words of Ethicus, we can state, as he himself does in his 
book, that there are twenty orders of angels; who he also as- 
sumed stand in the celestial glory. 

But far more is Apuleius of Mandara to be wondered at in 
his book on the God of Socrates, in which in his exposition of 
many wonderful things regarding the natyre of angels he 
transcribes the opinion of Plato in the Symposium, namely, that 
to each man there is an angel deputed to guard him against all 
evils, and to urge and arouse him to what is good. And after the 
soul has been separated, the angel becomes a witness before 

[ 646 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

God as the judge of all the good and evil things which that soul 
did in the body. He asserts, moreover, that angels carry the 
petitions of men to the heavenly beings and bring back gifts 
from them to men; and that one angel is charged with one 
duty, another with another; and he makes many statements 
of this kind in the following words: “There are certain divine 
powers in an intermediate state between men and gods, through 
whom our desires and merits reach the gods. They are bearers 
hence of prayers and thence of gifts, who quickly carry our 
petitions hence to the region beyond, and thence bring back the 
answers ; or they are certain agents acting for both parties, and 
each of them, according to his special function, provides that 
salvation be brought us by these messengers, either by confirm- 
ing dreams, or by directing those set over us, or by clearing up 
what is too obscure for us, or by inspiring prophets, or by other 
means which we recognize as from God. We must judge that all 
these things are done by the divine will, power, and authority, 
but by the ministry and activity of the angels. From this host 
of angels Plato then states one is assigned to each man during 
his life as a witness and a guardian, who, manifest to the mind, 
is always present as a judge not only of his acts but also of his 
thoughts. And when our life is over that same angel who was 
assigned to us must hasten thither and carry as it were his 
guardianship to judgment; and he must assist there in pleading 
the case and sentence must be given in accordance with his 
testimony.” “I then admonish you all who hear this divine 
opinion of Plato according to my version, so form your minds 
with regard to all your acts and thoughts, that you may know 
that a man has nothing secret in his soul nor beyond it because 
of those guardians. Nay, your angel carefully perceives all 
things, sees all things and understands them, this guardian, 
individual overseer, household observer, personal defender, in- 
timate advocate, constant watcher, personal judge, inseparable 
witness, condemner of what is evil, approver of what is good, 
provider in your uncertainties, forewarner in your doubts, de- 
fender in your perils, aid in your needs, who is able in dreams, 
and in signs, and in person when necessity requires, to curtail 
your ills, prosper your good, control prosperity, ease adver- 
sity.” For this is a wonderful statement and wholly favorable 
to the Christian, and contains nothing unworthy either in the 

[ 647 J 

Opus Majus 

letter or the spirit. May we clearly see that it contains well- 
known articles belonging to the faith; nor should the philoso- 
pher be here interpreted in a worse sense, since his statement 
evidently contains nothing except that which is consistent with 
the truth in a wonderful way. I make this statement because 
others sometimes try to obscure Catholic sentiments found in 
books of the philosophers. But we should receive gladly such 
statement in testimony of our faith; and since it is certain that 
these men learned them through a revelation made to them 
and to the holy patriarchs and prophets, as we have already 
shown. 

Porphyry, moreover, as Augustine states in the tenth book 
of the City of God, said that there are angels who descending 
from above proclaim divine messages to men, and that there 
are others who on earth declare those things that belong to the 
Father and state his majesty and profundity. Concerning the 
devil and his angels philosophers have said many things. For 
the philosopher Ethicus has expressed a trustworthy opinion 
about him, as stated above, in regard to his creation, his sin, 
and his primordial and final damnation after the judgment. He 
has also ventured to say that the tenth order fell after sin into 
the punishment of hell. Apuleius and Plato and others distin- 
guish two kinds of daemons, since daemon in Greek is the same 
as sciens [versed] in Latin. Therefore also there are calo-dae- 
mones and caco-daemones, that is, good and bad daemons. For 
calon means good and cacon means bad. Concerning the good 
we are to understand what has been said with reference to the 
guardianship of men. But the evil ones are devils by name and 
yield to the irrational passions of the mind, according to Apu- 
leius; whence they are subject to displeasure and torment of 
mind and pleasure from evil and rage and the other malign 
impulses. These are they of whom the poets speak, as Apuleius 
states, and whom they represent to be gods and the lovers of 
some people and hateful to others; and certain of them are in- 
cubuses and lead men to sins and vices, and afterwards to the 
punishment of hell, of which Hermes Trismegistus and the phi- 
losopher Ethicus speak. 

The immortality of the soul is touched upon in metaphysics. 
But we must mention it here in reference to morals and particu- 
larly in reference to the resurrection of the body, concerning 

[ 648 | 

Moral Philosophy 

which the metaphysician could not express an opinion, either 
general or particular. Moreover, not only Aristotle and Avi- 
cenna have given general conditions for the immortality of 
souls of which mention was made previously, but philosophers 
in treating of morals have spoken of it. For in the first place 
Cicero in the Tusculan Disputations states as a philosophical 
proposition the immortality of the soul, and through that whole 
book investigates it, and considers various arguments for it 
which are manifest from that book, nor can they be given here 
because of their great length. And similarly in his book on Old 
Age this same question of immortality is settled by Marcus 
Tullius. Moreover, in his book on the Divine Nature, Hermes 
Mercurius beautifully says, “The God and father of all and 
lord, and he who alone is all in all, gladly reveals himself ; not, 
however, as regards his locality nor quality nor quantity ; but 
the intelligence alone of the mind illuminates the man who, 
with the darkness of error dispersed and the brightness of truth 
perceived, identifies himself with a full sense of the divine in- 
telligence. Freed by his love of this from the share of nature in 
which he is mortal he conceives a confident belief in a future 
immortality.” Moreover, Avicenna says in the Morals that Ma- 
homet spoke of the glory of the body ; but we know, as he says, 
that the glory of our souls is greater, since we are not asses, 
reckoning only the delights of the body ; and therefore he finds 
fault with his own lawgiver and wishes another to investigate 
who promises not only the glory of our bodies, but rather that 
of our souls. In this Seneca agrees throughout, and Socrates 
and Plato, as is evident in the Phaedo. Avicenna, moreover, 
says in the Morals that the resurrection of our bodies must be 
assumed, as the entire man will be glorified in soul and body 
if he obeys the commands of God. Not only Avicenna and 
others of the school of Aristotle have perceived this truth, but 
Democritus also, who belonged to an earlier age and was a phi- 
losopher of great repute, as Pliny states in his Natural History, 
book VII. Moreover, Plato himself has also said that souls can- 
not exist forever without bodies, but return to them, just as 
Augustine teaches in the twenty-second book of the City of . 
God. Varro also in his book on the Race of the Roman People 
states that many philosophers have said that the same soul will 
return at length to the same identical body. If, therefore, Plato 

[ 649 ] 

Opus Majus 

maintained that souls return to bodies, and Varro that the soul 
returns to the same body, and if Porphyry, the greatest of phi- 
losophers according to Augustine, maintains that a purged soul 
will never go to evil nor to this world but to God the Father; 
the resurrection must then follow from the statements of the 
philosophers. 

This conclusion, moreover, is necessary, since from the source 
of philosophy they have elicited the fact that virtue belongs to 
the entire union formed of soul and body, that is, man, not to 
soul only nor to the soul in man, but to man through the soul, 
just like understanding and building, as Aristotle says in the 
first book on the Soul.* And they have therefore assumed that 
felicity belongs to the entire union, whence they have not as- 
sumed that man is a soul in a body but in reality is composed 
of soul and body, so that the essence of man is formed of soul 
and body, and that his essence is not soul alone in a body. For 
that which is nobler as regards man they have assumed to be 
the precise subject of virtue and felicity, but this is a union as 
far as possible of this kind, since he himself who is composed of 
soul and body is a noble substance. And although spiritual fe- 
licity and virtue are in man by reason of his soul, yet they do 
not belong to the soul, so that they have their place there, but 
they are in man because of the united man himself; and there- 
fore they have maintained that felicity which is man’s goal, 
completes the whole man, both as respects the body, as due to 
it, and as respects the soul. And therefore they have maintained 
that the body is at length united with the soul, so that both may 
be perfected in accordance with its special character. For they 
knew by reason that form is appropriated by its own matter, 
and contrariwise. And therefore incorruptible form appropri- 
ates incorruptible matter, and contrariwise. For they knew that 
the desire of form is not satisfied except in its own matter. And 
they have assumed that the desire of the soul is wholly satisfied 
by felicity. Wherefore they have assumed that it would be in 
a body. 

The reasonings and persuasive arguments of philosophers on 
this point are of this nature. For they knew that the power of 
God is infinite, and therefore it can cause the same body to re- 
turn. And the agent of finite power is able to make the same 

* De Anima, I, 4, 12. 

[ 650 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

thing in species, as, for example, nature from a corrupt seed 
makes other seeds of the same species. Wherefore much more 
so will the agent of infinite power be able to make the same 
thing in number [7.¢., the same individual]. For infinite power 
infinitely exceeds finite power. But the production of the same 
thing according to number infinitely exceeds the production of 
the same thing according to species. But Aristotle says in the 
ninth book of the Metaphysics that the living is formed from 
the dead if a resolving takes place to the first matter. Since, 
therefore, God is able to cause this resolving, as is evident, a 
resurrection can take place. Likewise we have a strong sup- 
porting argument in the phoenix, which after being reduced to 
its own ashes comes to life again and becomes a phoenix. But 
a stronger one is drawn from the worm, which after birth 
quickly dies, and again coming to life remains immortal, as the 
philosophers and sacred writers state, and as we learn from the 
books of the Hexaemeron which determine the works of the 
six days. 

In regard to the felicity of the other life and the misery pre- 
pared for the evil, the moral philosopher must assume prin- 
ciples in addition to that which has been touched upon in meta- 
physics. For these questions must be considered in metaphysics 
in general, but here in particular. For excellently do the phi- 
losophers determine the causes by which we are hindered from 
a knowledge of eternal life. These hindrances are four in num- 
ber: sin, care of the body, trammels of the sensible world, and 
lack of revelation. For revelation is not a matter within our 
power. But on the question whether there be an eternal promise, 
they have been able to secure some knowledge, as I have said, 
and also in general on the question of the reality and nature of 
this future life. They have not, however, been able to give us 
particular and definite instruction on this subject, chiefly be- 
cause of the four reasons first stated. Hence Avicenna in the 
Fundamentals of Moral Philosophy after many statements con- 
cludes, “Our condition as regards these matters is like that of 
a deaf man who has never heard in his privation of the power 
of imagining the delight of harmony, although he may be cer- 
tain of the reality and nature of its sweetness.” And not only is 
the intellect in this condition in knowing, but also the desire 
and the will in longing for, loving, tasting, or enjoying the 

[651 J 

as 

Opus Majus 

sweetness of eternal life, to quote the words of Avicenna. For 
he compares us to a paralytic to whom delicious food is brought, 
but he does not perceive its sweetness until he is cured of his 
paralysis and the disease removed. Such is our condition, he 
says, with respect to the sweetness of life eternal, both because 
of our sins and our union with a mortal body; for sins affect the 
desire of the rational soul, and the weight of the body burdens 
it. Hence Avicenna gracefully says that we in our age and in 
this body have been plunged in many vices, and therefore do 
not perceive that delight, although there are in us some of its 
causes. And therefore we do not seek after it nor are we at- 
tracted to it, until we have removed from our necks the yoke 
of pleasure and anger, and their sister vices, and thus shall we 
taste something of that delight; and thus perhaps we shall 
gain too slight a perception of it, as through something inter- 
posed, because revelation is still necessary. Therefore he says 
that then shall we have a clearer perception, especially when 
the questions concerning God, and the felicity and immortality 
of our souls, and the resurrection of our bodies have been set- 
tled; and similar truths of high import have been revealed to 
us. Then, as Avicenna says, “The comparison of our perfect 
delight with our imperfect one will be like a comparison of the 
delight of our senses in smelling the odors of delicious foods 
with the delight we experience in actually eating them.” 

But the attention paid by the soul to the body, as he says, 
causes the soul to forget itself and that which it ought to love; 
just as a weak man is forgetful of that which it is necessary to 
restore in place of that which is taken from him. For, as he him- 
self states, the body seizes upon the substance of the soul and 
makes it foolish, and causes it to forget its natural longing and 
search for the perfection that befits it, and its perception of 
the delight of its own perfection. Not that the soul has been im- 
pressed on the body and immersed in it; but because there is a 
bond between these two, which is the natural desire to direct 
the body and to excite its affections. 

The third hindrance is the attention one bestows on this 
world of sense, although a man may not sin nor be occupied 
with bodily interests. For since we are given over to the world 
of sense, we neglect the insensible and spiritual world, as Avi- 
cenna shows. In these statements he clearly and cogently 

[ 652 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

touches upon the causes that hinder us in our consideration and 
love of felicity. 

On the other hand, his words point out to us what our aids 

are in knowing and loving and tasting the delight of future 
felicity. The first of these is the purification of the soul from 
sins. And the second is the withdrawal of the soul from its 
natural desire to direct the body. And the third is the elevation 
of the mind from this world of sense, that it may cleave to the 
world of intelligence. And the fourth is the attestation through 
revelation and prophecy in regard to those things about which 
the human mind cannot form judgment, such as the questions 
of high import of which he is speaking. For in such matters, as 
he says, “We believe the testimony of the prophet and the legis- 
lator who receives the law from God.” He who possesses these 
four would not place felicity in this world but misery and death, 
as will be explained clearly below; and with Aristotle, Theo- 
phrastus, and other true philosophers would have leisure for 
the contemplation of future felicity, as far as a man can, in 
order that a good and merciful God might reveal the truth in 
fuller measure, just as we have proved that he revealed it to 
others besides those who were born and reared under the old 
dispensation or the new one, as must be stated in metaphysics. 
Since, moreover, they perceived that for a knowledge of fe- 
licity it is necessary to separate themselves from sins and from 
excessive love of the body and from the world, in order that 
they might be able to receive from God the fourth aid, namely, 
enlightenment within, so that they might understand the ar- 
ticles of the truths of the faith, casting all else aside they gave 
themselves up to a wise contemplation of future felicity. 

For wisdom, as Aristotle states in the fourth book of the 
Ethics, is almost the same as felicity, since wisdom is not mere 
knowledge but is an intellectual force, as he himself determines, 
producing rather an affection for future felicity than an under- 
standing and a beginning of it, since both are the knowledge 
and love of God. But wisdom possesses both of these as far as it 
is possible in this life, and felicity comprehends them imper- 
fectly. For this same fact is evident in regard to felicity and is 
made manifest in regard to wisdom by the first book of the 
Metaphysics and by the sixth and the tenth books of the Ethics. 
Therefore Aristotle himself, the most excellent of all philoso- 

C 653] 

Opus Majus 

phers, renounced all things, that he might have leisure for con- 
templation suited to a sage, because this life resembles most 
the divine life; and therefore it was seen by the sage to be the 
most worthy, as Cicero writes in reference to Aristotle in the 
fifth* book of the Academics; and similarly in reference to 
Theophrastus, his successor in philosophy. 

After they were prepared for divine enlightenment and had 
received it they maintained that this felicity is a beatitude of 
the whole man both in body and soul, which eye has not seen 
nor ear heard, as Avicenna says. This felicity is a state perfect 
in the aggregation of all good things, as the philosophy of 
Boetius teaches in the third book of the Consolation. Moreover, 
in the same book he proves that this can only be through par- 
ticipation in the highest good, which is God, because complete 
participation in good does not exist except in a participation in 
God who is the perfect good. Therefore men cannot be blessed 
and happy except by enjoying the goodness of God. Therefore 
his philosophy contains a noble corollary, namely, that the 
blessed are gods; but there is only one God of nature with 
many, namely, all the blessed, sharing his deity. Aristotle, 
moreover, in the first book of the Moral Philosophy teaches that 
human desire cannot have its limit in any good except in the 
highest good by which it is terminated; because the desire of 
the rational soul transcends all finite good and passes on to 
the infinite good. Therefore of necessity it participates in the 
highest and infinite good, which is God, if its desire must be 
satisfied. But it must evidently be satisfied through felicity, 
wherefore the soul must enjoy God for ever. And then as re- 
gards the speculative intellect, the soul will become, according 
to Avicenna, an intelligible world, and there will be described 
in it the form of the whole universe and the order of all things 
from the beginning, namely, God, both through all spiritual 
substances and the heavens, etc., until there is perfected in it 
the arrangement of the universe, so that it may thus pass into 
the world of intellect, perceiving that which is perfect beauty 
and true grace. And as regards the active intellect he says that 
it will be perfected in pure goodness, and its delight will not 
be of the kind of delight pertaining to the senses, which is 

* Bridges suggests that the reference may be to De Finibus, lib. V, cap. 25. 

L654] 

Moral Philosophy 

caused alone by bringing together the surfaces of sensible 
bodies affecting our senses; nay, it enters the soul, and is in- 
fused into its substance, and is a delight befitting the natural 
disposition that is in pure and spiritual living substances. It is, 
moreover, more excellent and more noble than any other de- 
light; and this is the delight of felicity, as he affirms. 

Not only have they spoken of the felicity, but also of the 
misery of the other life which is reserved for the wicked. Hence 
they have maintained that God has prepared for those who 
obey him a promised felicity which eye has not seen nor the 
heart of man apprehended; and for the disobedient a dreadful 
punishment, as Avicenna states. Moreover, Cicero, Trisme- 
gistus, Socrates, and many others have spoken expressly of 
these promises. Hence Cicero says in the first book of the Tus- 
culan Disputations* that two paths and two courses are open 
to men. Those who have kept themselves upright and pure and 
have had the least possible contact with the body and in their 
human bodies have imitated the divine life find the return easy 
to him from whom they came forth, namely, to God. But the 
path of those who have defiled themselves with human vices is 
at length far removed from the counsel of God. Hermes Mer- 
curius in his book on the Divine Nature speaks as follows: 
“After the departure of the soul from the body has taken place, 
the judgment and test of its merit pass to the supreme power, 
which on perceiving the soul to be good and just permits it to re- 
main in places suitable for it. But if this supreme power per- 
ceives the soul to be smeared with the stains of faults and 
marred with vices, it thrusts the soul down to the depths and de- 
livers it up to eternal punishments, so that in this case eternity is 
a disadvantage to the soul that has been brought under the yoke 
of eternal punishment by an unalterable sentence.” Therefore we 
learn that we must stand in awe and fear and be on our guard 
lest we be ensnared by these things. For unbelievers after their 
transgressions will be compelled to believe not by words but 
by examples, not by threats but by the actual suffering of pun- 
ishments. Ethicus the philosopher and Alchimus in their books 
teach that the wicked are to suffer in hell with the devil, in 

* Tusculan Disputations, lib. I, cap. 30. Here as in many other passages 
Bacon has substituted the singular of the word God for the plural. 

[655 J 

AN 

Opus Majus 

order that the impious may see the very savage and furious 
author of death, whom they followed into many useless and 
harmful desires. The just will deserve to see their Lord God, 
as I explained above. 

The principles having been stated with respect to what fol- 
lows, although they are conclusions with respect to the state- 
ments given previously, and with respect to others of this kind, 
we must now pass to the laws of divine worship before we 
consider the other rights, public or private, in human society. 
Moreover, it is evident that because of our reverence for God 
a worship without end is his due. This is due him also because 
of the blessing of our creation, which is the effect of his infinite 
power, and because of future felicity. Because of the first, Avi- 
cenna says in his Moral Principles that obedience to God’s pre- 
cepts is his right; because of the second, he says that obedience 
must be given to the commands of him to whom creation be- 
longs. Because of the third, he says that God has prepared a 
promised felicity for those obedient to him and for the disobe- 
dient a terrible future punishment. Worship is also due him be- 
cause of the cleansing of the human race from sins by the Son 
of God, a cleansing of which Porphyry has spoken, since this 
is more than the mere act of creating. Also because of the ac- 
ceptance of our humanity in the unity of the Divine Person, of 
which Albumazar, Plato, and Ethicus have spoken, for this 
must be infinite joy to us; and because of the prints of the nails 
and the passion and the redemption, which Plato and Ethicus 
have affirmed. And not only this but all that has been stated 
previously influences men to worship God and leads them to 
conclude that this worship should be rendered. 

For this reason Marcus Tullius in the first book of the Tus- 
culan Disputations says, “What else in fact is philosophy, the 
mother of all arts, if not, as Plato says, the gift, as I say, the 
invention of God? She taught us in the first place his worship, 
-and then the rights of mankind on which human society is 
based.” The same writer also says in the second book on the 
Divine Nature, “The best and likewise the most sacred, the 
most pure and pious worship of God is for us to reverence him 
always with a pure, blameless, unpolluted mind and voice. For 
not only the philosophers but our ancestors as well have sepa- 
rated superstition from religion. For those who were wont to 

[ 656 J 

Moral Philosophy 

pray whole days and to sacrifice, that* they themselves and 
their children might survive, were called superstitious, a word 
which afterwards became more general. But those who paid 
diligent attention to all that pertains to the worship of God and, 
as we may say, read over again these matters were called reli- 
giosi, religious, from relegendo, reading over again; as eli- 
gentes, those making a choice, from eligendo, making a choice; 
legentes, readers, from legendo, reading; and intelligentes, in- 
telligent, from intelligendo, understanding. The one is a term 
of reproach, the other of praise.” For Augustine in the fourth 
book on the City of God accepts and explains this opinion of 
Cicero in regard to superstition and true religion, and in the 
eighth book of the same work, his opinion regarding religion 
and the religious; maintaining that they were called religious 
because they choose God and revere him, again and again mak- 
ing the choice through a true and continuous worship. 
Moreover, in this worship, according to Avicenna and others, 
temples, prayers, oblations and sacrifices, and fasts must be ap- 
pointed, and also very great peregrinations to the seat of the 
legislator, in order that he may be kept in memory and held in 
veneration. Aristotle also in his considerations of this worship 
says that never should we be more modest than when we are 
engaged in divine worship; if we enter temples let us be com- 
posed, if we are about to approach the sacrifice let us lower the 
countenance, if in our prayer we are to give an indication of 
modesty. Therefore Avicenna says, “The teacher ought to in- 
struct one who prays in the proper means by which he may be 
prepared for prayer, just as a man is wont to prepare himself to 
meet a human king in cleanliness and with a becoming appear- 
ance. Such a teacher should cause his pupil to form the habit of 
cleanliness and of presenting a becoming appearance, and should 
train him in the manner of a man preparing himself to meet a 
king with humility and downcast look, with limbs restrained, 
and without needless turning of the body and disturbance.” 
Philosophers such as Avicenna and others decide that great 
festivals should be appointed, for the reason that they cause 
nations to assemble and give them boldness in the law and in- 
spire an emulation of it. Such festivals also give an opportunity 

* It is to be noted that Bacon has substituted isi et sui liberi for sibi sui 
liberi. 

[6577 

We 

Opus Majus 

for the prayers of the multitude to be heard; and because of 
these festivals they discover blessings from God. And similarly 
for the same reasons general fraternities should be formed. 

How, moreover, in particular prayer can fitly be offered 
Hermes Mercurius teaches in his book on Divine Matters, be- 
ginning thus, “God himself lacks nothing excellent, but let us 
adore him by giving thanks. For thanks when rendered by 
mortals are God’s highest incense.” He also says, “Thanks be to 
thee, thou supreme and most excellent Being, by thy grace 
alone have we obtained the light of thy knowledge. O sacred 
name and the one name to be honored, by which God alone must 
be blessed because of a paternal religion, since thou deignest 
to give to all paternal care and religion and love and all things 
that tend to make life sweeter, and grantest us rational sense 
and intelligence. Sense that we may come to know thee; reason 
that we may search thee out more clearly; intelligence that we 
may rejoice in knowing thee, and also that after being saved 
by thy divine power we may rejoice, because thou hast revealed 
thyself wholly to us. Let us rejoice because thou hast seen fit 
to consecrate us to eternity while we are still in our bodies. For 
the knowledge of thy majesty is the only source of human re- 
joicing. O true life of life! O universal productiveness of na- 
ture! we know thee, eternal in thy duration. Therefore in this 
whole prayer adoring thee we ask this only that thou wouldst 
keep us ever in the love of the knowledge of thee and never 
suffer us to be parted from this kind of life. With this prayer 
we turn to a pure supper free from animal food.” 

On the sacrifices, oblations, and ceremonies of these people 
we need not dwell, because they were superstitious and useless 
for the most part, except in so far as they took some things from 
the priests of the Jewish law. Hence also the philosophers them- 
selves practiced such customs because of civil statutes and be- 
cause of popular prejudice, not because of their truth, as Seneca 
states in the book which he composed against superstitions. For 
although as a senator he was obliged to dissemble in regard to 
the public statutes, yet he says that ceremonies of this kind do 
not pertain to the advantage but the custom of the people at 
large; and that no person of discernment should give them 
consideration in his private life. Also the observances of the 
Jews he considered absurd and unbecoming a wise man, just 

[ 658 J 

Moral Philosophy 

as God also allowed them to have these ceremonies rather lest 
they should become idolaters than because of their truth, as the 
sacred writers bear witness. And thus the fundamentals of the 
first part of Moral Philosophy are brought to a close. 

[659] 

MORAL PHILOSOPHY: SECOND PART 

CHAPTER | 

Concerning the observance of the laws of 
marriage and of the state. 

r i MHE second part treats of the laws and statutes regu- 
lating human relations. In the first place, the preserva- 
tion of the human species is considered in the line of 

propagation with a view to bind the people by laws in their in- 
crease. Therefore legislators give the laws of marriage and 
determine how they must be made and how obstacles may be 
removed; and especially do they decree that fornicators and 
sodomites be excluded from states, who are inimical to the 
fabric of the state, since they draw men away from that which 
is a better thing in states, namely, marriage, as Avicenna and 
others maintain. 

In the next place, laws are given in accordance with which 
the mutual relationship existing between subjects and prelates 
and princes is arranged, and that between slaves and their 
masters as regards every class of servitude and ownership. 
Laws are also given in accordance with which the fathers of 
families must live in directing their offspring and family, 
and the master as regards his pupils. Next, teachers are ap- 
pointed and artificers in the different sciences and arts; and 
from the youths to be instructed those best fitted to pursue 
studies and perform duties of this kind according to the advice 
of wise men are selected; and the rest are assigned to military 
duty to execute justice and check malefactors. And it is neces- 
sary, as Avicenna says, that in instituting law this should be 
the first intention, namely, to arrange the state in three parts, 
those who administer, those who serve, and those skilled in the 
law, and that in each of these groups a dignitary be appointed. 
After him other dignitaries inferior to him should be appointed, 
and after these still others until nearly all are included, to the 
end that no one should be useless in the state, but that each one 
may have an honorable status, and that from each profit may 
be derived by the state. Hence in Plato that state is said to be 
most justly organized in which each citizen comes to know his 

[ 660] 

+ 

Moral Philosophy 

proper function. Therefore, as Avicenna says, the prince of a 
state ought to prohibit idleness and lack of occupation. More- 
over, those who cannot be restrained should be expelled from 
the state except in the case of infirmity or old age; and then a 
place should be assigned in which people of this kind should 
remain and have a keeper appointed over them. It is necessary, 
moreover, that in the state there should be a means of collecting 
a public fund, which in part should come in accordance with 
the law governing contracts, partly from fines inflicted for 
malicious prosecution, partly from the estates and spoils of 
rebels, partly from other sources; and that this public fund 
should be secured in part for those who are not able to make a 
living owing to infirmity and old age, and in part for teachers 
of law and medicine, and in part for public uses. 

And then the legislator teaches men to frame laws relating 
to patrimonies, inheritances, and wills; because Avicenna says 
that the substance necessary for life is partly branch, partly 
root. But the root is patrimony and anything bequeathed and 
given by will, of which three roots patrimony is the most se- 
cure. But the branch of substance comes from gains derived 
from the various kinds of business. Then laws should be pub- 
lished regarding contracts in all kinds of business, buying, 
selling, giving out and taking contracts, borrowing, lending, 
expending, saving, and the like, so that in contracts whatever 
can do harm may be excluded, as Avicenna says. 

Then laws must be framed in accordance with which in all 
causes and cases justice may be shown and the cases closed, so 
that peace and justice may be fostered among citizens. After- 
wards, as Avicenna says, pursuits must be prohibited by which 
inheritances and property are lost, and the peace and concord of 
citizens are disturbed; and those practicing these pursuits are 
people who wish to get the upper hand in the case of some gain, 
as, for example, the wrestler, the gambler, and the like. Simi- 
larly, pursuits should be prohibited which are in opposition to 
what is advantageous, as he shows in his instruction in regard 
to thieving, pillaging, and other acts of this kind. 

And further ordinances should be passed, as Avicenna states, 
that men should aid and defend one another, and be united 
against the foes of law in the effort to subdue them. If, more- 
over, another state or government has good regulations and 

[ 661 |] 

Opus Majus 

laws, therefore no attack is made on it, except that the time will 
come when there must be no other law than that one, the estab- 
lishment of which, since it is the best, must then be extended 
throughout the whole world. In this statement the Christian 
law is hinted at, as will be explained below. If, moreover, there 
are some among these who are at variance with the law, let 
them first be corrected, in order that they may come to their 
senses; but if they are unwilling to do so, let them be put to 
death. 

CHAPTER I] 

THE last point required here is that the legislator should ar- 
range for his successor. This is done, according to Avicenna, in 
this way. For he must do this with the consent of the nobles 
and of the people; and he should choose a man who can rule 
well and is prudent and of good morals. He should be coura- 
geous, kind, skilled in management and in the law, than whom, 
in fact, no one is more skilled, and this fact should be evident 
to all. But if after this men should so disagree that they desire 
to choose another, they have actually denied God, and for this 
reason the legislator should place in his law enactments that the 
whole state should with one accord attack and slay any one 
who wishes to obtrude himself by power or money. But if they 
shall have the power to do this and shall not have done it, they 
have actually contradicted God, nor is he blood-guilty who kills 
such men, provided that the facts are already known to the peo- 
ple. But if the man who should receive the office is not worthy 
and this fact has been proved, let another be appointed. 

Thus terminates the statement of the application of the prin- 
ciples of the second part with what follows as consequences to 
the principles in general. In this part the civil law is included, 
which is now in force among the Latins, as is evident from the 
principles of this part. Moreover, it is certain that the Latins 
received their rights and laws from the Greeks; namely, from 
the books of Aristotle and Theophrastus his successor, with the 
exception of the laws of the twelve tables which in the first 
place came from the laws of Solon the Athenian. 

L 662 ] 

MORAL PHILOSOPHY: THIRD PART 

CHAPTER [Í 

Concerning the guidance of a man in reference to himself. 

HE third part of moral and civil science is concerned 

with personal conduct, to the end that every one 

should keep his life pure and free from the foulness of 
vices because of future felicity and the horror of eternal punish- 
ment. It is clearly evident that this should be the third part, 
since it is plain that that part which contains the worship of 
God is the first, as I have stated. But public good takes preced- 
ence of private good, as Aristotle says in the first book of the 
Metaphysics. But the part preceding contains the public good; 
this part urges upon men private good. For love is the greatest 
virtue, and is ordained for the common good, and peace and 
justice are its companions, virtues which transcend the morals 
of individuals. For man is a social animal and it is in accordance 
with his own nature, as Avicenna says in the fifth book on the 
Soul, that he should not live alone like a beast which in its life 
suffices itself alone. Therefore the laws regulating men with re- 
gard to the last topic are more important. 

According to Aristotle and Averroés, in the tenth book of the 
Metaphysics, a hermit who is not a part of the state, but lives 
for himself alone, is neither good nor bad. And Cicero in his 
book on Duties, quoting the words of Plato, highly commends 
his statement that we were not born for ourselves alone. Our 
country claims part of our origin, and friends a part, and as it is 
a tenet of the Stoics that all things are created for the use of 
men, they taught that men were generated for the sake of men, 
so that they might be able to benefit one another. Since Cicero 
himself says in the fifth book of the Academics, “Nothing is 
so noble as the imparting of benefits.” For it is innate in man 
to have some organized society, a relationship expressed by the 
Greeks in the word politicon. Hence in his book on the Happy 
Life Seneca says, “This statement is required of a man, that he 
benefit all if it can be done, or many; if not, a few; if not, his 
nearest relatives; if not, himself.” Wherefore the second prin- 
cipal part of moral philosophy must be concerned with public 

[ 663 J 

Opus Majus 

laws, as I have stated; and the third part will deal with the life 
and integrity each one should strive after. This, moreover, is 
the proper arrangement according to Nature’s dignity and for 
simplicity of statement, although Aristotle does not adopt this 
method in his books; because he proceeds by the path of in- 
quiry, and therefore from what is better known to us, not to 
Nature. But since we have been informed through him and 
others what the power of this science requires, we can arrange 
its divisions in accordance with the order that Nature’s dignity 
demands. 

Moreover, under this heading philosophers have said many 
admirable things in regard to the virtues and vices, so that 
every Christian may be confounded when we perceive that un- 
believers had such lofty conceptions of the virtues, and we 
seem basely to fall short of the glory of the virtues. But we 
should be much encouraged to aspire to the acme of virtue, and 
inspired by noble examples we should produce still nobler fruits 
of the virtues, since we have a greater aid in life than the phi- 
losophers themselves, and we are assured that we receive in- 
comparably greater assistance through the grace of God. I shall 
first quote certain passages relating to the virtues and vices in 
general, and shall then pass to special branches. 

CHAPTER II 

ARISTOTLE shows in the first book of the Ethics that virtue is 
twofold; one, according to him, is in the sensitive part of the 
soul, in so far as it is obedient to reason, or in reason dominating 
the parts of the sensitive soul, and so regulating them that they 
obey its rule. Virtue of this kind is called moral and habitual, 
by which men form good moral habits. He teaches, moreover, in 
the second book of the Ethics that there are twelve moral vir- 
tues, and he treats of these in the fourth book and calls them 
means, because each of these is a mean between two vices oppo- 
site to each other and to the virtue. For one extreme falls short 
of the virtue and the other passes beyond it; as is the case with 
avarice, which falls short of liberality, and with prodigality, 
which exceeds it. For the liberal man gives only what he should 
give, the miser gives nothing or very little; the prodigal scat- 

[ 664] 

Moral Philosophy 

ters abroad his all. Such is the case also with the vices that form 
the extremes for the other means. 

These twelve according to Aristotle are as follows. First is 
fortitude in attacking what is terrible and in bearing what is 
adverse. Second is chastity both in the things pertaining to taste 
and in those pertaining to touch. Third is liberality as relating 
to moderate expenditures. For the fourth virtue is munificence, 
which is concerned with important matters, like temples, divine 
worship, hospitals, and other public blessings. And just as mu- 
nificence and liberality differ in respect to money, so do mag- 
nanimity and a certain other virtue in respect to the merit and 
honor of virtue. Hence the magnanimous man is one who is not 
cast down by adversity nor puffed up by prosperity, but glories 
only in virtue. Hence magnanimity is the ornament of all vir- 
tues, as Aristotle says, by which a man raises his mind above 
all things human, and this virtue is of merited worth in all, nor 
does the magnanimous man meditate on injury or enmities. For 
he does not consider the avenging of injuries, nor does he pre- 
serve the memory of evils, nor does he deign to consider any- 
thing worthy of his anger, nor does he trouble himself about 
the folly and negligence of men, but overlooks all things by the 
greatness of his mind; nor does he rejoice in regard to honor 
done him, or only moderately, since for perfect virtue, as Aris- 
totle says, a reverence equal to it is not found, nor as much 
as it deserves; nor is he disturbed by anything, since there is 
nothing that is extraordinary in his sight, prepared as he is for 
retributions and benefits, like God as much as a man can be. 

The sixth mean, which bears the same relation to liberality 
as liberality does to munificence, has no name in Latin, but is 
concerned with matters of less merit than is magnanimity, and 
becomes any man according to his station. The seventh virtue 
is gentleness, which restrains angry passions. The eighth is 
friendliness in social intercourse, to the end that a man be 
pleasing to his fellow man without adulation, and that he be 
not envious or disagreeable but forbéaring. The ninth is sin- 
cerity, which removes from a man pretense and deceit, so that 
he is such in his heart as he appears to the outside world. The 
tenth consists in cheering others in the proper way, to the end 
that scurrility be excluded, and that a man be not boorish and 
rude, disquieted and glum toward the friendly advances of 

[ 665 ] 

Opus Majus 

others. For quiet relaxation and friendly cheer with a vein of 
humor are necessary in human intercourse, as the philosopher 
says. The eleventh is a sense of shame at sins, which is espe- 
cially needful for young people, so that they may not easily 
incline to vices. Therefore Aristotle says, “We praise youths 
with a sense of shame.” For Seneca in his book of the first 
Letters relates the story of a youth who sinned, and when a 
sage asked whether the youth had a sense of shame, and re- 
ceived the reply that he had, he said, “Well, then the situation 
is saved.” The twelfth is justice. 

And besides these virtues there are other nobler ones which 
do not depend on sense but belong absolutely to pure reason, 
and therefore are called intellectual virtues, which are intellect, 
knowledge, art, prudence, and wisdom. But these may be con- 
sidered purely in the region of speculation, when they are di- 
rected to truth alone. And in this view they are not virtues but 
intellectual and cogitative attitudes of mind, or they may be 
directed to matters of practice, and accordingly they have as 
their object the good. And thus they are virtues, namely, when 
they aim at the salvation of the soul; and this is the case when 
they are concerned with divine worship and public good among 
citizens, and integrity of life and morals, and the consideration 
of the life eternal and of like matters. Intellect is an acquired 
mental condition concerned with the principles underlying 
practice, and knowledge is an acquired mental condition con- 
cerned with conclusions. Art is the knowledge of good works in 
their outcome, and prudence is the acquired mental condition 
directing such works. But wisdom is the perfect knowledge of 
spiritual blessings together with the sweetness of love, a sweet- 
ness in which there is peace of the human mind as far as it is 
possible for the mind to enjoy such in this life; and therefore 
this is the beginning of future felicity, and is almost the same 
as felicity, as Aristotle says in the sixth book of the Ethics. 

In the same book he states that in every kind of virtue there 
is one that is natural and another that is acquired, just as we 
find a man chaste by nature and courageous, and the same is 
true in regard to the other virtues. He also makes a similar dis- 
tinction at the end of the tenth book; and he there says that the 
natural virtues are not derived from ourselves, but are given 
us by divine grace. This is a wonderful statement. Therefore 

[ 666] 

Moral Philosophy 

still more are the acquired virtues derived from God, which 
are far more noble, although the habit of virtuous action pre- 
serves and strengthens and moulds them, for which reason they 
are called the virtues of habit and are said to depend on our 
actions. 

The ancient philosophers uphold virtue as the whole good 
and the only good of man in this life, as Seneca teaches 
throughout in his book on the Happy Life, and Cicero every- 
_ where in the fifth book on the Tusculan Disputations. He also 
` solemnly assures us in his book on the Paradoxes that he will 
never consider anything good except virtue. He confirms the 
view by the judgment of one of the Seven Wise Men. When all 
his fellow citizens were fleeing from their homes owing to a 
hostile attack, and they asked him why he was not carrying his 
possessions with him as the rest were doing, he replied, “I am 
carrying my all with me” ; meaning that nothing was his except 
virtue. This man was Bias of Priene, as Valerius Maximus in- 
forms us in the fourth book. Seneca also in his book to Serenus 
on the topic, “How neither injury nor contumely happens to a 
wise man,” states that the philosopher Stilbon, on being asked 
by the tyrant who had invaded his state and had seized all his 
temporal possessions whether he had lost anything, replied, 
“Nothing, for my all is with me” ; and he bore witness that he 
was not only unconquered but had suffered no loss. For he had 
with him his real blessings, on which no hand is laid. But those 
things which were scattered and carried off as plunder he did 
not consider his, but the mere accidents of fortune following 
its nod. 

Moreover, virtue is the life of man: since Seneca says in the 
First Letters that men die before they begin to live, speaking of 
those who busy themselves in sins up to the time of their natural 
death. For this reason the very noble Apuleius in his book on 
the God of Socrates expresses astonishment that men do not 
care for their souls so that they may live. He says, “I am sur- 
prised at nothing so much as at the fact that, although men wish 
to live in the best way and although they know that they live in 
the mind alone, and that they cannot live in the best way with- 
out cultivating the mind, they do not, however, cultivate their 
mind. Thus, if a man wishes to see clearly, he must take care of 
his eyes; if you wish to run swiftly, you must take care of your 

[ 667 ] 

Opus Majus 

feet; similarly each of your members must receive special care. 
When I see all men acting on this principle, I do not know how 
adequately to explain to myself and to express my wonder why 
they do not also cultivate their mind by means of reason. The 
art of living is equally necessary for all, not so the art of paint- 
ing and of harp-playing; and the same is true of the other arts, 
not to go through them all, which you may be ignorant of with- 
out shame. But when you say, I am not ashamed of my igno- 
rance of the correct way to live—but you will never venture 
to say this. And chiefly must we wonder that those things which 
they are least desirous of seeming to be ignorant of, they never 
the less neglect to learn, and they fail to learn this same art and 
at the same time hold an ignorance of it reprehensible.’’* 

This statement is directed chiefly against those who pose as 
models and teachers of morals to others; of whom Aristotle says 
in the Elenchi, “They make very fine speeches, but their wishes 
are at variance with their words.” Cicero in the second book of 
the Tusculan Disputations asks in regard to such people, “How 
few of these philosophers will you find whose life and manners 
are conformable to the dictates of reason! who regard their pro- 
fession, not as a means of displaying their learning, but as a rule 
for their own life! who conform to their own precepts and obey 
their own decrees! You may see some carried away by such 
levity and vanity, that it would have been better for them to 
have remained ignorant; some covetous of money, others eager 
for glory, many slaves of their lusts, so that their discourse is 
strangely at variance with their mode of life, which indeed 
seems to me a most disgraceful thing. For just as if a professed 
teacher of grammar should speak ungrammatically; or if he 
who wishes to be considered a musician sings out of tune, such 
inconsistency being all the worse since each of them fails in the 
very subject in which he professes to be expert; so a philosopher 
who fails in the conduct of his life is the more disgraced, be- 
cause he errs in the very branch which he claims to teach, and 
does not regulate his own life by the rules he professes to 
teach.” When Zaleuchus, the lawgiver of the Locrians, with 
remarkable justice and zeal for virtue wished that the law 
which he had made inflicting the loss of both eyes as a penalty 

* “This quotation like many others made by Bacon,” as Bridges says, “‘is 
nearly but not quite accurate.” 

[ 668 J 

Moral Philosophy , 

for adultery should be complied with in the case of his own son, 
the state refused because of the integrity of the father. But the 
righteous judge put out one of his own eyes and an eye of his 
son to avoid breaking the law which he had made. Valerius 
Maximus records these facts in the sixth book. 

But all philosophers maintain that the grace of virtue by its 
own wondrous beauty should attract each man, since it is be- 
coming, as Cicero says in his book on Duties, that by its own 
power it draws us and allures us by its own worth. Apuleius 
also, in the third book on the Teaching of Plato, says that virtue 
is beauty of mind. Cicero in the fourth book on the Tusculan 
Disputations says, “As in the body there is a certain proper 
formation of limbs, together with a certain sweetness of com- 
plexion, which is called beauty, so in the mind beauty consists 
in an impartiality, and constancy of opinions and judgments, 
joined to a certain firmness and stability, following virtue or 
preceding virtue itself.” Apuleius says that virtue is not only 
beauty of mind but health and strength also. Cicero also holds 
the same opinions, as is evident from many passages in the 
second, third, fourth, and fifth books on the Tusculan Disputa- 
tions. 

Although it is impossible or difficult for the man who has be- 
come hardened in vicious habits to experience a change of 
heart, as Aristotle says at the end of the Ethics, yet Seneca says 
in the second book on Anger, “There is nothing so hard and so 
difficult, that the human mind cannot master it and render it 
familiar by constant practice. For none are so iron-hearted and 
of such an independent frame of mind that they may not be 
brought under control by discipline. Whatsoever the mind has 
imposed upon itself it has obtained. Some have gained such 
control of themselves as never to laugh. Others have forbidden 
their bodies the use of wine or fluid of any kind. Still others 
satisfied with a short sleep prolong the period of wakefulness 
tirelessly. Some have learned to run on very slender and steep 
ropes, and to carry great weights beyond the ordinary strength 
of man, and to dive into the sea to a great depth without any 
change of breath. There are a thousand other things in which 
perseverance overcomes every obstacle.” And he shows that 
nothing is difficult if the mind has enjoined patience upon itself. 
For as Averroés says in the second book of the Physics, many 

[ 669 ] 

Opus Majus 

have become accustomed to nourish themselves on poison, as 
Aristotle writes in the book of Secrets. For he himself dis- 
covered that a beautiful girl sent to Alexander with other gifts 
had been fed on poison. Therefore persistent labor conquers all 
things, as Vergil says. 

There is, then, no difficulty in virtue for him who loves it. 
For virtue is eager for danger. Virtue considers the end it has in 
view, not what it will be called upon to suffer, as Seneca writes 
in his work De Copia Verborum, and makes the same statement 
in another book in which he inquires why many misfortunes 
happen to the good. And he makes there the additional state- 
ment, “Since that which it is destined to suffer is part of the 
glory. Soldiers glory in their wounds and rejoice to show their 
blood flowing from wounds that are not mortal. He who returns 
wounded attracts more attention than those who return un- 
harmed from the battle-line, although they have been in the 
same engagement.” He states, moreover, in the seventh book on 
Benefits that it is easy to know and to possess the virtues, as far 
as they themselves and nature are concerned; and he adds, 
“Whatever will make us better and happy, nature has placed in 
plain view or within easy reach, if a man has consecrated his 
mind to virtue. And whithersoever virtue summons he con- 
siders the path easy, if he is a social animal and views the world 
created for the common good as one household, and always 
lives as though in the public eye, more fearful of himself than 
of others. Such a man withdrawn from the storms of tribula- 
tions has set his foot on a firm and peaceful soil. He has made 
useful knowledge his own. For of no thing is the discovery diffi- 
cult except of that whose only reward when discovered is in 
the discovery itself.” And this lies in the domain of the purely 
speculative, not in matters pertaining directly to the happy 
life. Seneca, moreover, in the second book on Anger, refuting 
those who seek the solace of vice instead of the difficult path of 
virtue, speaks as follows, “There is nothing in the vices which 
you may say cannot be removed; we are ill with curable mala- 
dies, and nature aids us, created as we were to be whole, if we 
desire to be cured. Nor is the road to the virtues hard and 
rough, as it has seemed to some; we advance along an easy path 
since God himself is our aid. Much harder is it to do what you 
are doing. What is more restful than peace of mind, what more 

[ 670 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

laborious than anger? what milder than forbearance, what 
more vexatious than cruelty? Chastity enjoys leisure, lust is 
very much preoccupied. Finally the guardianship of all the 
virtues is easy, the vices are cultivated at a great cost.” Cicero, 
moreover, in the third book on the Tusculan Disputations says, 
“The knowledge of the virtues is innate and if permitted to in- 
crease, Nature herself would conduct us to the happy life.” 
Seneca expresses the same sentiment in the book of the First 
Letters. That virtue, however, as he says in the first book on 
_ Anger, is surest which has greatly distrusted itself for a long 
time and has controlled itself and has advanced slowly and in- 
tentionally. 

CHAPTER III 

THEy discourse about sin in common just as they do about vir- 
tue. For Cicero in the fifth book on the Disputations says, “No 
one is permitted to sin”; because sins hinder complete perfec- 
tion of mind and acquisition of eternal felicity, since Algazel 
says in the Logic this felicity comes from perfection of soul. 
Now perfection of the soul consists of two things, cleanness and 
adornment. Cleanness is the purification of the soul from filthy 
habits and sanctification from foul impressions ; adornment con- 
sists in depicting on the soul the certitude of divine truth and 
the being of the whole universe in its sequence, by means of a 
revelation in which there is no error nor concealment; like a 
mirror, for example, which does not possess perfection unless 
a beautiful form is apparent in it; but this is not possible unless 
it has been cleansed completely from dirt and rust and beau- 
tiful forms afterwards placed before it. The soul, then, is like 
a mirror; for there are depicted in it the forms of the whole 
universe when it is clean and has been freed from foul habits. 
These are the words of Algazel. Sins, therefore, render a man 
blind, because every evil man is ignorant, as Aristotle says in 
the second book of the Ethics. Socrates says that it is not pos- 
sible for any one to do a base act except through ignorance; 
since when he reaches the state of a desire for sin, he loses his 
knowledge and his intellect is in abeyance. So great is the de- 
pravity and turpitude of sin that the Philosopher has said, “If 

[671] 

® 

Opus Majus 

I were to know that the Gods would pardon and that men would 
pardon, I would refuse to sin.” For this reason Cicero says in 
the second book of the Academics that men select darkness and 
solitude for committing sins, because the very baseness of sin 
deters by its foulness. Seneca, moreover, in the fifth book on 
Natural Questions says that because of their shamefulness 
crimes shun the sight of themselves, for concealing which no 
night is sufficiently dark. Apuleius also, in the third book on 
the Beatitude of Plato, says, “Evil or sin is filthiness of soul, 
and not only this but weakness and disease.” Cicero expresses 
the same thought in many ways in the Tusculan Disputations. 

Sin not only blinds, defiles, and weakens the rational soul, 
but lowers it to the level of the brutes, as the philosophers show 
in many passages. Hence Seneca in his book on the Happy 
Life says, “I place men in the same class whom a dull nature 
and ignorance of themselves have reduced to the level of brutes. 
There is no difference between them, since brutes do not have 
any reason, and such men have a depraved reason and one that 
is clever to their own hurt and in the wrong direction.” More- 
over, philosophy proves in the fourth book of the Consolations 
that evil men lose their identity, because the identity of a thing 
consists in retaining its order and preserving its nature. But sin 
is contrary to the order of nature, therefore evil men cease to 
retain their identity. It is necessary, therefore, to thrust down 
below the rank of mankind those whom their wickedness ex- 
cludes from human status. The result is, then, that you cannot 
regard as a human being the man whom you see transformed 
by vices. And the philosopher infers that you would compare 
to a wolf the robber who is inflamed with greed and employs 
violence in possessing himself of the property of other people. 
You will compare to a dog him who is insolent and wags a 
quarrelsome tongue. He who lurks by the way and finds delight 
in pilfering is on an equality with foxes. If a man roars in un- 
controlled anger, he may be regarded as having the intelligence 
of a lion. He who is timid and ready to flee, fearing what need 
not be feared, may be considered as similar to deer. The lazy 
and stupid dolt lives the life of an ass. The fickle and inconstant 
man who changes his pursuits differs in nothing from the birds. 
He who is plunged in defiling and unclean lusts is foully pos- 
sessed by the pleasure of a hog. Therefore it comes to pass that 

[ 672] 

Moral Philosophy 

he who ceases to be a man by the loss of his goodness is turned 
into a beast. 

Since, moreover, we gladly excuse as far as possible our sins, 
whether they be small or great, many or few, Seneca in the sec- 
ond book on Anger asks, “Which vice, pray, has lacked an ad- 
vocate?” but we do not thus excuse the vices of others. For in 
the same book he says, “We keep the vices of others in view, but 
our own in the background.” And since with the holy thou 
shalt be holy and with the innocent man thou shalt be innocent, 
Seneca says in the book of the Second Letters, “Nothing else so 
clothes our minds with the garments of respectability and re- 
calls to rectitude those who are wavering and inclining to evil 
as association with good men.” And in the third book on Anger, 
“We form our habits from our associates, and as certain diseases 
of the body pass from one person to another by contact, so the 
mind gives its evils to those with whom it comes in contact. The 
drunkard inspires his messmates with a love of wine. Associa- 
tion with the impure weakens the character even of a strong 
man, if it be permitted. Avarice passes on its poison to those 
near it. The virtues conversely have the same action in soften- 
ing everything with which they have to do. A mild region and 
more salubrious climate do not confer so great a benefit on 
bodily health as that derived by the morally weak from associa- 
tion with better people. You will understand how strong such 
influence is if you see that wild animals grow tame by living 
with us, and that no savage beast retains its ferocity if it has 
dwelt for a long time in the habitation of man. There is the 
added fact that not only does a man who lives with peaceful 
men become better by their example, but he does not find occa- 
sions for his vice and does not practice it.” 

Moreover, in the same book for the correction of all vices he 
says that all the senses must be brought to a condition of sta- 
bility. For they are patient if the mind, which must be called 
daily to render an account, has ceased to corrupt them. Sextius 
followed the practice, when the day was over and he had re- 
tired to rest at night, of questioning his own mind, “What one 
of your faults have you corrected today? What vice have you 
withstood? In what way are you better? Can anything be bet- 
ter or finer than this habit of examining the whole day? How 
wonderful is that sleep which follows self-examination; how 

[ 673 J 

ws 

Opus Majus 

tranquil, deep, and free it is after the mind has been praised or 
admonished; and as spy and secret censor of itself finds out 
about its own behavior.” And in the same book he says about 
himself, “I take advantage of this opportunity and daily be- 
fore myself plead my case when the lamp has been removed. 
I go over with myself the whole day, and I consider what I 
have said and done, I hide nothing from myself, I pass over 
nothing. For why should I have any fear of my mistakes, when 
I can say, See that you do not do that again, I pardon you this 
time?” 

Moreover, since that man is happy who dashes his little ones 
against the stones, Seneca says to Marcia, “All our vices will 
become fixed within us, unless they are crushed as they spring 
up. The violence of a disease should be checked at its outbreak 
by a gentle remedy, but we must take more vigorous measures 
against chronic disorders. For wounds are easily cured while 
they are fresh with blood.” And since this matter should receive 
particular attention in the period of our youth, Aristotle says 
in the second book of the Ethics that it makes no little difference 
that we are trained in this way or in that from our youth. For 
he compares the innocence of youth to a green twig, which can 
be bent in every direction and its curvature easily removed. 
And Seneca says in the second book on Anger, “It is easy to 
mould minds while they are still tender; for with difficulty are 
we freed from vices that have grown along with us.” Seneca 
likewise says to Helvia, “In this case mould both the manners 
and nature of the young girl. Precepts that are impressed at a 
tender age sink more deeply. You will bestow much upon her 
even if you give her nothing but your example.” And therefore 
in the second book on Anger he says, “Everything that is tender 
clings to the things nearest and grows to resemble them. The 
manners of youth soon repeat those of their nurses and tutors. 
A boy brought up in the home of Plato, on returning and seeing 
his father vociferating and shouting, said, I never saw this 
in the home of Plato. I do not doubt that he would have imi- 
tated more readily his father than he did Plato, had he been 
brought up in his father’s house.” 

L674] 

Moral Philosophy 

CHAPTER IV 

IF we consider what the philosophers have said and done in 
particular in regard to habits of this kind, we find much that 
is most pleasing. All their teachings are reduced to a contempt 
of riches in opposition to avarice, or to a despising of honors as 
opposed to pride, or to the shunning of pleasures as opposed 
to luxury and gluttony, or they have reference to the violent 
feelings and passions of the mind and are directed against 
anger, envy, and sloth; to the end that thus the seven mortal 
sins may be avoided. All these sins except anger relate to pros- 
perity. For the mind grows feeble in the midst of riches and 
pleasures while it delights itself in these sins. For as regards 
avarice, pride, luxury, and gluttony it is evident that they are 
aroused by a strong desire for enjoyment. Envy also springs 
from the good and the prosperity of another. Sloth, however, 
owes its being to the fact that the mind is absorbed in pleasures 
and in the other interests incident to prosperity. For in such 
circumstances a man loses interest in the true good which con- 
sists in virtue, and finds every virtuous effort disagreeable. Inert 
and lazy becomes the man for whom death of the soul is at the 
portals, to bring quickly to a close his spiritual life. Anger alone 
has no regard for prosperity and battles in adversity. For this 
reason I shall touch first upon their statements pertaining to 
the contempt for prosperity; then I shall consider how adver- 
sity should not be dreaded. 

Aristotle, the greatest of philosophers, accordingly is the 
most conspicuous example, who in contempt of the world with 
all its riches and honors and pleasures left his native land and 
ended his life in exile. Theophrastus, his noted successor in 
philosophy, did the same thing, as Cicero states in the fifth book 
on the Tusculan Disputations. But these were not the only in- 
stances, but there were many others among the most noted phi- 
losophers and fathers of philosophers, as Xenocrates, who was 
head of the old Academy, according to Censorinus in his book 
on the Natal Day, and Carneades, who founded the third 
Academy called the new one. For the disciples of Plato were 
called the Academics from the place in which Plato studied, 
and they were divided into many schools after the death of 
their master. But these were not the only ones; there were many 

[675 1 

Opus Majus 

other famous men, whom Cicero names to the number of six- 
teen: and still others in endless numbers, as he himself says, 
passed their years in exile and in constant travel abroad, who 
once having set out never returned home. Socrates, on being 
asked of what country he was a citizen replied, “I am a citizen 
of the world”; for he considered that he was an inhabitant and 
a citizen of the whole world, as Cicero states in the fifth book 
on the Tusculan Disputations. Seneca accordingly says to Mar- 
cellus in exile, “It is not a misfortune if you are without a 
country. You were trained to know that every place is a philoso- 
pher’s native land. The lowly hut to be sure contains the vir- 
tues. It will be more beautiful than any temple since we shall 
see in it justice, continence, prudence, piety, a plan of duties 
properly coérdinated, a knowledge of things human and divine. 
No place is narrow which contains this number of such great 
virtues.” Ptolemy also, in the maxims given in the Almagest, 
says, “He is superior among men who does not care under 
whose power the world is.” Nor is it strange if this philosopher 
speaks thus who spent most of his labor in learning about the 
heavenly bodies and the principal divisions of the world. For 
he proves in the first book of the Almagest that the whole earth 
has no sensible size in comparison with the heavens, a fact 
established more fully above. Seneca says to Helvia, “The mind 
is narrow which earthly things delight. For the higher men 
rear their towers, and the larger they build the roofs of their 
dining halls, the more do they shut out the heavens.” Xeno- 
phon, the pupil of Socrates, said, according to Censorinus, that 
to be in need of nothing is a characteristic of God, but to be in 
need of as little as possible is the next thing to God. 

Seneca in the fifth book of the Natural Questions, rightly 
judging the earth but a point in respect to the heavens, a fact 
proved by astronomy, considers of no moment and reduces to 
naught all things which are distributed in this world among 
men, as compared with heaven for which man was made. He 
accordingly says,* “He who now broadens and prepares his 
mind and makes it worthy of fellowship with God, possesses the 
complete and perfect good of the human lot; when treading 
under foot every evil he seeks what is above and enters into 

* This quotation is from the prologue to the first book of Naturales Quaes- 
tiones. 

L676] 

Moral Philosophy 

the bosom of nature, he delights wandering among the very 
stars to view the pavements of the rich and the whole earth with 
its gold, not that only which it has produced, but that which it 
reserves in secret for the avarice of posterity.” “This is a mere 
point which is divided by sword and fire among so many na- 
tions. Oh how ridiculous are the boundaries of mortals! The 
Dacian may not pass beyond the Ister. The Euphrates must re- 
strain the Parthians, and the Danube divide the Sarmatian and 
the Roman territories, the Rhine is to set a bound for Germany. 
The Pyrenees are to rear their crest between Gaul and Spain. 
Between Egypt and Ethiopia a vast uninhabited stretch of 
sand must lie. If any one should give human understanding to 
ants, will they not divide one anthill into many provinces? 
When you see armies marching with flags flying and the cav- 
alry now scouting ahead, now spread out from the flanks, that 
is merely the running to and fro of ants busying themselves in 
their narrow path. What difference is there between them and 
us except the extent of a small body? This is only a point on 
which you sail, on which you reign, on which you make war. 
Above are the vast spaces into the possession of which the mind 
is admitted; and as though freed from chains returns to its 
origin. And this is a proof of its divine origin that divine things 
delight and interest it, not as things alien to it but as its own 
possessions. It will then despise the narrow confines of its 
former abode. For the space from the remotest parts of Spain 
to India is traversed in a very few days if the ship have a 
favorable wind. But that celestial region requires a journey of 
thirty-six thousand years for the fastest star.” 

Moreover, Apuleius in his book on the God of Socrates fitly 
says that all good things, external and belonging to the body, 
_are to be despised and not to be taken into account in praising 
a good man. His words are, “In considering men do not set any 
value on things that do not really belong to them, but consider 
the man himself within, view him as my poor Socrates. Now I 
call those things not really his which his parents procured, and 
which fortune bestowed, no one of which I join to the merits 
of my Socrates, neither high birth, nor lengthy lineage, nor 
riches that cause others to envy. Therefore you may num- 
ber all gifts together; is he high born? You are praising his 
parents. Is he rich? I do not trust fortune. Nor do I enumerate 

[677] 

Opus Majus 

such gifts further. Is he in good health? He will be worn out 
by sickness. Is he active? He will pass into old age. Is he hand- 
some? Wait awhile and he will not be. But is he trained in the 
liberal arts and is he especially learned, and wise, as far as a 
man is permitted to be, and of good counsel? At length now 
you are praising the man himself. For this is neither a heritage 
from his father, nor is it dependent on chance, nor is it assist- 
ance dependent on the will of others, nor is it a transitory thing 
from the body, nor is it changed by age. All these things my 
Socrates had, and for this reason he despised the possession of 
all else.” Therefore Cicero in his book on the Paradoxes glories 
in the fact that he never counted gold or silver or honor or 
anything belonging to this world among blessings. Sallust, 
moreover, in his book on Catilina says, “Fortune makes all 
things famous according to its caprice rather than in accordance 
with fact. First there was the desire for money, then for em- 
pire. These became as it were the sources of all evils. For 
avarice has destroyed faith, probity, and the other good quali- 
ties; in place of these she has taught us pride, cruelty, neglect 
of God, and to consider that all things are to be bought and 
sold. Avarice has a fondness for money, which no philosopher 
has desired. This vice steeped as it were in noxious poisons 
weakens the body and mind of man; always boundless, insa- 
tiable, it is lessened neither by plenty nor want.” And Seneca 
in the third book on Anger says, “In regard to money there is 
the utmost vociferation; this wearies out the forums, mingles 
poisons, places swords in men’s hands, this is gathered from 
our blood, because of it the throng presses upon the tribunals of 
the magistrates, kings rage and overthrow states: the law 
courts echo with the roar of the cases, judges summoned from 
far distant regions sit to determine which one of the two liti- 
gants has the juster avarice.” And in his work De Copia Ver- 
borum he says, “The avaricious man’s only correct action 
is performed when he dies.” Sallust in the book mentioned 
above says, “The ambition for power has forced many men to 
become false; to have one thing locked in their heart and an- 
other ready on their tongue. And when men passed their lives 
in the land without greed, all were satisfied with what they had. 
But when insolence of power appeared, fortune changes along 
with character.” Therefore Seneca addressing those who were 

[ 678] 

Moral Philosophy 

proud because of the blessing of fortune says, “All things which 
force you, swollen with pride and superior to the common lot, to 
forget your own frailty, things which you guard with iron bars, 
which plundered from the blood of others you defend with your 
own, because of which after the rupture so often of the ties of 
marriage, friendship, and colleagueship the world was crushed 
between the two contenders, all these things I say are not yours. 
Already they are looking to another owner; either an enemy, or 
an unfriendly successor, or fire or some other misfortune will 
assail them. Do you ask how you are to make them yours? By 
bestowing them as gifts. Take thought then for your possessions 
and make your ownership of them sure and impregnable; you 
will render them not only more respectable but more secure. 
That in which you reckon yourself rich and powerful, as long 
as you are in possession, rests under a sordid name; it is house, 
or slave, or money. When you have donated it, it becomes a 
benefaction.” And therefore he asks in the book of the First Let- 
ters, “Who is worthy of God except the man who has despised 
riches?” 

CHAPTER V 

CONCERNING the sensual pleasures philosophers make many 
excellent statements. Cicero in his book on Old Age speaks as 
follows: “Since God has given to man nothing more excellent 
than mind, nothing is more hostile to this divine gift than sen- 
sual pleasure. For such pleasure hinders deliberation, is hostile 
to reason, and blindfolds the eyes of the mind. For the great 
Archytas of Tarentum, a Pythagorean and a teacher of Plato, 
was of the opinion that no one can doubt that a man so long as 
he is enjoying sensual pleasure is incapable of handling any 
matter requiring thought, reason, and reflection, since such 
pleasure, if indulged in too much or too long, extinguishes com- 
pletely the light of the soul.”* Hence Cicero in the third book 
on the Tusculan Disputations says,} “But these definers say 

* Bacon has changed the order of sentences in this quotation, as he fre- 
quently does in quotations from classical authors. See De Senectute, XII, 40, 41. 
+ Tusculan Disputations, IV, 9, 21. 

[ 679] 

Opus Majus 

that the source of these disturbances is lack of moderation, 
which is a defection from the entire intellect and from correct 
reasoning, a state so averse to the dictates of reason that the 
appetites of the mind can in no way be governed and re- 
strained.” Moreover, Pliny for this reason says in the four- 
teenth book of the Natural History, “After pleasure has begun 
to live life fails.” Aristotle also in his book on the regimen of 
Life said to Alexander, “Avoid the inclinations to bestial 
pleasures, for the carnal appetites incline the mind to the cor- 
ruptible pleasure of the bestial soul if no discretion be used. 
Therefore the corruptible body will rejoice, and the incorrup- 
tible intellect will be saddened. The inclination to carnal pleas- 
ure therefore generates carnal love. But carnal love generates 
avarice; avarice generates the desire of riches; the desire of 
riches generates shamelessness; shamelessness generates pre- 
sumption, and presumption generates infidelity. And therefore 
pleasure brings with it stains on the soul of man, by which the 
soul is darkened.” Aristotle for this reason also says in the 
book of Problems that we are called incontinent and blame- 
worthy more on account of taste and touch than because of the 
other senses, since we are overcome by the basest pleasures and 
by those in which we participate with the brutes. For the latter 
take no delight in seeing and hearing and smelling, as does man. 
For they do not seek an odor for itself, but because of the food 
to which they are led by the odor. But a man not suffering from 
hunger finds delight in a perfume, as in the case of roses and 
other odoriferous flowers. He also takes great delight in hear- 
ing and in seeing; but brutes take pleasure only in what is 
known to pertain to taste or to touch. For this reason regula- 
tions and directions for correct living are drawn up in regard 
to the pleasure of both taste and touch; and we are praised more 
when we abstain from these pleasures, and we are blamed be- 
cause of them since they are low and bestial. Moreover, Seneca 
says in the second book on Anger,* “When pleasures have cor- 
rupted both mind and body, no form of adversity seems tol- 
erable, not because it is hard, but because a soft man is enduring 
it.” For this reason since there are two principal modes of pleas- 
ure, one in lust, the other in intoxication and drunkenness, 

* De Ira, II, 25. 

L 680 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

Cicero asks in the fifth book on the Tusculan Disputations,* 
“Why should you not call that man most miserable whom we see 
raging and inflamed with lustful passions, madly craving all 
things with an insatiable desire, and thirsting the more keenly 
and ardently the more deeply he drinks everywhere from the 
cup of pleasure?” Seneca, moreover, says in the seventh book 
on Benefits} that “pleasure is fragile, brief, exposed to disgust, 
the more eagerly quaffed the more quickly subsiding into the 
opposite, a thing of which we must either repent or be ashamed, 
in which there is nothing splendid nor befitting the nature of 
man next to God, a thing that is low belonging to our base 
members, foul in its end.” And Seneca in the second book of the 
Declamations says, “The young man sins, the voluptuous old 
man is mad, for he brings dishonor on his old age, and is render- 
ing the age of youth more imprudent.” And Cicero in the fourth 
book on the Tusculan Disputations, teaching how to cure this 
lustful person, shows the worthlessness of such pleasure in these 
words, “Now the cure for one who is affected in this manner, is 
to show how light, how contemptible, how very trifling he is in 
what he desires; how he may turn his affections to another ob- 
ject, or accomplish his desires by some other means; or else to 
persuade him that he may entirely disregard it: sometimes he is 
to be led away to objects of another kind, to study, business or 
other different engagements and concerns: very often the cure 
is effected by change of place, as sick people that have not re- 
covered their strength are benefited by change of air. But above 
all things the man thus afflicted should be advised what mad- 
ness love is: for of all the perturbations of the mind there is no 
one which is more vehement; for, (without charging it with 
debaucheries, adultery, or even incest, the baseness of any of 
these being very blameable; not I say, to mention these,) the 
very perturbation of the mind in love is base of itself, for, to 
pass over all its acts of downright madness, what weakness do 
not those very things which are looked upon as indifferent 
argue, injuries, suspicions, unfriendliness, war, then peace 
again” renewed, all of which follow upon men inspired by lust? 
Hence it follows that 

* Tusculan Disputations, V, 6. 
+ De Beneficis, VII, 2. 
t Tusculan Disputations, IV, 35. Yonge’s translation. 

[ 681 J 

Opus Majus 

“The man who seeks to fix 
These restless feelings, and to subjugate 
Them to some regular law, is just as wise 
As one who'd try to lay down rules by which 
Men should go mad. 

Now is not this inconstancy and mutability of mind enough to 
deter any one by its own deformity? We are to demonstrate, as 
was said of every perturbation, that there are no such feelings 
which do not consist entirely of opinion and judgment, and are 
not owing to ourselves. For if love were natural, all would be 
in love, and always so; nor would one be deterred by shame, 
another by reflection, another by satiety.” For this reason Aris- 
totle in the Secrets of Secrets says to Alexander, “Kind Em- 
peror, do not yield to the desire for sexual intercourse with 
women, since such intercourse is a characteristic of swine. What 
glory is it for you if you practice a vice that is characteristic of 
unreasoning animals and follow the actions of brutes? Believe 
me without question that sexual intercourse involves the de- 
struction of our bodies, the shortening of life, the corruption 
of the virtues, the transgression of the law, and the adoption 
of effeminate manners.” Therefore, that every flaw of character 
may be avoided, Seneca says to Helvia,* “If you consider that 
sexual desire was given man not for his enjoyment but for the 
purpose of propagating the race, every other desire will pass 
by that man unscathed whom this secret and ruinous passion 
deep-seated in our very vitals has not harmed.” 

Concerning the pleasure taken in gluttony Seneca speaks 
fittingly to Helvia,j “Oh, how wretched are those whose appe- 
tite is not excited except at the sight of expensive foods! But 
not their fine flavor or the pleasure they give the palate but their 
rarity and the difficulty in procuring them render such foods 
dear. Otherwise, if they care to return to a sane state of mind, 
what need is there of so many arts ministering to the belly? 
What need to ravage forests, what need to search the deep? 
Everywhere are the different kinds of food, which nature has 
distributed in all places. But men pass by these as though they 

were blind, . . . and although they can appease their hunger 
* Ad Helviam, XIII. 
+ Lbid., X. 

[ 682] 

Moral Philosophy 

at a small cost, they whet it at a great one. From far and wide 
they bring together all that is known to pampered gluttony ; 
and they convey from a remote ocean that which is admitted 
with difficulty into a stomach weakened by dainties. May God 
confound those, the luxury of whose gluttony thus passes be- 
yond the boundaries of their own land.” Moreover, Seneca says 
in the book of the First Letters regarding intoxication and 
drunkenness,* “Oh, how many things men do when intoxicated 
for which they blush when sober! Consider drunkenness to be 
nothing else but voluntary insanity. Prolong the drunkard’s 
state to several days, will you have any doubt of his madness? 
Drunkenness undoubtedly elicits, kindles, and discloses every 
vice; it removes the sense of shame that hinders our evil pur- 
poses; . . . when the power of wine overpowers the mind, 
every hidden evil comes forth to view. It is then that the lustful 
man brooks no delay in gratifying the demands of his passions; 
it is then that the unchaste man proclaims his disease; it is then 
that the ill-natured man does not restrain his tongue or his 
hand.” And since such is the case Aristotle says in the second 
book of the Ethics that a twofold malediction is due the drunk- 
ard. And after many statements on this subject Seneca says in 
the place quoted above, “Cruelty generally follows wine drink- 
ing, for a man’s soundness of mind is corrupted and he is made 
savage. As prolonged illnesses render it difficult for the eyes to 
bear even a very weak ray of the sun, so continued spells of 
drunkenness bestialize the mind. For when people are fre- 
quently beside themselves, the habit of insanity becomes fixed, 
and the vices produced by wine retain their ascendancy without 
it.” Seneca, moreover, in the first book on Natural Questions 
writing against those with a luxurious and perverted taste in 
drinking says,ł “(Good God, how easy it is to slake a natural 
thirst! do you consider such the thirst of voluptuaries?” As 
though he were to say their thirst is not a thirst but a fever. 
“And indeed it is the more severe in this way because it is de- 
tected neither by touching the veins nor by heat diffused over 
the skin; but luxury dries up the heart itself, an unconquerable 
evil.” 

I wish now at the end to add to the authors cited a letter of 

* Epist., lib. XII, 1. 
+ Naturales Quaestiones, IV, 13. 

[ 683 J 

Opus Majus 

the philosopher Anacharsis assailing pleasure, which he wrote 
to the rich Hammo in these words:* “Anacharsis to Hammo 
greeting. My clothing is the same as that with which the 
Scythians cover themselves; the hardness of my feet supplies 
the want of shoes; the ground is my bed, hunger my sauce, my 
food milk, cheese, and flesh. So you may come to me as to a man 
in want of nothing. But as to those presents you take so much 
pleasure in, you may dispose of them to your own citizens, or 
to the immortal gods.” Cicero in the fifth book of the Tusculan 
Disputations quotes this letter with approval. Seneca in the 
book of the First Letters says, “He who comes forth into the 
light of this world, should be content to live on bread and 
water.” And in his book on the topic, Why many evils happen to 
good men, he exhorts us to shun luxury, “Shun luxury, shun an 
enervated prosperity, by which the mind is cloyed, and unless 
something happen to admonish of our human lot, it falls into 
a state of torpor like continued drunkenness.” Moreover, in 
the Phaedo of Plato we read that he who frees as much as pos- 
sible his soul from association with the body and is least under 
the influence of carnal pleasures is manifestly a philosopher. 
The meditation of philosophers is the freedom and separation 
of the soul from the body. He teaches us that the man has con- 
fidence in regard to his own soul who permits carnal pleasures 
to depart as though they were strangers, and adorns his mind 
not with an embellishment that is foreign but with one belong- 
ing to it, temperance, justice, fortitude, liberality, and virtue. 
Wherefore Cicero in his work on the Immortality of the Soul 
concludes for many reasons that the “whole life of philosophers 
is a meditation on death”; to separate the soul from the body, 
what else is it than to learn how to die? and therefore he con- 
tinues, “Lett us separate therefore ourselves from our bodies, 
that is, let us accustom ourselves to die, and thus while we re- 
main on earth we shall be enjoying a life like that of heaven, 
and when we are borne thither from these chains . . . then 
finally shall we live.” For this “life in fact is death,” as he him- 
self elegantly puts it. Moreover, Seneca says to Marcia,t 
“Tarrying in the body is never dear to great souls; they long 

* Tusculan Disputations, V, 32. C. D. Yonge’s translation. 

t 7bid., I, 31. 

ł Ad Marciam, XXIII, XXIV. 

[ 684] 

Moral Philosophy 

ardently to go forth and break loose, they endure with diffi- 
culty these narrow bounds, wandering as they do through the 
whole universe and accustomed from their lofty pinnacle to 
look down upon human affairs. Hence it is that Plato exclaims 
that the whole soul of the philosopher reaches out to death, de- 
sires it, meditates on it, always is carried away with a longing 
for it.” “These things that you see about us, bones, tendons and 
skin stretched over them, face and ministering hands, and all 
the rest with which we have been enveloped, are chains of our 
souls and shadows; by these the soul is overwhelmed, routed, 
_ stained, kept from the truth and from what is its own, and 
driven to what is false; its whole struggle is with this flesh that 
weighs it down; it presses forward to that place whence it was 
sent forth; there eternal rest awaits it.” Therefore Avicenna 
says in his Morals, “A man will not be set free from this world 
and its allurements, unless after becoming wholly dependent on 
that celestial world he desires that which is there, and the love 
of those things that are there withdraws him completely from 
the consideration of that which is behind him.” 

CHAPTER VI 

I HAVE spoken of prosperity and how the six mortal sins are 
nourished by it. Now I must speak of adversity and how anger 
contends with it, although anger suffers a base defeat. In the 
first place, I shall state the principles regarding those matters 
that are to be considered relating to the remedy for anger, and 
in the second I shall take up the main points in regard to the 
‘glorious endurance of adversity. The first step in resisting 
anger is the comprehension on our part of its horrible conse- 
quences, so that each of us bearing these in mind may make the 
avoidance of this vice his special study. Anger is a very serious 
sin. For the angry man blasphemes God, loses his neighbor, con- 
founds himself, scatters abroad his temporal blessings, and is 
not deterred in venting his rage by the fear that he is neglecting 
his eternal good and making himself liable to the punishments 
of hell. First, then, we must consider that anger is contrary to 
all human nature. For the description of man marking him as 
such is that he is an animal kindly by nature. Therefore Seneca 

[ 685 1 

Opus Majus 

in the first book on Anger proves that anger is contrary to hu- 
man nature in this way :* “If we consider man, what do we find 
milder than he is while he is in the right frame of mind? But 
what is more cruel than anger?” He continues, “Anger is eager 
to inflict punishment, but the presence of such a desire in the 
very peaceful breast of man is by no means in accordance with 
his nature.” But elsewhere he reasons thus: “Man is born to 
help his fellow man, but anger is instrumental in his ruin.” He, 
that is, man, “wishes to associate with his fellow man, anger tries 
to separate them: he wishes to benefit, anger wishes to harm: 
he wishes to aid even those who are unknown to him, anger de- 
sires to destroy those who are dearest: he is ready to expend 
himself in relieving the misfortunes of others, anger is pre- 
pared to run into danger, provided it can involve others. Who 
then is more ignorant of nature than he who assigns this savage 
and destructive vice to nature’s best and most faultless work,” 
namely man? “For human life consists of favors, and is bound 
together into common fellowship and assistance by concord, and 
not by fear but by mutual love.” And in the first book he com- 
pares men in anger to beasts, which are different from men in 
their nature. He says,} “Anger displays itself and appears in 
the face; and the greater it is the more manifest is its expres- 
sion. Do you not see that in the case of all animals, as soon as 
they rise to attack, signs precede, and their whole bodies cease 
to retain their usual quiet habit? The jaws of the boar are 
covered with foam, his teeth are sharpened by rubbing, the 
horns of the bull are tossed in the air and the dust is scattered 
by the stamping of his feet, the lion roars, and the neck of the 
angered snake swells, the look of the mad dog is forbidding.” 
Moreover, he expresses the opinion in his third book that angry 
men are further removed from human kindness than are other 
beasts. “Thet face, believe me, of a wild beast, whether goaded 
by hunger or by the dart piercing its vitals, even when half dead 
it makes a final attack with its jaws on the hunter, is less repul- 
sive than the face of a man inflamed with anger.” Moreover 
anger is contrary to man’s nature, because it first destroys and 
confounds his own substance. For in the first place it alters a 

* De [ras l, 5. 

T Lésd., 1; 1. 

4 /ded., III, 4. 

[ 686 7] 

Moral Philosophy 

man externally as regards his whole body into a foul and hor- 
rible appearance. Hence Seneca in the opening part of his book 
writes as follows :* “You have asked me, Novatus, to write how 
anger can be controlled, and not without reason do you seem to 
me to have feared this especially foul ungoverned state of mind. 
In other passions there is an element of rest and peace, but this 
state of mind is marked by violent agitation and passion of 
grief.” And in the second book on Anger he says,; “Nothing, 
however, will profit so much as first of all to view the hideous- 
ness of the thing. Nor is the appearance of any other passion 
more repulsive. It defiles the most beautiful face, renders sav- 
age the most tranquil brow. All beauty departs from those 
angered ; and if they are neatly dressed, at the dictate of anger 
they will pull their garments awry and pay no heed to their 
persons; and their hair smooth either by nature or art becomes 
rough along with their disordered mind. Their veins swell, 
their breast heaves with their rapid breathing, angry ejacula- 
tion of the voice distends the throat. Then the limbs become 
restless, the hands shake, the whole body is agitated. In what 
state do you suppose the mind is whose external appearance is 
so repulsive? How much more terrible within the breast is its 
look, how much keener its spirit, more eager its passion, des- 
tined to burst itself unless it find outward expression? We 
should picture anger to ourselves as similar to the fire-breath- 
ing monsters which the poets have imagined in the lower world 
—anger which raises its voice loudly with hissing, bellowing, 
and raucous sounds, which labors under universal hatred of 
itself, being especially anxious, if it cannot do harm otherwise, 
to bring ruin on lands, seas, and sky.” And in the third book 
he says, “It is necessary, therefore, to expose its foulness and 
ferocity and place before our eyes how monstrous is man raging 
at man” ; and “how we have described the angry man’s counte- 
nance as fierce and now pallid with the blood withdrawn and 
banished from the surface, and now red with all the color and 
energy brought into the face as though covered with blood, the 
veins swollen, and the eyes now restless and darting from their 
sockets, now fixed and set in a stare. Add the sound of his teeth 

* Jéid., I, 1. 
} 7did., II, 35. 
+ /éid., III, 3, 4. 

[ 687 |] 

Opus Majus 

as they clash not differing from the noise made by boars sharp- 
ening their weapons by grinding them together. Add the crack- 
ing of his joints as his hands crush each other, and his oft 
smitten breast, his rapid breathing and deep-drawn groans, his 
swaying body, uncertain words, his lips quivering with sudden 
exclamations and sometimes compressed, and hissing forth 
some dreadful imprecation.” Moreover, anger is contrary to 
man’s nature because it injures the body with many afflictions 
and scourges it with deformities. For Seneca says at the end of 
the second book, “We must see how many anger has injured 
by its own action. Some have ruptured their veins by excess of 
passion, and a shout raised beyond one’s strength has caused 
a hemorrhage, and humor discharged into the eyes with too 
much force has destroyed the sight, and the sick have suffered 
a relapse.” And we have seen frequently healthy men under the 
influence of violent anger attacked by various maladies. 

But similarly anger is unnatural in man as regards his soul. 
For the intellectual soul has two divisions; one is speculative 
and employs reason; the other is active and fitted for the love 
of virtue. Anger disturbs the first and is especially inimical to 
it, and frequently reduces it to madness and insanity. For in 
the second book Seneca says,* “Reason gives time to both sides 
of a question and seeks for time to investigate the truth. Anger 
is precipitate. Reason wishes that the decision be rendered in 
accordance with justice. Anger cares nothing for the just deci- 
sion rendered by reason. Reason considers nothing except the 
case in hand. Anger is influenced by foolish and irrelevant 
matters. Rage does not brook control; it is angered at truth 
itself if truth appears to oppose its wish. With shouting and 
uproar and tossings of the body it pursues with insults and 
curses the objects of its hate. Reason does not act in this way, 
but, if it be necessary, Reason silently quietly destroys families 
including wives and children that are dangerous to the state, 
pulls down houses and levels them to the ground, and roots out 
names inimical to liberty. All these things Reason does with- 
out gnashing its teeth and shaking its head or any other in- 
decorous act.” 

Moreover anger reduces reason to insanity and madness. For 

* De Ira, I, 18, 19. (Not from the second book.) 

[ 688] 

Moral Philosophy 

Seneca at the end of the second book on Anger says,* “There 
is no quicker road to insanity. Many accordingly have con- 
tinued in their state of passion and have never recovered their 
banished reason. Madness drove Ajax to death, anger drove 
him to madness.” And in the third book he says,} “What then? 
Does any one call that man sane who caught up as it were by a 
tempest does not walk but is driven along; and enslaved by an 
evil passion does not entrust to another his vengeance, but 
exacts it himself, mad alike in mind and deed?” And in the first 
book he says,t “That you may know that those are not sane 
whom anger possesses, look at their appearance. For as there 
are definite indications of madness, the bold and threatening 
look, the gloomy brow, the savage face, the hasty step, the rest- 
less hands, the changing color, the frequent and labored sighs, 
so are the same signs visible indicative of anger: the eyes blaze 
and flash, a deep flush covers the whole face as the blood surges 
up from the depths of the breast; the lips quiver, the teeth are 
pressed together, the hair is rough and erect, the breathing 
labored and strident, the joints emit a sound as they are bent, 
with groaning and bellowing and abrupt speech in words offer- 
ing little explanation and hands frequently clapped together, 
and stamping on the ground with the feet and the whole body 
agitated and making dire threats, the face foul and horrible to 
look upon. . . . You are in doubt whether the vice is more de- 
testable or hideous.” Finally anger is altogether unnatural in 
man, since the angry man does not shrink from exposing him- 
self to every kind of danger and has no fear of death, but freely 
runs the risk of death in order that he may take vengeance. 
Hence at the end of the second book he says, “Angry men are 
prepared both to fight with swords and to fall upon them.” And 
at the beginning of the third book he says,§ “The angry man 
is destructive not without his own destruction and sinks those 
things that cannot be sunk except with him who sinks them.” 
Not only does he destroy himself but he loses his neighbor; and 
not only does he drive his enemies to death, but he is the cause 
of the death of his friends. Seneca in the second book gives 

* Jéid., II, 36. 
; 7éid., III, 3. 
$ Zésd., I, 1. 

§ /écd., III, 3. 

[ 689 |] 

Opus Majus 

us an excellent example illustrating this matter. A tyrannicide 
on being captured by the tyrant deceived him with such caution, 
that the tyrant himself slew all his own friends ;* and the tyrant 
at length dies. Seneca says, “The incident of the tyrannicide is 
well known who on being thwarted in his attempt and seized 
was tortured by Hippias, so that he might disclose his asso- 
ciates. The tyrannicide thereupon named the friends of the 
tyrant surrounding him, to whom he knew the tyrant’s safety 
was especially dear. After ordering all those who had been 
named to be killed, the tyrant asked if there was any other sur- 
vivor. You alone, said the tyrannicide. For I have left no 
one else to whom you are dear. His anger, therefore, caused 
the tyrant to aid the tyrannicide and slay with his own sword 
his guard.” 

Just as anger confuses the speculative part of the soul and is 
unnatural to it, so also does it affect the active part and far more 
so. For this part of the soul has virtue as its dower, and in it vir- 
tue has its place; and anger is a vice. Since, therefore, according 
to Seneca in his book of the First Letters, and according to 
Cicero in his book on Duties, and according to the same author 
in the second book on the Tusculan Disputations, all the virtues 
are interconnected ; so that he who has one has them all owing 
to the general conditions of their association, although they 
differ in their special conditions, of necessity anger does not 
permit any virtue to accompany it, since anger excludes kind- 
ness which is joined chiefly to other virtues. This is what Seneca 
says in the second book on Anger, “You must first remove vir- 
tue from your mind, before you entertain anger, since vices do 
not associate with virtues; and a man can no more be at the 
same time both angry and good, than he can be sick and well.” 
Finally anger destroys the noblest virtues, namely, kindness, 
clemency, magnanimity, piety, joy, and peace of mind. For 
Aristotle in the fourth book of the Ethics teaches that kindness 
is a virtue the opposite of anger. And Seneca says in the first 
book on Clemency,} that no one of all the virtues is more be- 
fitting man than clemency, since there is none more human. But 
anger excludes clemency, because it degenerates into cruelty; 

* Bridges’ text reads inimicos. The sense of the passage requires amicos. 
f De Clementia, I, 3. 

[ 690 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

and cruelty is rightly the opposite of clemency, as Seneca says 
in the second book. 

Although clemency is fitting in all, yet, as Seneca says, 
clemency befits no one more than a king and a prince. For the 
kings of Israel are clement, says the Scripture. For as Seneca 
says,* “To have power to injure is a pernicious force; the great- 
ness of that man is firm and secure whom people know to be as 
truly for them as he is above them: from whom as he proceeds 
they do not flee, as though he were some dangerous animal, but 
they emulously run to him as to a bright and beneficent star” ; 
and he adds, since “savage and inexorable anger does not befit 
a king.” “It is proper for a prince to hold the same position 
with reference to his subjects as God does to him.” “Ift God 
forgiving and just does not immediately follow up the faults of 
sinners, how much juster it is for a man placed over men to ex- 
ercise his power with clemency, and to consider whether the 
aspect of the world is more pleasing to the eye and more beau- 
tiful on a calm and clear day or when all things are shaken by 
frequent peals of thunder; . . . and yet the appearance of a 
quiet and well-ordered government is not different from that 
of a calm and bright sky!” “This is true clemency,” as he in- 
fers, “to have no stain—a clemency that did not have its origin 
in regret for cruelty. This is in the midst of the greatest power 
the truest moderation of mind. Clemency renders princes not 
only more honorable but safer. Tyrants rage at will; kings not 
unless with reason and from necessity. Clemency creates a great 
distinction between a king and a tyrant. No one can have faith- 
ful and willing servants, whom he uses not otherwise than as 
beasts.” For severity long continued loses authority. “On the 
other hand there is the man in whose mind there is nothing in- 
imical, nothing savage; who exercises his power peacefully and 
beneficially ; affable in his speech, easy to approach, amiable of 
countenance which especially wins popular favor, . . . of 
whom men speak the same in private as in public.” 

Moreover, Seneca cites a fine example. He says,§ “Nature in- 
vented the idea of a king, as we may learn both from other 

* Tbid., I, 3. 
| [éid., 1, 7. 
S 77 ed ay 
§ /bid., I, 19. 

[ 691 ] 

Opus Majus 

animals and from the bees, whose king has a spacious couch in 
their midst and in the safest place. As the superintendent of the 
work of others he does none himself; and on the loss of their 
king the whole swarm separates; nor do they permit more than 
one king at a time, and by means of combat they discover the 
better candidate. The king is distinguished in appearance and 
unlike the others both in size and beauty. Bees are very subject 
to anger and for their size are most pugnacious, and they leave 
their stings in the wound: the king himself has no sting. Na- 
ture did not wish him to be savage nor seek a revenge that 
would be so costly, and took away his weapon, and left his 
anger unarmed: this is an important example for great kings 

. since the mind of men ought to be as much more under 
control as it is capable of doing more serious harm. Would that 
the same law applied to man, so that his anger would be broken 
with his weapon, and that he could not do harm more than 
once.” And he infers, “He is in error who thinks that a king is 
safe when nothing is safe from the king. Security must be ob- 
tained by mutual security. There is no need for a king to hedge 
himself about with walls and towers . . . clemency will render 
a king safe in the open. The love of his subjects is an impreg- 
nable fortification. For what is more beautiful than to live with 
the good will of all?” “We* exhort, therefore, that if clearly 
injured he retain his self-control, and remit the penalty, if he 
can do so with safety, and that he be far more willing to pardon 
injuries to himself than those to others. For as he is not gen- 
erous who is liberal with what belongs to another, but he who 
takes away from himself what he bestows on another, so I shall 
call clement, not the man who is easy going in the matter of an- 
other man’s grief, but him who when he is stirred by goads ap- 
plied to him does not spring forward.” And again Seneca says,} 
“The mere act of clemency on the part of a ruler causes a feel- 
ing of shame at wrong-doing.” “And not less disgraceful to a 
prince are many acts of punishment than many deaths to a 
physician.” For “by nature the human mind is stubborn and 
resists what is unpleasant and difficult, and follows more 
readily than it is led. And as spirited horses of noble stock are 
controlled with a light rein, so integrity of its own free will 

* De Clementia, I, 20. 
t öid.: I, 22, 24. 

[ 692 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

and motion follows clemency.” And at length directing his 
speech to the Roman prince he says,* “The kindness of your 
disposition will be handed down and gradually diffused 
throughout the whole of your empire, and all things will be 
formed in your likeness, as health derived from an excellent 
source spreads among all men.” 

Thus, then, I have introduced certain facts to show the 
beauty and nobility of clemency, in order that the principal 
proposition may be made clear, namely, the madness of anger, 
which destroys this glorious virtue, and turns it into cruelty. 
Now I wish to make some statements in regard to the other 
virtues enumerated above with clemency, all of which frenzied 
anger destroys. That one especially united to clemency is mag- 
nanimity, which, as Aristotle teaches in the fourth book of the 
Ethics, is the ornament of all virtues. It is characteristic of this 
virtue that he who possesses it is forgetful of injuries and dis- 
regards them, as stated above, and does not deign to give way 
to anger nor consider any one worthy of his anger. Hence 
Seneca says in the second book on Anger,f “It is the mark of 
a great mind to disdain injuries; the most insulting way to 
_exact vengeance is not to let him who has injured us appear 
worthy of our vengeance.” And in the book on the Four Car- 
dinal Virtues Seneca says; “If you are magnanimous, you will 
never consider that an insult has been offered to you. You will 
say of your enemy, He did not harm me, but he intended to do 
so: and when you see him in your power, you will think that 
you have been able to take your revenge. For you should know 
that to pardon is the most noble and greatest kind of ven- 
geance.” And in the second book on Anger he says,§ “It is 
characteristic of the small and pitiable person to attack the one 
who pains him. Mice and ants, if you move your hand towards 
them, turn their mouths; weak creatures think that they are 
hurt if they are touched.” Accordingly in the first book he 
says,|| ‘“The most irritable are infants, old people and the sick; 
and everything that is impotent is querulous by nature.” And 

* Ibid., II, 2. 

f De Ira, Il, 32. 

t De formula honestae vitae. 
§ De Ira, II, 34. 

I öid: l; 12: 

[ 693 ] 

Opus Majus 

in the third book he says,* “Sick people are never touched with- 
out a complaint. Anger is small and narrow. For no man is not 
inferior to him by whom he considers himself despised. But the 
great mind and the true appraiser of itself does not take ven- 
geance for an injury because it does not feel any. As missiles 
fly back from a hard object, and solids are struck with pain to 
him who strikes them, so no injury causes a great mind to feel 
it, since it is weaker than that which it attacks. How much 
nobler as though impenetrable to every weapon to spurn all in- 
juries and insults! For taking vengeance is a confession that 
one is hurt; it is not a great mind that is bowed by injury. 
Either a stronger man or a weaker injures you; if a weaker, 
spare him; if a stronger, spare yourself. There is no surer proof 
of greatness than to be unmoved by anything that can happen.” 
For who abandoning himself to personal grievance and mad- 
ness does not cast aside his sense of shame first? Who in his 
blind rush and assault on another has not cast away whatever 
feeling of shame he possessed? 

Since, therefore, nothing so befits a man as magnanimity, as 
Seneca says in the second book on Clemency, and since anger 
confuses and brings to naught this most glorious virtue, man 
should root out completely anger from his mind, and this is 
especially true of a ruler. Since in the first book Seneca says} 
that “it is the mark of a great mind to put up with injuries al- 
though possessed of the greatest power, nor is anything more 
glorious than a prince who refuses to punish personal offences.” 
And in the second book on Anger he cites an example pertinent 
to this point, “That prince is magnanimous and steadfast who 
like some mighty wild beast listens unmoved to the barking of 
his subjects.” He adds, moreover, in the third book,§ “There is 
no question but that he who disdains his assailants will free 
himself from the throng and will stand upon higher ground; 
for it is the part of true greatness not to feel that one has been 
assailed. Thus the huge wild beast regards indifferently the 
barking of dogs.” For the lion does not deign to hasten at the 
shouts and din of the hunters. “Thus in vain the wave assaults 

* De Ira, III, 5, 6. 

+ De Clementia, I, 20. 

t De /ra, II, 32. 
§ /did., III, 25. 

[ 694 1 

Moral Philosophy 

the huge rock. He who does not become angry, remains un- 
shaken by injury ; but he who yields to anger has been moved.” 
Hence this is the advice he gives against anger, “Beware lest 
your magnanimity and strength relied upon by most men fail”; 
most particularly has he in mind those possessed of great au- 
thority. And in the third book he says,* “The higher part of 
the world and that which is the more orderly and is nearest to 
the stars is never gathered into a cloud nor driven into a storm 
nor whirled into confusion; it is free from disturbance of any 
‘kind. It is the parts below that are blasted with lightning. In 
the same way the lofty mind, always serene and unmoved in its 
tranquillity, checking every disposition within itself to anger, 
is modest, commands respect and is properly disposed. You will 
find no one of these qualities in an angry man.” Hence anger 
has no greatness in it, as he says in the first book. “Wet must 
not think that anger makes any contribution to magnanimity. 
For anger is not greatness but a mere swelling of the mind. Nor 
to bodies already strained by a supply of harmful liquid is dis- 
ease a mere augmentation, but a destructive abundance. All 
whom an insane mind lifts above human thoughts believe that 
they are breathing something lofty and sublime: but there is 
nothing solid beneath; those things are prone to fall that have 
increased without foundations. Anger has nothing on which to 
stand: it does not spring from what is firm and destined to be 
permanent; but is full of wind and folly.” “Like ulcered and 
diseased bodies groaning at the lightest touch, anger is espe- 
cially the vice of women and children. . . . There is no reason 
why you should believe the words of men in anger whose din 
is great and threatening; within their mind is very timid, be- 
cause they are disturbed and hurt at trifles. Hence an angry 
man resembles closely a crocodile, an animal that is very bold 
when one is timid and very timid when one is bold. For it flees 
from one who pursues it and pursues him who flees from it: 
exactly what happens in the case of those who are subject to 
fits of anger. For they tower over those who are submissive to 
them, but shrink away when they are resisted with spirit. Hence 
they would not be disquieted so frequently at trifles unless their 
minds were weak. Since, therefore, anger is incompatible with 
* Ibid., III, 6. 
+ /bid., I, 20. 

[ 695 1 

Opus Majus 

magnanimity, a virtue most worthy of honor, anger must be 
banished completely from our hearts.” 

And not only is this true because of this virtue of magna- 
nimity and the remaining virtues mentioned above, but also 
because of other virtues, namely, mercy, piety, patience, joy, 
and peace of heart. Cicero in his plea to Caesar that he would 
spare Marcellus says, “No one of your many virtues is more 
admirable or pleasing than your quality of mercy; men in no 
other way approach more nearly to God than by granting de- 
liverance to their fellow men. Your fortune holds nothing 
greater than that you should be able, your nature nothing bet- 
ter than that you should wish, to save many.” Therefore in the 
case of each one of us Seneca says in the third book,* “Who 
am I whose ears it is a crime against heaven to wound? Many 
have pardoned their enemies; am I not to pardon the lazy, the 
negligent, the talkative? Youth excuses the child, sex the 
woman, freedom the stranger, familiarity one of the house- 
hold.” “He is a friend: he did what he did not wish to do: he 
is not a friend, he did what he should have done. Let us yield 
to one who is more prudent: let us pardon one who is more 
foolish. On behalf of each offender let us make this reply to 
ourselves that the very wisest men commit many faults; that 
no one is so circumspect that his carefulness is not sometimes 
forgotten . . . no one so fearful of offences as not to fall into 
them while he is seeking to avoid them. But if the most prudent 
sin, who is without a good excuse for his error? He is unjust 
who reproaches individuals with a vice that is general. The 
color of the Aethiopian is not conspicuous among those of his 
own race, nor is red hair gathered in a knot unseemly in a Ger- 
man. You will judge nothing noteworthy or unbecoming in an 
individual which is customary in his race. These peculiarities 
which I have mentioned are excused owing to the custom of 
some particular district and corner of the world; consider now 
how much more reasonable is pardon in the case of faults that 
are common throughout the whole human race. We are all in- 
considerate and careless; we are all unreliable, querulous, so- 
licitous of favor. Why under milder words do I hide a public 
ulcer? We are all evil; therefore each one of us will find in his 
own bosom that which he complains of in another.” “Let us be 

* De Ira, III, 24, 25, 26, 27. 

[ 696 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

more considerate of one another : we are evil men living among 
evil men. One thing can make us peaceful, an agreement to 
observe mutual affability. That man has already harmed me, I 
have not yet harmed him. But already you have perhaps in- 
jured some one; but you will do so. Do not consider only this 
hour, this day. Look into your whole habit of thought; even if 
you have done no evil, you have the ability to do it. How much 
better it is for a wrong to be healed than avenged! Vengeance 
consumes much time, exposes itself to many injuries, while it 
is smarting under one. We are angry for a longer time than we 
are injured; how much better it is to go off in the opposite di- 
rection and not oppose vices to vices! Would a man seem quite 
consistent if he sought satisfaction from a mule with his heels 
and from a dog with his teeth? Those creatures, you say, are 
ignorant that they are offending. In the first place how unjust 
is he in whose eyes the fact that the offender is a man is an 
obstacle in the way of his obtaining pardon. In the second if 
the fact that other animals lack sense protects them from your 
anger, let any one who lacks sense be equally privileged. For 
what difference does it make whether he has other qualities 
unlike those of brutes, if he has like the brutes that which de- 
fends them in every fault, namely darkness of understanding? 
He has offended; well, is this the first time? Is this the last? 
He will offend, and another will commit an offence against him, 
and all life will wallow in the midst of errors.” 

Therefore he says in the second book,* “Do not become angry 
at individuals, we must extend a general pardon: indulgence 
must be shown to the human race.” “Does any one become 
angry at children whose youthful years do not yet know the 
distinctions in things? The excuse is a more weighty one and 
a juster one that the offender is a man than that he is a child.” 
“What removes the anger of a wise man? The throng of 
offenders. He perceives both how unjust and perilous it is to 
be angry at a vice that is general.” “The wise man will not be 
angry at sinners, because he knows that no one is born wise. 
He also knows that very few in any age turn out to be wise, 
since he has the condition of human life under observation. No 
sane man becomes angry at nature. For what if he should take 
a notion to be surprised that apples do not grow in uncultivated 

* [bid., II, 10. 

[ 697 1] 

Opus Majus 

thickets? What if he should be surprised that thorns and 
briars do not swell with some useful fruit? No one becomes 
angry when nature defends a vice. The wise man, therefore, is 
calm and just to errors, he is not the foe but the corrector of 
sinners, he looks upon all men in just as kindly a way as a 
physician does sick people.” It is evident, therefore, that mercy 
and anger cannot be in accord. 

Similarly also the other noble virtues, piety, patience, joy, 
and peace of heart, are incompatible with anger. And since 
there is no question about these, and our discussion of the other 
virtues that are related to these has been an extended one, there 
is no need to dwell upon them. Piety which is effective in all 
things, according to Aristotle, is destroyed by anger, because 
the mind of an angry person is impious and cruel owing to an 
excessive desire for vengeance. That it destroys patience and 
peace of mind is evident; and therefore it removes and quenches 
all good, and breaks every protection against adversity. For as 
long as a man retains patience and happiness of mind and 
peace, he fears nothing, he is disturbed in no manner, he does 
not feel an injury, but master of his own mind he will despise 
whatever is termed adverse. Therefore the angry man by his 
anger destroys himself both in soul and body in this way that 
anger of itself acts on its own subject by destroying whatever 
is laudable in him. But not only do angry people thus incur 
danger, they even when goaded by passion and frenzied by the 
desire for vengeance expose their life to every danger, and 
with no fear of death impetuously oppose themselves to the 
assaults of their enemies, and are ready to fight with swords 
and to fall upon them, as Seneca says in the second book. And 
not only do they lose themselves but those nearest to them; and 
not only those whom they reckon hostile about whom there is 
no question, but also those who are friendly. For, as Seneca 
says in the second book, “Men in anger invoke death upon their 
children, and are hostile to their closest friends and must be 
avoided by those dearest to them.” He says, “Anger has 
brought grief to a father, divorce to a husband, and hatred to 
a magistrate.” And he aptly cites instances where men in anger 
have attacked their own friends. 

Moreover, in the third book he states that Praexaspes,* one 

* De Ira, III, 14, 15, 16, 17. 

[ 698 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

of the dearest friends of Cambyses, advised the monarch, who 
was addicted to over-indulgence in wine, to drink more spar- 
ingly, saying that drunkenness is disgraceful in a king, whom 
the eyes and ears of all make note of. But the king ordered the 
son of his monitor to proceed beyond the threshold, bent his 
bow and pierced the heart of the youth. And he infers, “I do 
not doubt that Harpagus* gave some such advice to the Per- 
sian King, at which he took offence, and served up to Harpagus 
his own children as a banquet.” “And Darius, who was first 
to obtain the Persian throne after the Kingdom had been 
wrested from the Magian, on being asked by the aged noble 
Oeobazus to leave as a solace to his father one of his three chil- 
dren and to employ the services of the other two, said that he 
would send them all to him, and cast them down slain in the 
sight of their parent.” And he continues, “I shall cite to you 
the case of King Alexander, favorite pupil of Aristotle, who 
slew at a banquet Clitus, a very dear friend who had been 
brought up with him; Alexander also threw to a lion Lysi- 
machus, a friend equally dear to him. Lysimachus, moreover, 
severely mutilated his friend Telesphorus by cutting off his 
ears and nose, and kept him for a long time in a cage as though 
he were some strange and very rare animal.” When Alexander 
traveled around the world, under the guidance of Aristotle and 
Callisthenes, he put Callisthenes to death, one of his great men, 
as Seneca states in his book on Natural Questions. Moreover, he 
provoked Aristotle to such an extent, that he was forced to 
free himself and the world by poison which he had sent Alex- 
ander to drink, as Pliny narrates in the thirtieth book of the 
Natural History. But these few examples are sufficient, because 
they are well known and have been written in regard to those 
matters under discussion. 

CHAPTER VII 

Not only does anger destroy its own subject and loses for him 

his neighbor and his friends, but dissipates his wealth, makes 

him negligent in regard to his good name, and careless of 

honor. For the love of vengeance surpasses every other affec- 
* 7bid.; LII, 15, 16, 17- 

[ 699 J 

Opus Majus 

tion of the mind and overpowers every other vice. Since Seneca 
says at the end of the second book on Anger,* “Anger has 
spurned avarice, the hardest and least pliant of evils, forcing 
it to scatter its wealth and set fire to home and possessions col- 
lected into a single heap. The ambitious man in fact has cast 
away insignia valued at a great price and has rejected an honor 
granted. There is no passion of the mind over which anger 
will not bear sway.” And not only does the angry man destroy 
himself, his neighbor, the blessings of fortune, but he offends 
and loses God. Not indeed so much because anger is a sin, but 
because in particular men in anger blaspheme God, of which 
there are numberless examples, and there have been and will 
be. And in contrast to such people, Seneca in the second book 
on Anger says,ł “God does not wish to harm nor is he able. 
For his nature is mild and peaceful, as far removed from doing 
injury to another as to himself. Therefore madmen and those 
ignorant of the truth impute to him the raging of the sea, vio- 
lent storms, and the persistence of winter. . . . No one of these 
happens for the purpose of injuring us, nay, there is nothing 
that is not for our preservation.” Hence he states in the first 
bookt that “Caius Caesar because his revelry was disturbed by 
thunderbolts challenged God to combat. How great was such 
madness! He thought either that he could not be harmed even 
by God, or that he could harm God.” 

Although many evils have been stated which arise from 
anger, since a man loses his body, his reason, his virtue, his 
neighbor, his possessions, his honor, and his God, yet its ex- 
ceptionally bad quality can still further be shown in which it 
surpasses all other sins. Hence Seneca says in the third book,§$ 
“Anger must be compared with the worst vices, in order that its 
nature may become apparent. Avarice acquires and hoards that 
which a better man might use. The angry man, however, by his 
anger loses more than the mere object of his wrath. Anger is 
worse than extravagance since the latter enjoys its own pleas- 
ures, the former the pain of another. Anger surpasses malig- 
nity and envy ; for they wish that a man become unhappy, anger 

* De Ira, II, 36. 

f 7ésd., Il, 27. 

t /éid., I, 27. 

§ /bid., III, 5. 

[ 700 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

wishes actually to make him so. They are pleased with for- 
tuitous ills; anger cannot wait for fortune. Anger wishes to 
harm the object of its hatred not merely that he be harmed by 
some one else or by fortune.” And at the beginning of the book 
he says,* “Anger does not disturb men’s minds in the manner 
of other vices,” “its impetuous and headlong violence does not 
proceed gradually: anger is hasty and does not make its attack 
on the objects only at which it aims, but vents its fury on every- 
thing that crosses its path. Other vices urge on our minds, anger 
drives them headlong. Even if a man may not oppose his low 
impulses, yet the impulses may cease of themselves. This vice 
just like thunderbolts and hurricanes and all other irrevocable 
things, because they do not proceed but fall, exerts its force 
more and more. Other vices deviate from reason, but this vice 
from sanity. Other vices have gentle means of approach and 
grow without attracting attention; in anger there is an over- 
throw of our minds. Nothing, therefore, drives on a man more 
than does anger, frenzied, as it is, and subject to its own vio- 
lence, insolent when it succeeds, crazed when it is foiled. Re- 
duced to a state of weariness not even by a repulse, when for- 
tune saves its adversary, anger turns its teeth against itself. It 
matters not what motive has aroused anger, for it passes from 
trifles to the greatest excesses. It passes by no period of life, it 
excepts no class of men. For certain races, thanks to their pov- 
erty have escaped luxurious living. Certain races because of 
their active and wandering life have escaped sloth. . . . There 
is no race that anger does not goad. . . . Finally other vices 
seize upon individuals. This is the one passion that sometimes 
lays hold of a people. Nowhere has a whole people burned with 
passion for the female sex, nor has a whole state built its hope 
on money or gain. Ambition seizes upon individuals. Fre- 
quently anger seizes upon men in a body. Men, women, old 
men, children, princes and commons have had but one feeling, 
and the whole multitude aroused by a very few words has out- 
stripped the very man who incited them. They have rushed 
forthwith for arms and fire-brands.” And in the first book he 
says,} “If you care now to view the effects of this vice, you 
will find that no bane has cost the human race more dearly. You 

* Tosd; IIL, r, 2. 
f 7ézd., I, 2. 

[zor] 

Opus Majus 

will behold murders, and poisons, and the mutual baseness of 
parties to an action and the ruin of cities, and the destruction 
of whole races . . . fires not confined within the walls of 
cities, but vast stretches of country lit up with hostile flames. 
Behold the foundations of the noblest cities scarcely dis- 
cernible; anger has cast them down. Behold tracts solitary and 
deserted for miles without an inhabitant: anger has depopu- 
lated them.” And since Seneca says in the third book,* “We 
shall protect ourselves against anger, if we represent to our- 
selves from time to time all its evils . . . it must be accused 
before us and condemned. Therefore its evils must be examined 
and brought to light” ; for this reason in what precedes I have 
recounted all the fundamental evils of anger to the end that it 
may be completely rooted out, and that no vestiges of it may 
remain in our hearts. 

CHAPTER VIII 

Not only does a consideration of these evils warn us to re- 
nounce anger, but I shall cite some noteworthy examples of 
philosophers and of illustrious princes which properly have 
the effect of quieting down any man who is angry and banishing 
wrath from his mind. Solinus in his book on the Wonders of 
the World states among other marvels that Socrates, the parent 
of the great philosophers, never changed countenance, but al- 
ways remained in the same habit of mind and face. And Seneca 
in the second book on Anger states the same fact with regard 
to Socrates. And Jerome writing against Jovinian touches on 
the subject of Socrates’ bad wife. When Socrates was asked 
why he did not drive away so cross a wife, he said, “I am being 
trained at home so that I may be able to bear more easily in- 
jury and abuse abroad.” And in the same place Jerome relates 
that on a certain occasion Socrates was drenched with dirty 
water from above after prolonged abuse from his wife, but 
merely remarked: “I knew that rain would follow that thun- 
der.” Cassianus tells us in his book of Dialogues of one who re- 
proached Socrates because he was a corrupter of boys; but when 
his pupils wished to assault this detractor Socrates restrained 

* De Ira, ITI, 5. 

[ 702] 

Moral Philosophy 

them with the words, “Well I am, but I keep myself under con- 
trol.” Seneca in the second book on Anger says, Socrates said to 
his slave, “I would beat you were I not angry.” And in the third 
book he says,* “Men say that Socrates on receiving a cuff on 
the ear merely remarked that it was annoying that men did 
not know when they should go forth with a helmet.” “Plato, 
the pupil of Socrates, when about to beat a slave with his own 
hand realized that he himself was angry and kept his hand 
suspended and stood in the attitude of one about to strike. On 
being asked by a friend what he was doing Plato replied, ‘I am 
exacting punishment from an angry man.’ ” He had already for- 
gotten the slave because he had found some one more deserving 
of punishment. Seneca tells this story in the third book on 
Anger, and he introduces after this another example. “Because 
of a certain offence Plato was considerably exasperated, ‘Do you 
then, Speusippus, correct this young slave with blows; for I am 
angry.’ For this reason he did not flog him... . ‘I am angry,’ he 
said, ‘I shall do more than I ought, I shall go too far; this slave 
should not be in the power of a man who is not master of him- 
self. ” And in the second book he gives an example that was 
quoted above, in regard to a boy brought up in Plato’s home, 
who on returning to his own home and finding his’father loud- 
mouthed, said that he did not see such behavior at Plato’s. And 
Archytas of Tarentum, the other teacher of Plato, being some- 
what angered at his steward said, “How would I have treated 
you if I were not angry!” These words are quoted by Cicerot 
in the fourth book of the Tusculan Disputations. Moreover, 
Eusebius in the Chronicles says that Xenophon, the pupil of 
Socrates next in importance to Plato, said to one who reviled 
him on a certain matter, “You revile me: I on the witness of my 
conscience have learned to despise abuse.” Diogenes the philoso- 
pher, as Seneca relates in the third book on Anger, when a for- 
ward youth spat on him as he was discussing anger, bore the 
insult meekly and like a philosopher. “I am not indeed angry,” 
said he, “but I am in doubt, however, whether I shouldbe.” And 
Seneca continues, “How much better seems the reply of that 
sage who as he was pleading a case had discharged into the 
middle of his brow a mouthful of thick spittle by Lentulus, a 
* Jésd., III, 11, 12. 
t Tusculan Disputations, IV, 36. 

C703] 

Opus Majus 

turbulent individual. He wiped off his face and said, ‘I am in a 
position, Lentulus, to state to all men that those are in error 
who say that you do not possess mouth’” [t.e., effrontery]. 
Democritus the philosopher resembled Socrates in the serenity 
of his countenance. For as Seneca tells us in the second book on 
Anger,* “Never did he appear in public without laughing: 
nothing in fact seemed serious to him of all that was being done 
with serious intent.” But Heraclitus the philosopher, as Seneca 
states in the same passage, whenever he went out and saw so 
great a throng of people around him living wretchedly, nay, 
rather, perishing miserably, would weep and pity all. 

Now these examples and the like refer to the philosophers. 
But there are deeds of others also that should be imitated. When 
Cambyses, a very evil king, had shot an arrow into the heart of 
the son and asked the boy’s father whether he had a sure hand, 
the father replied that Apollo did not shoot an arrow with 
truer aim; he did not revile the king nor did he utter a word of 
sorrow, although he perceived that his own heart had been 
pierced as well as that of his son. For if he had said anything 
as an angered man, he could have done nothing as a father. 
Seneca relates this story in the third book on Anger. And he 
continues, “When the Persian king served up to his friend Ar- 
pagus as a banquet the latter’s children and asked the father 
whether he was pleased with the food, Arpagus replied, ‘At a 
king’s table every dinner pleases’ . . . from this I infer that 
anger arising from great wrongs can be concealed and forced 
to utter words at variance with one’s thought.” 

He adds, moreover, “But although for those who serve con- 
trol of their passions and especially of this savage and un- 
bridled one is advantageous, it is still more so for kings. For 
all is lost when fortune permits a man to go as far as anger 
dictates.” “For what was easier for King Antigonus than to 
order two soldiers to be led forth, who while leaning against 
the tent of the king were doing that which men do with the 
greatest risk and also with the greatest satisfaction who are 
discontented with their king? Antigonus had heard all since be- 
tween the speaker and the listener there was only a curtain. 
Gently pushing the curtain aside he said, ‘Move further away 

* De Ira, II, 10. 
f /did., III, 16, 22, 23. 

[ 704 7] 

DOCTORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS 

Paris 

From Chants Royaux in the Bibliothèque Nationale, 

Moral Philosophy 

lest the king hear you.’ The same king on hearing certain of his 
soldiers calling down curses on their king for bringing them 
into that particular road and into mud from which they could 
not extricate themselves, approached those who were in the 
most serious difficulty, and said to them, ‘Now curse Antigonus, 
through whose fault you have fallen into these difficulties, but 
bless him who has rescued you from this morass.’ Antigonus 
bore insults as tranquilly from his enemies as from his subjects. 
Accordingly when the Greeks were besieged in a certain small 
fortress, and relying on the strength of their position held the 
enemy in contempt and passed many jokes on the ugliness of 
Antigonus, now deriding his small stature and now his flat nose, 
he said, ‘I rejoice and I hope that it is a good omen if I have a 
Silenus in my camp.’ After conquering them by hunger, he en- 
rolled in his cohorts those useful for war, the rest he sold; and 
he said he would not have done this save for the fact that it 
was expedient for these men who had such a bad tongue to 
have a master.” 

“Tf there was,” as Seneca says in this passage, “any virtue 
in King Philip, father of Alexander, it was his patience under 
insults, a great aid in protecting a kingdom. For when Athe- 
nian envoys came to him and were asked what the Athenians 
desired, one of them replied, ‘That you hang yourself.’ And 
when the indignation of those present flared up at such a rude 
answer, Philip bade them be quiet, and that the envoy be dis- 
missed safe and unharmed. ‘But you other envoys,’ said he, 
‘are to report to the Athenians that those exhibit far more 
haughtiness who make such statements than those who hear 
them without exacting vengeance.’”’ Alexander the Macedo- 
nian, grandson of Antigonus and son of Philip, although he was 
haughty and evil in his ways, yet, as Seneca says in the second 
book,* “after reading a letter from his mother, in which she 
warned him to beware of poison at the hands of Philip his 
physician, received the potion and drank it without fear. He 
relied on his own judgment rather in regard to his friend. I 
praise this in Alexander, because no man was more subject to 
anger. The greater the moderation in kings the more is it to 
be praised.” Seneca in the third book says,} “It is recorded of 

* Ibid., II, 23. 

ł ġid., III, 11. 

[ 705 J 

Opus Majus 

Pisistratus the Athenian tyrant that when a drunken table com- 
panion had declaimed vigorously against his cruelty, and there 
were not lacking those desirous of offering their hand to Pisis- 
tratus, and first one and then another tried to inflame his resent- 
ment, he bore the affront calmly and replied to those urging 
him on that he was no more incensed than he would have been 
had his detracter run into him blindfolded.” Seneca in the 
second book relates the following anecdote in regard to Marcus 
Cato, who according to the histories was second to none in 
virtue and in wisdom was foremost among the Romans :* 
“When a man ignorant of his identity unintentionally struck 
Cato in the bath (for who knowingly would have done him an 
injury?) and offered an apology, Cato replied, ‘I do not recall 
that I was struck’: he thought it better not to acknowledge the 
injury than to avenge it.” And in the third book he says,7 “The 
deified Augustus did and said many things worthy to be re- 
membered, from which we see that anger had no control over 
him. Timagenes, a writer of histories, had made certain state- 
ments against Augustus, against his wife and his whole house, 
and his pleasantries were not lost. For pleasantry of a daring 
kind is freely passed from mouth to mouth. Caesar frequently 
warned him to be more guarded in his speech. He put up pa- 
tiently with the abuse; he never complained to Pollio, the host 
of his enemy. He merely said this to Pollio, ‘Enjoy him, my 
dear Pollio, enjoy him.’ ” And Seneca concludes, “Therefore 
each one should say to himself, Am I more powerful than 
Philip? Yet an insult offered him was not punished. Have I 
more power in my home than the deified Augustus had in 
the whole world? Yet he was content to withdraw from his 
traducer.” 

CHAPTER IX 

WE have, however, remedies against anger drawn from a con- 
sideration of the evils inherent in it: moreover, we are influ- 
enced by the examples of the wise and powerful. In addition 
to these Seneca teaches us more direct remedies against this 

* De Ira, II, 32. 
+ /ésd., III, 23, 24. 

[ 706 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

vice. One of these is a knowledge of the facts before we give 
way to anger. For, as he says in the second book,* “Of those 
things that offend us some are told us, others we ourselves hear 
or see. We should not give ready credence to all that is told us; 
for many lie to deceive, many because they have been deceived. 
One tries to win favor by an accusation and feigns an injury 
in order that he may seem to have deplored its commission. 
There is the malignant man and he who wishes to separate 
firmly united friendships. . . . The question of a trifling sum 
would not be settled if you should act as judge, without a wit- 
ness. The witness would have no standing except under oath. 
You will give both parties a chance to state the case, you will 
give them time, you will hear the case more than once. For the 
truth will be more evident, the oftener the case is reviewed. Do 
you condemn a friend at once? Before you hear him, before 
you question him, before he is permitted to learn who his ac- 
cuser is or the charge, are you going to give way to anger? .. . 
The very man who told you will cease making the statement if 
he is required to prove it. “There is no reason,’ he says, ‘to drag 
me into it. If I am brought into it I shall deny all; I shall never 
tell you anything in the future.’ At the same time he both urges 
you on and himself withdraws from the contest and strife. He 
who is unwilling to speak to you except in private, is almost in 
the position of one who does not speak at all. What is more 
unjust than to believe in private and to be angry in public?” 
And again he says,f “Credulity causes a great deal of harm. In 
many cases we should not even listen, since in some things it is 
better to be deceived than to distrust.” Of some things we are 
witnesses, but “suspicion and conjecture, two of the most de- 
ceiving provocatives, must be removed from the mind. That 
man greeted me with scant courtesy. This one did not embrace 
me. Still another broke off abruptly the conversation we had 
begun. This man did not invite me to dinner. I noticed aversion 
on the face of that man.” “Suspicion will never lack a reason: 
we are in need of frankness and a kindly judgment in all 
things; we should believe nothing except that which meets our 
eyes and is manifest; and as often as our suspicion shall have 
appeared groundless, let us blame our credulity. For such cor- 
* [bid., II, 29. 
} /éid., II, 24. 

[ 707 |] 

Opus Majus 

rection will form in us the habit of not believing a story on in- 
sufficient evidence.” And for this reason he says in the third 
book,* “We shall find many innocent if we begin to investigate 
before we yield to anger. But now we follow our first impulse; 
then although our suspicion is groundless, we persist, in order 
that we may not seem to have begun without cause; and un- 
fairest of all is the fact that the injustice of our anger makes 
us the more obstinate. For we retain and augment our feeling 
of anger, just as though the excess of our passion were a proof 
of its justice. . . . You will find that very same thing in man 
which you see happen in the brutes. . . . The color red excites 
the bull, the adder rises at a shadow, a napkin angers bears and 
lions. All animals that are wild and savage are disturbed at 
trifles.” And similarly he says in the second book, “Trifles are 
a terror to such as have no stability in themselves. The motion 
of a chariot and the change in the appearance of the wheels 
drive lions back into their den. The squeal of a pig terrifies 
elephants.” And in the third book he says, “The same thing 
happens in the case of restless and stupid natures. They are 
struck by suspicion to such a degree that they call moderate 
favors injuries. In favors is found the most frequent, at any 
rate the most bitter, source of anger. For we become angry with 
our dearest friends because they have given us less than we ex- 
pected, less than they have bestowed on another. . . . ‘I have 
less than I hoped for . . . than I deserved.’ This source of an- 
ger is especially to be dreaded; from it spring most destructive 
enmities and such as are likely to attack all that is most sacred. 
More friends than enemies slew the deified Julius, friends 
whose insatiable hopes he had failed to satisfy. . . . For no one 
has made a more generous use of victory from which he claimed 
nothing for himself except the power to regulate. But how 
could he have satisfied such insatiable desires, since all gauged 
their wishes to the full extent of the power of a single indi- 
vidual? . . . This has turned the arms of their own subjects 
against kings, and has driven the most faithful adherents to 
plot the death of those for whom and before whom they had 
vowed to die. No man is contented with his own lot when he 
* De Ira, III, 29, 30. 

Föda II, rx. 
t /ed., III, 30, 31. 

[ 708 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

considers that of his neighbor. . . . So great is the injustice 
of men, that although they have received much, the fact that 
they could have accepted more they regard as an injury. He 
gave me a praetorship: but I had hoped for a consulship. He 
has given me that which he had to give some one: he has con- 
tributed nothing of his own. Come, be thankful rather for what 
you have received. Wait for the remainder and be glad that you 
are not yet filled. We should reckon it among our pleasures that 
there still remains something to hope for. . . . Consider how 
many more you precede than you follow.” 

The second remedy is delay in exacting punishment. Hence 
Seneca says in the second book,* “The greatest remedy against 
anger is delay. Beg of anger at the beginning, not that it par- 
don, but that it judge; it will cool down if it waits.” And in the 
third book he says, “Give yourself no license while you are 
angry. Why? Because you wish for free license in all things. 
Fight with yourself: if you cannot conquer your anger, it. is 
beginning to conquer you. If it is hidden, if an outlet is not 
given to it, let us destroy its signs, and let us keep it as far as 
possible hidden and secret. This will prove a great trial to us. 
For anger is eager to leap forth and inflame the eyes and 
change the face. But if we have allowed it to become manifest 
on our exterior, it triumphs over us. Let it be hidden in the 
lowest depths of our breast: let us carry it, let not it carry us. 
Nay, let us turn all signs into their opposites. Let our look be 
mild, our voice gentler than usual, our step slower. Gradually 
the inner man is conformed to the outer. In Socrates a lowered 
voice and restrained speech were indicative of anger. It was 
then apparent that he was holding himself in check. . . . Let 
us beg all our most intimate friends to treat us with the utmost 
candor when we are least in a condition to brook it, and not to 
lend themselves to our anger. Against this potent evil and one 
that is pleasing to us . . . it is best to be on the look-out for 
obstacles with which to oppose our known vices, and before all 
else so to order our mind, that even when shaken by sudden and 
very grievous blows it may either have no feeling of anger, or 
bury such a feeling if excited by some great and unexpected 

* Ibid., II, 29. 
+ Jbid., III, 12, 13. 

[ 709 J 

Opus Majus 

injury in the depths of the heart and give no manifestation of 
its pain.” 

In the second book he likewise combines both the remedies 
just mentioned in a fitting and useful way. He says,* “There- 
fore against the first causes we must fight: for the cause of 
anger is the thought that we have been injured. To this thought, 
however, we must not give ready acceptance. Not even to what 
is open and manifest must we accede at once. For some false- 
hoods bear the appearance of truth. Time should always be 
given; time discloses the truth. Let us not lend ready ears to 
those who prefer charges: let this vice of human nature be 
noted by us and suspected, because we willingly believe that 
which we are unwilling to hear, and we yield to anger before 
we sit in judgment on the matter. What of the fact that we are 
influenced not only by charges but by mere suspicions? And 
become angry at innocent people by misinterpreting a look or 
a laugh? We ought then to plead the cause of the absent against 
ourselves and to hold our anger in suspense. For a delayed 
punishment can be exacted; an exacted punishment cannot be 
recalled.” And he, moreover, says in the third book,} “It is not 
expedient to see all things, to hear all things; let many injuries 
pass unnoticed, most of which he does not receive who is ig- 
norant of them. You don’t wish to be angry? Then don’t be 
inquisitive. The man who asks what has been said about him, 
he who digs up malicious remarks even though uttered in secret, 
disquiets himself. Our interpretation leads us to view certain 
things as injuries ; therefore some of them should be postponed, 
others laughed at, and still others pardoned. Anger must be 
restrained in many ways: many things may be turned off into 
a laugh or a jest.” And in addition to all these he sets forth a 
threefold argument against anger in the second book: for he 
argues as follows: “It is wrong to injure your country; there- 
fore it is also wrong to injure a fellow citizen, for he is part of 
your country. The parts are sacred if the whole is worthy of 
veneration. Therefore it is wrong to harm any man, for he is 
your fellow citizen in the larger city, that is, in the world.” The 
second argument is drawn from a simile in reference to the 

* De Ira, II, 22. 

T Zid; LIL, ar 
t Zčid., II, 31, 34. 

[710] 

Moral Philosophy 

members of the same body, and is as follows: “What if the 
hands should wish to harm the feet, and the eyes the hands? 
As all the parts are in accord, because the conservation of the 
whole depends on the preservation of the individual members, 
so men should spare their fellows, because they were born to 
form a society.” The third argument is a most fitting and ex- 
cellent one, the conclusion of which he places first. He says, 
“Therefore we must abstain from anger; either the man is an 
equal you are to attack, or a superior, or an inferior. To contend 
with an equal is a doubtful matter, with a superior is madness, 
with an inferior is paltriness.” And he says,* “Is he a good 
man who has inflicted injury? Do not believe it. Is he a bad 
man? Do not imitate him. He will pay the penalty to another ' 
which he owes to you: and he who has sinned has paid the 
penalty to himself.” 

Many other matters should be considered with reference 
to anger, all of which are taken up mainly in the books of 
Seneca on Anger and on Clemency. But since the discussion in 
the present instance is in the nature of a plea and not of a com- 
plete presentation, I am for this reason concluding it at this 
point. I have spoken more fully on this vice, since it will al- 
ways injure and confound the whole human race so long as 
man retains his mortal state. For the vice is a very bad one and 
particularly unnatural in man, flaring out to his peril. For this 
reason I have written at greater length and in more detail in 
regard to it. 

CHAPTER X 

SINCE the subject of anger has just been considered, which 
fights with adversity and is conquered, some virtues will be 
touched upon which conquer adversity and take no thought for 
this world’s prosperity. Seneca composed a book to Lucilius 
whose title is, Since the world is ruled by providence, why do 
many evils happen to good men? in which he says, “When you 
see good men and such as are pleasing to God laboring, sweat- 
ing, mounting the steep road, but evil men wanton and welter 
in pleasures, consider that we are pleased with the modest be- 

* /bid., II, 30. Bacon substitutes imitari for mirari in this quotation. 

Laat 

Opus Majus 

havior of our sons, but with pertness of house-born slaves: that 
the former are restrained by a more rigorous training, and the 
latter are encouraged in their pertness. God treats a good man 
as a favorite, he tries him, hardens him, prepares him for him- 
self. No evil can happen to a good man; opposites do not min- 
gle. As so many streams, so great a quantity of rain water, 
and such an abundance of medicinal springs do not change the 
taste of the sea, do not even alter it; so the shock of adversity 
does not unsettle the spirit of a good man. He remains unmoved 
and gives to every event the coloring of his own character: for 
he is superior to all external happenings. I do not say that he is 
insensible to these things; but he conquers them, and his quiet 
and placid nature is supported against all adversity. He con- 
siders all adverse things as part of his training. . . . Virtue 
grows feeble without an adversary. Then are its greatness and 
its ability apparent when it shows its power of endurance. 
Whatever happens men should take in good part and should 
turn into good. It is not what you bear but how you bear it that 
matters. Do you not see how differently fathers and mothers 
show their affection? The former bid their children rise early 
` and begin their studies, do not permit them to be idle on holi- 
days, and draw the sweat from them, sometimes tears. But 
mothers desire to fondle their children and keep them in the 
shade: they are eager to save them from tears, labor, sad- 
ness. God views good men as a father, and loves them intensely, 
and says, Let them be trained by hardships, by pains, by losses 
to develop true strength. Animals fattened by inactivity grow 
weak: they succumb not only from labor, but from movement 
and their own weight. A happiness that is unimpaired can en- 
dure no blow. But after waging unceasing conflict with his own 
misfortunes, a man grows callous from the injuries he receives, 
he yields to no evil, but even if he falls, he still fights on his 
knees. . . . Behold two champions worthy the attention of a 
god, a brave man matched with an evil fortune.’”’* 

“Nothing seems to me more unfortunate than the man who 
has never been touched by adversity. For he has never had an 
opportunity to make trial of himself. . . . He is not considered 
fit to win a victory over fortune; as though fortune were to say, 
‘Am I to take that man as my opponent? He will lower his arms 

* De Providentia, I, II. 

L72] 

Moral Philosophy 

at once. There is no need of exerting my full power against 
him . . . he cannot sustain my look . . . I am ashamed to fight 
with a man who is ready to be conquered.’ A gladiator considers 
it a disgrace to be pitted against an inferior, and he knows that 
an opponent is conquered without glory who is conquered with- 
out danger. Fortune reasons in the same way: she seeks the 
bravest as her antagonists, she passes by certain with disgust, 
she attacks those that are most steadfast and upright, that 
against such she may direct her force. It is only adversity that 
‘discovers the shining example. . . . The greater the suffering 
the greater will be the glory: . . . prosperity falls to the lot 
of the common herd and to men of mean abilities.” * 

“But it is characteristic of a great man to overcome misfor- 
tunes and terrors common to mortals. But he who is always for- 
tunate and passes his life without vexation of mind is ignorant 
of the other side of nature. You are a great man; but how do 
I know it if fortune does not give you an opportunity of show- 
ing your excellence? . . . I consider you an unhappy man be- 
cause you have never been unhappy. You have passed your life 
without an opponent. No one will know what you could do; not 
even you yourself. For you cannot know yourself without trial. 
No man has learned his own ability without effort. Therefore 
some have voluntarily exposed themselves to adversity, which 
seemed to have forgotten them, and have sought for their vir- 
tue, destined to pass without notice, an opportunity to display 
itself. Great men,” he says, “rejoice sometimes in adversity like 
brave soldiers in wars. . . . Courage is eager for danger; it 
thinks of its goal, not of what it is to suffer on the way: since 
that also which it is called upon to suffer is part of the glory. 
Soldiers take pride in their wounds; and joyfully display their 
blood flowing from wounds that are not mortal. Although those 
who return unscathed from battle have met the same danger, yet 
he who returns wounded, receives greater admiration. . . . You 
perceive the quality of the pilot in the storm, of the soldier in 
the battle. How am I to know what fortitude you possess against 
poverty if you are wallowing in riches? How am I to know 
your steadfastness when you are the object of ignominy, cal- 
umny and popular hatred if you are growing old amid plaudits? 
. . . Do not be afraid of those things that God applies as goads 

* [éid., III. 

[713 J 

Opus Majus 

to our characters: misfortune is virtue’s opportunity. We may 
rightly call those wretched who grow torpid from excessive 
good fortune, whom as on an unruffled sea a lifeless calm de- 
tains . . . adversity presses harder on such as have never ex- 
perienced it; the yoke is heavy on tender necks. The recruit 
pales at the thought of a wound; the veteran views his own 
blood undismayed; he knows that he has often been victorious 
after his blood was shed.” 

“God therefore hardens . . . trains those whom he esteems, 
whom he loves. But those to whom he seems indulgent he is 
keeping soft for evils yet to come. You are in error if you be- 
lieve any one exempt: his own turn will come to the man who 
has long enjoyed prosperity. He who seems exempted is merely 
deferred. Why does God afflict all good people with ill health 
or grief or other misfortunes? Because in camp also the bravest 
are commanded to incur the greatest dangers. The general 
sends his finest troops to waylay the enemy by night. . . . No 
one of those who march forth says ‘The general has done me an 
injustice’; but each one, ‘He has a good opinion of me.’ Those 
should say the same thing who are bidden to suffer afflictions 
that bring tears to timid and mean-spirited souls. Shun luxury, 
flee from good fortune weakening to our moral fibre, in which 
our souls become steeped and, unless something happens to 
warn us of our human lot, we remain in a state of torpor re- 
sembling a lasting intoxication. . . . Since all things that have 
passed beyond a due measure are harmful, excessive good for- 
tune is most dangerous. . . . God follows the method in the 
case of good men that teachers employ with their pupils, exact- 
ing more work from such as are more promising. . . . Never 
is virtue’s apprenticeship a mild one. Fortune lashes and 
lacerates us. Let us be patient: it is not mere brutality, it is a 
contest: the oftener we enter it the stronger we become. That 
part of our body is most robust which we have exercised most. 
We must offer ourselves to fortune, that we may be hardened 
against her by her own training. Gradually she will make us a 
match for her. Constant jeopardy will give us a contempt for 
dangers. Thus are sailors’ bodies hardened from enduring the 
buffeting of the sea; thus do the hands of farmers become worn, 
the arms of soldiers acquire strength to hurl their weapons, the 
limbs of runners become agile ; that member in each is strongest 

[714] 

Moral Philosophy 

which he has exercised. The mind by endurance arrives at a 
point where it can despise the power of misfortunes. Why won- 
der that good men are shaken, that they may become steadfast. 
The tree is not firm nor strong unless it is subject to frequent 
assaults of the wind. For by the mere shaking it becomes firmly 
placed and more surely rooted. Fragile are the trees that have 
grown in the sunny valley. It is therefore for the advantage of 
good men themselves, in order that they may be undaunted, to 
be trained amid adversity and to bear with equanimity those 
‘things which are not ills except to the man bearing them ill.”* 

“This is God’s purpose which he would show to the sage. . . . 
Good men labor, they sacrifice and are sacrificed and that too 
of their own free will; they are not dragged along by fortune, 
they follow her and keep pace with her. If they had known, they 
would have preceded her. . . . I can utter only one compaint 
in regard to thee, O God; thou didst not make thy will known 
to me before; for I would have taken up those tasks earlier 
which I am assuming after being summoned. . . . Dost thou 
wish some part of my body? Take it. I am offering no great 
thing. I shall soon leave it all behind. Dost thou wish my 
spirit? I shall not hinder thee in receiving again what thou 
hast given. Thou shalt receive from a willing hand whatsoever 
thou askest. What then? I should have preferred to offer it 
rather.than to hand it over. We have received that which is as 
perishable as we are. Always cheerful and steadfast let us be- 
lieve that nothing which we lose is ours. What is a good man 
called upon to do? To offer himself to fate. It is a great con- 
solation to be borne away with the universe. . . . Fire tests 
gold; misfortune good men.”’+ 

“Yet why does God permit any evil to befall good men? He 
removes all evils from them, crimes, disgraces, wicked thoughts, 
covetous designs, secret lust, and avarice threatening the prop- 
erty of another. God protects and sets them free. . . . Democ- 
ritus cast away his riches, considering them as a burden on a 
virtuous mind. What then? Are you surprised if God permits 
that to happen to a good man which a good man at times wishes 
to happen to himself? . . . Imagine, therefore, that God says 
to you, what complaint have you to make of me, you who have 

* De Providentia, IV. 

+ [éid., V. 

[715] 

Opus Majus 

chosen virtue? I have surrounded others with false blessings, 
and I have mocked their empty minds with what I may call a 
long and deceptive dream; I have adorned them with gold and 
silver and ivory; within they are destitute of good. Those men 
whom you look upon as fortunate, if you see them on the side 
they hide and not on that which they show, are wretched, sor- 
did, base, after the similitude of their own walls adorned on 
the outside. Such felicity has no firm basis and exists in ap- 
pearance only. It is only a shell and a thin one at that. There- 
fore while they are permitted to stand and appear to men as 
they themselves desire, they are brilliant figures and impose 
on their fellows. When something happens which disturbs and 
discloses them, it then becomes apparent how much deep and 
real deformity is hidden by a splendor not their own. The bless- 
ings I have given you are sure and lasting, the more you con- 
sider them and investigate them in every way, the better and 
greater will they appear. I have permitted you to despise what 
other men fear and to disdain what they wish. You do not 
shine on the outside, your excellence is within. Thus the uni- 
verse despises all outside of itself, and rejoices in its own spec- 
tacle. Every blessing has been placed within. Your happiness 
consists in not having need of it. But you will say many things 
happen of a sad and dreadful nature and hard to bear. Because 
I was not able to withdraw you from them, I have armed your 
minds against them all. Bravely endure them; in this you are 
superior to God; he is exempted from the endurance of evils; 
you endure and triumph over them. While life is prayed for, 
learn of death.’’* 

CHAPTER XI 

SENECA, moreover, in his book to Serenus on the topic, Why a 
philosopher is affected by neither injury nor insult, maintains 
that a philosopher cannot receive injury or insult. And he 
proves this by the statement, “I have not meant to attribute to 
the sage an imaginary honor, but to place him in such a position 
that he can receive no injury. What then? Will there be no one 
to attack him, no one to disturb him? There is nothing in nature 

* De Providentia, VI. 

[716] 

Moral Philosophy 

so sacred as not to be subject to sacrilege: but divine things on 
this account are not on a less elevated plane. . . . That is not 
invulnerable which is not struck, but that which is not injured: 
this I tell you is the distinguishing mark of the sage. Is it not 
certain that you can depend more on the strength that is not 
conquered than on that which is not assailed, since untried 
powers are doubtful, but you rightly regard that strength of 
character as most reliable which successfully resists all as- 
saults? Thus you may rest assured that the sage is of a finer 
nature if he is harmed by no injury, than if no injury happens 
to him. I shall call that man courageous whom wars do not 
subdue nor hostile force terrify when directed against him; I 
do not call the man courageous who enjoys a luxurious ease 
among indolent people. This therefore I maintain, that the sage 

is subject to no injury. Accordingly it matters not how many. 

shafts are hurled at him since he is invulnerable to them all. He 
resembles the hardness of certain stones which does not yield 
to iron. The diamond cannot be cut or marked or worn away, 
but actually dulls every tool applied to it. He may be compared 
to certain substances that cannot be consumed by fire, but even 
when enveloped in flame retain their rigidity and form; or to 
rocks projecting out into the deep which break the waves nor 
do they show any traces of the sea’s violence although they have 
been lashed for so many ages.””* 

“Thus is the mind of the sage firm and gathers such strength, 
that it is as safe from injury as the objects to which I have 
compared him. . . . For the sage is too far removed from con- 
tact with baser things for any hostile violence to expend its 
force upon him. All the attacks of shamelessness, ill will, and 
pride directed against the sage are made in vain.” f 

“Let us distinguish, if you approve, Serenus, injury from 
insult. The former is more severe in its nature, the latter is 
milder and grievous only to weaklings. Men are not harmed by 
insult, only offended. Such are the weakness and vanity of some 
men’s minds, that they consider nothing more bitter: thus you 
will find a slave who prefers to be beaten with a whip rather 
than slapped in the face, and who considers death and stripes 
more tolerable than words of insult. We go so far in our folly 

* De Constantia, III. 
+ Zőid., IV. 

Eid 

Wa 

Opus Majus 

as to afflict ourselves not only with pain but even with. the 
thought of it. We are like children who are afraid of a shadow 
or the ugliness of masks or an ill-favored face. . . . Injury has 
the intention of harming some one. But wisdom leaves no place 
for harm. In the sight of wisdom there is only one thing that 
harms, namely, the baseness of sin, which cannot enter where 
virtue and integrity are already established. Every injury is a 
loss to him who is subject to it, nor can any one receive an injury 
without some loss in prestige, in person, or in external interests. 
But the sage can lose nothing. For he has stored away his all in 
himself, he trusts nothing to fortune, he has his possessions in 
safety, content with virtue, which has no need of fortuitous 
things and therefore can be neither increased nor diminished. 
For virtue in possession of the highest good can increase no 
more, and fortune snatches away nothing except that which it 
has given. But fortune does not bestow virtue, and therefore it 
does not take virtue away. For virtue is free, inviolable, im- 
movable, unshaken. Virtue so hardens a man against misfor- 
tunes, that he cannot even be bent, much less be conquered. 

. . Virtue does not lower its eyes nor change its expression 
at the sight of either adversity or prosperity. Therefore the 
sage will never experience a loss of which he will be sensible. 
For he is in possession of virtue alone,of which he can never 
be deprived. He uses all else as though merely borrowed: but 
who is disturbed at the loss of what is not his? But if injury 
can harm no one of the sage’s possessions, because they are 
guarded by his virtue, injury cannot befall the sage. King 
Demetrius, surnamed Poliorcetes, had captured Megara. When 
Stilbon the philosopher was asked by Demetrius whether he 
had lost anything, he replied, ‘Nothing; I have all my posses- 
sions with me.’ And yet his patrimony had been plundered, his 
daughters carried off by the enemy, his country reduced to a 
foreign yoke, and he himself questioned by a king enthroned on 
high and surrounded by the arms of a victorious army. But 
the philosopher robbed the king of his victory, and bore wit- 
ness that, although his city had been captured, he himself was 
not only unconquered, but had suffered no loss: for he had in 
his possession the true riches, on which no man could set hand. 
But those things that had been pillaged and destroyed, he did 
not consider his, but extraneous and subject to the caprice of 

[718] 

Moral Philosophy 

fortune; therefore he had not set his heart on these things as 
though they were his. For the possession of all that comes to 
us from without is hazardous and uncertain. The sage looks 
upon adversity . . . and bears prosperity with moderation, 
neither yielding to the former nor relying on the latter. He is 
one and the same under all circumstances, nor does he reckon 
anything his except the better part of himself. . . . Those de- 
fences which guard the sage are protected from flames and 
from every assault; they offer no entrance, they are lofty, im- 
‘pregnable, equal to God!’’* 

“You may not make your usual statement that this sage of 
ours is nowhere found. Such a beautiful human character is no 
mere fiction ; nor are we imagining some exalted being who has 
no existence, but one whose existence is an assured fact and 
has been proved by us . . . seldom found perhaps, and then 
only after a lapse of many years. For great and exceptional 
phenomena do not frequently occur. For the rest I am afraid 
that Marcus Cato is even superior to our model sage. Finally, 
that which injures must be stronger than that which is injured. 
But wickedness is not stronger than virtue: therefore the sage 
cannot be injured. It is only evil people that try to injure the 
good. Good men live at peace with one another. Evil men are 
not so harmful to the good as they are to one another. But if 
only the weaker man can be injured, but the evil man is weaker 
than the good . . . injury cannot befall the sage. For you need 
not be reminded that no one is good except the sage. If Socra- 
tes, you say, was condemned unjustly, he received an injury. 
It is necessary to observe here that it may happen that some one 
does me an injury and I do not receive it; as, for example, if 
a man place in my city house an article he has stolen from my 
house in the country, he has committed a theft, but I have suf- 
fered no loss. . . . If a man has intercourse with his own wife 
under the impression that she is the wife of another, he will 
be an adulterer, although she will not be an adulteress. Some 
one has given me poison, but it has lost its efficacy owing to the 
fact that it has been mixed with food; by administering the 
poison he rendered himself guilty of a crime, even though he 
did no harm. . . . All crimes are accomplished facts, so far as 
their guilt is concerned, even before they have produced their 

* De Constantia, V, VI. 

[719 ] 

Opus Majus 

effect. . . . If I have received an injury, one must of necessity 
have been done me. If an injury has been done, it does not 
necessarily follow that I received it; for many things can hap- 
pen to ward off injury.”* 

“Moreover justice can suffer nothing that is unjust, because 
contraries cannot unite; . . . therefore injury cannot befall 
the sage. Nor is there any reason why you should be surprised 
at this: if no one can do him an injury, no one can confer even 
a benefit upon him. The sage lacks nothing that can be con- 
ferred upon him as a gift. . . . No one therefore can either 
harm or benefit the sage; since what is divine neither craves 
aid nor can suffer injury. Moreover, the sage closely approaches 
God, is like God with the exception that he is mortal. Striving 
to mount to those beings on high, well ordered, inaccessible to 
fear, ever moving in an equal and harmonious course, tranquil, 
beneficent, created for the general good, salutary to himself 
and to others, the sage will set his heart on nothing lowly; he 
will suffer no affliction who supported by reason passes through 
human vicissitudes with a divine courage. There is no source 
from which he may receive an injury. Do you think that I refer 
only to an injury received from man? I mean not even one re- 
ceived from fortune which after a contest with virtue has al- 
ways been worsted. . . . And if the sage bears with equanimity 
the injuries of fortune, how much more will he endure those of 
men in power whom he knows to be the instruments of for- 
tune?’ + 

“Now there is the added fact that no one receives an injury 
with an untroubled mind, but is perturbed when he experiences 
it. But the upright man is free from perturbation. He is master 
of himself and of his deep and calm repose. For if an injury 
touches him, he is disturbed and hindered thereby. But the 
sage is free from anger which the appearance of an injury 
excites, nor would he be free from anger unless he was also 
free from injury, which he knows cannot happen to him. For 
this reason he is so firm and so happy, for this reason constantly 
elated with joy. So far is he from being saddened at the attacks 

* De Constantia, VII. 

f 7éid., VIII. 

f The reading moderator sui omitting erroridus seems to give better sense than 
the reading followed by Bacon. 

[ 720 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

made on him by men and things, that he views an injury as a 
means of experimenting on himself and testing his virtue.”* 

“After having passed through the first part, let us pass to 
the second,” namely, insult. “An insult is less serious than an 
injury: we can complain of it rather than exact punishment 
for it, and the laws have not considered it worthy of a penalty. 
The resentment which it excites is the effect of an abject mind, 
which an action or a word is capable of dishonoring. A certain 
man refused to receive me at his home today, although he ad- 
mitted others: he listened with a disdainful air to that which I 
had to say, or he openly laughed at it . . . and other affronts 
of this kind, which I can call only the complaints of a squeamish 
mind. Those affected by such insults are as a rule men who are 
pampered by luxury and prosperity. Characters weak and 
effeminate in nature owing to too much ease, and wanton from 
_the lack of real provocation, are aroused by affronts, the 
greater parts of which are taken as such because of a faulty 
interpretation of their intent. Thus he who is affected by an 
insult shows that he possesses neither prudence nor self-con- 
fidence. For he does not doubt that he has been scorned, and 
this sentiment cannot fail to lower and depress him in his own 
estimation. But the sage is despised by no one. He knows his 
own greatness and is convinced that no one is in a position to 
despise him, and does not overcome all these—I shall not call 
them miseries of our minds but rather plagues, nay, he does not 
even feel them. There are other things, however, which do 
assail the sage, even if they do not overthrow him, as, for ex- 
ample, physical pain and debility, or the loss of friends and 
children, and the ruin of his country in the flames of war. I 
do not deny that the sage feels these misfortunes. For we are 
not attributing to him the hardness of stone or iron. There is 
no virtue in supporting misfortunes one does not feel. In what 
then does the virtue of the sage consist? He receives certain 
blows, but overcomes those received and heals and checks them. 
But these minor ills, namely insults, he does not even feel, nor 
does he employ against them that virtue with which he is ac- 
customed to endure hardships, but he either does not notice 
them, or judges them worthy of a laugh merely.” + 

* Iid., IX. 

+ Ibid, X. 

[721] 

Opus Majus 

“Moreover since most of our affronts are offered by proud 
and insolent men, who are unable to stand prosperity, the sage 
can repel such pride with that noblest of virtues, magnanimity. 
He passes over such trifles, regarding them merely as idle 
dreams and visions of the night without reality. . . . Con- 
tumelia [insult] comes from contemptus [contempt], since men 
insult only those for whom they have contempt. But no one 
really despises a greater and a better man, even if he comports 
himself in the same way as those who do despise. For children 
slap a parent’s face, and the child disarranges and pulls the 
hair of the mother, and spits on her, or exposes in the sight of 
its parents what should remain covered, and uses obscene ex- 
pressions. We do not call any one of these acts an insult. Why? 
Because he who has committed them is not in a position to 
despise. . . . But what folly it is at one moment to be pleased, 
and at another to be vexed by the same actions, and to call a re- 
mark made by a friend an affront, but if made by a young slave 
a droll bit of repartee?’’* 

“The same feeling that we have toward children the sage 
has toward all who even after youth and gray hairs still re- 
main like children. Have those men secured any advantage, 
whose minds are evil and whose errors have grown greater, 
who differ from children merely in the size and shape of their 
bodies, but are not less inconstant and unreliable, men who are 
eager for pleasures without discrimination, restless beings and 
kept quiet not by their nature but by fear? No one would say 
therefore that there is any difference between such men and 
children, since the latter display avarice for knuckle-bones, 
nuts, and small change, while the former are greedy for gold 
and silver and cities. . . . Therefore children and those more 
advanced in years are equally in error, but with the difference 
that the latter fall into other and greater evils. Rightly there- 
fore does the sage regard their affronts as mere pleasantries. 
And sometimes he admonishes and punishes them as though 
they were children, not because he has suffered an injury, but he 
corrects them because they have inflicted one, and with the idea 
that they will cease to act in this way. For so also are cattle 
mastered with the lash, nor do we become angry at them when 

* De Constantia, XI. 

[ 722 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

they refuse to be ridden, but we curb them, in order that the 
pain may conquer their obstinacy. Therefore you will perceive 
that the objection has been removed . . . why, if the sage has 
not suffered an injury or insult, does he punish those who have 
inflicted them? For he is not avenging himself, but he is cor- 
recting them.”* 

“Does a physician become angry at an insane patient? . . . 
The sage has the same attitude of mind toward all men as the 
physician has toward the sick under his care. The sage knows 
that all these grave personages who pass before him clad in 
purple and whose visage proclaims good health are of unsound 
mind. He regards them in no other light than as sick men lack- 
ing self-control. Consequently he does not even become vexed 
if in their sickness they have ventured to illtreat him who is 
trying to cure them, and he shows the same good sense in reck- 
oning as equally unimportant both their dignities and their 
depravities. As he will not be flattered at the attentions of a 
beggar, nor will he regard it as an insult if a man from the 
dregs of the people does not return his salutation, so will he 
feel no pride if many rich men pay him honor. For he knows 
that they differ in no respect from beggars, nay, that they are 
more wretched. For the former need little, while the needs of 
the latter are great. And again the sage will not be affected if 
the King of the Medes or Attalus King of Asia passes him in 
silence and with a haughty look as he bows. Am I to be vexed 

if one of those . . . whose shops are filled with a horde of the 
worst kind of slaves, has failed to greet me by name? No, with- 
out doubt. . . . Therefore the sage will not be affected by 

the insult of any one. For they all differ from one another, but 
the sage considers them on an equality owing to the equality 
of their folly. For if he should once lower himself to the point 
where he is affected by injury or insult, he can never be secure. 
But security is the sage’s particular blessing, nor will he con- 
sent to pay honor to the man who has insulted him by feeling 
that an insult has been inflicted upon him. For one must neces- 
sarily value the esteem of the man whose contempt hurts.” + 
“But what is the sage to do if he is slapped in the face? He 

* Ibid. XII. 
f Zőid., XIII. 

[ 723 J 

Opus Majus 

is to do what Cato did when he was insulted in this way; he 
did not fly into a passion, he did not seek vengeance, he did 
not even pardon the injury, but said that it had not been done. 
He displayed a greater elevation of soul in disavowing the 
injury than in pardoning it. For who is ignorant that the sage 
does not hold the ordinary opinion with respect to what is be- 
lieved to be evil or good? . . . He pays no heed to what men 
in general regard as disgraceful or wretched. But as the stars 
hold their way in a direction opposite to that of our world, so 
the sage moves forward in opposition to popular opinion.”* 

“After you have calculated what you think you can endure, 
you assign a slightly further limit to the patience of the sage, 
but his virtue has placed him in another world where he has 
nothing in common with you. This being granted, the throng 
of hardships and difficulties hard to bear and of things revolt- 
ing to the ear and the eye will not overwhelm the sage; he will 
offer the same resistance to all as to each in particular. He who 
pretends to determine that which the sage can or cannot endure, 
he who limits the grandeur of the sage’s soul within certain 
bounds, is doing wrong: fortune vanquishes us unless she is 
completely vanquished. . . . The home of the sage is small, 
without luxury, without uproar, without sumptuous equipment, 
is not guarded by janitors; but over this threshold tended by 
no doorkeepers fortune does not pass. She knows that she has 
no place there where nothing is hers.” t 

“Epicurus said that injuries are supportable by the sage; we 
say that he suffers no injuries. Nor may you say that this is 
repugnant to nature. We do not deny that it is a disadvantage 
to be lashed and to be struck, and to lose one of our members; 
but we refuse to consider all those things injuries. We do not 
take from them a sense of pain, but we do remove the name of 
injury, which cannot be accepted without impairing virtue. 
. . . We are taught by both these examples to despise injuries 
and insults which I may call the semblances and suspicions of 
injuries. To disdain such one need not be a sage but merely a 
man of discernment. . . . If I have deserved that these things 
should befall me, I am justly punished. If I am not guilty, he 

* De Constantia, XIV. 
+ 7bzd., XV. 

[ 7241] 

Moral Philosophy 

should blush who commits an injustice. . . . The fruit of an 
insult consists in the sentiment of indignation which it excites 
in him who is subjected to it.’’* 

“Let us take as our models those whose patience we praise. 
Let us imitate Socrates who took good-naturedly the sarcasms 
launched at him in the comedies, and laughed as merrily as he 
did on the occasion when he was doused with dirty water by 
his wife Xanthippe. When Antisthenes was reproached with 
the fact that his mother was a barbarian and a Thracian, he 
replied that the mother of the Gods was born on Mount Ida.” + 

“We must not engage in quarreling and contention. . 
Whatever is done by foolish people must be disregarded, and 
honors and injuries having their origin in the vulgar throng 
are to be viewed in the same class; we are not to grieve over 
the latter nor be elated at the former. . . . Moreover liberty 
does not consist in exemption from suffering. Liberty is a su- 
periority of the mind to injuries.” $ 

CHAPTER XII 

SENECA in his book addressed to his mother Helvia speaks 
about the remedies not only for grief and suffering, but also 
those for poverty, exile, insult, and many other misfortunes of 
this kind. Therefore he proposes the following remedy to her 
on the occasion of an affliction which she found hard to bear: 
“Accordingly I shall exhibit to that heart all its own griefs 
and bereavements. This will be effecting a cure not by gentle 
means, but by burning and cutting. What end have I in view? 
That the mind victorious over so many sorrows may be ashamed 
not to bear bravely a single wound on a body marked by the 
scars of so many. Let us leave therefore tears and lamentations 
to those weak minds, so enervated by a long period of pros- 
perity, that the least shock of adversity overthrows them; but 
let those whose whole life has been spent in adversity, endure 
griefs even the most severe with a firm and unalterable con- 

* /éid., XVII. 
f Zid., XVIII. 
$ Zid., XIX. 

[725 ] 

Opus Majus 

stancy. Constant misfortune has the advantage of finally hard- 
ening those whom it is ever assailing.’’* 

“As recruits cry out at trifling wounds and are more afraid 
of the hand of a physician than of a sword, but veterans al- 
though seriously wounded permit their wounds to be treated 
with patience and without a groan, as though their bodies be- 
longed to other people.” . . . and therefore he recounts to his 
mother all the misfortunes she has patiently endured, in order 
that he may remove her grief for her son.} 

Then Seneca wishes to console her by his own example as 
follows: “But I shall overcome my grief, I believe, first if I 
shall show that I am suffering nothing that can render me an 
object of pity . . . I say that I am not unhappy. I shall add 
to relieve your anxiety that I cannot even be made unhappy.” 
And he proves his statement as follows: “We are born under 
conditions which would be favorable if we do not abandon 
them. Nature’s intention was that there should be no need of 
great magnificence for life to be happy. Every one can make 
himself happy. The power to turn the balance is slight in ex- 
ternal things and it exerts little influence one way or the other; 
the sage is not carried away by prosperity nor cast down by 
adversity. For he has always striven to rely entirely upon him- 
self, and to seek all his joy within himself. What then? Do I 
claim to be a sage? By no means. For if I were able to make 
such a declaration, I should not only deny that I am unhappy, 
but I should declare myself to be the most fortunate of men and 
almost the equal of God: as it is, I have done that which suf- 
fices to soften all asperities, I have put myself in the hands of 
wise men, and, too feeble for my own defense, I have fled to 
the camp of those who defend with ease themselves and their 
friends. They have bidden me stand constantly as though on 
guard and to foresee all attempts of fortune and all her as- 
saults long before they happen. She is dangerous to those who 
do not expect her: her attack is easily sustained by him who is 
always on the lookout for it. For the arrival of the enemy dis- 
mays those only whom it has taken off their guard; but those 
who have made due preparation beforehand for war, calmly 
and easily sustain the first assault which is the most violent. I 

* Ad Helviam Matrem, II. 
+ /ésd., III. 

[ 726 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

have never trusted fortune even when she seemed to bring 
peace. All those things that her favor conferred upon me, 
money, honors, influence, I have placed where she could recall 
them without moving me. I have left a great interval between 
them and me. Therefore she has taken them from me, she has 
not torn them away. Adverse fortune never crushes a man 
unless good fortune beguiles him first. Those who have set 
their heart on her gifts as though they were their own perma- 
nent possessions, who have wished to be looked up to because 
of them are humbled and distressed, when their empty and 
childish minds, ignorant of all stable happiness, are deprived 
of deceitful and transient pleasures. But the man who has not 
inflated himself with prosperity also does not collapse when 
fortune changes; toward both conditions he possesses a mind 
of tested firmness: for in the midst of prosperity he has tested 
his own strength against adversity. For myself I have never 
believed that true happiness is to be found in those things which 
all men desire: besides I have found them empty . . . and 
smeared with a deceptive rouge, with nothing on the inside 
corresponding to their exterior.’”’* 

Later on he takes up the consideration of particular ills, 
namely, exile, poverty, insult, as follows: “Now in these things 
which are termed evils I find nothing so terrible and so hard 

to bear as the popular idea led me to apprehend. . . . But the 
decisions of the people in a great measure are repealed by the 
sages.” 

“Disregarding then the judgment of the majority whom the 
outward appearance in such matters without further examina- 
tion leads astray, let us see what exile really is: it is to be sure 
a change of place. Let me add, that I may not seem to be nar- 
rowing its effect, and to be relieving it of its worst features, 
many disadvantages are attached to this change of place: pov- 
erty, ignominy, contempt. . . . I wish to consider in the first 
place what hardship mere change of place imposes.” 

“Consider, if you please, this throng for which the dwellings 
of an immense city (he means Rome) scarcely suffice: the 
greater part of this throng is deprived of their country... . 
Bid all these people be summoned and ask each where his 
home is: you will find that most of them have left their own 

* Tida IV, V. 

7274] 

Opus Majus 

abodes and have come to the greatest city in the world, but a 
city that is not theirs. Then leave this city which can be said 
in a sense to belong to all. Visit all other cities; there is not one 
of them that does not contain a large foreign population.” * 
His second reason is drawn from the nature of the soul. He 
says: “A restless and an unquiet mind has been given to man: 
it never remains at rest, it is ubiquitous, and directs its thoughts 
into all things known and unknown. The mind of man is al- 
ways on the move, objects to inaction, and takes the utmost de- 
light in constant novelty. You need not wonder at this, if you 
consider its origin; it is not formed from an earthly and 
sluggish body; its descent is from the pure celestial spirit. But 
perpetual motion is characteristic of the heavenly bodies which 
are borne along in their rapid course. Contemplate the stars 
that give light to the world; not one of them is stationary. 
. How idle then to suppose that the mind of man suffers 
with regret a transition and change of place, although nature 
either delights or preserves herself by a continual and very 
rapid change!” + 
He draws his third reason from the experience of all na- 
tions. He says: “Turn now your thoughts from the heavenly 
bodies to the affairs of men: you will see that whole nations 
have changed their abodes. How can we account for Greek 
cities in the midst of barbarous lands? What of the speech of 
Macedonia among the Indians and the Persians? Scythia and 
that whole stretch of lands inhabited by savage and uncon- 
querable races show Grecian cities planted on the shores of the 
Black Sea. The whole side of Italy that is washed by the 
Tyrrhene sea was greater Greece. Asia claims the Tuscans. The 
Tyrians dwell in Africa. The Carthaginians emigrated to 
Spain, the Greeks to Gaul, the Gauls to Greece. The Pyrenees 
offered no obstacle to the passage of the Germans. The wander- 
ing spirit of man has cut for itself roads through the unknown. 
Some after the trials of a long journey have selected an abode, 
yielding to their fatigue rather than making a deliberate choice. 
. This at least is manifest that nothing has remained in 
the same place in which it had its origin.” He then returns to his 

* Ad Helviam Matrem, VI. 
{t éid., VI. 

[ 728] 

Moral Philosophy 

argument in the words, “But what else are all these migrations 
of nations but exiles on the part of peoples?’’* 

“Due allowance being made for all the other disadvantages 
that are inseparable from exile, Varro, the most learned of 
Romans, remarks as a sufficient consolation for change of 
place, that wherever we go we are bound to find the same na- 
ture. Marcus Brutus considers it sufficient that his own virtue 
accompanies the exile wherever he goes. If each of these 
methods of consolation, taken separately, does not suffice the 
exile, we can have no doubt of their efficacy when they are 
united. For how trifling is our loss? Two things that are most 
excellent will always accompany us, universal nature and per- 
sonal virtue. But if he says that universal nature consists in 
whatever is best, this lies outside of the powers of man: it can 
neither be given nor taken away. I speak of this world, the 
grandest and most magnificent of the works of nature; of this 
mind made to contemplate and admire the world, of which it 
is the noblest part, ours as a lasting possession destined to 
remain with us as long as we ourselves shall last. Let us hasten 
then with alacrity and resolution wheresoever circumstances 
may direct. . . . From all places equally we lift our eyes to 
the heavens, all things divine are separated by equal intervals 
from all things human.” t 

“Narrow is the mind that earthly things delight,” as quoted 
above from this book. “Brutus in his work on virtue says that he 
saw Marcellus in exile in Mitylene living as happily as human 
nature permits, and never more interested in the liberal arts 
than at that time. . . . Brutus adds that he felt when on the 
point of returning without Marcellus that it was he who was 
going into exile, and not Marcellus who was being left in exile. 
How much more fortunate was Marcellus when he merited the 
praise of Brutus because of his exile, than when he won the 
praise of the republic because of his consulship! . . . You so 
trained your mind, Marcellus, by methodical studies, that you 
knew that every place for the sage was his native land.’”’t 

“Marcellus then supported exile well, nor did change of place 
produce any change in his mind, although poverty followed 

* /éid., VII. 
t Zid. VIII. 
ł bid., IX. 

[729] 

Opus Majus 

upon it. No man considers poverty an evil, unless he has 
reached that point of madness which permits avarice and 
luxury to subvert all things. . . . The desires of the body are 
few: relief from cold, hunger, and thirst. He who desires more 
than these toils to serve, not his needs, but his vices. It is not 
necessary to ransack every sea, nor to burden the stomach by 
the slaughter of animals, nor to dig up shellfish from the un- 
known shore of a remote sea: may the gods and goddesses 
destroy those whose extravagance passes beyond the limits of 
an empire exposed to hatred. . . . From every land all things 
known to a pampered palate are brought to Rome. That which 
is admitted with difficulty by a stomach enfeebled by delicacies 
is transported from a remote ocean. They vomit that they may 
eat, and they eat that they may vomit, and do not deign even to 
digest feasts that have required a search of the whole world 
for their viands. What harm does poverty do the man who 
holds such luxuries in contempt? . . . Unhappy people”—as 
was noted above; and he continues; “I am disposed to say: 
Why do you launch ships? Why arm bands against wild beasts 
and against men? Why run hither and thither in such a commo- 
tion? Why pile treasures on treasures? Do you never stop to 
think how small your bodies are? Is it not the height of folly 
and madness, when you can hold so little, to desire a great deal? 
Therefore although you may increase your rating and extend 
your boundaries, you will never give your bodies a greater 
capacity. . . . Such is the lot of men when they measure wealth 
not by the standard of reason, which has fixed bounds, but by 
that of a debased habit of life, whose caprices are insatiable 
and incomprehensible. For cupidity nothing is sufficient, for 
nature even a little suffices.’’* 

“Everything that nature has rendered necessary for man 
she has made easy for him to obtain. . . . That man is poor 
not through the fault of fortune but through his own. . . . He 
who accordingly keeps himself within the limits prescribed by 
nature, will not have a sense of poverty; he who disregards 
these limits will be pursued by poverty even in the midst of the 
greatest wealth.” For “exile is” always “able to provide neces- 
saries, but not even a kingdom suffices to supply things that are 
needless. It is the mind that makes men rich. This accompanies 

* Ad Helviam Matrem, X. 

[ 730] 

Moral Philosophy 

the exile, and in the midst of the most cruel solitudes, after it 
has found enough to sustain the body, overflows with its own 
blessings and enjoys them; money has no more to do with the 
mind than with the immortal God. All these things . . . stones, 
gold, silver, and great circular tables are earthly burdens, 
which the unpolluted mind cannot love, remembering as it does 
its own nature, itself light, free from contamination, and ready 
to spring on high whenever released: meanwhile to the full 
extent permitted by hampering limbs and the burden that rests 
heavily upon us, the mind on the wings of thought traverses 
the realms of the gods. Therefore the mind can never be exiled, 
the mind that is free and related to God and equal to all space 
and alltime. . . . This feeble body, the prison and the chain of 
the soul, is tossed hither and thither. It is against this that 
punishments, robberies, and maladies do their worst; the mind 
itself is sacred and eternal, and the hand of violence cannot be 
laid upon it.’’* 

“Consider that the poor, who form the larger part of hu- 
manity, have not a more gloomy or anxious air than the rich; 
nay, I am inclined to think they are more joyous owing to the 
fact that their mind is distracted by fewer cares. . . . As for 
me, when I look back at instances in the past, I am ashamed to 
draw any consolation from poverty. Luxury has increased to 
such an extent in our day, that the provision made for exiles 
exceeds the patrimony of the chief men of the state in days 
gone by. We know that Homer had but one slave, Plato three, 
Zeno, founder of the unbending and virile philosophy of the 
Stoics, had none. Will any one say therefore that these phi- 
losophers lived in a wretched way, without seeming himself to 
be most wretched to all men on this account?’ + 

“The reply may be made: Why do you unnaturally separate 
these evils, which can be borne singly, but when united cannot 
be endured? Change of place is endurable if one change merely 
his dwelling-place. Poverty is endurable, if disgrace be not 
added, which even alone is wont to crush men’s spirits. To him 
who seeks to terrify me with an aggregation of evils I must 
make this reply: The mind that is superior to any one phase of 
fortune will be superior to them all. The mind once hardened 

* [bid., XI. 
+ Loid., XII. 

E730 

Opus Majus 

by virtue is invulnerable to every assault. If avarice, a very 
deadly bane of the human race, has relaxed its grip on you, 
ambition will not cause you delay. If you do not regard your 
last day as a punishment, but as a law of nature, the fear of no 
other thing will venture to enter that breast from which you 
have driven the dread of death. If you consider that sexual de- 
sire was given man not for the sake of enjoyment but for the 
purpose of propagating the race, every other desire will pass by 
untouched him whom this ruinous passion deep seated in our 
very vitals has not injured. Reason does not triumph over the 
vices singly but over all of them together; her victory is gen- 
eral.” And he continues in regard to disgrace: “Do you sup- 
pose the sage is disturbed by disgrace, who relies wholly on 
himself, and who is free from the opinions of the common herd? 
An ignominious death is more even than disgrace. Yet Socrates 
with the same look with which he had treated the thirty tyrants 
with disrespect on a certain occasion, entered the prison, des- 
tined to remove disgrace even from such a place. For that abode 
could not seem a prison in which Socrates was. . . . No man is 
scorned by another unless he has first been scorned by himself. 
A groveling and an abject mind is exposed to insult; but he who 
raises himself above the most cruel misfortunes and triumphs 
over evils by which other men are crushed, regards the very 
misfortunes as a badge of distinction, since,” no doubt, “our 
disposition is such, that nothing challenges our admiration 
more than a man courageous in adversity. As Aristeides was 
being conducted to punishment in Athens, all who met him 
lowered their eyes and groaned at the fate, not of a just man, 
but of justice itself. One man, however, as he passed, spat in 
Aristeides’ face . . . but Aristeides wiped his face off and with 
a laugh said to the magistrate who accompanied him: Warn 
that fellow not to yawn so offensively. . . . If a great man has 
fallen, he retains his greatness; he is no more an object of scorn 
than are the ruins of temples when trodden under foot. To such 
ruins the devout pay the same respect as to temples still stand- 
ing.”* 

After giving his mother these remedies against adversity, he 
takes up again all the misfortunes that have befallen her, in 
order that he may teach her how one is victorious who has al- 

* Ad Helviam Matrem, XIII. 

[ 732 1] 

Moral Philosophy 

ready vanquished so many ills by strength of character. He 
says accordingly: “But the harder these trials are, the greater 
the courage you must summon to your aid; it is an enemy 
known and often vanquished, against whom you must struggle 
with fresh ardor. Blood in this instance has flowed from a body 
that has already suffered wounds, through whose very scars 
you have been stabbed.” * 

CHAPTER XIII 

WRITING to Gallio on the remedies for misfortunes Seneca 
says: “You are going to die, death is natural to man and is not 
to be regarded as a punishment. I entered the world on the 
condition that I should leave it. It is foolish to fear what you 
cannot avoid. . . . You are going to die; I am not the first nor 
the last: many have preceded me, all will follow me. . . . Am 
I ignorant that I am a rational and a mortal animal?’ +} 

“Men think evil of you. But they are evil men. Now to dis- 
please evil men is worthy of praise. An opinion can have no 
weight when he who condemns is himself worthy of condemna- 
tion. . . . Men are speaking ill of you. I should be disturbed, if 
they were acting with sound judgment: as the matter stands, 
their action is prompted by a diseased state of mind. They do 
not know how to speak well of a man. They act as they do, not 
because I deserve it but because such is their habit. . . .”Ẹ 

“You will suffer exile. You are mistaken: there is only one 
country for us all. I am not forbidden to dwell in my native 
land but in a certain locality. . . . No foreign land is a place 
of exile but simply another country. . . . A man’s country is 
where he does well. But well-being is in the man himself, not 
in his location. . . . If he is a sage, he is simply dwelling 
abroad; if he is a fool, he is suffering exile.” § 

“Grief threatens. If it is slight, let us bear it: patience is a 
small matter. If our grief is severe, let us bear it, glory is not 

* [bid., XV. 

+ De Remediis Fortuitorum, II. 
$ /éid., VII. 

§ 7ézd., VIII. 

[733 1 

Opus Majus 

a small matter. Grief is a hard thing. Nay, you are soft. Few 
have been able to endure grief. Let us be among the few.””* 

“Poverty is grievous to me. Nay, you are grievous to pov- 
erty. The fault is not in poverty but in the man suffering from 
it. Poverty is free from encumbrance, blithe, safe. . . . You 
are poor because you think you are. The birds lack nothing. The 
beasts of the field live for the day. . . . That man has received 
a great sum of money. Therefore pride also. . . . Do you con- 
sider him a man? He is a money-chest. Who is envious of a 
treasury or of full coffers? He is merely the coffer whom you 
consider the owner of the money. If he is prodigal, he will not 
have it; if he is a miser, he does not have it. He whom you 
reckon fortunate often grieves, often sighs. Many accompany 
him. Flies follow honey, wolves carrion, ants grain. That 
throng is after the booty not the man.” Death, exile, grief, 
pain, and the like are not the punishments but the tributes of 
life. 

CHAPTER XIV 

CONSOLING Marcia for the death of her son, Seneca writes as 
follows: “Grief renews and strengthens itself daily . . . and 
sorrow becomes the pleasure of an unhappy mind. Do not 
imagine it a great achievement to preserve a courageous bear- 
ing in the midst of prosperity when life moves forward pro- 
pitiously. A calm sea and favoring wind do not display the skill 
of the pilot; something adverse must occur to test his courage. 
. . . The envy of fortune is aroused by nothing else to such a 
degree as by tranquillity of mind. The steersman of the ship 
is disgraced who permits the helm to be wrested from his grasp 
by the waves, who abandons the sails to the gale, and hands 
over the ship to the tempest. But we must praise him even in 
shipwreck whom the sea has overwhelmed while still retaining 
his ship and struggling to save it.” $ 

“Longing for one’s own is natural. Who denies this, as long 
as it is within moderation? . . . But our feeling passes far 

* De Remediis Fortuitorum, IX. 

} /bid., X. 

+ Ad Marciam, I, V, VI. 

[ 7341 

Moral Philosophy 

beyond the requirements of nature. Consider how violent is 
the grief of animals and yet how brief. For one or two days the 
lowing of the cow is heard, and the frenzied wandering of the 
mare does not last longer. Wild beasts after following the tracks 
of their young, on their return to their plundered lairs allow 
their rage to subside within a short time. Birds with loud cries 
mourn over their empty nests, yet within a brief space of time 
they resume quietly their flight. Man is the only animal that 
suffers a prolonged grief for the loss of its young. . . . But to 
convince you that it is not natural to succumb to our griefs, 
consider that the same loss inflicts a deeper wound on women 
than on men, on barbarians than on cultured nations, on the 
ignorant than on the learned. But those things that have 
derived their force from nature retain the same. It is apparent 
that that which varies is not natural. Fire burns all ages, the 
citizens of all cities, men and women alike. Iron will display 
its power to cut in every body. Why? Because it has derived 
its powers from nature. . . . Each one in his own way feels 
poverty, grief, ambition, according to the impress of habit 
upon him: and according to a dreadful preconceived idea in 
regard to things that should not be feared, an idea that has ren- 
dered him feeble and incapable of endurance.”’* 

“In the second place what is natural does not decrease with 
time: grief, however, is consumed by time. But you will say, 
‘I did not think that it would happen.’ Do you think that some- 
thing will not happen which you know can happen to many and 
which you see has actually happened to many? An excellent 
maxim and worthy of no common origin is the line, 

That which can happen to anyone can happen to each. 

That man has lost his children; you can also lose yours. This 
man has been condemned; and your innocent life is in imminent 
danger. This error deceives. . . . He robs present evils of their 
power who has foreseen that they were coming.” t 

“All this accidental splendor that surrounds us, Marcia, chil- 
dren, honors, riches, spacious halls, throng of clients, crowded 

vestibules . . . and all the rest depending on an uncertain and 
capricious fortune are the property of another and are merely 
* bid. VII. 

f 7ézd., VIII, IX. 

[ 735 J 

wa 

Opus Majus 

loaned to us. No one of these things is given us. They are like 
those borrowed decorations that embellish our theaters, which 
are to be returned to their owners, some on the first day, others 
on the second, while a few remain to the end of the play. There- 
fore there is no reason why we should admire these things as 
though we were located among our own possessions. The use 
and enjoyment of them is ours. It is God who gives these 
games, who determines the time of restitution. We must hold 
in readiness what has been given us for an indefinite time only, 
and when called upon must make restitution without complaint. 
It is only a very bad debtor who reviles his creditor. . . . The 
mind must often be admonished to love such objects as destined 
to leave us, nay, as now doing so. You are to possess the bless- 

ings of fortune without a permanent claim. . . . You have no 
promise for the coming night, none for the present hour. You 
must hasten; you are threatened from the rear. . . . All your 

possessions are subject to plunder; you are ignorant, poor 
wretches, that your life is only a flight.”* 

“Why should we weep over the details of life? It is deplor- 
able as a whole. New misfortunes will press upon you, before 
you have finished with the old. . . . What is man? A fragile 
vase shattered by any jar. There is no need of a great tempest 
to shatter you. You will decompose under any shock. What is 
man? A weak and fragile body, naked, without natural de- 
fense, dependent on the aid of others, exposed to all the out- 
rages of fortune . . . the prey and the victim of any wild 
beast . . . unable to endure cold, heat, toil. . . . An odor, a 
savor, insomnia . . . and food and the things without which 
man cannot live, prove deadly to him. . . . He is not capable 
of enduring every climate, change of water and the blast of an 
air to which he is not accustomed; in a word, the most trifling 
causes make him ill . . . meanwhile how great a commotion is 
stirred up by this animal so contemptible! In what great 
thoughts does he indulge, forgetful of his own condition! His 
projects are limitless, eternal, his plans include grandsons and 
great-grandsons. But in the midst of his great designs death 
overwhelms him. That which we call old age is merely the cir- 
cuit of a very few years.” t 

* Ad Marciam, X. 
+ Zbid., XI. 

[ 7367] 

Moral Philosophy 

“As a rule great and lasting blessings do not fall to the lot 
of anyone. Good fortune does not last nor continue to the end 
unless it be moderate.’’* 

And he introduces examples of patience in bearing the loss 
of sons. “Greece is not the only nation to be proud of a father 
who in the midst of a sacrifice on learning of the death of a 
son merely bade the flute-player be silent, removed the chaplet 
from his head, and duly completed the rest of the ceremony. 
Pulvillus the pontiff acted in a similar manner when the death 
of his son was reported to him while he was consecrating the 
Capitol. He pretended that he did not hear what had been told 
him, and repeated the solemn words of the ritual, without suf- 
fering a groan to interrupt his prayer.” + 

“Cornelia, daughter of Scipio, mother of the Gracchi, re- 
called her twelve children by as many deaths. ... The Gracchi, 
to whom one refuses the title of good citizens but not that of 
great men, the mother saw slain and deprived of sepulcher. To 
those who offered her consolation and called her unhappy she 
said, ‘I shall never call myself unhappy, I who have borne the 
Gracchi.” Octavia and Livia,t one the sister of Augustus, the 
other his wife, lost sons both in the flower of their youth, and 
both regarded as a future emperor. Octavia refused all consola- 
tion. . . . Through the rest of her life she gave way to her 
grief as she had done at the funeral. She would have considered 
it a second bereavement had she ceased to weep; she wished 
for no portrait of her beloved son, she did not permit his name 
to be mentioned in her presence. . . . Livia displayed the sensi- 
bility of a mother and the firmness of the wife of an emperor. 
She did not cease to celebrate the name of her son, to picture 
him in private and in public, to speak of him and to hear him 
mentioned with the utmost pleasure.” 

“Human life is assailed by evils of every kind; they never 
accord us a long peace, scarcely a truce. . . . It is in fact the 
nature of mortals that nothing is more pleasing than that which 
they have lost.’’§ 

“Tt is then opinion that torments us; it is we ourselves who 

* Ibid., XII. 
f Zőid., XIII. 
f See Zžid., II and III, where this passage belongs. 

§ Jézd., XVI. 
[ 737 1 

Opus Majus 

place the estimate on our misfortune. The remedy is in our 
hands.” * 

“All the works of man are perishable and of short duration; 
they do not occupy any place in the immensity of time . . 
whose increment however great will be negligible. There is 
only one way to live for a long time, that is to live sufficiently. 

. . You will find no difference between the longest life and 
the shortest if you compare the time one has lived with that 
which he has not lived.” + 

“Do you complain, Marcia, that your son did not live so long 
as he might have lived? How do you know if a longer life 
would have been to his advantage? If his own interest did not 
require his death? What man can you find today whose interests 
are on so sure a foundation, that he has nothing to fear as time 
goes on? Human affairs are always subject to change, are 
never stable . . . and for this reason death is to be desired by 
those who are most fortunate, because in such a state of in- 
stability and in such a disordered condition of affairs the past 
alone is certain. Nothing is so deceptive as the life of man, noth- 
ing so insidious; no one would have accepted it, had he known 
the nature of the gift.” f 

“Besides this since everything in the future is uncertain and 
threatening, the pathway to the gods is easiest for the souls 
that have been set free betimes from human intercourse. For 
they have contracted very little defilement and sluggishness, 
since they are set free before an earthly character is too deeply 
impressed. They fly back on lighter wing to their origin . . . 
a lengthy sojourn in the body is never pleasing to great 
minds.’’§ There are other passages also as noted above. 

CHAPTER XV 

I HAVE treated this third part of Moral Philosophy at greater 
length than I purposed at the beginning. But the beauty of the 
moral sentiments delights us; and especially are these princi- 

* Ad Marciam, XIX. 

+ Lbid., XXI. 

$ /did., XXII. 

§ /did., XXIII. 

[ 738 1 

Moral Philosophy 

ples brought out with great clearness of thought by the efforts 
of philosophers. And we should accept them with greater eager- 
ness since we Christian philosophers do not know how to rea- 
son on the subject of morals, nor can we make so eloquent an 
appeal. Would that we might approve by our conduct those 
principles which the philosophers so wisely propound. For al- 
though in regard to the virtues bestowing grace, namely, faith, 
hope, love, and the like, we are able to perceive truths of which 
even the philosophers are ignorant, yet in the virtues that in 
general are requisite for integrity of life and for the intercourse 
of human society, both in word are we no match for them, and 
in deed are we less efficient, as is clearly shown by a considera- 
tion of the wisdom taught by them. This is quite blameworthy 
in us and worthy of the scorn of all men. It should therefore 
be necessary for Christian philosophers to consider the un- 
clouded glory exhibited by the philosophers. Moreover, we 
are encouraged thereto by the examples of the sacred writers. 
For they diligently applied to divine things the teaching of the 
philosophers, and especially those principles pertaining to 
morals and to the rules of correct living. 

But there is a particular reason for my lingering on these 
works of Seneca, since although I have searched. for books of 
this kind from my childhood, I have never succeeded in finding 
them until the present time. I refer to the De Ira, Ad Helviam, 
Cur bonis mala accidunt, An in sapientem cadunt contumelia et 
injuria, Ad Marciam, and the three following works. Since I 
do not know whether these books have been seen by your Ex- 
cellency, I have attempted to quote them here somewhat freely. 

CHAPTER XVI 

SENECA begins his consolation addressed to Paulinus on the 
shortness of human life as follows: 

“Most men complain of the injustice of nature, because our 
life is short. . . . We do not have too little time, we waste too 
much of it. Life would be long enough and would suffice to 
complete the greatest enterprises, if it were properly arranged 
as a whole. But when life has been dissipated in extravagance 
and in neglect of opportunity, when it is devoted to no useful 

[ 739 J 

Opus Majus 

occupation, at length under the prodding of the last grim neces- 
sity, we perceive that life has passed without our perception of 
its passage. The fact is, we have not been granted a short life, 
we have made it so. As riches falling into bad hands are dissi- 
pated in a moment; while a modest fortune if entrusted to a 
good guardian is increased by his care; even so our life if well 
employed extends over a long period.* 

“Life is long if you know how to use it. But one is possessed 
by an insatiable avarice, another devotes himself constantly to 
superfluous efforts. Still another is steeped in wine. And yet 
another stagnates from sloth. . . .. The whole period is not 
life but is time. Vices surround and press upon us from every 
side nor do they suffer us to rise or to lift our eyes to examine 
truth, but they press us down plunged and held fast in our lust. 
We are never permitted to recover ourselves; when perchance 
we have some moments of respite, our passions never permit 
us to be perfectly tranquil; we are like the sea whose waves con- 
tinue in motion even after the wind has ceased. That man is 
attached to such a one, while this man is attached to someone 
else. No man belongs to himself.” 

“Though all the geniuses that have enlightened the world 
by common consent express their wonder at this one thing, 
they will never express adequately their astonishment at this 
blindness of the human spirit. No man is found who is willing 
to distribute his money ; among how many does each of us dis- 
tribute his life! They are careful in guarding their patrimony; 
they are prodigal when it comes to wasting their time, the only 
thing in which avarice is laudable. . . . This is your hundredth 
year or more. Come, reckon up your life. Tell me how much of 
this time the creditor, how much the mistress, the patron, the 
client, have consumed; how much in the coercion of slaves, 
how much in running about to oblige your friends? Add the 
diseases we have brought upon ourselves. Add the time also of 
which we have made no use: you will see that you have fewer 
years than those you count. Recall how many times when you 
were firm in your resolution . . . when you made use of your 
own self, when your face remained serene and your spirit un- 
daunted, . . . how many have pillaged your life without your 

* De Brevitate Vitae, I. 
+ 7éid., II. 

[ 740 1 

Moral Philosophy 

perceiving what you were losing . . . you will perceive that 
your death is premature. What then is the reason? You live as 
though you expected to live always. Your frailty never occurs 
to you. Like mortals you fear all things, like immortals you 
desire all things. You will hear many say, ‘At fifty I shall re- 
tire! My sixtieth year will free me from business.’ . . . Who 
will permit those plans of yours to mature as you now arrange 
them? Are you not ashamed to reserve for yourself only the 
remnant of your life, and to destine for the good of your soul 
only that time which you can employ in no other way? How 
late it is to begin to live at a time when we must cease our exist- 
ence . . . to postpone sane counsels, and to desire to begin life 
at a limit few have attained.’’* 

“You will hear the most powerful and exalted personages 
say that they desire repose; you will find that they praise it 
and prefer it to all the blessings they enjoy. They wish mean- 
while to descend from their lofty position if they can do so with 
safety. For fortune topples down upon herself although neither 
assailed nor shaken by an external force. The deified Augustus, 
on whom God bestowed more than upon any other prince, 
prayed without ceasing for repose and sought for relief from 
the affairs of state. All his conversation always returned to this 
one theme, his hope for rest. With this sweet yet deceptive 
solace he was wont to console his labors. . . . But those things 
can be accomplished with more glory than promised. . . . Re- 
pose seemed so desirable that, not being able to enjoy it in fact, 
he pictured it in imagination. He who saw all things dependent 
on himself alone, who regulated the destinies of men and of 
nations, regarded the day on which he should lay aside his 
greatness as the happiest in his life. For experience had taught 
him how much effort those benefactions cost which spread such 
luster throughout the world, how much disquietude they 
covered,” f but did not remove. 

“Marcus Cicero . . . while driven hither and thither with 
the Republic and while endeavoring to keep it from going to 
ruin . . . how many times had he reason to curse that consul- 
ship of his, which he had praised not without cause but without 
end? How tearful the words he utters. . . . It is useless to recall 

* Šíd., III. 
ł /éid., IV. 

[741 J 

Opus Majus 

here the examples of many who, reputed to be very happy, have 
borne true witness against themselves in their utter hatred of 
every act of their lives. . . . Though your life extend beyond 
a thousand years, it will be reduced to a very short span.’”* 

“In the first place then I number those who have leisure for 
nothing except wine and lust. For none are occupied more dis- 
gracefully. As for the rest although they are possessed by a 

vain idea of glory . . . they err in a more manly way; it isa 
disgraceful wasting sickness that afflicts men given up to wan- 
tonness and lust. . . . Finally all are agreed that nothing can 

be handled properly by a man preoccupied with other mat- 
ters; one cannot cultivate eloquence or the liberal arts, when 
his mind is distracted by other interests and is incapable of re- 
ceiving any deeper impression, and rejects all that is forced 
upon it. Nothing is less in the possession of the preoccupied man 
than his own life; there is no science more difficult than that of 
life. All the other arts have many prepared to teach them. Mere 
boys seem to have mastered some of them to such a degree that 
they could even teach them: we require the whole of life to 
learn how to live; and what will perhaps surprise you still more, 
we require the whole of life to learn how to die. So many very 
great men, after freeing themselves from all hindrances, after 
renouncing riches, occupations, and pleasures, up to the very 
end of their lives have tried to learn how to live. Yet many of 
them departed this life confessing that they were still ignorant 
of this art. . . . It is the mark, believe me, of a great man who 
is raised far above human errors to permit none of his time to 
be wasted. His life therefore is a very long one, since whatever 
its span, it has been wholly at his service. No part of that time 
was unemployed or wasted in idleness, no part was under the 
control of another. A rigid economist of his time, he finds noth- 
ing worthy to be received in exchange for it. Therefore his 
allotted time sufficed him: but of necessity time failed those, 
from whose life the public took a large portion,” and their 
vices robbed them of still more. . . . “Count up, I say, and 
examine closely the days of your life; you will see that very 
few of them remained at your own disposal. . . . But he who 
employs some of his time to his own advantage, who arranges 
all his days with a view to life itself, neither wishes for the mor- 
* De Brevitate Vitae, V, VI. 

C742] 

Moral Philosophy 

row nor fears it: he actually directs fortune as he wills; his life 
is in safety. Nothing can be added to him, nothing taken away. 
Such an addition is like a portion of food given to a man al- 
ready sated and filled; he receives that which he does not de- 
sire. You should not accordingly think that a man has lived a 
long time because of his gray hairs and wrinkles; he has not 
lived a long time, but he has existed a long time. What then! 
Are you to think that he has made a long voyage whom the 
savage gale caught on leaving the port and bore hither and 
thither? Or likewise he whom shifting and raging winds have 
driven around in a circle over the same spot? Such a man has 
not made a long voyage, but has been much buffeted.” * 

“T am constantly surprised to see people asking for the time 
of others; I am also surprised at those who grant requests of 
this kind with such readiness. Both regard the motive of the 
request, neither pays heed to the thing requested: as if nothing 
is asked for, as if nothing is given, the most precious thing in 
the world is made a jest of. It deceives them because it is in- 
corporeal, because it does not come under their eyes.” . . . But 
“no one puts a value on time. They employ it as a thing of no 
value. But behold these same men, when they are sick and be- 
lieve themselves in danger of death, embracing the knees of 
their physicians; if they fear capital punishment, behold them 
ready to expend their all, in order that they may live; so great 
is the discord of their passions. But if each of us could know the 
number of his years in the future as he does the number in the 
past, how would those of us tremble who saw that they had few 
left, how sparing they would be of them? And yet it is an easy 
matter to regulate what is certain even though it be small: we 
should guard with greater care that which may fail us at any 
moment.” f 

“They arrange their life at the expense of life. They direct 
their thoughts far afield. Postponement is responsible for life’s 
greatest loss . . . it robs us of our present while promising 
what is more remote. Life’s greatest hindrance is the expecta- 
tion which depends on tomorrow and loses today. You make 
disposition for that which has been placed in the hand of for- 
tune; you lose that which has been placed in your own. Whither 

* Ibid., VII. 
f Zőid., VIII. 

[ 743 J] 

Opus Majus 

are you directing your gaze, to what point are you straining? 
All that is to come is uncertain: begin to live now. Behold, the 
greatest of bards warns us. . . ‘The best day in the life of 
unhappy mortals is that which flees first. ”* 

“Why do you delay? Unless you seize it, it is gone. And when 
you have seized it, it will still be in flight. Therefore you must 
combat the swiftness of time with promptitude in making use 
of it. The poet seems to reproach us admirably for our endless 
planning for the future by saying not that it is the best age that 
flees first, but only that it is the best day. It is of the day the 
poet speaks to you, of this very day which is in flight. There is 
no doubt, then, that the best day is the first that takes flight for 
unhappy mortals, that is, for mortals burdened with the cares 
of life, whose minds, still those of mere children, are crushed 
by old age which they have reached unprepared and defense- 
less. For they have made no provision; old age assails them 
suddenly, at a moment when they did not expect it.” 

“Fabianus, not one of your pedantic philosophers, but a true 
philosopher of the old type, used to say, ‘We must combat the 
passions with force, not with subtlety; we must repulse their 
evil band not with light blows but with a vigorous assault.’ . . 
When we reproach men for their errors, we should teach them 
and not merely deplore their blindness. Time is divided into 
three parts, past, present, future. Of these what we are doing 
is short: what we are going to do, doubtful: what we have done, 
certain. Fortune has lost her rights over the last: it is no longer 
at the disposal of any one. It is the past that men lose who are 
wrapped up in their own affairs. For they have no leisure to re- 
view the past; and if they should have the leisure, the recalling 
of a thing to be repented of is not pleasant. It is therefore in 
spite of themselves that they recall times that have been mis- 
spent, nor do they venture to return to those subjects whose 
faults are evident on review. The man whose conscience, al- 
ways an infallible judge, has censored all his actions, is the only 
one who will look back to the past with pleasure. But he whose 
ambition has been inordinate, whose pride has rendered him 
contemptuous, who has been insolent in his success, who has 
insidiously deceived, greedily stolen, prodigally squandered, of 

* Vergil, Georgics, III, 66, 67. 

} De Brevitate Vitae, IX. 

E744] 

Moral Philosophy 

necessity fears his own memory. Yet this is the portion of our 
time that is sacred and consecrated, beyond the reach of all 
human accidents, withdrawn from the realm of fortune, which 
neither want, nor fear, nor disease assails. This can be neither 
disturbed nor snatched away ; the possession of it is lasting and 
unshaken. Each of our days is present only moment by moment, 
but the days that have passed will present themselves at our 
bidding, and will submit to inspection and detention in ac- 
cordance with our will. . . . It is the untroubled and tranquil 
‘mind that can survey all the portions of its life; the minds of 
the preoccupied, as though under a yoke, are unable to turn 
and look back. The life of such men therefore passes away into 
obscurity . . . thus it matters not how much time is granted 
them . . . it passes through minds shattered and riddled with 
holes. The present is very brief; so much so, in fact, that some 
do not think that it has any existence. For time is always on the 
wing, it flows along and speeds ahead, it is over before it ar- 
rives. . . . The present, then, is the only time that concerns the 
preoccupied, but this so brief that it cannot be seized, and is lost 
so far as it affects them.’’* 

“Do you wish then a proof of the shortness of their life? 
Consider how they wish to prolong their life. Decrepit old men 
beg in their prayers for a few additional years. They pretend 
that they are younger than they are. They delude themselves 
with the lie, and willingly deceive themselves, as though they 
were deceiving the fates at the same time. When at length some 
infirmity has warned them of their mortality, in what great 
fear do they die, not as if they are departing from life, but as 
though they are being dragged out of it. They cry out that they 
have been foolish not to have lived, and that if they may only 
recover from that illness they will live in repose. It is then that 
they realize how vain has been their preparation of things they 
were not to enjoy, how profitless all their labor has proved to 
be. On the other hand how ample is the life that is passed far 
from all distraction . . . no part of it is dissipated . . . nothing 
is subject to fortune . . . nothing is lost through negligence 

. nothing is superfluous. . | . Therefore no matter how 
short life may be it is amply sufficient, and when the last day 

* Ibid., X. 
[745 1 

Opus Majus 

comes, the sage will not hesitate to advance to death with a 
firm step.”’* 

And since Seneca has conceived of the sage as being in a 
state of repose, and the foolish and the vicious as preoccupied 
and not enjoying repose, he has divided them into three classes. 
For some men have minds busied with the cares that sins and 
vanities impose, although they do not commit such or at least 
only a few, possibly because they are not able. Of these men 
Seneca says: “Certain have an occupied leisure; in their coun- 
try house, in their bed, in the midst of solitude. For although 
they have withdrawn from men, they are a burden to them- 
selves, whose life must not be called one of leisure, but a sloth- 
ful occupation.” Those do not enjoy leisure whose desires em- 
brace many projects. Of the man who is continually given over 
to sins and follies and plunged in vices Seneca says: “This man 
does not enjoy leisure. You should employ another term in his 
case. He is sick, nay, he is dead.” Of those who are not addicted 
either in thought or deed to such sins of the flesh, yet find de- 
light in curious trivial details of learning, Seneca says: “No 
one doubts that” when “you devote yourself to scholarship of 
a useless kind, your laborious efforts have no real value. . . . 
If you keep these results to yourself, your inner man is no 
better off; if you publish them, you appear not more learned 
but more of a bore. A useless zeal for such information has 
appealed to Romans also. . . . I heard recently a certain savant 
recount what each of our Roman generals had been the first 
to inaugurate: Curius Dentatus was the first to lead elephants 
in a triumph. . . . Who was the first to persuade the Romans 
to go aboard a ship? It was Claudius, surnamed Caudex for 
this reason, because by this word the ancients designated a 
framework of many planks. For the same reason the public 
registers are called codices, and boats which, following ancient 
usage, carry provisions on the Tiber are called codicariae. Such 
knowledge is not likely to profit us. . . . Will you suffer any 
one to give himself concern over the fact that Lucius Sulla 
was the first to put unbound lions in the circus to be slain by 
javelin-throwers sent by King Bocchus, while in general they 
were presented bound? . . . What benefit is it to know that 
Pompey was the first who showed in the circus a combat of 

* De Brevitate Vitae, XI. 

[ 746 1 

Moral Philosophy 

eighteen elephants with criminals? . . . He considered it a 
notable kind of spectacle to destroy men in a novel way... . 
It were better that such things as these be forgotten, lest some 
man in power should learn about them and be tempted to imi- 
tate their inhuman cruelty. . . . Then there are a host of other 
things which are either fictions or resemble lies. . . . For our 
Fabianus used to say he was in doubt whether it is better to 
apply oneself to no studies at all than to become entangled in 
these.” 

Seneca has cited these things to illustrate his meaning, and 
includes them as things to be avoided. But I have introduced 
them rather because of their value in explaining ancient words, 
in which we all make mistakes regarding their meaning not 
only in profane but also in sacred writings. For, omitting any 
consideration of the other words, we learn from this passage 
the meaning of the word Circus, from which is derived ludi 
circenses [contests in the Circus Maximus], of which Jerome 
makes mention in his Epistle to Paulinus which serves as a 
preface to the Bible. The contests are not called circenses be- 
cause they are circa enses [having to do with swords], al- 
though Isidore gives this explanation in the eighteenth book 
of the Etymologies, nor is the true explanation found in any 
of the other ones suggested. But the contests are called circenses 
from circus [circle], which was a place circular in form, in 
which gladiators and javelin-throwers used to fight with wild 
beasts as a public spectacle, as is still the custom in many prov- 
inces where men gather in a circle around those who fight with 
wild beasts. 

But we must return with Seneca to our topic. He says: 
“Alone of all men those enjoy repose who have leisure for wis- 
dom; they alone live; for they not only conserve carefully 
their own time,” but “they judge all the ages to be theirs. All 
the years that have preceded them are their possession. Unless 
we are most ungrateful, we shall recognize the fact that it is 
for us those very illustrious authors of thoughts regarded with 
reverence have been born and have prepared life. We are con- 
ducted through the labor of others to very beautiful things 
which have been drawn by them from darkness into the light. 
No age is forbidden us, we are admitted to all ages. And if we 
have sufficient greatness of spirit to advance out of the narrow 

£747 J 

Opus Majus 

confines of human weakness, we see open to us a vast stretch 
of time. We may, if we desire, dispute with Socrates, doubt 
with Carneades, . . . conquer human nature with the Stoics, 
escape from it with the Cynics, since nature permits us to enter 
the fellowship of all time. Why not whole-heartedly transfer 
ourselves from this narrow and fleeting passage of time to 
those boundless and eternal spaces which offer us fellowship 
with nobler men? . . . Those who wish to have daily Zeno, 
Pythagoras, Democritus, and the remaining masters of the 
liberal arts, and Aristotle and Theophrastus as their most inti- 
mate friends . . . will receive from them whatever they wish. 
Men will have their full permission to drink their fill. What 
happiness, what a noble old age awaits the man who has made 
himself their client! He will have counsellors with whom he 
may consult on matters of the least and of the greatest moment, 
whose advice he may ask daily concerning himself, from whom 
he may hear the truth without offense . . . in whose likeness 
he may mould himself. . . . These men will show you the road 
that leads to eternity, and will raise you to that place from 
which no one is cast down, this is the true. way of extending 
your mortal life. . . . Honors, monuments, all that ambition 
has ordered by her decrees or reared by her efforts are quickly 
overthrown. . . . What wisdom has consecrated no age will 
destroy. . . . The life of the sage therefore has a wide range. 
His life is not closed by that same limit that bounds the life of 
other men. He alone is set free from human limitations. All. 
ages render him service as though he were a god. The time that 
has passed he grasps with memory, that which is present he 
makes use of, that which is to come he anticipates’’* and ar- 
ranges... . 

“The life of those is very short who forget the past, neglect 
the present, fear for the future. . . . Their joys also lack tran- . 
quillity; for they do not rest on solid foundations, but are 
troubled by that same insecurity from which they spring. . . . 
All their greatest blessings are sources of anxiety, and the 
highest good fortune is always least to be trusted. To safeguard 
good fortune additional good fortune is required, and prayers 
must be offered for the prayers that have just been answered. 
For all that comes as the gift of fortune is unstable. The higher 

* De Brevitate Vitae, XIV, XV. 

[ 748 J 

Moral Philosophy 

fortune rises the more liable it is to fall. That which threatens 
ruin cannot be a source of pleasure to any one. Most wretched, 
therefore, as well as very brief must be the life of those who 
secure with great labor what they retain with still greater 
effort. They laboriously acquire what they want, they retain 
with anxiety what they have acquired. . . . They substitute 
new occupations for old ones. Hope excites hope, ambition 
arouses still further ambition. No end of their woes is sought 
for, only the cause for them is changed. . . . There will never 
‘be lacking either unfortunate or harrowing causes of care, all 
repose will be gnawed away, so to speak, by the occupations of 
life. Repose will never be enjoyed. Life will always be de- 
sired.”’* 

“Separate, then, yourself from the common throng, dear 
friend, and withdraw at length into a more peaceful haven, 
after your stormy voyage which has lasted longer than one of 
your years should reasonably expect. Consider how many waves 
you have breasted, how many storms you have endured, some 
of which you have encountered as a private citizen, while others 
in your public capacity you diverted from the state to your- 
self. You have given a sufficient proof of the quality of your 
virtue in labors and difficulties: now give it a trial under peace- 
ful conditions. The greater part of your life, certainly the better 
part, has been devoted to the state: devote some of your time 
also to yourself. . . . You administer the affairs of the whole 
world as disinterestedly as those of others, as diligently as your 
own, as faithfully as those of the republic. In your public posi- 
tion in which it is difficult to avoid hatred you win affection. 
But, believe me, it is better to know the value of one’s own life 
than that of the public grain supply.” F 

“We must press on to better things while our blood is warm 
and we are still in our prime. In this new kind of life you ex- 
perience the enjoyment of all the liberal arts, the love and the 
exercise of virtue, forgetfulness of the passions, the art of living 
and of dying, a profound repose. The state of all men preoccu- 
pied with worldly affairs is indeed an unhappy one, but most 
wretched is the lot of those who toil without profit for them- 
selves, whose sleep is subject to the sleep of others, whose step 

* [bid., XVI, XVII. 
+ Zőid., XVIII. 

[ 749 J 

Opus Majus 

must be accommodated to the step of another. . . . If these men 
desire to know how short their life is, they should consider how 
small a part of it is their own.”* 5 

“At fifty years of age the law exempts the soldier from serv- 
ice, at sixty it does not summon the senator. Men obtain more 
easily from the law than from themselves an end to their 
labors.” + 

CHAPTER XVII 

As a solace for a man’s death and that of his loved ones Seneca 
eloquently says: “Who is so vain, so presumptuous, as to wish 
that he and his should be the only ones exempt from the laws 
of a necessity by which nature summons all things back to the 
same end? Who will pretend to shelter his family from a de- 
struction that menaces the world itself? It is therefore the 
greatest consolation to think that nothing has befallen us except 
that which all before us have suffered and all are destined to 
suffer. And nature accordingly seems to have dealt her severest 
blow to all men alike, so that the equality of our fate might 
console us for its severity.” $ ' 

“We can accuse destiny over and over again, we cannot alter 
it. . . . But what is so abject and effeminate as to allow one- 
self to be consumed with grief?” And since the man was a 
great one to whom he is speaking, he says, “Many things are 
not permitted you which are permitted men in an humble and 
obscure position. High rank involves great slavery. He is hap- 
pier, believe me, for whom fortune is unnecessary, than the 
man who has her at his command. All those blessings which 
delight us with their specious but deceptive pleasure, money, 
rank, power, and many other things which excite the admira- 
tion and cupidity of blind mortals, are retained with effort and 
viewed with envy, and crush those very same men whom they 
adorn. They threaten more evil than they bring good. They 
are hazardous and uncertain. We never are in secure possession, 
for supposing that we need not fear for the future, yet the mere 

* De Brevitate Vitae, XIX. 

f Zid., XXX. 
t Ad Polybium, I. 

[ 750] 

Moral Philosophy 

guardianship of great wealth is filled with anxiety. If you wish 
to take the view of those with a deeper insight into truth, all 
life is a punishment: cast upon this deep and restless sea, with 
its change of ebb and flow, at one moment we are raised on the 
crest of the wave and at the next are precipitated into its 
trough ; we are unceasingly buffeted and have no secure resting 
place. We are in suspense and float hither and thither, one 
colliding with another, and at some time or other we suffer the 
shipwreck of which we are in constant fear. For those em- 
‘barked on this troubled sea, exposed as it is to every storm, 
there is no haven except death. . . . There is, believe me, great 
happiness in the mere happiness of dying. Nothing is certain 
for an entire day. Where the truth is so involved and hard to 
see, who can divine whether death has envied the dying one or 
has dealt kindly with him?’”* 

“He is unjust who does not leave to the donor the power to 
deal with his gift; miserly is the man who treats as gain that 
which he has received, and puts down as loss that which he has 
returned. Ungrateful is the man who calls the termination of a 
pleasure an injury, foolish he who finds profit only in present 
blessings. . . . Is not he to be regarded as an unjust man who 
is vexed at having paid back borrowed money, especially when 
it was borrowed without interest? Nature has given life and 
then, exercising her own right, takes it away. Nor is nature at 
fault whose terms were well known, but the greedy hope of the 
mortal mind, a hope that constantly loses sight of what nature 
is, and never remembers its own lot except when it is admon- 
ished. How much juster was he who, when his son’s death was 
announced to him, expressed a sentiment worthy of a great 
man: ‘When I brought him into the world I knew that he 
must die.’ . . . Let us rejoice over that which shall be given 
us, and let us return it on demand. . . . I do not know whether 
it is more foolish to be ignorant of the law of mortality or more 
shameless to refuse to submit to it.” f 

“The deified Augustus lost his very dear sister Octavia. . . 
sons-in-law, children, grandsons; and during his whole life 
no one realized more than he that he was a mere mortal. Yet 
his heart, capable of confronting all things, mastered these 

* [bid., IV, VI, 1X. 

f éid., X, XI. 

[7511 

Opus Majus 

many bitter afflictions, and the deified Augustus became victor 
not only over foreign nations but over his own griefs also.” “But 
to pass over all other instances . . . twice has fortune assailed 
me with grief for a brother, twice she perceived that I could 
be wounded, but that I could not be vanquished. . . . Thus, 
however, have I controlled my feelings, that I neither left un- 
done anything that should be required of a loving brother, nor 
did I do anything that could be censured in a prince.” “For not 
to preceive one’s misfortunes is unworthy of a human being, 
and not to bear them is unworthy of a man.”* 

CHAPTER XVIII 

WE must now consider Seneca’s views on the blessed life and 
on peace of mind. For the statements in those books strengthen 
and fortify the mind against adversity, and render it careless 
of outward prosperity. Seneca, a master of moral precepts, 
begins his essay addressed to Gallio on the Blessed Life as 
follows: 
“All men, brother Gallio, wish to live happily, but have no 
clear vision when they are called upon to determine what makes 
life happy. . . . So that if one has lost his way, his speed 
merely increases his distance from his destination, since he is 
on a road leading in the opposite direction. . . . But as long 
as we wander about with no other guide but the uproar and 
discordant shouting of those summoning us in different direc- 
tions, life will pass away amid errors—life which is short, even 
if we labor night and day with excellent intentions . . . since 
the conditions in this case are not the same as those in our other 
travels. For in the latter there is some well-defined road, and 
natives of the locality on being asked do not suffer us to go 
astray. But in life all the most beaten and frequented paths 
lead us farthest astray. We must therefore exercise the utmost 
care not to follow like sheep the flock ahead of us, which is 
moving forward not in the required direction but along the 
trodden path. And yet there is nothing that involves us in 
greater ills than lending an ear to mere rumor, considering as 
we do those things best which have received general assent.” 
* Ad Polybium, XV, XVI. 

C7521 

Moral Philosophy 

The other causes of error I have collected and noted in their 
proper place in the first part of this work. “For we are harmed 
by attaching ourselves to those advancing ahead of us, and as 
long as we prefer to trust others rather than to judge for our- 
selves, we form no judgment in regard to life.. . . Our cure 
depends on our separation from the crowd.’’* 

“There is no occasion for your answering in the conventional 
way ; ‘This side seems to have the majority’ ; since for this very 
reason it is in the wrong. Human affairs are not so well or- 
‘dered, that better counsels appeal to the majority ;” and Seneca 
makes other statements as above. “Let us seek to discover what 
conduct is best, not what is most usual; and what will place us in 
possession of happiness, not what has won the approval of the 
multitude, the very worst judge of the truth. . . . I havea 
better and more certain light by which to distinguish the true 
from the false; let the soul discover the good qualities of the 
soul. If the soul ever has time to breathe and to withdraw into 
itself, how it will confess the truth to itself after self-examina- 
tion and will say, ‘All that I have done up to the present time I 
should prefer undone. . . . lam not yet a friend to myself... . 
Those things that attract attention, at which men pause, which 
one man points out to another with admiration, are bright and 
fair externally, but within are hideous.’ ”} 

“Let us seek for some good possessing not mere appearance 
but solid and abiding worth, one that is more beautiful in that 
which is less visible to the eye . . . nor is such a boon remote 
from us; it will be found. It is only necessary to know in which 
direction to extend your hand; now we pass by as though in 
darkness what is near at hand. . . . But not to take you by too 
long a circuit . . . I assent to nature. Wisdom consists in keep- 
ing close to nature and forming oneself in accordance with her 
law and model. Happy then is the life that is in harmony with 
its own nature. Such a life cannot be realized unless the mind is 
sound and in constant possession of its sanity; it must also 
possess courage, strength, magnanimity, patience, resignation 
to circumstances. The care of the body and of what concerns 
it is not excluded, but must not be a source of anxiety. We can 
procure the commodities of life without being disturbed by 

* De Vita Beata, I. 
f Zőid., II. 

[ 753 ] 

Opus Majus 

any of them; we can use the gifts of fortune but we must not 
be enslaved by them. You perceive, even if I do not add, that 
perpetual peace and liberty are the result when those things 
have been removed that irritate and terrify us. For in place of 
pleasures and in place of what is trivial and perishable . . . a 
great joy, constant and unalterable, succeeds, also peace and 
harmony of mind and greatness united with kindness.” * 

“We can also give other definitions of our good in different 
terms but with the same meaning. . . . The greatest good is a 
mind that despises all that depends on fortune, a mind that 
rejoices in virtue; or, it is an invincible force of mind, fortified 
by experience, calm in action, endowed with much benevolence 
and regard for one’s fellow men. We may also define the happy 
man as one for whom there is no good and there is no evil except 
a good mind and an evil one. Such a man fosters what is 
honorable, is contented with virtue, and is neither exalted by 
fortune’s favors nor broken by her rebuffs. He knows no higher 
good than that which he can bestow upon himself; his greatest 
pleasure is the contempt of pleasures. . . . For why should we 
not define the happy life as the possession of a mind free, up- 
right, undismayed, firm, placed beyond fear, beyond desire, 
whose only good is integrity, whose only evil is shame. Such a 
mind regards as of no moment all other things, which neither 
take from the happy life nor add to it, which come and go 
without augmenting and decreasing the highest good. Constant 
happiness and profound joy must attend the man with such 
principles, since he finds his happiness in what he has, and does 
not crave more than he possesses in his own store. . . . Con- 
tempt of fortune alone can bestow this liberty; then will come 
into being a peace of mind based on security, an elevation of 
thought, a great and unalterable joy from the knowledge of the 
truth after fears have been banished, and an affability and 
serenity of mind, which will delight the sage not as mere bless- 
ings but as blessings arising from his own goodness.” } 

“The happy life then is based on a correct and certain judg- 
ment and is immutable. For then is the mind pure and free 
from all evils when it has escaped not only from lacerations but 
even from stings, resolved always to’stand her ground and to 

* De Vita Beata, III. 
+ Jbid., IV. 

C754] 

Moral Philosophy 

maintain her position even against an angered and hostile for- 
tune,” * 

And he shows that carnal pleasure is not the supreme good 
in the following statement: “Pleasure enters the worst life, but 
virtue does not admit an evil life. . . . Pleasure itself is a 
source of man’s unhappiness, which could not be if virtue and 
pleasure could mingle, because virtue often lacks pleasure, but 
never needs it. Why put together dissimilars, nay, opposites? 
Virtue is something high, lofty, royal, invincible, indefati- 
gable; pleasure is low, servile, weak, perishable, whose post and 
abode are brothels and cook-shops. You will find virtue in the 
temple, in the forum, in the senate house with hands hardened 
by labor; you will discover pleasure more frequently in hiding 
and eager for dark retreats around the public baths and suda- 
tories . . . steeped in wine and perfume.” Likewise he says, 
“The highest good is immortal . . . contains neither satiety nor 
regret. An upright mind never varies, nor does it become hate- 
ful to itself. . . . But pleasure vanishes at the very moment 
when it delights most. Pleasure has narrow borders and quickly 
fills them, then wearies, and languishes after the first impres- 
sion is passed. Nor is that ever certain whose essential nature is 
movement. Thus it is not even possible that there should be any 
real substance to a thing that comes or passes with the utmost 
speed, destined to perish in its very use. For at the point where 
pleasure arrives it ceases, and even at its commencement is 
near its end.” + 

Likewise, “What of the fact that the evil enjoy pleasure as 
well as the good? The vicious find as much pleasure in their 
shame as the virtuous in their moral rectitude. It is for this 
reason that the sages of old have taught that men should lead 
the best life, not the most agreeable one, to the end that pleasure 
should not be the guide but the companion of good and honor- 
able intentions. For it is nature that we must take as our guide: 
it is she that reason follows and consults. It is the same thing, 
then, to live happily and to live according to nature. I shall 
now explain my meaning. If we conserve with care but without 
fear our bodily gifts and such things as are fitting to nature, re- 
garding them as given but for a day and likely to take flight, 

* Ibid., V. 

+ [bid., VII. 

[755] 

WA. 

Opus Majus 

if we do not enslave ourselves to them, nor permit ourselves to 
covet the possessions of others, if we regard all that is pleasing 
to the body and all that comes to us from without as, so to 
speak, merely auxiliary and light-armed troops in the camp, 
we shall be living according to nature. Those things should 
serve, not master us; thus then they become useful to the mind. 
A man should be incorruptible and unconquerable as regards 
external things, and should admire himself alone, confident 
in mind and prepared for either of the two contingencies, the 
artificer of his own life. His confidence should not be without 
knowledge, his knowledge not without constancy ; his decisions 
should stand, nor should there be any alteration in his decrees. 
It is evident, even if I do not state the fact, that such a man 
will be well constituted and properly regulated, and in all his 
conduct displays greatness combined with cheerfulness . . . 
let it return into itself. For this world also which embraces all 
things, this God who rules the universe extends outwardly, but 
yet wholly returns into himself from all directions. Our mind 
should do the same: When the mind following its senses has 
with their aid extended itself to external objects, it should be 
master of them and of itself. In this way a single force will be 
produced and a power in harmony with itself, and pure reason 
will come into being, certain in its conclusions and without in- 
consistency or vacillation in its ideas. . . . The mind that has 
arranged itself properly, that has codrdinated its own parts, 
and brought them into tune, so to speak, has attained the high- 
est good. For nothing base, nothing slippery remains on which 
it may stumble or fall. Such a mind will do all things at its own 
bidding, it will meet nothing unexpectedly, but easily, readily, 
without question will turn its every act into good. For inaction 
and irresolution indicate lack of harmony and inconstancy 
within. Wherefore you may declare with confidence that the 
highest good consists in peace of mind. For the virtues must be 
present where harmony and unity prevail: the vices are always 
at variance with one another.”’* 

“But you yourself, they say, cultivate virtue for no other 
reason than your desire to derive some pleasure from it. . . . 
If virtue shall guarantee us pleasure, virtue is not sought after 
for this reason . . . but the effort of virtue, although directed 

* De Vita Beata, VIII. 

[ 756 J 

Moral Philosophy 

to another object, will secure for us pleasure also. As in a field 
that has been ploughed for a crop of grain, flowers spring up 
amid the grain, yet so much labor has not been expended on 
their behalf although they do please the eye. The sower had 
something else in view, the flowers came merely as an accessory. 
So also pleasure is not the recompense nor the cause of virtue, 
but the accessory. . . . The supreme good consists in the judg- 
ment alone and habit of a virtuous mind. When such a mind 
has rounded out its own goodness and has enclosed itself within 
its own boundaries, it has attained the supreme good and de- 
sires nothing more. For nothing exceeds the whole, nor ex- 
tends beyond the end. Therefore you make a mistake when you 
inquire what ulterior motive I have in seeking virtue; for you 
are asking for something higher than the summit. Do you ask 
what I am seeking from virtue? I am seeking virtue itself. 
Virtue has nothing better to give me; virtue is its own recom- 
pense. . . . For when I tell you that the supreme good 
consists in the firmness, foresight, keenness, sanity, freedom, 
concord, and beauty of a strong mind; why speak to me of 
pleasure? I am seeking man’s good.’’* 

And since the objector would at once say that he is not 
speaking of carnal but of spiritual and mental pleasure, Seneca 
for this reason introduces a statement of the supposed objector 
excluding carnal pleasure in order to assign another pleasure 
to virtue. Because of this other pleasure, then, the objector says, 
“I am not seeking the pleasure of the belly, an organ which 
is larger in domestic animals and in wild beasts. You pro- 
fess ignorance of my meaning, he says. For my assertion is 
that no one can live pleasantly unless at the same time he 
also lives virtuously. Such a life is not possible for dumb ani- 
mals nor for men who measure their good in the terms of 
food. I aver clearly and openly, says he, that this life which 
I call pleasant is inseparable from virtue.” But Seneca meets 
the objection with the statement that pleasure is found not only 
in gluttony and debauchery, but in other spiritual vices also, 
since men take pleasure in these other vices as well as those 
mentioned above. And therefore virtue cannot exist for the 
sake of mental pleasure, since pleasure accompanies sins as well 
as virtue, being in fact common to both virtue and sin, because 

* Ibid. IX. 

[7571] 

Opus Majus 

men rejoice and find pleasure in evil as well as in good. This 
is his further statement : “Who does not know that all men with 
the least sense are the most sated with pleasures? And that 
wickedness is overflowing with pleasurable things? that the 
mind itself supplies many low kinds of pleasure? Chief among 
these are arrogance, too high an opinion of oneself, a fancied 
superiority to others, and a blind and heedless love for one’s 
own possessions.” Since then the reply might be made that the 
good man at least experiences pleasure and joy and therefore 
has pleasure of mind, he says, “Virtue judges pleasures before 
she admits them, nor does she place a high value on such as 
she approves, for she merely admits them, and does not rejoice 
in the use she makes of them but in the limits she prescribes.” 
And he says to the objector, “You embrace pleasure, I restrain 
it. You enjoy it, I use it. You consider it the greatest good, I 
not even a good. You do all things for the sake of pleasure, I 
do nothing.’’* 

“T do not call that man a sage to whom something is superior, 
and still less if this something be pleasure. For, dominated by 
pleasure, how shall he withstand labor, danger, and want. . . 
how shall he endure the sight of death, of pain? How shall he 
endure the convulsions of nature and such a host of bitter foes, 
he who has been vanquished by so feeble an adversary?” And 
because the objector might still press his point, Seneca con- 
tinues his opposition, “Do you not see how many counsels 
pleasure is likely to give?” “She will be able to give no bad 
advice since she is joined to virtue,” is the objector’s reply. But 
Seneca thus refutes the statement: “Do you not see what would 
be the nature of a supreme good that requires a keeper, that it 
may be a good? But how shall virtue rule pleasure which it 
follows, since it is incumbent on one who obeys to follow, and 
on one who commands to rule. Do you place your general in 
the rear? The eminent function of virtue in your system is to 
test in advance the pleasures . . . and as happens to many they 
are mad with a jovial madness and laugh in their delirium. But 
the pleasures of the sage are mild and restrained and almost 
listless. They are kept under subjection and are scarcely notice- 
able, since they come unsought, and when they present them- 
selves, they are not received with honor nor welcomed with 

* De Vita Beata, X. 

C758] 

Moral Philosophy 

any joy on the part of those experiencing them. For they mingle 
them and intersperse them through life like play and jest in 
the midst of serious matters. Let them cease, then, to try to 
ally two things that are incompatible, namely, to combine 
pleasure with virtue, a fault by which they pay court to all the 
most corrupt. The corrupt man, absorbed in his pleasures, al- 
ways overfed and drunken, believes that he is living virtuously 
since he is living pleasurably. For he is told that pleasure can- 
not be separated from virtue; he then gives to his vices the 
“name of wisdom and makes a display of what he should con- 
ceal. Therefore steeped in vices they seek for some defense and 
cloak for their lusts, and they lose the only good thing they 
possessed among their evils, namely, their feeling of shame at 
wrongdoing. . . .”* 
“That which suffices nature is insufficient for debauchery. 
. . . Whosoever has given his assent to virtue has given the ap- 
pearance of noble qualities. He who follows pleasure seems soft, 
without vigor, degenerate, a man destined to fall into evil ways, 
unless someone distinguish for him among the pleasures, in 
order that he may know which of them confine themselves 
within the limits of natural desire, which are uncontrolled and 
unrestrained and the more they are sated the more insatiable 
they become. . . . No good is burdened by its own greatness.” f 
“And if that union of virtue and pleasure pleases you, let 
virtue precede, let pleasure attend upon it, and be like the 
shadow to the body . . . we shall have pleasure, but we shall 
be its masters and controllers. Whatever pleasure secures from 
us will be won by entreaty not by compulsion. But those who 
have entrusted pleasure with the leadership have deprived 
themselves of both; they lose virtue, and they do not possess 
pleasure but pleasure possesses them, victims equally of its 
absence which torments them, and of its excess which suffocates 
them; wretched if they are deserted by it, still more wretched 
if they are overwhelmed. . . . The greater and the more nu- 
merous they are, the smaller is he whom the world calls happy, 
and the slave of many masters. . . . He who follows pleasure, 
renounces liberty first, and expends himself for the sake of 
his belly ; he does not purchase pleasure for himself, but he sells 

* Jbcd., XI, XII. 
f 7éid., XIII. 

[759] 

Opus Majus 

himself to his pleasures. Yet what prevents, he asks, virtue and 
pleasure being united into one, and the supreme good being 
formed in such a way that it becomes at the same time both 
honorable and pleasing? Because no part of the honorable can 
be dishonorable. Nor does the supreme good retain in itself 
its own purity, if it beholds in itself something inferior... . 
But he who associates virtue and pleasure weakens whatever 
vigor is found in the one good by the frailty in the second, and 
sends under the yoke that invincible liberty than which nothing 
is known to be more precious. For he begins to have need of 
fortune, which is the very worst slavery. . . . You do not, 
therefore, grant to virtue a solid and immovable base, but you 
bid virtue stand in a changing and uncertain position. For 
what are so uncertain as the expectation of what is fortuitous 
and the diversity of bodies and of things affecting the body? 
How can this man obey God and accept with a tranquil mind 
whatever happens? . . . How can he put a favorable construc- 
tion on his own ills if he is sensitive to the least incitements of 
pleasure and pain? But not even of his country is such a man a 
good guardian and avenger, nor is he a defender of his friends 
if he is given over to pleasures. Let, then, the supreme good 
mount to a point from which no force can drag it down, to a 
point inaccessible to pain, fear, hope, and to all else that may 
impair the full rights of the supreme good. But virtue alone 
can mount to this height; that ascent can be mastered by her 
alone. She will stand firm and will endure whatever betides 
not only with patience but also with pleasure, and will realize 
that all difficulties are in accordance with nature’s law. She 
is like the courageous soldier who endures his wounds, counts 
his scars, and pierced by darts dies still loving the commander 
for whom he falls. He will bear in mind that old precept, Fol- 
low God. Whosoever complains and laments and groans is none 
the less forced to obey, and, in spite of his resistance, to exe- 
cute the orders imposed upon him. But what folly it is to be 
dragged along rather than to follow! It is both ignorance of 
one’s condition and folly to grieve . . . to be astonished and 
indignant at those things that happen to the good as well as 
to the evil. Let us meet with high courage all the universal 
order requires us to endure. We have been caused to take this 
oath to bear the lot of mortals and not to be perturbed by those 

[ 760] 

Moral Philosophy 

things which it is not in our power to avoid. . . . Obedience 
to God is liberty.’’* 

“True happiness, then, rests in virtue. What advice will this 
virtue give you? Do not consider anything as either good or 
evil that does not proceed from virtue or vice. She will further 
counsel you to be firm and in opposition to evil to form God 
from the good, as far as you may do so in accordance with the 
divine will. What does she promise you for such an enterprise? 
Great blessings and equal to those possessed by the gods; you 
‘will suffer no compulsion, you will lack nothing, you will be 
free, safe protected from loss. You will never attempt anything 
in vain, you will never be arrested by any obstacle, all things will 
happen to you in accordance with your wish. Nothing adverse 
will happen, nothing contrary to your expectation. . . . What 
then? Virtue suffices for a happy life. Why should it not suffice? 
Nay, it is more than sufficient. For what can a man lack who is 
without desires? What need of external things can he have who 
has gathered all things into himself?” + 

But since no men or at least very few attain such moral excel- 
lence, and since Seneca might be subjected to criticism for 
certain imperfections of his own, in not conforming as a teacher 
of virtue all his actions to the requirements of virtue, Seneca 
replies when criticism of this kind is directed against him as 
follows: 

“Now I make this reply to you; I am not a sage, and, to add 
more fuel to your fiery criticism, I shall not become one. Exact 
of me, therefore, not that I equal the best, but that I be better 
than evil men: this suffices me daily to lessen somewhat my 
vices and to correct my errors. . . . I prepare palliatives rather 
than cures for my gout, content if it returns less frequently and 
is less painful: I am a weak runner compared with your 
powers.” 

“Your speech and your life do not correspond, you say. 
Plato and Zeno were subjected to this same reproach. All those 
teachers used to tell not how they themselves were living, but 
how they ought to live. I am speaking of virtue, not of myself, 
when I abuse the vices. . . . Nor shall that malevolence of 

* De Vita Beata, XIV, XV. 
+ Zid., XVI. 
t /d:d., XVII. 

[ 761 J 

Opus Majus 

yours, imbued as it is with much venom, deter me from what is 
best. Not even that poison with which you attack others, with 
which you kill yourselves, shall hinder me from continuing to 
praise the life, not that I am leading, but the one I know that 
I ought to be leading. Nor shall it hinder me from adoring vir- 
tue and from creeping after her at a great distance.” * 

“The philosophers are useful in their statements regarding 
virtue. . . . For if they acted in accordance with their teach- 
ings, what life could be happier than theirs? Meanwhile-there 
is no reason why you should despise good words and hearts 
full of good thoughts. The pursuit of useful studies is to be 
commended apart from their result. Is it surprising that by 
routes so difficult men do not reach the summit? But recognize 
powers that are attempting great things even though they fail. 
It is a noble thing to attempt lofty things and to conceive in 
the mind projects too great even for a great soul to accomplish. 
Such a man has proposed to himself this line of conduct: I shall 
view death on its arrival with the same look that I have when I 
hear it mentioned; I shall resign myself to labors, however 
great they shall prove to be, supporting my body with my 
mind; I shall be equally contemptuous of riches whether I have 
them or lack them, neither sadder if I know that they are in the 
possession of others, nor prouder if I find them casting their 
luster about me: I shall look with indifference upon fortune 
whether she comes or goes: I shall view all hands as belonging 
to me, and mine as belonging to all other people: I shall so 
live persuaded of the fact that I have been born for others. . . . 
She has given me to everybody and everybody to me; whatever 
I possess I shall not guard in a niggardly way norscatter abroad 
lavishly : I shall believe that I possess nothing more than what 
I have bestowed with discernment: I shall not count my bene- 
fits, I shall not weigh them, nor shall I value them except in 
accordance with the merit of him who receives them. If he is 
worthy of them, I shall not think that I have done much; I 
shall never take opinion, but my conscience, as the motive in 
all that I do; I shall believe that whatever I do, when I am the 
sole witness, is done in the sight of the whole world; my pur- 
pose in eating and drinking will be to satisfy the desires of 
nature, not to fill and empty my stomach; I shall be agreeable 

* De Vita Beata, XVIII. 

[ 762 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

to my friends, mild and affable to my enemies; I shall be ap- 
peased before I am asked, I shall meet more than half-way rea- 
sonable requests; I shall know that the world is my country 
and God is its ruler; that he is above me and about me as the 
censor of my deeds and my words; and when either nature shall 
demand back my spirit or reason release it, I shall go hence 
after bearing witness that I loved a good conscience, honorable 
pursuits, that I impaired no man’s liberty. . . . He who shall 
propose, wish, try to do these things, will be making his journey 
toward God; verily, such a man even if he does not keep to his 
course ‘falls in a daring and a great enterprise.’* You indeed 
who hate virtue and him who practises it do nothing new. For 
weak eyes fear the sun and . . . nocturnal animals . . . are 
dazed at his rising and everywhere seek their lurking-places 
. . - groan, employ your wretched tongue in abusing the good 
. you will sooner break your teeth than sink them in.” 

“Why does he who is devoted to philosophy live in opulence? 
Why does he say that riches should be despised and yet still 
hold on to them? Why does he think that life should be despised 
and yet still live? Why does he think that health should be 
despised and yet guard it with the greatest care? . . . And 
thinks and says that exile is only an empty name: what harm is 
there in changing countries: and yet . . . he is growing old 
in his native land?” 

He answers this question by showing how the sage can be 
good who wishes to have riches and does not wish to be poor: 
by drawing a distinction between the use made of riches by the 
sage and by the foolish, he shows how the sage should regard 
riches. The sage as well as the man of evil habits requires the 
necessities of life: and so out of the abundance owing to the 
world’s resources he wishes to have what is necessary for him- 
self and for others, that he may aid the indigent, and handle 
the business of the state. And thus since he possesses his riches 
for an honorable and useful purpose, he will not lose his vir- 
tue, which the evil man will throw away because of his abuse 
of riches. He says therefore that “these things should be de- 
spised by the sage, not that he should not possess them, but that 
he should not possess them with uneasiness of mind. He does 

* Ovid, Metamorphoses, II, 328. 
+ De Vita Beata, XX. 
[ 763 J 

Ie 

Opus Majus 

not drive them away from himself, but attends them on their 
departure without regret. Where indeed shall fortune deposit 
more safely her riches than with him, from whom she will re- 

ceive them back again without complaint? . . . The sage does 
not love riches but prefers them. He receives them into his 
home, not into his heart. . . .”* 

And he says to the foolish man “If riches forsake me, they 
will carry away nothing but themselves; you will be amazed 
and you will think you have been left without yourself, if they 
should depart from you. With me riches have a place, with you 
they hold the highest place. . . . Riches belong to me, you be- 
long to riches.” F 

“The philosopher will have ample riches, not stolen from any 
one nor stained with another’s blood, secured without injury to 
any one, free from sordid gain, riches which pass out as honor- 
ably as they enter, and are complained of by no one unless he 
be envious. . . . Such a man will neither boast of his patrimony 
gained by honest means nor will he blush because of it. He will 
have . . . reason for pride if, on opening his house and admit- 
ting the public to view his possessions, he shall be able to say, 
Let each one take what he recognizes as his own. O great man, 
rich in the most excellent way! . . . Let riches come, let them 
enjoy his hospitality. He will neither be prodigal with them nor 
will he hide them; the former is the act of a silly mind, the 
latter that of a timid and petty one. . . . He will possess his 
wealth but will regard it as fickle and likely to vanish: nor will 
he suffer his riches to weigh upon either himself or another. 
. . . He will give to the good . . . or to those whom he shall 
be able to render good. He will give with the greatest discre- 
tion choosing the most worthy. . . . He will give from upright 
and laudable motives. For a gift unworthily bestowed is to be 
classed among disgraceful losses. His purse will open easily, 
but will not have a hole in it, a purse from which much comes 
out and nothing falls out.” $ 

“And note this first; there is a difference between him who 
is interested in wisdom and the man who has actually acquired 
it. The former will say to you, ‘I speak excellently, but I am 

* De Vita Beata, XXI. 

f /bid., XXII. 
ł /did., XXIII. 

C764] 

Moral Philosophy 

still involved in very many evils. There is no reason why you 
should judge me in accordance with the rule I have laid down 
for myself. . . . I am still working on myself and fashioning 
myself and trying to attain to a high standard. If I advance as 
far as I propose, then require that my acts correspond to my 
words.’ But the second man, having attained the height of 
human wisdom, will talk to you in a different way and will say 
to the foolish man: ‘First, you should not permit yourself to 
pass judgment on your betters; I already possess a proof of 
rectitude in being displeasing to evil men. . . . I deny that 
riches are a good: for if they were, they would make men good. 
Now since they are found in the possession of evil men, riches 
cannot be called good: I refuse them this name. . . .’’’* 
“Place me in the most luxurious home with gold and silver 
at my command. . . . I shall not respect myself because of 
those things which, although they are in my possession, are yet 
not part of me. . . . Drive me away among the beggars: I 
shall not, however, despise myself on this account, because I 
am found among those who hold out the hand for alms. For 
what matters the lack of a morsel of bread when one has still 
the opportunity to die? . . . I shall not think myself a whit 
more happy because I have a soft cloak, and because my guests 
recline on purple. . . . I shall not be more unhappy if my 
wearied head finds repose on a bundle of straw. . . . No hour 
is without some complaint; I shall not for this reason call my- 
self wretched in the midst of these adversities. . . . For I have 
provided that no day should be a sinister one for me. . 
Therefore,” declares the sage, “my life is not at variance with 
my teaching. But you do not hear aright. The sound merely of 
my words reaches your ears, you do not seek their meaning.” } 
“What then is the difference between me with my folly and 
you with your wisdom, if we both desire to have riches? A very 
great difference. For riches in possession of the sage are in 
servitude, in the possession of the fool are in command. The 
sage intrusts nothing to riches; riches mean everything to you. 
You accustom yourselves to them and cling to them as though 
some one had promised to you their eternal possession: the sage 
never meditates so much on poverty as when he is in the midst 

* [bid., XXIV. 
f žid., XXV. 

[ 765 J 

Opus Majus 

of affluence. . . . You waste away in the midst of your own 
possessions nor do you think how many chances threaten every 
moment to carry off your precious spoils. He who deprives the 
sage of his wealth leaves him all things that are really his. For 
the sage lives pleased with the present and without anxiety 
for the future. Of nothing has Socrates so firmly convinced me 
as that I should not regulate the conduct of my life in accord- 
ance with your opinions. Marshal from all sides your usual array 
of words: I shall consider that you are not uttering insults but 
wailings like very unhappy children. . . . Your hallucinations 
I put up with as does Jupiter the absurdities of the poets, one 
of whom has attached wings to him, another horns, and still an- 
other has introduced him as an adulterer. . . .”* 

“Lo! Socrates, from that prison which he cleansed by his en- 
trance and rendered more august than any senate-house, pro- 
claims, ‘What madness is this of yours, what nature hostile to 
God and man that prompts you to decry the virtues and to vio- 
late all that is sacred by your wicked statements?’ Praise the 
good if you can; if not go your way. But if you find pleasure in 
exercising that foul freedom of yours, direct your attacks on 
one another. For when you rave against heaven, I do not say 
you commit sacrilege, but you lose your pains. . . . It is an 
advantage for virtue to be brought forth and put to the test, 
nor do any perceive her greatness better than those who have 
felt her power from attacking her. It is only by striking a piece 
of flint that one realizes its hardness. I offer myself to their 
attacks like a solitary rock in a restless sea, which the waves lash 
unceasingly on every side, and yet they do not move it from its 
place or wear it away through so many ages by their incessant 
attack. Spring at me, make your assault. By my endurance I 
shall overcome you. All that rush upon what is firm and in- 
vincible expend their force to their own hurt. Therefore seek 
some soft yielding substance in which to drive your spears. But 
have you the time to examine the faults of others and pass 
judgments on any man? Why, you ask, does this philosopher 
live too well housed, why does that one dine too sumptuously ? 
Are you observing the slight blemishes on others when you 
are yourself covered with many ulcers? Such conduct is like 
that of him who laughs at the moles or warts on the persons of 

* De Vita Beata, XXVI. 

[ 766 || 

Moral Philosophy 

the most beautiful when he himself is devoured by a terrible 
skin disease. Reproach Plato because he demanded money, 
Aristotle because he accepted it, Democritus because he ne- 
glected it, Epicurus because he expended it. Cast in my teeth 
my inheritance. How very happy you will be as soon as you 
are in a position to imitate our faults. Nay, regard rather your 
own vices, which riddle you everywhere, some raging exter- 
nally while others burn in your vitals. What shall I say more? 
Is not a kind of whirlwind, even though you scarcely discern 
it, rotating and enveloping your minds as they flee from and 
pursue the same objects?”’* 

CHAPTER XIX 

“For among our other ills the very worst is that we change 
our vices . . . and this also plagues us that our judgments are 
not only bad but also fickle. We move to and fro, we grasp at 
one thing after another, we abandon what we have been seek- 
ing, we seek again what we have abandoned. Our life is merely 
an alternative between our desires and our regrets. For we 
depend wholly on the judgments of others, and we consider that 
best which is praised and sought after by the multitude, not 
that which is praiseworthy and desirable in itself. We judge a 
road to be good or bad only by the number of footprints among 
which there are none of those returning.” + 

“Man is too mortal for the comprehension of things immor- 
tal.” And since the pursuit of wisdom and virtue is still disap- 
proved of by many on the ground that it involves the abandon- 
ment of civic duties, he therefore cites this charge against the 
leisure of the sage: he says, “Nature has destined me for two 
things, action and contemplation.” $ 

“Virtue banished to a leisure without action is an imperfect 
and languid good and never displays what it has learned... . 
He ought not only to think of what he should do but also take 
a hand sometimes in realizing his meditations. . . . The sage 
withdraws into seclusion, that he may be assured of the op- 

* Ibid., XXVII, XXVIII. 
+ De Otio, I. 
E 7did., V. 

E67] 

Opus Majus 

portunity to do what will benefit posterity. We surely are ready 
to admit that Zeno and Chrysippus accomplished greater re- 
sults than if they had led armies, held offices, promulgated 
laws; in effect they did promulgate laws, not for a single state, 
but for the whole human race. Do you think, then, that such a 
leisure is unworthy of a good man, a leisure in which he forms 
the ages to come, and addresses not a small number of his fel- 
lows but the men of all nations present and future? . . . They 
have found the means of rendering their leisure more useful 
to men than the activity and sweat of others. Therefore they 
accomplished much although they took no part in public af- 
faits: a 

“To what state shall the sage withdraw? To Athens in which 
a Socrates is condemned, from which an Aristotle flees to es- 
cape condemnation? in which envy overwhelms the virtues? 
Shall he go to Carthage where sedition is always rife and lib- 
erty is deadly to all good people? . . . If I should care to pass 
in review all governments, I shall not find one which can endure 
the sage or one which he can endure.”’} 

CHAPTER XX 

Now finally I shall introduce some quotations from Seneca’s 
work addressed to Serenus on peace of mind, because this ac- 
companies the happy life; and it is certain that happiness can- 
not be possible in this life without peace of mind. Nor will the 
life of true happiness in the future be complete without it. All 
adversities can of necessity be easily borne if we possess this 
peace of mind. But since we are just as prone to flatter ourselves 
as others, and by palliating our vices measure our happiness of 
mind by a false standard, Seneca says with excellent point, “We 
look familiarly on the imperfections in our own household, and 
our self-love blinds our judgment. I think that many could have 
attained to wisdom if they had not believed that they were al- 
ready sages, if they had not concealed certain vices in them- 
selves, if they had not skipped over others with their eyes 
closed. For there is no reason why you should think that we are 

* De Otio, VI. 
f /éid., VIII. 

C768] 

Moral Philosophy 

ruined more by flattery of others than by our own. Who has 
ventured to tell himself the truth? Who set in the midst of herds 
of flatterers and courtiers has not been his own most eager 
flatterer ?”’* 

“What you wish for, Serenus, is to remain unshaken, a per- 
fect state of mind resembling that of God himself. The Greeks 
call this stability of mind ev@vpia, on which there is an ex- 
cellent treatise by Democritus: I call it tranquillity. . . . We 
are seeking then to discover how the mind, enjoying always a 
' perfect equality, may follow a uniform course, live at peace 
with itself, contemplate its lot with satisfaction, experience this 
joy without interruption, and maintain itself in a state of calm 
never suffering undue elevation or depression: this will be 
tranquillity.” And first he touches upon the vices that destroy 
our peace of mind, in order that we may know how to avoid 
them and return to our former state of mind. He says accord- 
ingly: “Some men are plagued with a fickleness of mind and 
a feeling of irksomeness and habitual inconstancy of purpose, 
men who always prefer the plan they have rejected, . . . they 
are weak and indolent. Add those who resemble the victims of 
insomnia, tossing about and trying this position and that until 
fatigue finally brings them repose. Such men, constantly chang- 
ing their manner of life, finally remain in that state in which 
not a dislike of change but old age too sluggish to make one 
finds them. Add also those whom the vice of sloth rather than 
reason preserves from inconstancy; they live not as they wish 
but as they have begun. Vice has innumerable forms but one 
general effect, namely, displeasure with oneself; for which 
reason peace of mind departs. “This arises from lack of mental 
balance and from desires that are timid or from such as are 
crowned with little success, where either their daring is not 
commensurate with their wishes, or they do not obtain what 
they wish, and live entirely upon hope. Such men are always 
in a state of agitation and suspense, the inevitable result of 
being dependent on their own wishes. . . . Those men are 
possessed by regret for what they have begun and by fear of 
making a new start; and that agitation of a mind which finds 
no egress creeps upon them, since they are able neither to con- 
trol their wishes nor to gratify them. Thus their life arrested so 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, I. 

[ 769 J 

Opus Majus 

to speak in its course drags along slowly and painfully, and the 
mind languishes in the midst of its disappointed hopes. All 
these ills are aggravated, when in their resentment at an ill 
fortune that is so burdensome they have taken refuge in leisure 
and private studies, which cannot be endured by the mind that 
is interested in public affairs, eager for action, restless by na- 
ture, and that possesses in itself few sources of solace. For this 
reason, when the delights are withdrawn which their occupa- 
tions furnish, they cannot endure home and solitude and con- 
fining walls. The mind left to itself does not care to view its 
own image. This is the cause of weariness and self-disgust, of 
the agitation of a mind never at rest, and of the pain and bitter- 
ness with which it endures its own inaction. . . . Desires pent 
up without egress stifle themselves: then come grief and lan- 
gor and the thousand fluctuations of an inconstant mind held 
in a gloomy and deplorable state of suspense by the hopes it has 
entertained. Then follows the condition of mind of the man 
who detests his own leisure and complains that he has nothing 
to do, and who views with an envious eye the success of another. 
For sloth causing unhappiness breeds envy, and men desire the 
fall of others, because they have not been able to advance them- 
selves. . . . For the mind of man is naturally active and prone 
to movement. Every occasion of exciting and diverting itself - 
is pleasing to the mind; still more pleasing to the worst char- 
acters who waste away voluntarily in their pursuits. As certain 
ulcers crave the harmful touch of the hand and find pleasure 
therein, and whatever irritates gives pleasure to a foul itch of 
the body, just so I may say that these minds in which desires 
like malignant ulcers have broken out find their pleasure in 
labor and vexation of spirit. For there are certain things that 
give pleasure to our bodies also, as for instance turning about 
in bed and changing a side that is not yet tired, and exposing 
ourselves to the air in first one position and then in another. 

. . It is characteristic of a sick man not to endure anything 
for a long time and to employ changes as a means of relief. . . . 
We are weak in our endurance, we cannot stand either labor 
or pleasure for any length of time, and grow weary of our own 
and of all other interests. Some have been driven to suicide 
when they realized that by frequent change they had arrived 
again at the point of departure and had deprived themselves of 

[770] 

Moral Philosophy 

the possibility of further change. Life and the world itself be- 
came a source of disgust to them.’’* 

Seneca then introduces remedies for these vices. And he first 
touches upon them, quoting the opinion of another writer. He 
says, “You inquire what remedy in my judgment should be 
used against this feeling of disgust. The best would be, as 
Athenodorus says, to keep oneself always on the alert in the 
management of affairs, in the administration of the state, and 
in civic duties. For as some spend the day in the sunshine in 
* the exercise and care of the body, and as athletes find it most 
serviceable to spend most of their time in exercising their arms 
and nursing their strength, to which alone they have devoted 
themselves; so is it most fitting for us in preparing our mind 
for the arena of public life to be always at work. For since he 
has determined to render himself useful to his fellow citizens 
and to mankind, he is occupied and of service at the same time 
when he has placed himself in the midst of affairs and ad- 
ministers public and private matters to the best of his ability.” 

Seneca, however, does not agree with him in this, but recom- 
mends the pursuit of wisdom. He says therefore: “But since in 
this mad race of ambition, with so many detractors putting the 
wrong construction on upright conduct, integrity has insuffi- 
cient protection, and since there will always be more to hinder 
than to promote success, we should withdraw from the forum 
and from public affairs. But a great mind has an opportunity 
to develop itself freely in private life. The power of lions and 
of other animals is held in check by the cages that restrain 
them ; not so with man, whose greatest actions are performed in 
retirement. Let the sage conceal himself indeed, but with the 
intention of serving in his solitude both public and private in- 
terests with his talents, his voice, and his counsel. For he who 
defends the accused and votes on questions of peace and war is 
not the only one that benefits his country. The man who in- 
structs the youth, who in so great a dearth of good teachers 
instills virtue in the youthful mind, who draws back those who 
are eagerly pursuing money and pleasure, and retards at least 
for a time their ruin, such a man, I say, even in his private posi- 
tion is working for the public. Is the magistrate who judges be- 
tween citizens and strangers, or the city praetor who pro- 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, II. 

[77% 

Opus Majus 

nounces on litigants the sentences dictated to him by his 
assessor, more useful than he who teaches what justice is, what 
loyalty is, patience, fortitude, contempt of death, knowledge of 
God, and the great benefit of a good conscience? Therefore if 
you should devote to study the time you take from active em- 
ployments, you will not have deserted your post nor failed in 
your duty. For he is not the only one performing military serv- 
ice who stands in the line of battle and defends the right or the 
left wing, but he also serves who guards the gates, and fills a 
less perilous post, but not, however, an idle one, by standing 
guard and supervising the armory. These duties, although they 
are performed without risk to life, are classed as military serv- 
ices. By devoting yourself to study you will escape all the te- 
dium of life, nor will you desire the return of night because of 
the irksomeness of the day. You will be neither burdensome to 
yourself nor useless to others. You will win the friendship of 
many, and all good men will be attracted to you. For virtue al- 
though obscured never remains hidden, but sends forth indica- 
tions of its existence. Whosoever is worthy will find her by her 
footsteps. For if we break off all relationship and renounce the 
human race, and live occupied with ourselves alone, this soli- 
tary life deprived of every kind of liberal study will be followed 
by a total lack of occupation. We shall begin to erect buildings 
in one place and tear them down in another . . . and to make 
a bad use of our time, . . . a very serious fault. Often an aged 
man has no other proof to offer in establishing the fact that 
he has lived for a long time except his age.’’* 

“Let him be in private, in public, at table, a good companion, 
faithful friend, temperate table companion. If he no longer 
performs the duties of a citizen, let him fulfill those of a man. 
We have not shut up our minds within the walls of a single 
city, but have sent them forth to have intercourse with all lands 
and we have claimed the world as our country, so that we may 
give our virtue a wider field. . . . The work of a good citizen 
is never useless. He has been heard, he has been seen; his look, 
his nod . . . even his step are of use. As certain medicines are 
efficacious by their odor apart from their taste and contact, so 
virtue though at a distance and unperceived spreads abroad an 
atmosphere of helpfulness; whether virtue walks abroad at 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, III. s 

ya 

Moral Philosophy 

will. . . or enjoys only a precarious freedom in this respect 
. or inactive, silent, narrowly circumscribed . . . in what- 
ever guise she makes her appearance, she is beneficial. What 
of this? Do you consider of little moment the example of a man 
who knows how to rest? It is a very excellent thing, then, to 
mingle leisure with action whenever a life of action is pre- 
vented either by adverse fortune or by the state of the republic. 
For never have all avenues of approach been so closed, that 
honorable effort found its passage completely barred.”* 

“Can you find a city more wretched than was that of the 
Athenians when it was distracted by the thirty tyrants? The 
thirty had slain thirteen hundred citizens, nor had they reached 
by any means the end of their atrocities, but their barbarity was 
increasing under its own stimulus. . . . Socrates, however, 
continued to live in their midst, consoling bereaved parents, 
encouraging those who were despairing of the state, reproach- 
ing the rich who were trembling for their wealth . . . and 
exhibiting a lofty example to those who were willing to imitate 
him by boldly entering the presence of the thirty. Yet Athens 
herself executed this man in prison, and even liberty did not 
endure the man who as a free citizen had defied a throng of 
tyrants.” f ğ 

“But we must now consider in the first place ourselves ; then 
the matters on which we are engaged; finally the persons for 
whom or with whom we must act. Before all else it is necessary 
to form an estimate of ourselves, because frequently we over- 
estimate our powers. One man will fail because of overconfi- 
dence in his own eloquence, another has drained too heavily his 
patrimony, still another has taxed his weak body with too 
strenuous work. Some have a timidity rendering them unfit for 
civic affairs which require resolution. The inflexibility of others 
does not meet with success at court. Some do not keep their 
anger under control, and under any provocation are indiscreet 
in their language. Others do not know how to restrain their 
raillery,” in their reprimands, “and do not refrain from dan- 
gerous witticisms. For all these classes of people a quiet life is 

better than one of action. . . . We must then estimate the mat- 

ters themselves which we are undertaking, and we must com- 
_ * Ibid, IV. 
+ lbid., V. 

etal 

: Opus Majus 

pare our powers with the projects we propose to attempt. For 
the power must always be greater than the resistance. Of neces- 
sity he must be crushed who carries a burden too great for his 
strength. There are, moreover, certain matters which are not 
so important in themselves, but which carry the seed of many 
others. We must shun activities from which spring still other 
occupations of a new and complex nature. We must not travel 
to a point from which we may not return at will; let us charge 
ourselves with matters which we can terminate or at least hope 
to do so. Let us abandon projects that go too far afield and do 
not terminate at the point we have set.” * 

“In our choice, then, of individuals we must examine whether 
those are worthy on whom we are bestowing a portion of our 
life; whether the expenditure of our time has any good effect 
on them. For some people go so far as to charge against us the 
favors we render them. Athenodorus says that he would not 
even dine with a man who would not feel under obligation to 
him for this favor. . . . You must consider whether your na- 
ture is better fitted for a life of action or for a leisure devoted 
to study and contemplation ; and you should follow your natural 
bent. . . . For natures that are forced make a poor response. 
. . . But nothing so delights the heart as a sweet and faithful 
friendship. How great a blessing it is when there are ready 
hearts to which every secret can be intrusted with safety, whose 
conscience you fear less than your own, whose conversation 
relieves your solicitude, whose opinion aids your judgment, 
whose gaiety dispels your sadness, the mere sight of whom is 
a pleasure! We shall choose, to be sure, those who are free as 
far as possible from passions. For vices creep along and pass 
to all that are exposed to them and harm by contact. Therefore 
as we are careful in times of pestilence not to sit near persons 
already infected and inflamed with the disease, because we shall 
incur danger and shall suffer even from their breath, so in our 
choice of friends we shall make every effort to select such as 
are least corrupt. Association of healthy people with sick folk 
is the beginning of disease. Nor should I give you this advice 
not to follow or attract any one but the sage. For where will 
you find him for whom we have been searching so many ages? 
The best is the least bad. . . . Now indeed in such a dearth of 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, VI. 

L ae 

Moral Philosophy 

good men our choice should be less exacting. Avoid, however, 
in particular those gloomy and mournful individuals whose de- 
light is in complaining of all things in general. Although he 
may be of a kind and loyal heart, a gloomy companion with a 
perpetual sigh on his lips is an enemy to your peace of mind.”’* 

“Let us pass to riches, the greatest source of human anxie- 
ties. For if you compare all our other worries, such as death, 
sickness, fear, desire, endurance of pain and labor, with those 
ills caused by our money, you will find that the latter press far 
more heavily upon us. Therefore we must consider how much 
less painful it is not to have than to lose what we have had; and 
we shall perceive that the less we have to lose the less is poverty 
able to torment us. For you are in error if you think that the 
rich support losses with greater fortitude: the largest and the 
smallest bodies suffer equal pain from a wound. Bion cleverly 
says, “Plucking out hair is just as painful to heads that are 
bald as to those covered with hair.’ . . . It is more endurable 

. . not to acquire than to lose; and for this reason you will 
see those more happy on whom fortune has never smiled than 
those whom she has deserted. Diogenes, a man of lofty spirit, 
perceived this truth, and was careful to have nothing which 
could be taken away from him. Call this condition poverty, 
need, indigence, give to this state of security any opprobrious 
hame you wish; I shali cease to believe in his happiness only 
when you find me some one else guaranteed against loss. Either 
I am deceived, or it is a mark of kingship, that there is one man 
who cannot be harmed among the covetous, robbers. . . . He 
who is doubtful regarding the happiness of Diogenes may well 
be in doubt whether the condition of the immortal God is not 
deficient in happiness, since he has neither estates, nor gardens, _ 
nor farms enriched by the labor of slaves, nor a large income 
from money in bank. Are you not ashamed, you who are en- 
raptured with riches? Just look at the world; will you not see 
God giving all, retaining nothing? Do you consider the man 
who has divested himself of all fortuitous things poor or like 
the immortal God? Is it your idea that a rich man is happier? 
Diogenes’ only slave ran away from him, nor did Diogenes 
consider it worth while to have him brought back when he was 
informed of his whereabouts. ‘It is disgraceful,’ said he, ‘that 

* Ibid., VII. 

[775 ] 

Opus Majus 

Manes can live without Diogenes, but Diogenes cannot live 
without Manes.’ He seems to me to have said, ‘Attend to your 
own business, Fortune; you have no longer any claim on Di- 
ogenes. Has my slave run off? Nay, it is a free man that has 
departed.’ . . . But since we do not possess such strength of 
character, we should at least curtail our wealth, so that we may 
be less exposed to injury at the hands of fortune. Those are 
better fitted for warfare whose bodies can be contained within 
their armor, than those of too great bulk, whose size exposes 
them to wounds. The best measure of wealth is to be neither 
too near to poverty nor too far removed from it.’’* 

‘We shall be pleased with this measure, if we begin by taking 
pleasure in frugality, without which no riches suffice, 
especially since the remedy is at hand, and poverty itself can be 
converted into riches by means of frugality. Let us accustom 
ourselves to do without pomp and to estimate things in accord- 
ance with their usefulness and not in accordance with their em- 
bellishment. Our food and drink should suffice to remove 
hunger and thirst; . . . let us learn to go about on our own 
legs, and not regulate our dress and mode of living after new 
fashions; . . . let us learn to increase our continence, restrain 
our luxury, temper our pride, soften our anger, look upon pov- 
erty in the proper light, cultivate frugality, even if the majority 
is ashamed to apply to natural longings relief secured at a 
small cost, let us learn to restrain as it were in fetters unbridled 
hopes and thoughts soaring into the future, and to exert our- 
selves in seeking riches from ourselves rather than from for- 
tune. . . . Let us accustom ourselves, then, to dine without a 
number of guests, to require the service of fewer slaves, to get 
our garments for the purpose for which they were intended, and 
to dwell in narrower confines.” 

Seneca speaks of the aid we derive from study as follows: 
“Our expenditure on studies is most praiseworthy so long as 
it is kept within reasonable limits. To what end such numberless 
books and libraries, whose owner in the course of his whole 
life scarcely reads through the titles? A multitude of books 
burdens, does not instruct, the learner; and it is much better 
to devote yourself to a few authors than to lose your way in 
a host of them. Forty thousand of the books in Alexandria were 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, VIII. 

[776] 

Moral Philosophy 

destroyed by fire. The vaunting of this superb monument of 
royal magnificence I leave to another, as Livy, for example, 
who says that it was a masterpiece of taste and care on the part 
of sovereign power. As a matter of fact it was not an example 
of taste and care, but of the extravagance of study, nay, not 
even of study, since they did not have study in view but merely 
ostentation. . . . In all excess there is vice. Why should you 
pardon the man who eagerly acquires bookcases laden with the 
works of either unknown or discredited authors and yawns in 
the midst of so many thousands of books, a man whose chief 
pleasure is derived from their titles and frontispieces? . . . I 
could certainly pardon this madness if it had its origin in an 
excessive zeal for study. As a matter of fact, they search with 
such care for the works and busts of revered men of genius in 
order that they may use them as mural decorations.’’* 

“You have fallen into a difficult sort of life, and either pub- 
lic fortune or your own particular fortune has fastened a noose 
upon you without your knowledge, which you can neither 
loosen nor break. Consider how prisoners at first endure with 
difficulty the chains and shackles on their legs; then when they 
have made up their minds not to worry over but to endure them, 
they are taught by necessity to bear their shackles with forti- 
tude and by familiarity with ease. You will find in every kind 
of life delights, relaxations, and pleasures, if you wish. . . 
On no other count has nature deserved more gratitude from 
us than for her discovery of habit as an alleviation of woes, 
familiarizing us quickly with the severest evils, fully aware 
as she is of our heritage of cares. No one could hold out if ad- 
versity oft repeated had the same impact as its first blow. We 
have all been linked with fortune: of some the chain is golden, 
of others lax, of still others tight and foul. But what difference 
does it make? We are all prisoners together, and those who have 
bound others are bound themselves also . . . one is bound by 
honors, another by wealth. Some are the slaves of their high 
birth, others of their obscurity. Some are subject to a strange 
yoke, others are subject to a yoke of their own. These are kept 
in one place by exile, those by their priestly office. Every life is 
servitude. One must accustom himself, therefore, to his lot and 
complain of it as little as possible. . . . There is nothing so 

* Jbid., IX. 

Ewa 

Opus Majus 

bitter that a tranquil mind does not find some comfort in it. 

. . Apply reason to difficulties; hard things can be softened 
and narrow places broadened. . . . Moreover, we should not 
permit our desires to go far afield, but should limit their excur- 
sions to the immediate neighborhood. . . . Renouncing objects 
that we cannot obtain, at least without difficulty, let us seek for 
those things that are at hand and offer encouragement to our 
hopes; and let us realize that all things are equally worthless, 
outwardly differing in appearance, but inwardly alike vain. 
And let us not envy those above us. This seeming elevation is 
but.the edge of a precipice. -~. . There are many © 2 - oma 
lofty pinnacle from which they can descend only by falling; but 
this very fact is evidence that their burden is a very great one, 
because they are compelled to be burdensome to others, and 
that they have not merely been raised to their high position but 
have been pilloried there. Let justice, human kindness, liber- 
ality, prepare resources for the lot which awaits them, in the 
hope of which they may hang on the edge of the abyss with 
greater security. Nothing, however, will serve better to emanci- 
pate these men from these mental upheavals than always to fix 
some limit to the increase of their greatness, and not to leave 
the decision of their retirement to fortune, but to halt far this 
side of the boundary set. In this way the mind will feel the 
goad of desires, and will not be carried on into a limitless un- 
certainty, since its desires are limited.” * 

“This discourse of mine is not addressed to the sage, but to 
those who are imperfect and whose health is not assured. The 
sage must advance neither timidly nor step by step. For so 
great is his confidence in himself that he never hesitates to meet 
Fortune and will never give ground to her, . . . since not only 
his slaves and possessions and rank but his body also and eyes 
and hands, and whatever renders life dearer to him, nay, his 
very self he reckons among things committed merely to his 
care, and he lives as though lent to himself and is prepared to 
return them on demand without regret. Nor is he cheap in his 
own eyes because he knows that he does not belong to himself; 
on the contrary, he will do all things with all the care and cau- 
tion with which a scrupulously honest man guards all that is 
intrusted to his keeping. But whenever he is bidden return the 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, X. 

[778] 

Moral Philosophy 

loan, he utters no complaint to Fortune, but says, ‘I thank you 
for what I have possessed and had. It is true that I have cared 
for your property at great expense, but at your demand I give, 
I yield it up gratefully and willingly. . . . My treasures, my 
home, my family I give back, I restore.’ If it is Nature who has 
summoned us to restore what she previously intrusted to us, we 
shall say to her also, “Take back a better soul than you gave. I 
do not refuse nor do I seek to flee. I restore to you voluntarily 
that which you gave me without my knowledge.’ . . . He will 
have a bad life of it who does not know how to die properly. 
Therefore the first value set upon life must be revised and the 
spirit must be reckoned among things of little value. . . . The 
fear of dying is often the cause of death. Fortune, who stages 
shows for her own amusement, says, ‘Why should I reserve you, 
evil and cowardly creature? You shall be wounded and stabbed 
the more, because you do not know how to present your throat; 
but you shall live longer and die more easily who do not draw 
back your neck from the iron nor resist with your hands but re- 
ceive it with courage.’ . . . But if we know that from the in- 
stant even of our conception the verdict has been passed upon 
us, we shall live following the order of nature; and the same 
strength of mind will prevent our regarding any event as un- 
expected. For by foreseeing the possibilities the future has in 
store for us we shall lighten the force of all evils which bring 
no surprise to those who are prepared and ready for them. Mis- 
fortunes come to those who believe themselves secure and are 
concerned with their own happiness alone. For sickness, cap- 
tivity, ruin, fire, are by no means unexpected. I knew that Na- 
ture had shut me in a troubled lodging. I have heard so often 
the funeral lamentations in my neighborhood, I have seen pass 
so often before my door the torches and wax tapers attending 
the funeral processions of those who died young. Often the 
crash of a falling building has met my ear. A single night has 
carried off many of those with whom the forum, the senate- 
house, conversation had brought me in contact, and severed 
hands joined in friendship; ought I to be surprised that the 
dangers have at last reached me which have always been roving 
about in my vicinity? . . . Publius, a more forceful writer than 
the authors of tragedy and comedy, has said: 

‘That which can happen to an individual man can happen to all.’ 

L779 1 

Opus Majus 

If any one has grasped the full meaning of this maxim, and has 
viewed all the numberless and daily mishaps of others with a 
realization that he himself is equally exposed to their assaults, 
he will arm himself long before he is attacked. Too late is the 
mind trained to endure dangers after it has been exposed to 
them. I did not think that this would happen. . . . What riches 
are there which are not followed by indigence, hunger, and 
beggary? . . . What kingdom is there for which overthrow 
and ruin do not lie in wait? . . . Nor are such changes sepa- 
rated by long intervals, but the short space of an hour reduces 
a monarch to a suppliant. Know then that every condition is 
subject to change, and whatever can happen to another can hap- 
pen to you also. You are rich; not richer than Ptolemaeus, I 
suppose? . . . He begged for the rain drops: he perished of 
hunger and thirst. . . . On the same day on which the senate 
escorted Sejanus, the populace tore his body in pieces. . 
Therefore in such constant vicissitudes of rising and falling 
fortune, if you do not regard the possibilities the future holds 
in store for you, you are lending force to your own adversity, 
a force which he has already broken who has foreseen it.’’* 

“We must curtail restless activity, such as engages most 
men as they wander about their homes and the theaters and the 
forums. They busy themselves in the affairs of others always 
with an assiduous air. If you ask one of these men as he leaves 
his house, ‘Where are you going? What have you in mind?’ 
He will answer you, ‘I do not know; but I shall see some people, 
I shall do something or other.’ Without any definite aim they 
go to and fro seeking for things to do; . . . their inconsiderate 
and useless course is like that of ants crawling on trees which 
mount to the top and then descend without carrying anything. 
. . . Therefore every labor should have some definite purpose, 
some definite end in view. . . . Not real diligence but false 
views of life actuate these restless madmen. . . . In the same 
way each one of those whom vain and trifling motives lead 
hither and thither through the city and who sally forth to swell 
the crowd . . . some run as to a fire or to salute some one who 
will not return their greeting, or to escort the dead body of a 
man unknown to them. . . .f On this evil hangs that heedless 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, XI. 

f Bacon has altered this sentence greatly. 

[ 780 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

vice of prying into secrets of state and of learning many things 
which are neither told nor heard with safety.”* 

“It is this consideration, I suppose, that led Democritus to 
begin as follows, ‘To live in tranquillity one must abstain from 
many public and private matters.’ He had reference to super- 
fluous things. . . . For he who engages in many enterprises 
frequently gives Fortune a hold upon him, with whom it is the 
safest course not to have any dealings, but always to keep her 
in mind and to put no confidence in her loyalty. . . . This is 
why we say that nothing can happen unexpectedly to the sage. 
We are not exempting him from the accidents to humanity, but 
from humanity’s errors: nor do all things turn out for him as 
he wished, but as he thought. But first of all he perceived that 
his projects might meet obstacles. But lack of success in a cher- 
ished plan is necessarily less painful when one has not promised 
himself its realization.” + 

“We ought to cultivate a complaisant disposition, that we 
may not indulge too far our fixed ideas and projects, and may 
accommodate ourselves to changed conditions, accepting with- 
out fear such as are dictated by our position or by wisdom, 
without, however, becoming the victims of inconstancy, a vice 
most hostile to tranquillity of mind. For obstinacy, of necessity, 
is an anxious and wretched condition of mind; . . . incon- 
stancy is much worse, since it in no way sets a curb on itself. 
There are two excesses equally deadly to tranquillity, the im- 
possibility of changing and the impossibility of enduring any- 
thing. Undoubtedly the mind must retire into itself from all 
external interests; the mind should trust itself, be pleasing to 
itself, have regard for its own interests, withdraw as far as 
possible from the concerns of others, and cling to itself; it 
should not feel losses, and should put a kindly interpretation 
even upon adversity. Zeno the philosopher on learning of a 
shipwreck in which he lost everything merely said, ‘Fortune 
bids me take up philosophy with fewer encumbrances.’ A tyrant 
was holding out the threat of death and loss of sepulcher to the 
philosopher Theodorus. ‘You can please yourself,’ the philoso- 
pher said, ‘I have a measure of blood at your disposal; as re- 
gards my burial you are indeed a fool if you think that it mat- 

* Jéid., XII. 
f 7éid., XIII. 

[ 781 J 

Opus Majus 

ters to me whether I rot above ground or beneath it.’ Canus 
Julius, a man. . . of true greatness, . . . on being condemned 
to death after a long dispute with Caius Caesar said, ‘I thank 
thee, excellent prince.’ . . . He was playing chess when the 
centurion who was leading to execution a band of other victims 
bade him be summoned also. At this order he counted his pieces 
and said to his companion, ‘See that you do not after my death 
state falsely that you won.’ Then nodding to the centurion he 
said, ‘You will be my witness that I am one point ahead of 
him.’ . . . His friends were sad at the thought of losing such 
a man. ‘Why are you down-hearted?’ he said. ‘You ask whether 
the soul is immortal: I shall soon know.’ He did not cease to 
search for truth even at the very end, and to make his own 
death a subject of investigation. . . . And at length the emi- 
nence was close at hand on which a daily sacrifice was offered 
to Caesar. A friend said to him, ‘Of what are you now thinking, 
Canus? Or what idea is in your mind?’ ‘I have determined,’ 
said Canus, to observe in that fleeting moment of death whether 
the soul is conscious of its own departure.’ He promised that, 
if he discovered anything, he would go about and make known 
the state of the departed. Lo! a calm in the midst of a storm. 
Lo! a soul worthy of eternity, a soul that summons its own 
condition to bear witness to the truth, and at the very end of 
life makes an inquiry regarding its own departure, continuing 
to learn not only up to the moment of death, but even from 
death itself gaining information.” * 

“But it is vain to have rid ourselves of the causes of personal 
unhappiness” unless we overcome those that are general. “For 
sometimes a hatred of the human race takes possession of us, 
and the throng of so many wrongs that prosper passes in re- 
view; . . . Honesty is rare . . . and innocence unknown. . 
We must accustom ourselves, therefore, to look upon the vices 
of the multitude not as hateful but as ridiculous, and to imitate 
Democritus rather than Heraclitus. For the latter used to weep, 
the former to laugh, whenever they appeared in public. All our 
actions seemed tragic to the one and comic to the other. . . . 
There is the added fact that he is more serviceable to the human 
race who laughs at it than he who mourns over it; the former 
leaves something at least to kindly hope, while the latter fool- 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, XIV. 

E 782.1 

Moral Philosophy 

ishly weeps over what he regards as without hope of correction. 
And after a general survey he is possessed of a greater mind 
who does not restrain his laughter than he who does not re- 
frain from tears. . . . Let each one of us represent to himself 
all those things that render him sad or joyous, and he will per- 
ceive the truth of what Bion has said, ‘All the actions of men 
are like mere beginnings, and their life is neither a more re- 
vered nor a more serious matter than their conception.’ But 
it is better to view without emotion public morals and human 
' vices and to refrain from both laughter and tears. For to torture 
oneself with the evils of others is a never-ending misery, and 
to take delight in their ills is an inhuman pleasure.’’* 

“We shall pass to the case that habitually and rightly de- 
presses us; . . . I mean the unhappy end of some good men. 
Socrates, for example, is forced to die in prison, . . . Cicero to 
offer his neck to his own clients, Cato, . . . the living image of 
the virtues, by falling on his sword to put an end to his own 
life and the republic as well. . . . Consider how each of them 
bore his fate, and wish for the courage of those who showed 
themselves brave. If they perished like weaklings and pol- 
troons, no loss was suffered. . . . I shall weep over no man 
who rejoices” in meeting dangers, “I shall weep over no man 
who weeps when confronted with peril: the former has him- 
self wiped away my tears, the latter by his tears has rendered 

7). 

himself unworthy of any.” + 

CHAPTER X XI 

SINCE according to Scripture the body which is corrupted bur- 
dens the soul, and our earthly habitation is depressing to the 
sense that is cognizant of many things, for peace of mind, there- 
fore, human frailty must necessarily relax the mind at times 
through the comforts and recreations necessary for the body. 
For otherwise the spirit becomes anxious, dull, fitful, and 
gloomier than it should be, languid with the tedium of good- 
ness, complaining, and prone to frequent fits of impatience and 
anger. For this reason the most godly men would seek relief 

* /bid., XV. 
+ [bid., XVI. 

C 783 J] 

Opus Majus 

sometimes from their spiritual cares, soften at times the rigor 
of their abstinence, and moderate their excessive vigils. The 
most blessed John the Evangelist as a relief to his human 
frailty used to amuse himself with a partridge, as we learn from 
the Collations of Cassianus; and the blessed Benedict, when he 
was rebuked by a passing traveler for diverting his monks 
with physical pleasure, replied by asking the stranger to stretch 
a bow more and more. On the stranger’s replying, “I will not 
do so, because I should break the cord,” Benedict drew the 
parallel that he could force his monks to the rigor of penitence 
to such a degree that they could not endure it, but would break 
under the strain. And for this reason the Patriarch Jacob ex- 
cused himself from accompanying Esau, fearing lest, if he 
tried to keep pace with him, his sons and his wives and his 
cattle would die. 

Hence it is that Seneca wisest of men, who was granted a 
revelation accorded by God to few, as the Apostle says, realiz- 
ing the weight of human frailty, took up the question of relaxa- 
tion and recreation for the body at the end of his essay on 
Peace of Mind, in order that by introducing remedies of this 
kind our vigor may be more strongly restored. For even Cato 
says, ‘‘Intersperse sometimes joys with your cares,” so that we 
may say to God with the Psalmist, “My strength will I ascribe 
unto thee.” Seneca accordingly touching upon solaces of this 
kind speaks as follows: “The world and the retreat are two 
things that should intermingle and one succeed the other. The 
latter will cause us to long for our fellow men, the former for 
ourselves, and the one will be a remedy for the other. Solitude 
will relieve the irksomeness of the throng, and the throng that 
of solitude. The mind should not be kept at the same tension, 
but should be relieved by witticisms’” and recreations for the 
body besides. “Socrates did not think it beneath his dignity to 
play with children. Cato used to refresh his mind with wine 
when he was wearied with affairs of state. Scipio, after so many 
triumphs, did not disdain to move his martial body to the 
rhythm of the dance, not affecting, as is the custom today, those — 
soft attitudes and wanton movements which give to our dancing 
an effeminate air, but dancing in that manly fashion which 
characterized the heroes of old on festive days, and which 
would not provoke unfavorable criticism even if they were seen 

[ 784] 

Moral Philosophy 

by the enemies of their country. We must give our minds re- 
laxation ; they are better and more active after a rest. Just as 
we must not constantly force fertile fields, since an uninter- 
rupted productiveness will soon exhaust them, so unremitting 
toil will break our mental vigor. Repose for a short period and 
relaxation will restore our powers of mind. A certain dullness 
and languidness are produced by incessant mental effort. If 
play and jest did not possess some natural attraction, men would 
not be so strongly drawn to them. Frequent indulgence in them, 
_ however, will rob the mind of its force and gravity. For sleep 
is necessary to refresh the body, but if it continues day and 
night it will become death. There is a great difference between 
relaxing a thing and decomposing it. Our legislators appointed 
feast days, in order that men, assembled for public amusements, 
might find some intervals of relaxation necessary for their 
work; and illustrious men were in the habit of observing each 
month certain holidays. Some of them in fact would divide each 
day between leisure and business, whom no matter of business 
detained beyond the tenth hour. They would not even read a 
letter after this hour for fear that it might prove to be the 
source of fresh worry, but during the two remaining hours they 
would refresh themselves from the fatigue of the whole day. 
. . . Our ancestors forbade any new motion in the senate after 
the tenth hour. The mind requires indulgence and rest from 
time to time to serve in the nature of nourishment and renewal 
of its powers. It is also essential to take walks in the open 
country ; a free and abundant air gives the spirit a new tone. 
Sometimes a ride, a journey, a change of scene, a banquet and 
a somewhat great indulgence in drink will give us renewed 
vigor; . . . for wine drowns cares, lifts the soul out of its de- 
pression, and is a cure for sadness as well as for certain ills of 
the body. Liber, who is Bacchus, has been called the inventor 
of wine, not owing to the freedom of speech he imparts, but be- 
cause he frees the mind from the servitude to care and makes 
it more daring in all its efforts. . . . It is generally believed 
that Solon, one of the seven wise men, and the philosopher 
Arcesilaus were fond of wine. Cato has been charged with 
drunkenness. He who casts this reproach will find it easier to 
prove the vice of drunkenness honorable than to prove Cato 
base. But moderation in both liberty and wine is beneficial; we 

C785] 

Opus Majus 

must not repeat the remedy too often, lest the mind acquire a 
bad habit. And yet there are times when the mind should be 
aroused to a state of exultation and freedom and permitted to 
throw off for a season its gravity and sobriety. For if we are to 
believe a Greek poet, ‘It is sometimes pleasant even to lose one’s 
reason,’ or Plato, ‘In vain has a man-in his senses knocked at 
the door of the Muses,’ or Aristotle, “There has never been a 
great genius without a strain of madness.’ The mind unless 
stirred cannot utter anything sublime, surpassing the speech of 
others. It is only when it has spurned all that is common and 
ordinary and has mounted aloft with divine inspiration that 
it has uttered something too sublime for human lips. The mind 
cannot reach the realms of the sublime while it remains sane. 
It must leave the beaten track, dash forth, take the bit in its 
teeth, and carry its rider where he would have feared to mount 
himself.’’* 

Seneca ends his discourse at this point, maintaining that he 
strengthened the vigor of his mind by proper relaxation at 
times, and that he would make greater efforts than if he devoted 
himself constantly to spiritual and mental activities. The 
prophet Elijah bade the lute be brought, in order that his 
soul, stirred by the delight of physical harmony, might be 
caught up to contemplate divine things. 

* De Tranquillitate Animi, XVII. 

t Bridges has the following note: “The foregoing extracts from Seneca con- 
tain many variations from the text now usually adopted..Some of these are evi- 
dently due to Bacon himself, occurring naturally as the result of condensation. 
Some may be due to the imperfection of the text used by him. Other errors are 
doubtless due to the incompetence of Bacon’s transcribers. Some of the more 
obvious mistakes have been corrected. But no attempt has been made to elevate 
this series of extracts to the standard of a critical edition.” 

[ 786 | 

FOURTH PART OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 

CHAPTER [| 

| HAVE dwelt upon this third part of Moral Philosophy at 
greater length than I was required to do, owing to the 
beauty and helpfulness of moral sentiments, and because 
the books are rare ones from which I have gathered these roots, 
' as it were, flowers, and fruits of morals. I now wish to take up 
the fourth part of this science, which although not so rich and 
abounding in material as the third part, is, however, more 
wonderful and more exalted than not only this third part, but 
also than all the other divisions of the subject, since it consists 
of a plea for belief in the religion which the human race should 
accept, for loyalty to it, and for confirmation of it by our deeds. 
There is nothing else within the range of philosophy more 
necessary for man or of such great utility and worth. For be- 
cause of this part of the subject is it especially true that all the 
other sciences are subordinate to Moral Philosophy. For all 
wisdom is constituted with a view to the discovery of salvation 
for the human race; and this salvation consists in the percep- 
tion of those things that guide man to the felicity of the other 
life.. Avicenna says that this felicity is such as eye hath not 
seen nor ear heard, as I stated above. And since this fourth 
part of philosophy has as its object the investigation of this 
salvation and the attracting of mankind to it, all the sciences, 
arts, and activities are attached to this most noble part of civil 
science; and this is the end of all human consideration. 

For this reason it is most profitable to consider the purpose 
of this part of the subject; and it is fitting that every Christian 
should do so for the confirmation of his own profession, and 
to the end that he may have the means of correcting those in 
error. Verily, God can never deny to the human race a knowl- 
edge of the way of salvation, since he wishes that all men should 
be saved, according to the Apostle. And his goodness is infi- 
nite, wherefore he has always left men the means by which 
they might be enlightened to gain a knowledge of the ways of 
truth. Aristotle in his Politics takes up the different kinds of 
sects, and says that he wishes to consider out of the sects and 

[ 787 J] 

Opus Majus 

laws of states four or five of the simple ones, and see which laws 
corrupt states and kingdoms and which do not. He says also 
that the four or five simple ones are corrupt sects, meaning that 
a sect or law is called simple because it has only one end in 
view, and is called complex when the end in view is complex, 
since every sect varies according to the end it has in view, as 
Alpharabius teaches us in his book On the Sciences, expound- 
ing the view of Aristotle regarding the sects. According to Al- 
pharabius, and still more clearly according to Boetius in the 
third book of the Consolation of Philosophy, these simple aims 
are pleasure, riches, honor, power, fame, or glory of name. 

I shall now state the principal nations in which the various 
sects are found that are now existing throughout the world, 
namely, Saracens, Tartars, Pagans, Idolaters [Buddhists], 
Jews, Christians. For the principal sects do not exceed this 
number nor can they do so until the sect of Antichrist appears. 
There are, moreover, sects formed from all of these, or from 
four, three, or two of them, according to various combinations. 

But besides these aims there is another, namely, the felicity 
of the other life, which is sought and striven after in different 
ways. Because some believe that it consists in the delights of 
the body, some in the delights of the soul, and still others in 
the delights of both. In addition there are sects that include 
this felicity and all the others aims, or at least many of them, 
and that too in various ways. For although they all have in 
view a future felicity, yet many men abandon themselves to 
pleasures, and others are eager for riches, and certain aspire 
after honors, while others desire sovereign power, and still 
others crave glory and fame. I shall touch first upon the three 
divisions of the sects, that the end in view may be made clear. 
Then I shall deal with the choice of the sect of the faithful, 
which is the only one that should be spread throughout the 
world. 

Some desire to confine those aims to the present life, without 
considering that they are losing future felicity, abusing tem- — 
poral blessing, and yielding themselves up to the allurements 
of pleasures, as, for example, the Saracens, who, in accordance 
with their law, take as many wives as they wish. 

Some are inflamed with the lust for dominion, as the Tartars, 
whose emperor says that there should be only one ruler on earth 

[ 788 1 

Moral Philosophy 

just as there is only one God in heaven, and that he himself 
ought to be constituted that ruler, as we see in the letter he 
sent to the Lord Louis, King of France, in which he demands 
tribute from him. This is recorded in the book of Friar Wil- 
liam on the Manners of the Tartars, which he wrote to the King 
of France just mentioned. From their actions it is clear in what 
way they have already gained possession of the kingdoms of 
the East. They care nothing about the refinements of life but 
are quite barbarous in this respect. They use the milk of mares 
for drink, and make a practice of eating unclean foods, as we 
learn from the book just mentioned and from that of Friar 
John on the Life of the Tartars, and also from the Cosmog- 
raphy of the philosopher Ethicus. For that philosopher and 
those books on the manners of the Tartars describe this very 
foul and wicked race, as we stated in the section on Mathe- 
matics describing the races and localities of this world. 

Real Pagans, like the Praceni and the nations bordering on 
them, live according to custom and not according to laws based 
on reason. Their interests are centered in the delights, riches, 
and honor of this life, and they believe that the life to come is 
similar in every way to this. Hence at death they have them- 
selves burned publicly, together with their precious stones, 
gold, silver, equipment, family, friends, and all their wealth and 
goods, hoping to enjoy all these things after death. 

Similarly the Idolaters expect to possess a future in the en- 
joyment of all the blessings they had in this world. Their 
priests, however, take a vow of chastity, and rejoice in ab- 
stinence from the delights of luxury, as we learned in regard 
to the regions of the East lying toward the north in the section 
of this work dealing with the localities of the world. All these 
expect corporeal blessings in the life to come, and have no dis- 
cernment regarding spiritual blessings. It is not contrary to 
their laws to seek for this world’s goods in any way possible, 
nor do they believe that in any event are they deprived of the 
life to come. 

But the Jews hoped for blessings both temporal and eternal ; 
in a different way, however, since with spiritual discernment 
by virtue of their law they aspired after blessings not only of 
the body, but also of the soul. But interpreting their law in its 
literal sense they believed the blessings of the law only cor- 

[ 789 |] 

Opus Majus 

poreal. Similarly according to their law they seek temporal pos- 
sessions not as a matter of right and wrong, but on the authority 
of God and in accordance with his laws. For although they 
plundered many nations and subjugated them, they had a 
just right to do this. For the Promised Land was due them by 
hereditary right, because they were descended from a son of 
Noah; and the sons of Cham invaded those lands without any 
right, since they did not fall to their lot at the beginning. For 
Egypt, Africa, and Ethiopia were given to the sons of Cham, 
as we learn from Scripture, the sacred writers, and the his- 
tories. We have touched upon this topic also in a previous 
section. 

The Christians, securing spiritual blessings by spiritual 
means, according to their law are able to have temporal bless- 
ings, owing to their human frailty, in order that they may prac- 
tice the things of the spirit in this life, to the end that they may 
at length reach the life eternal both in body and in spirit. And 
yet in that life they will live without the extrinsic things men 
employ in this present life. For the animal body will become 
spiritual, and the whole man will be glorified, and will live with 
God and the angels. 

These then are the principal sects. The first is that of the 
Pagans, who have less knowledge about God and are without 
a priesthood, but each man fashions a god to his own liking 
and worships whatever he pleases and sacrifices at will. Then 
come the Idolaters, who have priests and synagogues and huge 
bells like those of the Christians, with which they are sum- 
moned to their office and to certain prayers and regular sacri- 
fices; and they maintain that there are many gods, but that 
no one of them is omnipotent. The Tartars are third, who adore 
and worship one God as omnipotent. But they nevertheless 
venerate fire and the threshold of the home. For they cause all 
things to pass through fire; for this reason they cause the effects 
of the dead and gifts and messengers to pass through flames 
and other things, that they may be purified. For their law de- 
clares that all things are purified by fire. Moreover, he who 
treads on the threshold of the house is condemned to death. 
Both in these two matters and in certain others they are quite 
barbarous. In the fourth class are the Jews, who should have 
had a better knowledge of God in accordance with their law, 

[ 790 |] 

Moral Philosophy 

and should have truly desired the Messiah, who is Christ. And 
those have actually done so who knew the law spiritually, as 
the holy Patriarchs and Prophets. In the fifth place are the 
Christians, who accept the law of the Jews spiritually and com- 
plete it by adding the faith of Christ. Last of all will come the 
law of Antichrist, who shall subvert the other laws for a time, 
except that the elect in the Christian faith shall remain firm, 
although with difficulty, owing to the fury of the persecution. 
There are, then, six laws according to this division, and six 
according to the former one, each with its special aim, pleasure, 
wealth, honor, power, fame, and felicity of the life to come 
apart from these temporal blessings. 

In the relationship of Mathematics to the Church discussed 
in a preceding section the sects were considered with reference 
to planetary influences and were found to be six, namely, the 
law of Saturn, the law of Mars, the law of the Sun, the law of 
Venus, the law of Mercury, the law of the Moon. In whatever 
way, then, we may distinguish the sects, we shall find that they 
are always six in number. For the first and principal distinc- 
tion is this one in regard to the planets; upon that the other 
distinctions follow, since the celestial influence inclines a man 
to receive the laws, either as a controlling influence, or as an 
important one, or as one that renders the reception easier. For 
although the rational soul is not forced to anything, yet, as we 
proved above, a man’s habit of thought is much altered with re- 
gard to the sciences, morals, and laws. By these changes the 
soul is stimulated as far as the action of the body is concerned, 
and is influenced to acts both public and private, with complete 
freedom of the will, however, in all matters. And hence it 
comes to pass that, in accordance with the conjunctions of 
Jupiter with the other planets, six changes appear in the laws 
and habits in men’s hearts, as we noted above. There cannot 
be more than the six sects; and at times the followers of one 
sect incline to another, owing to the strong influence of the 
constellation, and sometimes they change their own sect en- 
tirely, or in great part, or modify it with the tenets of another 
‘sect in accordance with the occurrence of the several constella- 
tions. It is in this way that sects become composed of the parts 
of several others. For the Saracens, although they follow in 
the main the law of Venus, yet derive much from the Jewish 

[791] 

Opus Majus 

law and from the Christian law, since they employ various bap- 
tisms and sacrifices quite similar in part. They say, moreover, 
that Christ is the Son of the Virgin and the greatest of the 
prophets, and they retain many words of the Evangelists in 
their law, and they all wish to die the death of Christians. They 
made this declaration in the disputation they held with Chris- 
tians and Idolaters in the presence of the great emperor of the 
Tartars, as we learn in the book on the Manners of the Tartars. 
But the Tartars profess chiefly the law of Mars. For they ven- 
erate fire, are eager for war, and devote their leisure to the 
principles of philosophy, like the ancient Chaldeans, to whom 
the law of Mars is attributed. They, however, are modified by 
the law of Mercury. For they permit their sons to be instructed 
in the Gospel and in the lives of the Fathers. When they become 
sick they ask for Christian priests and the cross and holy water, 
as we learn in the book of Friar William, and as the experience 
of men worthy of our belief renders us certain in this matter. The 
law of the Jews is that of Saturn; and the law of the Christians 
is called that of Mercury by the astronomers for certain reasons 
noted above. The sects of the Pagans and Idolaters are reduced 
to the sect of Mars and that of the Egyptians, a sect worshiping 
the sun, which is the leader of the heavenly host. For these two 
sects worship the creature instead of the creator, since the 
Idolaters worship images made by hand and the heavenly 
bodies. And therefore in as far as they worship the celestial 
natures they agree with the Egyptians. In as far as they wor- 
ship these objects here below they are in accord with the law 
of Mars. But the Pagans worship both terrestrial and celestial 
things. For whatever they meet with of a useful character, as 
the sun, moon, an animal, a grove, water, fire, or anything else 
they worship from affection. But whatever they find terrible 
they worship from fear. 

After the statement of these principal sects as regards the 
following they have among the nations, the influence of the 
planets upon them, and the diversity of their aims, the con- 
sideration follows of the necessary means to be employed in 
persuading men of the truth of a sect. I said above, in the sec- 
tion on Mathematics, in regard to the conversion of unbelievers, 
that persuasion of the truth as alone contained in the Christian 
religion is a twofold matter, since we may appeal to miracles 

[ 792 1] 

Moral Philosophy 

which are beyond us and beyond unbelievers, a method in re- 
gard to which no man can presume; or we may employ a 
method familiar to them and to us, which lies within our power 
and which they cannot deny, because the approach is along the 
paths of human reason and along those of philosophy. Philoso- 
phy belongs in an especial sense to unbelievers, since we have 
derived all of our philosophy from them, and not without the 
most weighty reason, to the end that we may have on our own 
behalf a confirmation of our faith, and that we may be able to 
speak convincingly on behalf of the salvation of unbelievers. 
Nor should the statement of Gregory be urged as an objection 
that faith has no place where reason furnishes the proof. For 
this statement is to be understood of the Christian who relies 
only or mainly on human reason. But this should not be: nay, 
we must put our faith chiefly in Church and Scripture and the 
Sacred Writers and Catholic doctors. 

But as a solace for human frailty, to the end that it may 

avoid the attacks of error, it is useful for the Christian to have: 

effective reasons for those things which he believes, and he 
should have a reason for his faith for every case requiring it, 
as the blessed Peter in his first Epistle teaches us, saying, “But 
sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord; and be ready always to 
give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the 
faith and hope that are in you.” But we are not able to argue 
in this matter by quoting our law nor the authorities of the 
Sacred Writers, because unbelievers deny Christ the Lord and 
his law and the Sacred Writers. Wherefore we must seek for 
reasons in another way which is common to us and to unbe- 
lievers, namely, philosophy. But the power of philosophy in 
this particular is in perfect accord with the divine wisdom, nay, 
is a vestige of the divine wisdom given by God to man, that by 
this vestige man might be stimulated to comprehend divine 
truths. Nor do these things belong exclusively to philosophy, 
but are common to theology and philosophy, to believers and 
unbelievers, given by God and revealed to philosophers, to the 
end that the human race might be prepared for particular 
divine truths. And the reasons of which I speak are not alien 
to the faith or outside of its principles, but are drawn from its 
roots, as will appear from what is to be said. 

I might indeed be able to present these methods in a simple 

C 793] 

An 

Opus Majus 

and crude manner within the grasp of the unlettered multitude 
of unbelievers, but this is not expedient. For the multitude is 
too imperfect, and for this reason a plea for the faith that is 
within its grasp is crude, undigested, and unworthy of the 
learned. I wish, therefore, to proceed on higher ground and to 
present a plea concerning which the learned can judge. For in 
every nation there are some active individuals who are fitted to 
receive wisdom who can be persuaded by force of reason; so 
that when these men become enlightened, the persuasion 
through them of the multitude is much easier. 

I assume in the first place that there are three kinds of knowl- 
edge; one comes from study of our own devising along the 
pathway of experience. The second is that which is learned 
from others. The third precedes these and is the pathway to 
them, and is called natural knowledge, being so named because 
common to all. For that is natural which is shared by all mem- 
bers of the same species, as, for example, burning is natural 
to fire, as Aristotle explains in the fifth book of the Ethics; and 
Cicero makes this same statement in the first book of the Tus- 
culan Disputations, and we see it exemplified in numberless 
ways. For we say the cries of animals have a natural signifi- 
cation because they are common to the individuals of their 
species; and things of this kind are naturally known by us in 
which we all agree, as, for example, that every whole is greater 
than its part, and the like, both simple and complex. For we 
know that the rational soul is formed to learn the truth and to 
love it, and the proof of this love is shown in our deeds, ac- 
cording to Gregory and all the sacred writers and philosophers. 
Certain, however, think that there are two distinct divisions in 
the rational soul, or two faculties; that by one of these the soul 
learns the truth, and by the other desires to hear the truth when 
learned. But certain believe that there is one substance of the 
soul that performs both functions, because these acts are re- 
lated to each other, since the knowledge of the truth is owing 
to the love of it; for it is one and the same faculty. According 
to these thinkers the mind first perceives truth, and then loves 
it when known and carries it into practice. Hence Aristotle 
maintains in the third book on the Soul* that the speculative 
intellect through the extension of truth to the love of it becomes 

* De Anima, III, 7. 

[ 794] 

Moral Philosophy 

the active intellect. Nor does he ever make a specific differ- 
ence between the speculative and the active intellects, as he 
does between the intellect and the sense and the vegetative soul. 
For he proves in the second book on the Soul that these three 
are different in species, because their actions are different in 
species, namely, intelligence, feeling, and growth; nor are they 
related to one another. But the knowledge of the truth is re- 
lated to the love of it and is because of it; and for this reason 
_ there is one faculty, or nature, or substance of the rational soul 
' that learns the truth and loves it. Hence in the third book on 
the Soul Aristotle thus begins: “Concerning the part of the 
soul with which it learns and understands I must now speak ;’”’* 
maintaining that it is the same part that has both functions; 
just as it is in the sensitive soul; because it is the same faculty 
_that perceives and desires, as is evident in every sense. For 
touch perceives warmth and seeks for it, and so taste with savor, 
and the same is true of the other senses. 

But as regards these matters it is not of great moment how we 
define the faculty. For we know that the rational soul is formed 
to learn the truth and to love it. But the truth of a religion is 
perceived only so far as the knowledge of God abounds in the 
individual, because every religion is referred to God; and 
therefore he who wishes to arrive at a definite knowledge of a 
religion must begin with God. But the knowledge of God, so 
far as the question of his existence is concerned, is known to 
all naturally, as Cicero shows in his book on the Immortality 
of the Soul. And he proves it with this statement,j “No nation 
is so savage and barbarous as not to have some conception of 
God, nor is there any nation without some form of divine wor- 
ship.” But should Avicenna say in the first book of the Meta- 
physicst that this science seeks to prove the existence of God, 
we must reply that this is true as regards full certitude. For the 
natural knowledge possessed by the individual in regard to 
God is feeble, and is weakened by sins which are numerous in 
every one. For sin darkens the soul, and especially is this 
true with regard to divine things. l 

Therefore this knowledge needs the support of argument and 

* 7éid., III, 4. 
f De Natura Deorum, I, 16, 23. 
+ Metaphysics, I, 1. 
[795 J 

Opus Majus 

faith. But the knowledge of God’s unity and of his other attri- 
butes is not known by nature. For in these particulars men 
were never in agreement, some maintaining that there are many 
gods, others believing that the stars are gods, and still others 
that things here below are deities, as, for example, the pagans 
and the idolaters. And therefore they must err in their religion. 
All others who say that there is only one God do not understand 
other truths regarding him. And therefore the advocate of a 
religion in the first place must know how to answer the ques- 
tions that are asked about God in general. He must not, how- 
ever, enter into a discussion of all the particular truths at once, 
but should proceed gradually and begin with the easier topics 
in this way. For as the geometer gives his definitions in order, 
that the symbols and terms he employs may be known, so should 
we proceed in religious instruction; for unless we know the 
_ meaning of the terms used, we shall arrive at no proof. 

God, then, is the first cause antecedent to which there is no 
other, a cause that did not emerge into being nor will it be 
possible for it to cease to be, of infinite power, wisdom, and 
goodness: the Creator of everything and the director of every 
man according to the susceptibility of individuals to such guid- 
ance. And in this definition Tartars, Saracens, Jews, and 
Christians agree. The learned also among the Idolaters and 
Pagans cannot contradict when the reason for this has been 
grasped, nor can the multitude as a consequence whom the 
learned direct as rulers and guides. For there will be a double 
method of proof on this point: one is the consent of all other 
nations and religions and of the rest of the human race. But 
the minority must conform itself to the majority; and the part 
is disgraced that is not in accord with the whole. It is generally 
agreed that the wiser men are found among the other sects, and 
the Pagans and Idolaters are not ignorant of this fact. For 
when we meet them they are easily convinced and clearly per- 
ceive their own ignorance; as was shown by the emperor of the 
Tartars, who summoned before him Christians, Saracens, and 
Idolaters to confer on the truth of their religions; and forth- 
with the Idolaters were confounded and convinced. This fact 
is stated in the book on the Manners of the Tartars addressed to 
the present Lord King of France. And when Christians confer 
with Pagans, like the Praceni and the other adjoining nations, 

C796] 

Moral Philosophy 

the latter are easily convinced and perceive that they are in 
error. The proof of this is found in the fact that they would 
become Christians very gladly if the Church were willing to 
permit them to retain their liberty and enjoy their possessions ; 
in peace. But the Christian princes who labor for their conver- 
sion, and especially the brothers of the Teutonic order, desire 
to reduce them to slavery, as the Dominicans and Franciscans 
and other good men throughout all Germany and Poland are 
aware. For this reason they offer opposition: hence they are 
resisting oppression, not the arguments of a superior religion. 
Then the advocate of the religion of the faithful has on the 
part of Metaphysics and this Moral Science another method of 
procedure in giving his proofs, which I merely wish to hint 
at, until the treatise is finished which your Highness has re- 
quested. And in fact we can present to the assiduous man who 
is amenable to the force of reason the following as an ac- 
ceptable proposition. Causes do not go back endlessly, since 
they cannot be infinite in number nor can they be so conceived 
of. For all things that exist and that are perceived are in- 
cluded within some number, as Aristotle says in the third book 
of the Physics. There is not therefore a cause preceding a cause ' 
endlessly. Therefore we must stop at some first cause, which 
does not have a cause antecedent to it, and the whole number 
is reduced to a single one. And in every class one must be first 
to which all the rest are reduced. But if this should be the first 
cause without any other cause antecedent to it, it is evident that 
- it did not come forth in being through some cause; nor is any- 
thing else the cause of its being, nor does it cause itself to exist 
after non-existence, since in that case, while it was non-existent, 
it would have existence, so as to cause itself to be. For every- 
thing that causes something else to be after non-existence, has 
being while it is performing this act; therefore nothing is the 
cause of its own being. Wherefore this first cause never had 
non-existence, and therefore has always existed. But if this is 
granted, then it will always exist, since there are many things 
that will always exist, and yet have not always existed, as an- 
gels, souls, the heavens, earth, and the like; and for this reason 
that which never had non-existence will far more easily pre- 
serve its existence eternally. Moreover, that which never had 
non-existence is infinitely removed from non-existence, and 

C797] 

Opus Majus 

therefore it is impossible that it should pass into non-existence. 
For some things that have come forth into being can cease to 
exist, because they are not infinitely removed from non-exist- 
ence. For at one time they did not exist: therefore since non- 
existence is infinitely removed from that which has always 
existed, there is no comparative relationship between them. 
And therefore such a thing will not be able to cease to be; and 
this statement is more readily accepted than any of the other 
statements here made, and for this reason is rather a matter of 
perception than one in need of proof. 

But it is evident that the thing that has always existed and 
shall exist is of infinite power. Because if it is of finite power, 
then is its power imperfect, since in every finite thing something 
can be added, and every imperfect thing is naturally subject to 
change; but it is not possible to assume some change unless a 
first one be assumed. For what is first naturally precedes what 
comes after. And therefore since the first change is in regard 
to existence and non-existence, this change must be possible 
in that which has finite power. But this change does not hap- 
pen in that which has always been and always shall be: where- 
fore there is no limit to its power. 

Likewise Philosophy argues in the third book on Consola- 
tion* in this fashion. In every class. where the imperfect is 
found it is natural that the perfect be found. And therefore in 
the genus of power we must find a perfect power, since we find 
an imperfect one. But that is perfect from which nothing is 
lacking nor can something be added, according to Aristotle in 
the third book of the Physics and the fifth of the Metaphysics. 
And that to which nothing can be added is infinite; because to 
everything finite in so much as it is such, an addition can be 
made, and something else can be understood beyond it. There- 
fore perfect power must be infinite. But in things apart from 
this cause which we are seeking there is not a power that is 
perfect and infinite, therefore in this cause there will be such 
power. But if its power is infinite, then is its essence infinite, 
since power does not exceed essence. For essence is either equal 
to power or greater. Already the proofs on this point have been 
stated in the discussion of matter. It is manifest, therefore, that 
the essence of the first cause is infinite. 

* Consol, Philosophiae, Bk. III, Prosa X. 
[ 798 J 

Moral Philosophy 

And surely if its essence and power are infinite, its goodness 
must be infinite, since a thing whose essence is finite has finite 
goodness. Therefore infinite essence will have infinite good- 
ness; and otherwise there is no comparative relation of good- 
ness to essence in this cause; which cannot be in so great a 
majesty. And if its goodness were finite, it would be imperfect, 
and something could be added to it, and it could be lessened, 
and it could thus be subject to change; and for this reason it is 
natural for it to have non-existence, just as we proved above 
with regard to power. But that which has infinite majesty in 
essence and power and goodness cannot possibly lack knowl- 
edge, since a thing which is of such a nature has usefulness, 
nor can it be referred to the infinite majesty like the elements 
and stones and vegetation. 

Then we see that things lacking infinite power, as animals 
and men and angels, have knowledge, owing to the nobility of 
their nature: therefore since the nature of the cause now sought 
for is infinitely nobler than anything of this kind, it will have 
the power of knowledge. But since all the other things that 
are in it are found to be infinite, this cause has infinite wisdom. 
Moreover, if it- were finite it would be imperfect and subject 
naturally to increase and diminution, as we see in the case of 
other intelligent beings, and as is true in all imperfection. And 
therefore the first change which is with regard to existence and 
non-existence could be found here, as we argued above. There- 
fore the wisdom in this cause must be infinite; but if its power 
is infinite it can create this world, and its infinite wisdom knows 
how to make the best possible arrangement in regard to it, be- 
cause it is characteristic of the best to do the best, and to com- 
municate its goodness to others, as far as it is possible for them 
to receive it. Therefore this cause has necessarily produced the 
world. 

Unless an objector might say that the world never came forth 
into being, and did not have a non-existence. But in that case 
it would be of infinite power, just like this cause, and therefore 
would be equal to it and would be God, a conclusion that no one 
deems worthy of a hearing, and which no religion maintains. 
For if the world has always been, and never had non-existence 
before existence, then it did not come forth into existence after 
non-existence. Nor at the same time did it have existence and 

E3091. 

Opus Majus 

non-existence, because contradictories are not true either at the 
same time or by nature. Therefore the world was brought into 
being, but by no agency except this first cause. Unless you say 
that there are more causes than one of this kind, which cannot 
be true, since no one of them would be of infinite power. Be- 
cause if one is of infinite power it can do whatever it wishes, 
and therefore can act contrary to the will of another; therefore 
this other is not of infinite power since its will can be thwarted. 
And at any rate in one world there will be one God. For one 
God suffices for one world. And Aristotle in the eighth book of 
the Physics says that it is better to assume that there is one than 
more, since one suffices; but more worlds cannot coexist, as we 
showed in the chapter on Unity of the World. It is manifest, 
therefore, that there is only one God. Likewise if there were 
more worlds, one God would still suffice, because he is of in- 
finite power, therefore he would be able to produce and rule 
all those worlds, since all of them, no matter how many in num- 
ber, would not make something infinite. 

But Aristotle* in the eighth book of the Physics and in the 
eleventh of the Metaphysics concludes that there is one prime 
motor, or one first cause, since there is one prime motion, 
namely, the daily one, and one world. And that there cannot be 
more worlds he himself proves in the first book of the Heavens 
and the World,} because the earth of this world would be simi- 
lar in nature and species to the earth of another world. But 
things of the same nature have a natural motion to the same 
place, just as all heavy bodies naturally tend to move to the 
same point below. Therefore the earth of another world would 
tend to move to the same place to which the earth of this world 
naturally moves, since it is of the same specific nature. But the 
earth of another world could not move to the center of this 
world unless it passed through the circumference of the other 
world so as to penetrate it and at length fall to the center of 
this world. Since therefore this is impossible, it is not possible 
that there should be two earths or two worlds. There is there- 
fore one God, who is the first cause of all causes, who has al- 
ways existed and always will exist, possessing infinite majesty, 
power, wisdom, and goodness, the Creator and Ruler of all 

* Nat. Auscult., Bk. VIII. 
} De Coelo, I, 8, 9. 

[ 800 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

things. Nor can there be more than the one God blessed for 
ever and ever, Amen. 

After the Christian advocate has sufficiently verified this 
fundamental principle of religion, he should then argue fur- 
ther that man is bound to do God’s will and to serve him with 
all reverence. For his majesty is infinite, as we have shown. 
Therefore boundless reverence is due him. But the blessing of 
creation is a boundless one in this, that it cannot be brought 
to pass except by infinite power. For no finite power is able to 
create, because there is an infinite distance between non-exist- 
ence and existence. Therefore the transition from non-existence 
to existence must be through the infinite power of an agent. 
Wherefore the creature owes the Creator boundless reverence. 
Hence Avicenna says in the Elements of Morals that it is God’s 
right that we should obey his precepts. For the creature must 
obey the commands of its Creator. 

But a third reason is found in the infinite felicity he will 
bestow on those who obey him and the endless punishment he 
will inflict on those who are disobedient to him. Hence Avi- 
cenna expresses these reasons why we must serve God in the 
statement that he has prepared a promised felicity which eye 
has not seen nor ear heard for those who obey him, and for 
those who are disobedient he has prepared a terrible future 
punishment. This is also made apparent by Metaphysics and the 
first part of this Moral Science. For the soul is immortal, as 
Aristotle, Avicenna, and all the noble philosophers say; and 
Cicero has composed a book on this immortality. Seneca, more- 
over, avows this truth everywhere, and all sects aspire to this 
other life. Even the simple Pagans believe that they will live 
after death in body and soul, as I explained before; and there- 
fore they hold that there is a resurrection of the dead. Hence the 
Saracens hold this belief also. But they have in mind only the 
physical enjoyments of this present life. For Avicenna says in 
the Elements of Morals that Mahomet offered only a glorifica- - 
tion of our bodies, not of our souls, except in so far as the soul 
shares in the enjoyment of the body. The Jews also hold that 
there is a resurrection, and the Christians as well. And if the 
first and the last, that is, Pagans and Christians, agree in this 
belief, all the intermediate sects must necessarily believe in it; 
and for this reason the Idolaters like the others must avow it. 

[ 801 ] 

Opus Majus 

And the philosophers in particular teach this tenet, as I showed 
above in the first part of this Moral Science. 

But it cannot be that a man pleasing to God in this life will 
have after the resurrection a life such as we have now, because 
this life is full of all miseries, and is not in accordance with the 
goodness of human nature. And therefore when the resurrec- 
tion shall grant us an immortal state, we must of necessity be 
free from these miseries. Nor shall those who serve God meet 
with any misery, because it is just that they be given a reward 
according to the bounty of the divine goodness. And in the sec- 
ond place, the good as a rule have more misfortunes here than 
the evil. Therefore if God is a just judge he does not assign in 
this present life his rewards to the good, nor consequently will 
they be similar in the other life to the blessings in this. There- 
fore of necessity the just must be free from all misery; and 
since that state is perfect, there must be a glory of both body 
and soul. But the desire of the rational soul transcends all finite 
good. And therefore its desire cannot be satisfied except by an 
infinite good, and this is God; and therefore our human glory 
will participate in the goodness of the Deity; and from this 
the noblest corollary of philosophy follows, found in the third 
book of the Consolations,* namely, that by participation in the 
Deity men will become gods, although God is one by nature. 

Similarly since the evil here offend the divine Goodness, 
which is infinite, and fall into the crime of treason against God, 
their punishment of necessity in the other life must be inex- 
pressible and of infinite duration. Since these are the facts, a 
man should desire to please God by doing his will, to the end 
that he may so serve God that he shall escape intolerable pun- 
ishment, and obtain infinite beatitude. 

But if it behooves a man to do the will of God for the reasons 
given, namely, the dignity of an infinite majesty, and because 
of the benefit of creation into the existence of nature and of 
preservation therein, and because of the retribution to come, 
he should learn the divine will, and the things that belong to 
God, and the state of future felicity and misery. But man can- 
not of himself know these things, as is evident because of the 
errors and heresies and differences, nay, the contradictions of 
the principal sects, and not only of these, but because of the 

* Consol. Philosophiae, Bk. III, Prosa X. 

[ 802] 

Moral Philosophy 

articles of the same principal sect. For among Christians we 
see so many differences: since some are heretics, some schis- 
matics, some true Christians. The difference among heretics 
has no limits. Similarly among the Jews; for some were Phari- 
sees, some Sadducees, and others differing from both, as the 
Gospels teach us, and Josephus makes clear in his books of 
Antiquities. Similarly the Saracens, for Avicenna and other 
philosophers contradict the rank and file and the priests. For 
they show that not only does glory belong to our bodies, but 
also, and in greater measure, to our souls; and they decide that 
that sect will soon be destroyed. So too the Idolaters have dif- 
ferent sects. For those called Ingures, whose literature is pos- 
sessed by the Tartars, hold that there is but one God, a belief 
not shared by many other Idolaters, as we learn in the book on 
the Manners of the Tartars. But the Tartars likewise are in 
serious disagreement. For some of them lean to the Christian 
rite, some to that of the Saracens, and others to that of the 
Idolaters, although they are members of the same principal 
sect. Among the Pagans there are still greater diversity and 
error, because the individual fashions a god according to his 
liking and worships what is pleasing to him. 

But the power of knowledge in man does not suffice for the 
material things of this world and objects of sense, as is obvious 
to all. For no man knows with certainty and sufficiency the na- 
ture of the smallest thing, as, for example, a small plant, or 
fly, or anything else. And we see the utmost disagreement on 
the part of the learned in regard to the natures of material 
things. Much more then will man err in regard to things im- 
material, as spiritual substances, and the state of the other life, 
and especially as regards those things which pertain to God and 
to God’s will. Wherefore man must have revelation. 

This is in accordance with Aristotle’s statement in the sec- 
ond book of the Metaphysics, that the human intellect is so re- 
lated to the most manifest things of this kind in its own nature 
as the eye of the bat and of the owl to the light of the sun. And 
Avicenna says in the first book of the Metaphysics that man’s 
relation to those things that belong to the Lord of the ages in 
his kingdom is like that of a man deaf from his birth to the 
delight of musical harmony or of a paralytic to the delights of 
food. Wherefore man will not be able to attain certainty in 

[ 803 J 

Opus Majus 

these matters to a greater degree than the bat, owl, deaf man, 
or paralytic in the subjects mentioned. Moreover, Alpharabius 
says on this topic in his Morals that the untaught child bears 
the same relation to the man most learned in human wisdom 
as such a learned man to the divine verities: and therefore he 
will not be able to advance except through instruction and reve- 
lation. And he adds that if man could attain to the verities of 
sacred religion the world would not require revelation and 
prophecy. But both these, as he says, have been granted to the 
world and are necessary. Therefore man cannot unaided know 
verities of this kind. Avicenna makes this clear in his Elements 
of Moral Philosophy in his statement that religion requires a 
revelation from God; and that mortal man cannot pass to these 
immortal things. This accords with Seneca’s statement in his 
book on Peace of Mind, that man is too mortal for immortal 
things. 

Then, as man cannot unaided attain to these things, so should 
he not presume of himself to decide on these questions without 
revelation and instruction, for two reasons. One reason is 
found in the fact that those things that pertain to the other 
world, and in particular the will of God and matters pertaining 
to God, are of infinite greatness. Therefore they transcend our 
wretched humanity; nor is man worthy to try to discover and 
understand these matters of his own powers; wherefore it 
suffices for him to believe the one instructing him. Nor is he also 
worthy to believe those verities because of his sins and his 
wretched state. Let him rejoice, then, that he is taught by an- 
other, but not unless he be taught by God or by angels on God’s 
authority. For it is obvious, therefore, that man should not at- 
tempt to inquire regarding these divine verities before he is 
taught and believes. Moreover, God himself has infinitely bet- 
ter and more certain knowledge of all that concerns him than 
the creature can have. The authority and wisdom of God are 
infinite, with respect to which no human authority has com- 
parison or wisdom, and especially with respect to those things 
that are divine. 

It remains, then, that the authority of God should alone be 
sought, since his goodness is infinite which wishes to reveal to 
the human race what is necessary for salvation. And without 
doubt we clearly see in the sects that all believe that their re- 

[ 804 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

ligions possess a revelation. For this is evident in the case of 
Christians and Jews. The Saracens also believe that Mahomet 
had a revelation, and he himself makes such a claim; other- 
wise he would not have been believed. Moreover, if he did 
not have a revelation from God, he had one from demons. The 
Tartars similarly say that God revealed their religion, as we 
find written in the book mentioned and as we are assured. The 
Idolaters and Pagans in like manner believe that God reveals 
all pertaining to religions of this kind: because man would not 
‘ believe man otherwise in this matter. For every one who estab- 
lishes a sect ascribes the authority to God that he may gain 
greater credence. 

Since then these sects are so constituted we should be more 
fully persuaded that revelation should be made to only one per- 
fect lawgiver, and that one perfect law should be given by 
God. And this is apparent because of divisions and heresies. 
For if there were more heads, the human race could not be 
united, since each man strives to defend his own view. More- 
over, since there is one God and there is one human race to be 
regulated in accordance with God’s wisdom, of necessity this 
wisdom must choose unity from the twofold unity just men- 
tioned, or otherwise it would not conform to either one God or 
one human race. For if there were more gods and more worlds, 
and, so to speak, more human races, then there could be more 
than one divine wisdom. But the existence of many gods and 
many worlds is not possible. Therefore God’s wisdom cannot 
be plural. Moreover, since the perfect religion should show 
man what he ought to know about God and all that is useful for 
the individual, another religion will be either superfluous if 
it treats of the same subjects, or erroneous if it promulgates op- 

posing doctrines. Wherefore there can be only one perfect 
sect of the faithful, and likewise only one lawgiver who re- 
ceives this revelation from God; because if there is only one 
religion, there is also only one lawgiver; and the contrary 
` would also be true. This is also the teaching of Avicenna in the 
Elements of Morals, and of Alpharabius in the Morals. For, as 
Avicenna says, there must be one mediator of God and men, 
and a vicar of God on earth to receive the law from God and 
to promulgate it. Of this lawgiver Alpharabius says, “When it 
has been proved that he comes to us by inspiration from God 

[ 805 ] 

Opus Majus 

he cannot possibly be false. And when we have established a 
truth of this kind, his word must remain unquestioned. Nor is 
further scrutiny of his statements permissible, nor must there 
be further consideration if we are to put implicit faith in him.” 

This point settled, we must then inquire who should be pro- 
claimed as lawgiver and which sect should be spread through- 
out the world. The principal rites are first that of the Pagans, 
who live according to custom alone, and have no priests, but 
each man is his own teacher. The second rite is that of the 
Idolaters, who have a priesthood, agree in certain regulations, 
and assemble in one place at required hours to celebrate their 
rites. For they have large bells like those of the Christians, as 
I stated above. The Idolaters also differ from the Pagans. For 
the Idolaters worship images, while the Pagans worship natu- 
ral objects like woods, waters, and the like in endless number. 
The third rite is that of the Tartars, who pursue eagerly phi- 
losophy and the arts of magic. The fourth is that of the Sara- 
cens. The fifth is that of the Jews. The sixth is that of the 
Christians. For there are no more principal sects in this world, 
nor will there be until the sect of Antichrist appear. 

Since the Pagans and the Idolaters maintain that the crea- 
ture is God and avow that there is a multitude of gods, and 
since both of these tenets are impossible for the reasons given, 
it is evident that their rites are erroneous. Hence the Emperor 
of the Tartars, who is named Mangu Khan, of whom mention 
was made above in what was said about Places in the World, 
assembled together Friar William with his Christians, and Sara- 
cens and Idolaters, in order that they might dispute in regard 
to their religions. Both the Christians and the Saracens at 
once proved the Idolaters in the wrong and the latter ceased 
to defend their religion, as Friar William states in his book 
mentioned above, addressed to the Lord Louis, illustrious King 
of France. And since the foul state of the Pagans and the 
Idolaters is evident, we shall not consider them further at 
present. : 

Although the Tartars worship the one true God, yet they 
nevertheless incline to idolatry. For they adore fire, believing 
that all things are purged and expiated through it. Hence they 
cause their sons and messengers and gifts to pass through fire. 
Similarly they honor the threshold of the house; for he who 

[ 806 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

steps on the threshold is condemned to death. Hence likewise 
the Azotii did not step on the threshold of the temple of Dagon, 
as recorded in the fifth chapter of the first book of Kings. More- 
over, they do not have any priests except philosophers who 
also lean to magic arts and employ the responses of demons, 
as we learn in the book on their manners and as we know for a 
fact. Hence they do not pass beyond philosophy either true or 
magical. But I showed above that philosophy is related to reli- 
gion. For he who is perfect in the wisdom of philosophy bears 
“ the same relation to revealed religion as the untaught child to 
the aforesaid sage, as I explained above. It is evident, then, that 
the religion of the Tartars is not that which we are seeking, 
and the Tartars themselves acknowledge this. For the Emperor 
of the Tartars mentioned above acknowledges that the religion 
of the Christians is given by God to man and is the best. More- 
over, the Tartars have their sons instructed in the Gospel and 
in the lives of the Fathers, and they accept holy water and the 
cross and Christian priests when they are sick and have re- 
course to them as to a last refuge, as we learn in the book on 
their manners, and as we ascertain through experience. For the 
empress wife of that emperor summoned Friar William and 
Christian priests, along with their holy water and cross, seek- 
ing their counsel, when she had become ill. It is an easy mat- 
ter, therefore, for one who considers the facts to perceive that 
these religions should be eliminated. But the three others are 
more rational, namely, the religion of the Jews, of the Saracens, 
and of the Christians. 

But that the Christian religion alone should be preferred we 
can decide in the following ways: first, from the views of the 
philosophers noted above in the relationship of mathematics to 
the Church, and in the first part of the Moral Philosophy. For 
in that section are presented their noble testimonies regarding 
the articles of the Christian faith, namely, regarding the blessed 
Trinity, Christ, and the Blessed Virgin, creation of the world, 
angels, souls, judgment to come, life eternal, resurrection of 
the body, punishment in purgatory, punishment in hell, and the 
like, which are contained in the religion of the Christians. 

Philosophy is not, however, in such conformity with the reli- 
gion of the Jews and with that of the Saracens; nor do the phi- 
losophers bear witness in their favor. It is evident then that, 

[807 ] 

Opus Majus 

since philosophy is the forerunner of religion and disposes men 
to it, the Christian religion is the only one that should be ad- 
hered to. Moreover, the philosophers not only give way to the 
Christian religion, but they destroy the other two. Since Seneca, 
in the book which he composed against the religion of the 
Jews,* shows in many ways that it is most irrational and erro- 
neous, so far as the carnal Jews are bound to the letter alone, 
according to their belief that it suffices for salvation. 

The Saracen philosophers, moreover, find fault with their 
own law and decide that it will soon come to an end. For Avi- 
cenna in the ninth book of his Metaphysics proves Mahomet in 
error because he has set forth only physical delights and not 
spiritual ones. Albumazar, also, in the first book of the Con- 
junctions teaches that that sect will not last for more than 693 
years, and already 665 have passed, and he holds that it can 
cease in less time, as I noted above in the section on Mathe- 
matics. And it is evident that the Tartars have destroyed nearly 
the whole dominion of the Saracens on the north, east, and 
south as far as Egypt and Africa. Thus it happens that their 
Caliph, who holds the position of a pope among them, was 
destroyed thirteen years ago, and Baldach, a city belonging to 
that Caliph, was captured with a great number of Saracens. 
But we can see this same thing in another way through the 
testimony of the Sibyls. For, as shown above, they proclaimed 
that Christ is God, and made known all the principal articles of 
the Christian faith. But they do not bear witness to the other 
religions: nay, they have said that this religion alone possesses 
salvation. 

But there is also another way of considering these matters 
by reviewing the peculiar characteristics of the lawgiver and 
of the religions. The religion of the Jews does not in truth end 
with Moses, but looks forward to a Messiah who is Christ; al- 
though the Jews do not expect the Christ who is the head of the 
Christian Church, but another, who, they imagine, is still to 
come. Therefore it is evident that their law does not suffice, since 
they expect a more perfect lawgiver than Moses. But that this 
is Christ the Lord of the Christian can be proved by their law 
and by their authorities. For the prophecy of Daniel by a com- 

* Quoted by St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, VI, 11. 

[ 808 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

putation of years evidently extends up to Christ; for he came 
after that time. Moreover, at the advent of Christ the priesthood 
of the Jews ceased and also royal power among them, as they 
themselves cannot deny. But this was fulfilled at the time of 
Christ. For the kingdom of the Jews passed first to Herod and 
then to the Roman empire, as the histories of the Jews teach us. 
This information is contained in the books of Josephus, a Jew 
who narrated the destruction of the Jews by Titus and Vespa- 
sian. But Josephus says in the same work that in his time “Jesus 
“ Christ, a most holy man, appeared, if it is right to call him a 
man, concerning whom all things were fulfilled which our 
prophets said regarding him, as he himself gloriously bears 
witness.” Likewise he himself says that, when the Lord was 
crucified, the voice of the heavenly powers was heard to say in 
Jerusalem, “Let us abandon our abode.” Since Josephus is the 
chief authority on history among Jews, Greeks, and Latins, as 
all learned men and the sacred writers acknowledge, the fact is 
established by him that the Messiah promised by the Jewish 
law is the Lord Jesus Christ whom the Christians worship. We 
see this clearly from the fourth book of Esdras. For he states 
that God the Father thus spoke, “For my son Jesus shall be 
revealed with those that shall rejoice with him and that remain 
four hundred years: and after four hundred years my son 
Christ shall die, and the world shall be changed.”’* But so many 
years passed from Esdras to Christ. Likewise in the book of the 
twelve Patriarchs there is teaching of the clearest nature re- 
garding Christ. For each Patriarch gave his tribe definite proof 
in regard to Christ, and there was corresponding fulfillment. 
And if it be said that these books belong to the Apocrypha, 
that is, of unknown authorship, this fact does not destroy their 
veracity, since these books are accepted by Greeks, Latins, and 
Jews. For the blessed Ambrose in his homily on the Gospel of 
Luke quotes the authority of Esdras. And the Church in its 
office employs many other passages from that book. For there 
are many books current among Latins, Hebrews, and Greeks, 
the authorship of which is uncertain: nay, we Latins are cer- 
tain of the authorship of only a few books, and in many cases 
we are in error. For when we think that Avicenna composed 
the book on the Heavens and the World which is commonly 

* 2 Esdras, VII, 28, 29. 
[ 809 ] 

Opus Majus 

attributed to him, we are in error. And many commentaries are 
thought to be the work of Averroés, but are to be considered 
rather those of Alpharabius, as, for example, the commentary 
on the Physics of Aristotle. And in theology the authors of Ec- 
clesiasticus and of Wisdom are unknown, some regarding them 
as works of Solomon, others of Philo, while still others believe 
them the works of some one else. Hence we cannot urge as an 
objection that a book is of unknown authorship, provided that 
the book has the sanction of the majority of learned men. 

Moreover, if we consider the Jewish religion literally as it 
is presented, it is abominable, irrational, and intolerable. It is 
abominable because the slaughter of those rams, calves, bulls, 
and goats by the priests in the temple is horrible and most un- 
clean; and it is wholly irrational because it contains abuses 
without end, as is apparent to every one; and it is intolerable 
because the burden of it is without limit; nor were the Jews 
able to carry out fully the ceremonials of that law; as the 
blessed Peter says, “Neither we nor our fathers.” And this is 
evident from the series of Scripture bearing on the law; since 
owing to the intolerable burdens they turned to idolatry and 
to strange gods from age to age. And God himself bears wit- 
ness that ceremonies of this kind did not please him, as we 
learn from many Psalms, where the Psalmist says, “Sacrifice and 
oblation thou hast not desired, but mine ears hast thou opened.” 
And in another Psalm, “I shall not accept from your house calves 
nor he-goats from your flocks.” And in the first chapter of Isaiah 
and elsewhere the same fact is made clear. Hence lest they 
should become wholly Idolaters, God kept them busy in cere- 
monies of this kind. In the second place, the law promises only 
temporal and physical blessings ; but the perfect religion prom- 
ises eternal and spiritual blessings, as is evident from what 
precedes. 

In the same way we may consider the religion of the Sara- 
cens and their lawgiver. In fact, Mahomet himself in the Koran, 
which is the book of his law, says that Christ was born of the 
Virgin Mary by the influence of the Holy Spirit without a 
human father, and that he is the greatest prophet of God. Hence 
Christ takes precedence of Mahomet, and for this reason the 
law of Christ must take precedence. Since, therefore, there 
should be only one law in the world, as we have proved, it will 

[ 810] 

Moral Philosophy 

be that one which is better and more worthy; and this is the re- . 
ligion of Christ. Moreover, the philosophers of the Saracens 
find fault with their own religion. But the religion of truth, 
although it is above philosophy, is not, however, contrary to it, 
nor is it called in question by philosophy but is approved by 
it, as I have shown in regard to the religion of Christ in the sec- 
tion on Mathematics and in the first part of the Moral Philoso- 
phy. Likewise they point out that this sect will be destroyed and 
the time for its destruction is made known. But the religion of 
“ life eternal will always continue, even up to life eternal, because 
it leads to eternal life; therefore this religion is not that of 
Mahomet. Moreover, the lawgiver of this sect was most de- 
praved in his life; for he was a very wicked adulterer, as we 
find recorded in the Koran. For every beautiful woman he took 
forcibly from her husband and violated her. But adultery is 
contrary to every law and religion, for this it is that introduces 
discord among citizens; and likewise causes false heirs to ap- 
_ pear, and therefore destroys the laws of the state. 

But if we examine more closely these three sects, we can see 
more clearly which of them should be preserved. We must as- 
sume as a fundamental principle in this consideration that the 
histories of all nations are to be accepted on an equal footing 
when we take up the form in which the disputation is to pro- 
ceed. For if Christians should refuse to accept the histories of 
the Saracens and of the Jews, they with equal right will reject 
the histories of the Christians. Let us uphold for the sake of 
argument the histories of these sects, in order that we may see 
which sect should prevail in this matter. It is said then in Gospel 
history that among those born of women none has arisen greater 
than John the Baptist; but this same John says that he is not 
worthy to unloose the latchet of the shoe of Jesus Christ: and 
therefore neither Mahomet nor Moses is worthy, since there is 
no comparison of them with Christ, nor are their laws com- 
parable with his. Moreover, Alpharabius in his book on Sci- 
ences shows the ways in which religions are proved, and he 
presents two of these as more noteworthy than the others. One 
test is that there should be a perfect lawgiver to whom prophets 
preceding and following bear witness. But prophets preceding 
and following do not bear witness to Moses nor to Mahomet. 
Therefore Christ alone is the legislator whom we are seeking. 

[ 811 ] 

Opus Majus 

That the earlier prophets bear witness to Christ, he himself testi- 
fies, saying in the last chapter of Luke, “As is written in the law 
of Moses and in the Prophets and in the Psalms concerning me.” 
Also in the second chapter of John, “For Moses wrote of me”; 
and we have further evidence in the prophecy of Daniel men- 
tioned previously; also in Isaiah who says, “Lo a virgin shall 
conceive and bring forth a son” ; and Mahomet is in accord with 
Isaiah when he says that Christ is the son of the Virgin. Jo- 
sephus also testifies that all things were fulfilled in Christ that 
were said of him by the prophets. But the fact is made apparent 
not only in this way, but also through the prophets that followed 
him, namely, the numerous Sacred Writers, who not only 
gave testimony to Christ, but also testify that the earlier 
prophets spoke all things concerning him. 

But these later holy prophets are to be believed for six rea- 
sons. The first and weightiest reason for believing them is their 
perfect sanctity, since Cicero in the Topics, in which he con- 
siders the question of authority, rightly assigns this first and 
per se to virtue; because a good and holy man does not wish to 
lie. The second condition is an ineffable wisdom by which they 
have known how to avoid all error. For they have knowledge 
not only of things present in their sight, but also of things that 
are absent; and not only of things physical, but also of things 
spiritual as affecting the consciences of men. Filled with the 
prophetic spirit these men had knowledge of the present, past, 
and future, as the histories of the Christians inform us in num- 
berless instances. The third condition was the indescribable 
power of miracles with which these sacred writers were en- 
dowed. But Alpharabius says that men should believe because 
of miracles. For this is the second method offered by Al- 
pharabius of proving a religion, namely, by means of miracles. 
The fourth condition found in these sacred writers was their 
steadfastness even unto death in defense of their doctrine, a 
quality they would not have exhibited had they not known 
that there was supreme truth in their teaching. The fifth condi- 
tion is found in the fact that, while living in different parts of 
the world, they promulgated the same sentiment, although no 
one of them received the doctrine from another. Therefore they 
must have spoken by the inspiration of God, and hence without 
error. The sixth ground is found in the fact that they were 

[ 812 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

private citizens and laymen, such as Peter and others, and poor, 
humble, downtrodden men: and yet their view prevailed over 
their emperors, philosophers, and pontiffs. It is evident, there- 
fore, for these reasons, that those men are worthy of belief. But 
those men say that the earlier prophets bear witness to Christ: 
therefore this is true. Moreover, they themselves bear witness 
to Christ in numberless instances: nay, their whole life, not 
only their doctrine, was a confirmation of the Christian law. 
Since, therefore, the earlier and the later prophets in countless 
= numbers have borne witness to Christ, as have also Moses and 
Mahomet, while lacking such witness themselves, as is evident 
from the histories of the Jews and the Saracens, Christ must, 
therefore, be the perfect lawgiver. 

This same fact is proved by the second method of Alphara- 
bius in regard to proving religions, namely, by miracles. For 
although Moses did great wonders in fact, and Mahomet in 
appearance only and by fraud, yet they are not to be compared 
with the miracles of Christ. For conceding all their miracles 
and all the histories, we shall find in the Gospel history of John 
in the last chapter this statement: “But there are many other 
things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written 
every one, I suppose that even the world itself-could not con- 
tain the books that should be written ;” owing to the number and 
greatness of the miracles, a statement that cannot be accepted 
with regard to the histories of Moses and Mahomet. He like- 
wise says, “But that ye may know that the Son of man hath 
power to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy), I say 
unto thee, arise.” But to forgive sins and heal the soul is a mira- 
cle boundless in its nature, and greater than the performance 
of an infinite number of physical miracles. And on this fact 
rests a very strong argument in favor of Christ. For no one 
can forgive sin unless he be God; therefore Christ was God. 
Moreover, all histories confess that he is God, and these his- 
tories were given to the world by sacred writers whose sixfold 
qualification was stated above, who could not lie. Therefore the 
fact stated must be true. The earlier prophets moreover confess 
that he is God. Hence Isaiah says, “He shall be called Emanuel, 
that is, God with us.” And David says, “Thy seat, O God, is for 
ever and ever.” And there are very many other passages of simi- 
lar import according to the exposition of the prophecies made 

[ 813 J 

Opus Majus 

by the later Sacred Writers who cannot err. Since then Christ 
is God, which is not true of Mahomet and Moses according to 
the testimony of even Jews and Saracens, it is evident that he 
and he alone is the perfect lawgiver, and that there should be no 
comparison of Moses and Mahomet or of any one else with him. 

Moreover, this same fact is obvious from a comparison of 
the laws. For all sanctity and perfection of life are taught in the 
Christian law, and the impurity of sin is not permitted. But 
with Mahomet many sins are allowed, as is evident in the 
Koran, and no perfection of life is observed, since they are ab- 
sorbed in sensual pleasures because of their polygamy. Simi- 
larly the Jews above all else were eager for offspring. For the 
barren woman lay under the curse of the law, and virginity was 
not commended by them, nor voluntary poverty, nor the sub- 
mission of one’s will to that of another, three things indicative 
of the utmost perfection. For no one can doubt that virginity is 
a most pure and holy state, and voluntary poverty is approved 
by all philosophers, as we learn above quite clearly from the 
third part of the Moral Philosophy. But to submit oneself en- 
tirely to the will of another is the supreme and the most diffi- 
cult test of all, as every one knows. And therefore since these 
virtues are taught in the law of Christ, and not in the law of 
Mahomet nor in that of Moses, it is evident that the law of 
Christ is altogether superior. Moreover, by the law of Christ 
we are assured with reference to God and the future life of the 
good and of the evil, and likewise with reference to the blessed 
Trinity and other spiritual truths. But these verities are not 
presented in the law of Moses nor in that of Mahomet, as is evi- 
dent. Therefore the law of Christ should be preferred to the 
others. But it is such a law that should be published through- 
out the world, as we have shown above. Therefore this law 
must be the Christian law. 

Since we have proved that the Christian faith is to be ac- 
cepted, all its articles must evidently be accepted also. For if 
the whole is approved, each part of it also must be conceded. 
Since, however, a certain article seems burdensome to human 
frailty, for this reason some deny it, others are doubtful in re- 
gard to it, still others accept it with difficulty, some look upon 
it as hard, others imperfectly understand it, a few grasp it 
easily with full peace and sweetness of mind. I refer to the Sac- 

[ 814] 

Moral Philosophy 

rament of the Altar, as regards which, according to the Apostle, 
many are weak and sickly among you and many sleep. There- 
fore in regard to it I have thought it proper to undertake to 
show that this sacrament is a most true and certain one, which 
ought to be most ardently desired and most earnestly sought 
for, which we should most fervently await, with all reverence 
worship, with joy and devotion retain, with most certain faith 
contemplate. If this sacrament did not exist, we should seek to 
obtain it from God with the utmost diligence, and to purchase 
it not with corruptible gold and silver but with life and death. 
If it should exist and be unknown, it should be received as soon 
as it is offered, nay, it should be snatched from the mouth of him 
who proffers it, nay, without a teacher it ought to be known and 
loved above all things, so that he that is faithful should rejoice 
in knowing and possessing nothing else; since this being known, 
all things are known that pertain to salvation; this being un- 
known, all things are unknown; this being possessed, all things 
are possessed, and he who lacks this is proved to possess noth- 
ing. Since, therefore, it is necessary for every one to under- 
stand this, although notwithstanding many are ignorant of 
this sacrament, while others on being converted to the faith 
are more disturbed by this particular doctrine than by any 
other, and many Christians, who strive to judge with their 
human sense in regard to divine things, waver or are imper- 
fect; it is best to consider how both unbelievers and Christians 
can be most surely convinced in regard to this verity. I shall 
therefore give the main points of this persuasive reasoning ac- 
cording to the grace given me. 

Therefore that this fact is most certain, namely, that the 
Lord Jesus is present in this sacrament as true God and true 
man, is shown first by the assent of the whole Christian Church; 
and since that Chuch has been proved to be the true one, and 
since this sacrament is one that this Church professes, it is evi- 
dent that it will contain the truth. Moreover, in addition to the 
general proofs applicable to the whole religion, this blessed 
truth possesses its own particular modes of proof just like the 
whole religion. For this sacrament is clearly taught by holy 
Scripture in the Gospels and by the Apostle; “Your fathers did 
eat manna and are dead; he that eateth me liveth because of 
me; and, I am the living bread which came down from heaven ; 

[815 J 

Opus Majus 

if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.” And in the 
sixteenth chapter of the book of Wisdom, “Thou feedest thy 
people with angel’s food” ; and below, “For thy substance and 
the love thou hast for thy sons thou showest.” This is the bread 
on which the angels desire to look, according to the Apostle 
Peter. And therefore it is not that manna of the ancient people, 
since that is not the food of angels; when he says, “Thy sub- 
stance, etc., we are evidently not to understand this of the an- 
cient manna. And the Apostle who first persecuted the truth of 
Christ later confesses that he received this sacrifice from the 
Lord. Moreover, this truth is made manifest not only by Holy 
Scripture, but by all the Sacred Writers, who bear witness in 
regard to this article, who could not lie because of the condi- 
tions I have enumerated above regarding them. But this is evi- 
dent by common agreement and definition of all Catholic doc- 
tors, masters, and readers in the law of God. For all agree in 
their testimony that Christ is present in this sacrament. 

In the next place, there are an innumerable number of mira- 
cles which are found in the Sacred Writers and in the histories. 
But I shall here record two, which have not yet been chronicled, 
of undoubted authenticity and subject to no doubt. For a cer- 
tain devout matron desiring to have offspring had her hopes 
excited by a heretical bishop, who promised her a son. Sum- 
moning a necromancer who knew how to evoke demons, the 
woman, the bishop, and the necromancer met at a secret place. 
After the necromancer had gone through all the rites to his 
satisfaction in the matter of circles and incantations, a demon 
appeared in the guise of a boy wearing a crown, who asked 
them what they wanted. Both the necromancer and the bishop 
asked the woman what she desired. But while she terrified and 
seized with the fear of God made no reply, the demon retired 
to a certain wall near by, and taking the crown from his head 
worshiped and bent the knee. After doing this he returned to 
them and again asked what they wanted. And when the evil 
men kept asking the woman, and she did not venture to speak 
from fear, the devil returned to the place where he had first 
adored, and bent his head, but did not lay aside his crown nor 
genuflect. On his return to them they inquired why he had 
acted as he had on the first and on the second occasion. He 
replied that a man lay sick in a house beyond the wall, and a 

[ 816 ] 

Moral Philosophy 

priest brought the body of Christ to him; and “I was com- 
pelled,” said the demon, “to lay aside the crown from my head 
and worship and genuflect, because it is written, At the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow of things in heaven, and things in 
earth, and things under the earth. And when I returned the 
second time, the priest had given the body of Christ to the sick 
man, and was carrying the empty vessel, and therefore I did 
not lay aside my crown nor genuflect, but I merely bent my 
head and adored out of respect for the priest who carries the 
‘ body of Christ and for the sacred vessel.” Then the heretical 
bishop became a true Christian, and immediately began to 
preach the faith of Christ, and to confound heretical evil. Oh, 
how true a proof and how noble a one this is, adequate praise 
of which cannot be expressed! Moreover, many are alive who 
know for a certainty the truth of this miracle. 

It came to pass, moreover, that in the Franciscan order there 
was a brother who for many years was unable to partake of 
this sacrament, nor would he have stood before the altar with 
his brothers when they received the sacrament, had any one 
offered him the whole world; and yet he himself was ignorant 
of the reason of his own inability to receive the sacrament. And 
as it pleased God, a certain wise and holy brother said to him 
that he was either in cruel mortal sin, or that he was not bap- 
tized. The man himself, since after careful self-examination 
he had no consciousness of mortal sin, began to have doubts 
regarding his baptism. Inquiring of his parents in regard to 
the manner of his baptism, he learned that he and another boy 
were presented to the priest at the same time, who baptized the 
other child and innocently neglected to baptize him. After 
learning this fact he had himself properly baptized, and after- 
wards received the Sacrament of the Altar like any other man. 
From this it is evident that the truth of this sacrament is proved 
by baptism, and the truth of baptism by this sacrament. And 
therefore, since the Church holds that baptism must first be 
performed in order that the rest may follow, it is quite evident 
by this miracle that what the Church believes in regard to this 
most noble sacrament is true. 

But besides these methods of proof there are reasons of the 
following nature. For just as the Creator is related to the crea- 
ture and as far as he is related to the being of nature, so is the 

Pa 

A 

Opus Majus 

Redeemer related to the redeemed or to those who are in the 
state of grace, and more abundantly so. For it is more to re- 
create than to create; but it is in accordance with the law of 
the Creator’s majesty that he be omnipresent to the creature, nor 
is there any creature that does not share his presence. There- 
fore it will be in accordance with the power of the infinite Re- 
creator that he be present to every one who has been re-created 
and is in the state of grace. But his presence is not granted to 
us except in this sacrament. Therefore of necessity this sacra- 
ment must exist. 

Likewise the boundless need of the creature requires the 
presence of the Creator. For the creature otherwise would fail, 
because it would tend to a state of non-existence, unless it is 
supported by the presence of majesty; as philosophy and the- 
ology agree. But so great, nay, greater, is the need of the re- 
created for the Redeemer; therefore the Re-creator must be in 
the re-created and be present to him, if he is to remain in the 
state of re-creation, that is, in the state of grace. For as the state 
of nature is related to the Creator, so is the state of grace to 
the Re-creator. And, therefore, just as the creature would fall 
into a natural state of non-existence without the presence of 
the Creator, so would the re-created fall into a state opposed 
to grace unless he be supported by the presence of the Re- 
deemer. 

Moreover, the power of Christ is infinite, since he is God, and 
his wisdom is infinite, and his goodness likewise. Wherefore if 
from the infinity of his power he is able to do this, and from the 
infinity of his wisdom he knows how to do this, therefore from 
the infinity of his goodness he wishes to do this; because it is 
characteristic of the best to do what is best. And therefore since 
he possesses infinite goodness he must do infinite good, and as 
far as possible this must be received from him. But this good 
can be received by the re-created, that is, one in the state of 
grace; therefore it must necessarily happen to him. 

And yet again this is evident by a comparison? For any crea- 
ture in the state of nature receives from the Creator as much 
as he can receive in his condition: as Cicero says in his book on 
the Nature of the Gods,* “All parts of the world are so consti- 
tuted, that they cannot be excelled in their utility, nor can they 

* De Natura Deorum, II, 34. 

[ 818] 

Moral Philosophy 

be more beautiful in appearance.” Therefore similarly what- 
ever is re-created, being in the state of grace, will receive from 
the goodness of the Re-creator all that it is capable of receiv- 
ing. But it can receive the blessing of his substance; therefore 
it will receive this blessing, as the book of Wisdom says, “Thy 
substance hast thou given them.” And therefore every man in 
the state of grace must receive his Savior as the Church has 
appointed. 

For the rest original sin cannot be removed without offering 
‘ this sacrifice to God. But mortal sins are multiplied daily. 
Therefore it is necessary that this sacrifice make satisfaction to , 
God the Father for the sins of the world. Likewise God assumed 
this humanity so as to permit his blood to be shed by dying for 
us, and thus he redeemed us. But this is more than feeding us 
with this flesh and this blood. Therefore if he has wished of his 
goodness to do what is more, much rather will he wish to do 
what is less, since it is useful, convenient, and necessary for us. 

These arguments and the like can give conclusive proof that 
this sacrament is true, so that no one can nor should gainsay 
it. But mere assent is not the sole requirement; we should ac- 
cept this truth with the greatest ease, nay, we should accept it 
more easily, more willingly, more devotedly than any other 
truth that can be submitted to us in this life; nay, we should so 
accept it that in this life we may be at peace just as in the sweet- 
ness of life eternal; that we should wish for nothing except 
this; and if we were without it, we should consider that we 
neither knew nor possessed anything with regard to this glori- 
ous truth by which we are deified and taken into life eternal. , 

As regards the ease with which we may accept it there are 
several modes of approach. The first method is the considera- 
tion of what is contained in this sacrament; the second is the 
mode of existence; the third is the manner in which it is made 
available; and there are certain other modes, as I shall note. 
In this sacrament are contained the culmination of majesty and 
glory and fullness of salvation and perfection of beauty ; truths 
that are evident since God and Man, glorified and one, are here 
existent in one person. For God in accordance with his own 
nature possesses infinite majesty and goodness and beauty, as 
we see from the topics discussed above. For whatever is in him 
is infinite. Similarly man, received into the glory, goodness, 

[ 819 ] 

Opus Majus 

and the beauty of God, shares the threefold infinitude by rea- 
son of the union of an indivisible person. Therefore there is 
full infinitude of glory, salvation, and beauty in the content of 
this sacrament. 

The same is true in the mode of its existence. For since this 
Person in his divine and human nature of the same majesty is 
similarly present here and in heaven, so in every church, and 
in every one in the state of grace is he received similarly and at 
the same time. This is a mark of infinite power, because he is 
not limited to this nor to that, and this attests his infinite maj- 
esty. Similarly the fact that Christ as a whole is present in 
every part of the Host is a mark of infinite power; because he 
is not limited to a part, nor are his parts divided in the parts of 
the Host. There is therefore a threefold reason for his majesty 
in the mode of his existence. Moreover there is a fourth reason 
for his majesty evident in this sacrament. For his humanity, 
although in itself it is a creature, yet it there transcends the laws 
governing the creature, nor has it the mode of existence re- 
quired of the creature, namely, that it confine itself within the 
limits of space and physical locality, but it is free in these re- 
spects like Deity; and therefore so far as its mode of existence 
is concerned it is raised to the divine mode of existence, so as 
to transcend every law of existence that trammels the creature. 
And this can be effected by the infinite power of God, just as 
the assumption of humanity into a union of persons was effected 
by this same power. 

In like manner there is in this sacrament the infinitude of our 
salvation proceeding from the infinite goodness. For in con- 
ferring upon us the power at will through our ministry of caus- 
ing the Savior to be present in a miraculous manner in this 
sacrament, God concedes more to us than if he granted any one 
of us the power to make a universe of himself, nay, more than if 
he granted him the power to make an infinite number of uni- 
verses. For the advantage of an infinite number of universes 
to us is nothing in comparison with that of this sacrament. We 
need not say, therefore, with the Prophet, “If he delay, await 
him.” Nor with that other prophet, “Would that thou wert 
breaking through the clouds and descending” ; because God has 
placed in our hands the power to cause him to be present among 
us when we so desire, according to the dispensation of his divine 

[ 820] 

Moral Philosophy 

goodness by which we say, “Do this in remembrance of me.” 
For he commanded the clouds, and opened the doors of heaven, 
and rains upon us the manna of eternal life when we wish to 
utter five words. Wonderful goodness of God! which, since 
nothing is easier for us than to form a word, has granted us 
the power by merely a word to cause the Lord our Savior to be 
with us at our will. For we are not required to ascend into. 
heaven, to pass over seas, nor to plow nor reap for this bread, 
nor to plant vineyards nor tread out the wine for this drink, but 
' we are required to utter with ease five words, in order that our 
God and Lord may be with us, who is blessed for ever more. 
For this reason it is said in the thirtieth chapter of Deuter- 
onomy, “For this commandment which I command thee this 
day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in 
heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to 
heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? 
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall 
go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, 
and do it? But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, 
and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.” Therefore, in order 
that we may have eternal life, we need only believe in our 
heart, and utter a brief sentence compressed into the number 
of five words. For this number in its distinct comprehension of 
various things is better than all other numbers, according to 
Aristotle in his book of Secrets. 

Moreover, that this is veiled from our sense is due to our in- 
ability to comprehend him. For we would not be able to sustain 
with our senses the majesty of God, but we should fail com- 
pletely, owing to our reverence and devotion and wonder; just 
as the Apostles after the resurrection were not able to endure 
the sensible presence of the Lord. Even the blessed Dionysius 
the Areopagite was unable to bear the presence of the Virgin 
Mary after the ascension of the Lord. Nay, when he crossed 
from Greece to the Holy Land, that he might see the mother 
of the Lord, on entering the place where the blessed and glori- 
ous Virgin prayed, he fell as though dead, crying out that he 
should be led forth, freely confessing that no believer ought to 
look upon the glorious Virgin out of reverence for her. There- 
fore far less able would any one be to bear the sensible presence 
of the Lord; and this we prove by experience. For those who 

[ 821 ] 

Opus Majus 

exercise themselves diligently in faith and in love of this sacra- 
ment are unable to sustain the devotion which springs from 
pure faith, but give way to a flood of tears and the mind is dis- 
solved wholly in the sweetness of devotion, raised above itself, 
not knowing where it is or its own condition. Wherefore it 
would be impossible for a believer to sustain the sensible pres- 
ence, and therefore God has arranged with the utmost good- 
ness for us that the sensible vision should be veiled from us. 

Moreover, we could not sustain it from horror and loathing. 
For the human heart could not endure to masticate and devour 
raw and living flesh and to drink fresh blood. And therefore 
the infinite goodness of God is shown in veiling this sacrament. 
But its advantage in other respects is very great, so that we 
may learn to aspire to real blessings. For all our principal bless- 
ings and evils are invisible; namely, God, the angels and the 
saints, eternal life, virtue and grace, demons, purgatory, and 
hell. And this could not belong to the class of our principal 
blessings unless it were veiled from our senses, for which reason 
the Lord says, “Unless I go away, the Comforter will not come 
to you” : to the end that we should know that we should cleave 
to invisible blessings which do not appear; according to the 
Apostle, “Those things that exist, that is, are apparent, let us 
reckon as non-existent, and those things that do not appear let 
us reckon as existent and as good.” It was necessary also for us 
for our infinite advantage, that this infinite good should be 
veiled from our senses, and that we should know this means of 
salvation by the intuition of our mind alone. 

In the third place, we gain facility in believing by the use of 
this sacrament. For if the mode of its existence possesses an 
infinitude of salvation, majesty, and beauty, much more does 
the use itself of this sacrament in which we are united to God. 
Three things are here to be considered. For we are nourished 
by the glorious body and we are permitted to drink of his 
glorified blood, nay, we are renewed by the whole Christ, God 
and Man. But this is eternal life and infinite salvation as far as 
this mortality can sustain it. For God is not satisfied to feed us 
sensibly with his creatures and to give us drink, but he cherishes 
us spiritually with himself and with his flesh and blood. Then 
from participation in God and Christ we become one with him 
and one with Christ and are gods, as Philosophy in the third 

[ 8227] 

Moral Philosophy 

book of the Consolations concludes, because from participation 
in the Deity many become gods, although he is one by nature. 
And therefore by participation in Christ we become Christ’s. 
And for this reason the Scripture says, “I have said, ye are 
gods”; and elsewhere, “Do not touch my Christs.” And what 
more can a man seek in this life? 

Here the manuscript breaks off abruptly. 

[ 823 1 

INDEX 

Aaron, his vestments, 233. 

Abraham, instructed Egyptians, 53, 
196. 
Accentuation, errors in, 105; con- 

nection with music, 259. 
Adversity, value of, ii, 712-716. 
Aethiopia, 330-332, 337. 

' Africa, 334-337. 
Air, gravity of, 152. 
Albategnius, on motions of Mercury, 

279. 
Albumazar, astronomy taught by 
Shem, 196; prediction of Anti- 

christ, 208; height of clouds, 252; 
prophecy of the Virgin, 280; his 
astrology, 404; on Incarnation, íi, 
643; on Antichrist, ii, 644; on 
Creation, ii, 645. 

Alchemy, improvements in, ii, 626. 

Alchimus, ii, 655. 

Alcuin, praises Augustine’s transla- 
tion of Categories, 30. 

Alexander, correspondence with Aris- 
totle, 312, 405, 408; self-mastery, 

ii, 705. 
Alexandria, 333. 
Alfraganus, earth relatively small, 

201; on beginning of day, 216, 
diameter of earth, 248; on motions 
of Mercury, 279. 

Algazel, faculties obscured by vice, ii, 
671. 

Alhazen, referred to in Part V, pas- 
sim: spoken of as auctor perspec- 
tivae, ii, 434, 436; color ineffective 
without light, ii, 473; analysis of 
visual perception, ii, 497-499; of 
binocular vision, ii, 511; of double 
vision, ii, 512, 516; quotations 
from, ii, 442, 453, 464, 486, 495, 
497, 498, 530; vision not by rays 
issuing from the eye, ii, 469; ap- 
parent size of stars near horizon, ii, 
532. 

Alkindi, theory of vision, ii, 468; 
transit of light instantaneous, ii, 
486, 480. 

Alleluia, explanation of, 105. 

Almagest, size of heavenly bodies, 201. 

Aloes, ii, 623. 

Alphabet, Hebrew, 83; Greek, 85. 

Alpharabius, commentary on Aristo- 
tle’s Rhetoric, 34; separation of in- 
tellect from other psychical facul- 
ties, 44; practical side of logic, 81; 
connection of grammar and logic 
with mathematics, 118; inspiration 
of law-giver, ii, 805. 

Altavicus, on astrological houses, 277. 

Amazons, 378. 

Ambergris, ii, 623. 

Ambrose, 31, 36; admits astrological 
prediction, 269; on southern hemi- 
sphere, 326; description of Brah- 
mins, 371 ; examples of virginal con- 
ception, ii, 644. = 

Amen, derivation of, 98. 

Anacharsis, simplicity of life, ii, 684. 

Anaxagoras on inundations of Nile, 
341. 

Anger, ii, 685-711; outward symp- 
toms, ii, 686-688; destructive of 
reason, ii, 688-690; incompatible 
with clemency, ii, 690-693; with 
Magnanimity, ii, 693-606; with 
mercy, ii, 696-698; with peace of 
mind, ii, 698; examples of, ii, 698, 
699; comparison with other vices, 
ii, 700, 701; examples of self-re- 
straint, ii, 702-706; remedies 
against, li, 706-711. 

Angles of incidence and reflection, ii, 
547. 

Animals possess judgment, ii, 424; 
also a faculty akin to reason, ii, 
426; recognition of universals, ii, 
543; unconscious of their mental 

[ 825 1 

Index 

processes, ii, 544; teach rules of 

health, ii, 620. 

Antichrist, advent of, may be pre- 
dicted, 289; will employ science, ii, 
633; advent of, ii, 644, 788. 

Antigonus, example of self-restraint, 
ii, 704. 

Apocryphal works, value of, 68. 

Apollo, more than one so called, 56, 
57; tradition of, obscured, 64. 

Apuleius (of Mandara) on Angels, ii, 
646, 647; virtue spiritual health, 
ii, 669; vanity of worldly pros- 
perity, ii, 677. 

Aqueous humor (albugineus), ii, 435. 

Aquila, translation of Bible, 77. 

Arabia, 343-351. 

Araxes, 379, 380. 

Arcesilaus, enjoyment of wine, ii, 785. 

Archytas, successor of Pythagoras, 60; 
visited by Plato, 61; intellect weak- 
ened by lust, ii, 679; self-restraint, 
li, 703. 

Aristides, calmness under insults, ii, 
732. 

Aristotle, great but not perfect, 10; 
attention to predecessors, 15}; ap- 
preciation by Avicenna, 22; con- 
demnation of works, ib.; his life, 
62; entitled the philosopher, 63; 
translations of, not possessed by 
fathers, 63; Physics and Meta- 
physics introduced by Michael Scot, 
63; disregard of wealth, ii, 675; 
translations of, defective and con- 
fusing, 77, 79; li, 427, 475, 608. 
Analyt. Post, 125; knowledge at- 

tained by study of cause, 190. 

Categories, connection of mathe- 
matics with, 120. 

De Anima, separation of Intellect, 
44; Sensus Communis, ii, 421, 
422}; passivity of sensation, ii, 
470; distance needed for sensa- 
tion, ii, 55; taste and touch, ib.; 
effect of vacuum on vision, ii, 
485; instantaneous transit of 
light, ii, 486. 

Aristotle (continued) : 

De Coelo, geometrical figures filling 
space, 46; gravity of air, 152; 
form of universe, 174; disputes, 
relation of elements to regular 
solids, 183; opposed to plurality 
of worlds, 185; extent of sea be- 
tween India and Spain, 311; on 
southern pole, 326; imperfect 
account of lunar phases, ii, 525; 
illusions caused by motion, ii, 
535; scintillation, ii, 536; trinity 
in nature, ii, 611. 

De Generatione, influence of heavens 
compared with elements, 394; 
moisture and dryness, ii, 423; 
passivity of matter, ii, 495; Va- 
riety in eyes of animals, ii, 502. 

De Insomniis, 164; shifting im- 
pressions of color, ii, 520. 

De Memoria, 10, 125. 

De Natural. Auscult., material and 
other causes not coincident in 
same object, 46; eight modes 
essendi in actu, 47; on vacuum, 
166; controverts Parmenides, 
169; influence of sun on genera- 
tion, 394; transit of light, ii, 487. 

De Plantis (apocr.), 394. 

De Sensu, on Sensus Communis, ii, 
422; on colors, ii, 197. 

De Somno et Vigilia, ii, 422. 

Ethics, 8, 10, 15; capacity of youth 
for mathematics, 123; principles 
of, ii, 664-667; difficulty of 
moral reformation, ii, 669; train- 
ing of young, 674. 

Metaphysics, 2, 6, 14, 120, 123; 
connection of dancing with music, 
260; visual sense reveals differ- 
ences, ii, 4194 private and public 
good compared, ii, 663. 

Meteorologica, lunar rainbow, 46; 

source of stellar light, 148; oc- 
cultation of stars, ib.; formation 
of clouds, 252; Milky Way, ii, 
517. 

Poetic, 119. 

L826] 

Index 

Aristotle (continued) : 
Problemata (spurious), ii, 475, 680. 
Soph. Elench., 14; ii, 668. 
Topica, 12; remark on vision, ii, 

469. 

Arithmetic, theological applications of, 
242 et seq. 

Ark, 232. 

Armenia, 379, 380. 

Armenia (major), 379; destruction of 
churches, 380. 

Armenia (minor), identical with Cili- 
cia, 373. 

Artephius on longevity, ii, 621. 

Article, use of, in Greek, 87. 

Arym, 319, 329. 

Arzachel, his tables, 213, 297; on 
motions of Mercury, 279. 

Asia Minor, 373. 

Aspiration, note of, 92. 

Astrolabe, 247; described by Ptolemy, 
ii, 616; movable in accordance with 
motion of heavens, ii, 616. 

Astrology, 261-290, 391-418; pre- 

dictions of, admitted by the fathers, ` 

268; condemnation of, by recent 
theologians, 270; predictions not 
absolute, 270; applicable to states 
more ‘than to individuals, 273-275; 
connection with religious changes, 
254-280; effect of heavens on things 
of earth, 392; best understood by 
Hebrews, 395; special parts of the 
body affected, 396; relation of, to 
medicine, 397, 401, 406; lunar 
mansions, 399; legitimate use of, 
403-411; studied by Tartars, 415. 
Astronomy, appreciated by Cassio- 
dorus and Augustine, 199, 200; re- 
veals man’s insignificance, 201; 
verifies Biblical geography, 203- 
208 ; governs construction of calen- 
dars, 208, 209; indicates date of 
creation, 210-213; of deluge, 215; 
of exit from ark, 220; of delivery 
of the law, 222, 223; of Nativity 
and Passion, 224-232; enables us 
to measure the earth, 246-249; the 

heavenly spheres, 249-251; height 
of clouds, 251-252; diameters ap- 
parent and real of planets, 253-257; 
the fixed stars, 257-250. 

Athenodorus, ii, 771, 774. 

Atlas, contemporary with Moses, 
grandfather of Hermes, 55. 

Atoms, 172. 

Attica, 389. 

Augustine, St., 13; retraction of 
errors, 16; freedom of criticism, 17, 
18; translated Aristotle’s Cate- 
gories, 29; scientific works, 106; 
value of science, 198-200; De Doc- 
trina Christ, 36, 39; Soliloguia, 
47; on Biblical text, 88; admits 
astrological prediction, 269; views 
on propagation of rays, ii, 468; 
citations from Porphyry, ii, 641. 

Authority, errors due to, 4-10, 13-19. 

Aux, explanation of, 137. 

Avarice, ii, 675-679. 

Ave, derivation of, 100. 

Averroes, 6; criticized Avicenna, 16; 
attacks upon, 22; Bacon’s estimate 
of, 64; on transparency of planetary 
orbs, 149 ; continuity of points, 170; 
few solids can fill space, 184; gen- 
erative force of sun, 308; influence 
of heavens, 394; his theory of vi- 
sion, ii, 469; vision affected by 
cold, ii, 506; on transparency of 
heavens, ii, 483; scintillation re- 
sults from density and motion of 
medium, ii, 540. 

Avicenna on intellect, 44; principal 
expositor of Aristotle, 63; most of 
his work still untranslated, 64; 
celestial things nobler than terres- 
trial, 201; correction of Aristotle, 
ii, 428; an authority on optics, ii, 
430, 433; theory of vision, ii, 469; 
De Anima, ii, 427, 473; De Ani- 
malibus, ii, 427, 445, 474; dis- 
turbances of vision, ii, 507; views 
of Creation, ii, 646; on spiritual 
blindness, ii, 651-653; future re- 
ward and punishment, ii, 655 ; cere- 

[ 827 J 

Index 

monial, ii, 657; legislation, princi- 
ples of, ii, 661; mediator between 
God and man, ii, 805. 

Bagdad, capture of, by Tartars, 287 ; 
ii, 808; position of, 351. 

Baltic, countries bordering on, 376. 

Basil, qualified approval of astrology, 
268. 

Bede, lawful to use pagan knowledge, 
43; on Noah’s exit from the ark, 
220; date of law-giving from Sinai, 
222; date of Passion, 225; rela- 
tion of miracle indicating time of 
Easter, 303, 304. 

Bee, operation of, ii, 544; a type of 
royal government, ii, 691, 692. 

Bells rejected by Greeks because used 
by Buddhists, 388; ii, 806. 

Bible, corrupt text of, 87, 243. 

Binocular vision, ii, 511. 

Black Sea, 374. 

Boetius on authority in belief, 16; 
translated logical works of Aristo- 
tle, 30; knowledge of language, 76; 
precise comprehension of terms, 97 ; 
translated Greek mathematicians, 
117; symbolic meaning of propor- 
tions, 118; De Consolatione quoted, 
li, 484, 654, 672, 788. 

Brahmins, 371. 

Brain, organs and functions of, ii, 421, 
428; is not sensitive, ii, 428; rela- 
tion of, to heart, ii, 428; organs of 
vision and smell, ii, 452; larger in 
man than in other animals, ib. 

Brevitas Vitae, Seneca’s dialogue on, 
ii, 739-750. 

Buddhists (idololatrae) description of 
their worship, 388 ; chastity of their 
priesthood, ii, 789; different sects 
of, ii, 803; are polytheists, ii, 806. 

Bulgaria (major), 378, 383. 

Cadmus, contemporary with Othniel, 
56. 

Caesar (Augustus), example of self- 
restraint, ii, 706; wish for retire- 

ment, ii, 741; endurance of be- 
reavement, ii, 751. 

Caesar (Caius), ii, 782. 

Caesar (Julius) reported use of mir- 
rors when invading Britain, ii, 581; 
friends more dangerous than foes, 
li, 708. 

Calendar, reduction of, to Christian 
standard, 209; correction of, 290- 
306. 

Canus, ii, 782. 

Cara-Cathaia, 384. 

Carneades, ii, 748. 

Carpini, mission to Tartary, 386. 

Carthage, 335. 

Caspian gates, 289, 372, 381; ii, 645. 

Caspian Sea, rightly described by 
Franciscan missionaries, 372, 382; 
li, 645. 

Cassianus, ii, 702, 784. 

Cassiodorus, theological value of sci- 
ence, 40; praise of mathematics, 
197; on time in music, 260. 

Cat, fact proving intelligence of, ii, 
544. 

Cathaia Magna (China), 387. 

Cato, example of self-restraint of, ii, 
706, 724; type of perfection, ii, 
719; relaxation, ii, 784; enjoyment 
of wine, ii, 784. 

Caucasian gates, 372. 

Caucasus, variously defined, 360. 

Censorinus, on accents, 260. 

Centilogium, see Ptolemy. 

Ceremonial of Pagans, worthless, ii, 
658. 

Chaldaean language used by Daniel 
and Jeremiah, 82. 

China (Cathaia Magna), 387. 

Choroid, see Uvea. 

Christianity, supreme object of phi- 
losophy, ii, 787; comparison with 
other religions, ii, 790, 806-814; 
philosophical proofs of, ii, 792-804. 

Chronology, dependence on Mathe- 
matics, 208-216; reduction of, to 
Christian standard, 208, 200. 

Chrysostom, 7, 10. 

[ 828 J] 

Index 

Cicero, Hortensius, 3; Tuscul. Disp., 
6, 13; philosophy a gift of God, 48; 
intuitive knowledge of geometry, 
121; Acad. Prior., 6; Deorum Na- 
tura, 7; on immortality, ii, 649; on 
future state of misery, ii, 655; 
divine worship, ii, 656; public 
spirit, ii, 663; virtue the sole good, 
li, 667 ; consistency of character, ii, 
668 ; sin, ii, 671, 672; endurance of 
ancient philosophers, ii, 676; disre- 
gard of wealth, ii, 678; lust, ii, 
679-681; self-restraint, ii, 703; 
discontent with office, ii, 741. 

Citizens, form organic whole, ii, 710. 

Claudius, on Plato’s teaching of 
Trinity, ii, 640. 

Climate, conditions of, 153-158; in- 
fluence on character, 159, 272. 

Cloud, made visible by distance, ii, 
482; height of, how estimated, ii, 
523, 524. 

Clouds, height of, 251. 

Coelum, derivation of, 99. 

Cognition, three modes of, ii, 497- 
500; examples of, by sense only, ii, 
517-521; by scientia, ii, 521-523; 
by. syllogism, ii, 523-525. 

Color of eye, ii, 444; concerned in 
vision, ii, 449, 473, 495; mixture 
of, ii, 438-461 ; color of deep water 
and sky, ii, 482; apprehended by 
sensation, ii, 517; modified by pas- 
sage through colored substance, ii, 
522; dependence of, on angle of 
incidence, ii, 557; of rainbow, ii, 
605, 610-612; of ocular structures, 
i, 612. 

Colure (equinoctial), 
309. 

Comestor (Peter), 215. 

Comet, of 1264, 400. 

Commissure (optic), ii, 431. 

Conceit of knowledge, 20-26. 

Confession (Bacon’s) of imperfect 
knowledge, 231, 232, 290, 293; ii, 
615. 

definition of, 

Conjunctions, planetary, 
284, 285, 401. 

Consecration, formulae used in, 106, 
107. 

Constantia (de), Seneca’s treatise, ii, 
716-725. 

Constantinus (Africanus), ii, 430. 

Contact, point of, 169-172. 

Contract, laws of, ii, 661. 

Conversion of heathen promoted by 
Science, ii, 632. 

Corinth, 390. 

Cornea, described, ii, 433; functions 
of, ii, 444. 

Cornelia, ii, 737. 

Creation, date of, 210. 

Cube, 181; related by Platonists with 
earth, 183. 

Cumanians, destruction of, by Tartars, 

278, 279, 

375. 
Custom, errors due to, 5-10. 
Cycle, lunar, 216-220; its defects, 

296-300; Arabian cycle preferable, 
300. 

Cyprian, 13. 

Cyrene, 336. 

Cyril, studied astronomy, 31. 

Dacia (for Dania), 375. 

Damiata, on site of Memphis, 333. 

Dawn, due to accidental rays, ii, 519, 
520; see Twilight. 

Day, beginning of, 216. 

Dead Sea, 356. 

Degeneration, hereditary, ii, 618. 

Degree, terrestrial arc corresponding 
to, 247. 

Delos, Apollo worshiped in, 57. 

Deluge, 215. 

Demetrius (Poliorcetes), ii, 718. 

Democritus, 173; on vacuum, ii, 485; 
on quiet life, ii, 781; the laughing 
philosopher, ii, 782. 

Dialects, 75, 82. 

Diameter, of earth, 248; of planets 
(apparent), 253, 254; (real), 254- 
256. 

[ 829 ] 

Index 

Diaphanum, see Transparency and 
Medium, 

Dimension, of heavenly bodies, 246 et 
seq. 

Diogenes, his self-mastery, 
703, 775- 

Dionysius, studied astronomy, 31; in- 
troduced Christian era, 225. 

Diphthongs, Greek, 86. 

Diplopia, ii, 512-516. 

Disease, caused by stellar rays, 163. 

Distance, a condition of sensation, ii, 
474; medium how affected by it, ii, 
481-482; how appreciated, ii, 523- 
525. 

Dodecahedron, 182; related by Pla- 
tonists with the heavens, 182. 

Dogma, derivation of, 99. 

Dominicans, corrections of Biblical 
text, 88. 

Don, the river, 375, 377. 

Drunkenness, causes double vision, ii, 
506. 

Dura mater (membrane of brain), ii, 
421. 

69; ii, 

Earth, dimensions of, 248; an insig- 
nificant fraction of universe, ii, 676. 

Easter, kept at wrong time, 294-296, 
301, 302. 

Eccentricity, of solar orbit, 158, 314. 

Ecclesiastes, as to sun’s motion, 202. 

Ecclesiasticus, effect of sun on earth, 
202, 236-238. 

Eclipses, 148. 

Effect, study of, one of the paths to 
knowledge, 189. 

Egypt, 332-334. 

Elijah, value of music, ii, 786. 

Elixir vitae, described, ii, 622-624. 

Embolismus, in lunar cycle, 297. 

Ennui, ii, 770, 771. 

Envy, ii, 675. 

Epicurus, toleration of injuries, ii, 724. 

Equator, definition of, 309. 

Equinoxes, error as to time of, 291- 
293. 

Error, causes of, Part I, passim; con- 

fessed and retracted by fathers of 

Church, 16, 28. 

Esculapius, 56, 64. 

Esdra, contemporary of Pherecides, 
60; of Socrates, 61. 

Esdras, on proportions of land and 
water, 311; prophecy of Christ, ii, 
809. 

Ethicus, 288 ; authority in geography, 
390; on persons of Trinity, ii, 642; 
on Christ, ii, 644; on Antichrist, 
ii, 644; on future misery, ii, 655- 

Ethilia, see Volga. 

Etymology, 99-103. 

Eucharist, ii, 814-823; its diffculty 
and importance, ii, 814; proofs from 
Scripture and Church, ii, 815; con- 
temporary miraculous evidence, ii, 
816, 817; proofs from reason, ii, 
817-819 ; power conferred on priest, 
ii, 820, 821 ; mercifully hidden from 
sense, ii, 821; incorporation with 
Christ, ii, 822, 823. 

Euclid, Elements, 121, 124, 131, 171, 
173; 175, E2775 181, 182; 186, e575 
Catoptrica, ii, 571. 

Optica, a radiation from eye to ob- 
ject, ii, 468; the whole object 
never seen at once, ii, 510; circle 
may appear rectilinear, ii, 525; 
on visual angle, ii, 530. 

Euphrates, course of, 352; inunda- 
tions of, 340. 

Eusebius, worked at astronomy and 
music, 31; as to lunar cycle, 303. 

Exaltation (astrological), 281. 

Example, influence of, ii, 673. 

Experiment, on passage of light 
through an orifice, ii, 464; on visual 
angle, ii, 480; on double vision, ii, 
512-515; contrasted with reason- 
ing, ii, 583; illustration from Eu- 
clid, ii, 583; errors due to neglect 
of, ii, 584; spiritual aspect of, ii, 
585-587; distinguishes natural or 
technical processes from fraud and 
magic, ii, 587; should be carried 
further, ii, 615. 

[ 830] 

Index 

Eye, structure and functions of, ii, 
430-448; spherical shape of, ii, 
447; emanation of rays from, ii, 
470-472; morbid states of, ii, 492; 
when deep-set sees further, ii, 501, 
502; intrinsic light in, 505; com- 
pression of globe, effect of, ii, 508; 
allegorical significance of parts of, 
li, 576-578. 

Eye-lash, ii, 447. 

Eyelids, ii, 447; their effect on sight, 
il, 503- 

Fabianus, ii, 744. 

Facies (astrological), 282. 

Falling bodies, strain of all parts ex- 
cept center, 189. 

Fascination, 164, 413, 414; examples 
of, in Bacon’s time, 416, 417. 

Fire, sphere of, distinct from that of 
ain t53. 

Force, propagated in straight lines, 
131; distinction of vertical and 
oblique action, 139, 140. See 
Species. 

Fortunatianus, letter of St. Augustine 
to, 18. 

Fractions, reduction to common de- 
nominator, 242. 

Franciscans, corrections of Biblical 
text, 88; their mission to the Tar- 
tars, 289, 324. 

Freewill, interfered with by magic, 
262; not so by astrology, 270, 406. 

Future, knowledge of, necessary, 306. 

Galaxy, ii, 517, 518. 

Galen, on prognosis, 273; De Dyna- 
midtis, 398; on critical days, 401. 

Galilee, 366, 367. 

Ganges, 371. 

Gellius, A., Woctes Atticae, 11. 

Gender, differences in Latin from 
Greek, 102. 

Gennesareth, lake of, 360, 361. 

Geography, 306 et seq.; general prin- 
ciples of, 308-319; its political and 
religious importance, 320-323; 

mathematics needed for, 203 ; spirit- 
ual meaning of Biblical geography, 
204-208. 

Geometry, connection with theology, 
232-242. 

Georgia, 378. 

Gerlandus, on date of Passion, 227. 

Gluttony, ii, 682. 

Gnomon, addition of, to rectangle il- 
lustrates growth, 121. 

Government, laws respecting, ii, 660- 
662. 

Graecia Magna, 59, 61. 

Grammar, Part III, passim. 

Gratian, ignorant of science, 33, 34. 

Gravity, of particle, affected by posi- 
tion, 191-194. 

Greek fire, ii, 620. 

Greek language, Part III, passim. 
Greeks, received elements of science 
from patriarchs and prophets, 53. 
Gregory, Pope, writings attacked after 

death, 21. 

Grosseteste, scientific knowledge, 76, 
126; translations from Greek 
fathers, 78, 82. 

Gunpowder, ii, 629. 

Habitable region, 310-313. 

Halcyons, described, ii, 632. 

Haloes, ii, 612-614; further experi- 
mental research needed, ii, 615. 

Haly, distinguishes astrology from 
magic, 264; connection of astrology 
with medicine, 397, 399, 402, 407, 
409; ii, 620; work De Regimine 
Senum, ii, 622, 625. 

Health, rules of, ii, 617-619. 

Heart, relation to brain, ii, 428, 429. 

Heat, generated by motion, 189; 
solar effect of, 308, 314. 

Heaven, influence of, on Earth, 307, 
308. : 

Heavens, their transparency, ii, 482; 
optical illusion as to their shape, ii, 
529. 

Hebrew, affinity of, with Chaldaean, 
82; correspondence of letters with 

[831] 

Index 

those of Latin, 96; 
excellence of, 301. 
Hegesippus, 359, 365. 

Heliopolis, 333. 

Helvia, Seneca’s discourse to, ii, 725- 
733- 

Heraclitus, the weeping philosopher, 
li, 782. 

Hercules, 56. 

Hermann, 82; difficulty of rendering 
Aristotle’s Poetic Argument from 
Arabic into Latin, 119. 

Hermes (Mercurius), nephew of At- 
las, 55; on creation, ii, 646; future 
rewards and punishments, ii, 655; 
on divine worship, ii, 658. 

Hesiod, 58. 

Hexagons, will not fill a surface, 182; 
form of bee’s cell and of certain 
crystals, 185. 

Hipparchus (Abrachis), 57. 

Hippocrates, 294. 

Hippocrates, on prognosis, 273. 

Homer, 58, 76. 

astronomers, 

Horace, 80. 
Houses (astrological), division of 
heaven into, 277; two distinct 

meanings of, 280. 

Hungary, 376; Asiatic origin of peo- 
ple, 383. 

Hygiene, rules of, insufficiently ob- 
served, ii, 617-6109. 

Hyperboreans, 327, 376, 377. 

Iconium, seat of Turkish power, 373. 

Icosahedron, 181; related by Pla- 
tonists with sphere of water, 183. 

Illusions (optical), ii, 506-516, 520, 
521, 523-525, 529, 532-535. 

Illyria, 390. 

Imaginatio, contrasted with Sensus 
Communis, ii, 422; their contiguous 
position in brain, ib. 

Incommensurables, 173. 

Inconsistency, ii, 761-765. 

India, vast extent of, 327; southern 
boundary, 328; other boundaries, 
370, 371. 

Indus, 371. 

Inheritance, laws of, ii, 661. 

Injury and-insult not felt by wise man, 
li, 716-725. 

Innate, disposition how determined, 
159. 

Ionic school of philosophy, 60. 

Isaac (physician), on astrological pre- 
diction, 267. 

Isidorus, 13; his Etymologica, 69; on 
time in music, 260; a geographical 
authority, 323; derivation of cir- 
censes, li, 747. 

Isis brought learning to Egyptians, 54. 

Isoperimetry, 176. 

Israel, meaning of, 93-96. 

Italic school of philosophy, 60. 

Jeremiah, contemporary with Ancus 
Martius and Tarquinius Priscus, 62. 

Jericho, spiritual meaning of, 207. 

Jerome, 7; retraction of error, 16; 
criticism of Augustine, 17; mis- 
judged in lifetime, 21; on literal 
translation, 75; his view of Sep- 
tuagint, 77; not always accurate, 
77; his version of Bible when used, 
90; on the word Israel, 94; on 
biblical geography, 204. 

Jerusalem, 368; spiritual meaning of, 
206, 207. 

Jews, imperfection of religion, ii, 7890, 
790; relation to planet Saturn, ii, 
792; discord of sects, ii, 803; their 
revelation, ii, 805; Seneca’s attack 
on them, ii, 808; expectation of 
Messiah, ii, 808; dark side of their 
religion, ii, 810; their testimony to 
Christ, ii, 812. 

John, Bacon’s disciple, 24. 

John (St., Evangelist), relaxation, ii, 
784. 

Jordan (river), 358, 359; spiritual 
meaning of, 206. 

Jordanus (Nemorarius), on triangles, 
179; on equilibrium, 190-195. 

Josephus, chief authority on sacred 

[ $32 ] 

Index 

history, 78; greatest of historians, 
196; capture of Jerusalem, ii, 809. 

Joshua, arrest of sun, 202. 

Jubilee, derivation of, 90. 

Judaea, 364. 

Judgment, possessed by animals, ii, 
424, 543; animal judgment not dis- 
tinguished by Aristotle from 
memory, ii, 427. : 

Jupiter, dimensions of sphere, 250; re- 
ligious significance of his conjunc- 
tions, 278-280. 

Juvenal, 104. 

Knowledge, perfection of, unattainable, 
24; ii, 803; attained by study of 
cause, or of effect, 189. 

Koran, ii, 810, 814. 

Lamentations, book of, 82. 

Lamps, ever-burning, ii, 629. 

Language, Part III, passim. 

Latin, insufficiency of, 75, 76; imper- 
fect translations into, 78; foreign 
words in, 98. 

Lebanon, 362. 

Legislation, principles of, ii, 660-662. 

Lens (ocular), ii, 434, 445. 

Leo (Pope, the great), decision as to 
Easter, 303. 

Leucippus, 173. 

Library, Alexandrian, burning of, ii, 

por 76: 

Libya, 334, 335- 

Life, brevity of, ii, 
blessed, ii, 752-767. 

Light, necessary for vision, ii, 449, 
473; passage of, occupies time, ii, 
485-490; regarded by Empedocles 
as an emanation, ii, 489; a propa- 
gation of motion not of particles, 
li, 490; apprehended by sensation, 
11,0527. 

Line, mathematical and physical, 171; 
force propagated in, 131. 

Liturgy, explanation of terms used in, 
106-108. 

Livia, ii, 737. 

739-750; the 

Logic, its practical side, 79-81; re- 
quires little teaching, ii, 499; its 
rules followed unconsciously by 
animals, ii, 544, 545. 

Longevity of patriarchs, 214; means of 
increasing, ii, 617-626. 

Longitude, computed sometimes from 
meridian of Toledo, 318, 319; not 
yet scientifically determined, 320. 

Louis IX sends Franciscans to Tar- 

289, 324; his defeat near 
Damiata, 330. 

Lucan, 324, 343. 

Lunar rainbow, 46, 234. 

Lunations, 216-220 (see Moon). 

Lust, ii, 679-682. 

tary, 

Magic, deterred fathers from study of 
philosophy, 32; introduced by 
Zoroaster, 54; distinction from 
mathematics, 261 ; inconsistent with 
freewill, 262; involves fraud, 263; 
discredits Christian miracles, 263; 
condemned by philosophers, 264- 
267; imputation of, dreaded by 
modern theologians, 410; counter- 
acted by experiment, ii, 631, 632. 

Magnanimity, ii, 665, 693. 

Magnetic force, ii, 616, 630, 631. 

Magnitude, a condition of vision, ii, 
477; how estimated, ii, 530-532; 
apparent increase of, due to vapor, 
ji, 573; how affected by form of 
refracting surface, ii, 566-570, 573. 

Mahomet, accepts miraculous concep- 
tion of Christ, ii, 810; low moral 
standard, ii, 811. 

Mahommedanism, inferior morals of, 
284; speedy destruction of, 287 ; ii, 
811. 

Mahommedans, polygamy, ii, 788, 
814; partial adoption of Judaism 
and Christianity, ii, 791; their re- 
ligion attacked by themselves, ii, 
803, 808, 811; their revelation, 805. 

Mangu Khan, 385, 415; ii, 788, 806, 
807. 

Map, Bacon’s, 315, 320. 

[ 833 J 

Index 

Marcia, Seneca’s letter to, ii, 734-738. 

Maria, etymology of, 106. 

Marianus, on date of Passion, 226. 

Marisco, Adam de, 82; mathematical 
knowledge of, 126. 

Marriage, laws respecting, ii, 660. 

Mars, dimensions of sphere, 250. 

Martianus, on climate, 155; height of 
clouds, 252; on time in music, 260; 
on polar regions, 327. 

Mathematics, neglected by moderns, 
27; the key to the sciences, 116; 
estimate of, by Boetius, Ptolemy, 
Alpharabius, and others, 117-120; 
known to patriarchs, 122; sim- 
plicity of, ib.; type of certainty, 
123 ; application to astronomy, 128; 
explains laws of force, 1293; con- 
nection of, with theology, 195; ap- 
preciation of, by fathers, 196-200; 
use of, in explanation of Scripture, 
201-203, 232-246; in Biblical 
geography, 203-208; in solving 
problems of chronology, 208-232; 
distinction from magic, 261. 

Matter, unity of, refuted, 164-160. 

Media, 369, 370. 

Medicine, known to Adam and Noah, 
56. 

Medium, transparency of, affected by 
distance, ii, 481, 482; rarity of, 
necessary to vision, ii, 484; density 
and motion of, affect scintillation, 
li, 539, 540. See Species, Refraction. 

Melissus, 160. 

Memory, its cerebral position, ii, 422; 
Aristotle’s view criticized, ii, 427- 
429; recollection of past sensation, 
li, 408. 

Meni (Manes), origin of his sect, 286. 

Mercury, dimensions of sphere, 250; 
conjunction with Jupiter, 279 ; com- 
plexity of motions, 279; connection 
of, with the sign Virgo, 283. 

Meroe, 330, 332, 343. 

Mesopotamia, 351. 

Metaphysics, relation to Ethics, ii, 
637-640. 

Michael Scot, introduced Aristotle’s 
Physics and Metaphysics, 63 ; trans- 
lation of Avicenna’s De Animalibus, 
li, 427. 

Midian, 347. 

Milky Way, ii, 517. 

Milleius, 233. 

Minerva, 54. 

Miracles, of Christ, superior to those 
of Moses and Mahomet, ii, 813; in 
proof of Eucharistic doctrine, ii, 
816, 817. 

Mirrors, various kinds of, ii, 550-557; 
parabolic, 134; reflection from frac- 
tured mirror, ii, 561; use of, in 
warfare, ii, 580-582. 

Moab, 346. 

Moal (Mongol), 384, 385. 

Moon, color of, when eclipsed, ii, 521; 
why invisible when in conjunction 
with sun, ii, 522; explanation of 
phases, ii, 525-520; inherent lumi- 
nousness of, 150, and ii, 549; di- 
mensions of sphere, 250; diameter 
of, 254, 255; error in estimating 
age of, 296; lunar mansions, 399. 

Moonstone (Selenitis), 304. 

Moral Philosophy, reference to, 66, 
723 ii, 635-823; its practical char- 
acter, ii, 635; relation to theology, 
ii, 635; relation to metaphysics, ii, 
637-640; indicates doctrine of 
Trinity, ii, 640-643; of Incarna- 
tion, ii, 643; of Angels, ii, 646-648; 
of Immortality, ii, 648-656; civic 
morality, ii, 660-662; personal 
morality, ii, 663-786; judgment as 
to true religion, ii, 787-823; pre- 
pares the way for Christian the- 
ology, 72-74. j 

Mortal sins, denouneed by ancient phi- 
losophers, ii, 675-685. 

Moses, difficulty in convincing men of 
truth, 21; furnished with wisdom 
of Egyptians, 41, 52; contempo- 
rary with Atlas and Prometheus, 
55; his miracles in Tampnis, 333; 
expedition against Ethiopians, 407 ; 

[ 8347] 

Index 

threefold division of moral system, 
li, 637; miracles, inferior to those 
of Christ, ii, 813. 

Motion, relation to time, 186; ii, 489; 
perception of, ii, 520, 533-535; of 
medium, produces scintillation, ii, 
540-542. 

Mountains, climate affected by, 155, 
156; effect of sun’s rays on, 236- 
238. 

Music, theological importance of, 259, 
260; moral value of, ii, 786. 

Naphtha, ii, 629. 

Nero, geographical expedition, 312. 

Nestorians, wide diffusion of, 384; im- 
perfect Christianity of, 388. 

Nice, Council of, 303-306. 

Nile, 337-343. 

Noah, instructed Chaldeans, 52, 53; 
exit from ark, 220-222. 

Novara, tables constructed to meridian 
of, 231. 

Numbers, Perfect, 9, 245; errors of, 
in received version, 243-245. 

Obedience, rule of, not inculcated in 
Mosaic law, ii, 814. 

Oblique rays, mostly neutralized by 
vertical, ii, 456-461. 

Octavia, ii, 737. 

Octohedron, 181; related by Pla- 
tonists with sphere of fire, 183. 

Odor, propagation of, ii, 491. 

Old age, Bacon’s work on, ii, 622; 
State provision for, ii, 661. 

Olympus, height of, 252. 

Opacity, a condition of vision, ii, 481 ; 
of reflection, ii, 548; obstruction 
to transit of rays not absolute, 133. 

Optic nerves, origin and course of, ii, 
421,.430-432. 

Opus Majus, described as a pre- 
liminary work, ii, 615. 

Orbs, transparency of, 148; thickness 
of, 249, 250. 

Origen, erroneous belief in ultimate 
salvation of wicked, 17. 

Ormesta Mundi, ii, 633; see Orosius. 

Orosius, on length of stadium, 252; 
on southern limits of Spain, 312; 
Alexander’s conquests, ii, 634. 

Orpheus, 57. 

Osanna, explanation of, 105. 

Oscillation, of arms of balance, 194. 

Ovid, 278; poem de Vetula attributed 
to, 285, 288. 

Pagans, ii, 789, 803, 805, 806. 

Palestine, 353-360. 

Parabolic, mirrors, 134. 

Paradise, site of, 202, 214; rivers of, 
352. 

Parallel rays, ii, 534. 

Paris, Biblical text of, 88; meridian 
of, 231; latitude of, ii, 593. 

Parmenides, 160. 

Parthia, 370. 

Passion, date of, 224-232. 

Pathalis, 328. 

Patriarchs, had revelation of scien- 
tific truth, 52, 195; book of testa- 
ments of, 67; long life necessary 
for astronomical studies, 64. 

Paul, St., conflict with St. Peter, 17; 
visions of, 23; quotations from 
heathen poets, 42. 

Peace, of mind, ii, 768-786. 

Pella, 362, 365. 

Pentapolis, 355. 

Perception, Analysis of, ii, 493-496, 
497-500. 

Persuasio, applied to Opus Majus, 324, 
3433 ii, 575. 

Philip (of Macedon), example of self- 
restraint, ii, 705. 

Philology, Part III, passim. 

Philosophy, why neglected by fathers, 
31-33; a divine revelation, 48, 52 
et seq.; defined by Pythagoras, 59; 
of small value apart from theology, 
66, 74; conscious of its own incom- 
pleteness, 71; yet necessary to the- 
ology, 72. 

Phoenicia, 364. 

C835 J 

Index 

Phoroneus, beginning of Greek law, 
54, 55- 

Pia mater (membrane of brain), ii, 
421, 431. 

Planets, dimensions of, 255-257; Of 
their spheres, 249, 250; influences 
of, incentive not compulsory, 270, 
271, 288; characteristics of, 392- 
394; conjunctions of, 401. 

Plato, respect for truth, 17; better 
known to fathers than Aristotle, 
29, 61; his date and history, 61; 
could not have conversed with Jere- 
miah, but may have seen writers of 
Septuagint, 62; knowledge of Pen- 
tateuch, 68; heaven of fiery sub- 
stance, 202; his Phaedo, ii, 684. 

Platonists, relation of regular solids 
to universe, 182, 183. 

Pleasure, relation of, to virtue, ii, 755- 
761. 

Pliny, on climate, 155; height of 
clouds, 251 ; condemnation of magic, 
262; proportions of land and water, 
311; on Caspian Sea, 324; on 
shadows in south latitudes, 324, 
325; extent of India, 327; and 
passim in geographical section; on 
double pupil, ii, 509; instance of 
longevity, ii, 622; non-sexual con- 
ception, ii, 644. 

Plurality, of worlds impossible, 186. 

Poetry, inspires love of right action, 
80. 

Points, Hebrew, 84. 

Poland, 376, 378. 

Polar regions, have more water than 
equatorial, 314; length of day in, 
317. 

Polybius, Seneca’s dialogue addressed 
to, ii, 750-752. 

Pope, power of, to effect reform, 35; 
to save Europe from Antichrist, 417. 

Popular opinion, errors due to, 10-13. 

Porphyrius, anticipated doctrine of 
Trinity, ii, 641; of Angels, 648. 

Poverty, rule of, ii, 814. 

Practice opposed to Speculation, ii, 

635. 

Prerogatives, of experimental science, 

li, 587, 615, 627. 

Prester John, 384. 
Pride, 13,676, 677. 
Principalis Scriptura. See Scriptum 

Principale. 

Priscian, 102. 
Progress, intellectual, duty of, 66. 
Prometheus, contemporary with Moses, 

55, 65. 

Prosody, mistakes made in, 103, 104. 
Providentia (de), Seneca’s treatise, ii, 

711-716. 

Prussians, 377 ; ii, 789, 796. 
Ptolemais, 330. 
Ptolemy, Almagest, 

258; ii, 510, 676. 

Astrological works, 196, 279, 401, 
404. 

Cosmographia, 315. 

Optica, ii, 419; predecessor of Al- 
hazen, ii, 468; rays of light and 
color, ii, 495; deep set eyes, ii, 
502; shooting stars, ii, 520; ef- 
fect of distance, ii, 520; mixture 
of rays in medium, ii, 464; terms 
for refraction and reflection, ii, 
550. 

Punctuation, 

259. 

Pupil (of eye), small size of, com- 

patible with vision, ii, 454-456; 

sometimes double, ii, 509; allegori- 

cal meaning of, ii, 576, 577. 

Pyramid, round, Bacon’s expression 

for cone, 138. 

Pythagoras, 50, 60, 65. 

IIl7, 247, 254- 

connected with music, 

Quadrant, 247. > 

Qualities, primary, ii, 423. 

Quantity, rational and irrational, sym- 
bolic meaning of, 240. 

Rainbow, errors of Aristotle’s trans- 
lators on lunar, 46, 234; ii, 607; 
final cause of, 51; geometrical ex- 

[ 836 ] 

Index 

planation of, 234-236; full discus- 
sion of, ii, 588-615 ; compared with 
prismatic and iridescent colors, ii, 
588; altitude of, ii, 590-599; mo- 
tion of, with observer, ii, 599-605; 
color of, an optical illusion, ii, 605, 
611; an assemblage of minute 
images, ii, 607; form of, explained, 
li, 608-610. 

Rank, graduations of, ii, 660. 

Rays, direct and refracted, 131, 132; 
ii, 503-575; reflected, 133-1353 ii, 
547-562; diffused, 135; pencils of, 
138; symbolic meaning of, 238- 
240; blending of, ii, 458-461; 
vertical preponderate over oblique, 
li, 454-461; not spiritual but ma- 
terial, ii, 463, 464; in vision ema- 
nate from eye as well as from object, 
li, 468-472; from distant source 
seem parallel, ii, 534. See Species. 

Reason, how far possessed by animals, 
li, 426, 543-545. 

Reflection, of rays, 133-135; of solar 
light from moon, 150; also, ii, 549; 
theory of, ii, 546-562; smooth sur- 
face needed for image, ii, 546; 
equality of reflected and incident 
angle, ii, 547; no effect produced 
on mirror, ii, 548; from plane mir- 
rors, ii, 550; from convex, ii, 552; 
from concave, ii, 553-557; double, 
from mirror immersed in water, ii, 
561; from fractured mirror, ib.; 
application of to practical problems, 
ii, 580. . 

Refraction, described, 131; ii, 563- 
575; proves plurality of media in 
space, 152; astronomical signifi- 
cance of, 153; in vitreous humor, 
of rays forming visual cone, ii, 563; 
at cornea of rays outside that cone, 
ii, 563, 564; at plane surfaces, ii, 
565, 566; at convex surfaces, ii, 
566-568; at concave surfaces, ii, 
568-570; of oar in water, ii, 570; 
of sun and moon near horizon, ii, 
572, 573; allegorical significance 

of, 579; application of, to practical 
problems, ii, 582. 

Relaxation, necessity of, ii, 783-786. 

Religion, changes of, indicated by 
planets, 276; superiority of Chris- 
tian, 284; ii, 806-814; etymology 
of, ii, 657; comparison of, ii, 787- 
823; religions of northern Europe, 
377; of Tartary, 387, 388. 

Resurrection, equilibrium of bodily 
elements in, ii, 624. 

Retina, ii, 433. 

Rhetoric, a part of logic, 79. 

Romulus, 59. 

Rubruquis, 289; Bacon’s personal in- 
tercourse with, 324; passes by Cau- 
casian gates, 323; on inundations 
of Volga, 340; brings reply of Khan 
to King Louis, ii, 789. 

Russia, 375. 

Saba, 349-351. 

Sabbatarianism, attacked by Seneca, ii, 
808. 

Sacrifices, Jewish, sanguinary charac- 
ter of, li, 810. | 

Sallust, accurate description of north 
Africa, 334; history of Catiline 
quoted, ii, 678. 

Samaria, 359, 367. 

Saracens, see Mahommedans. 

Saturn, dimensions of sphere, 251 ; re- 
ligious significance of revolutions, 
286. 

Scammony, medical properties of, 392. 

Scandinavian nations, 375. 

Scenopegia, derivation of, 101. 

Scintillation, ii, 535-542, 560. 

Sclerotic (consolidativa), described, 
ii, 433; center of, ii, 430-441; its 
function, ii, 447. 

Scriptum Principale, 
324, 332, 340, 343, 391; ii, 575, 
615. 

Sea, proves sphericity of earth, 177; 
extent of, 310-315. 

Secretum Secretorum, 11, 18, 53, 56, 
65; elixir vitae, ii, 617, 623; effect 

references to, 

[ 837] 

Index 

of environment on character, ii, 
628; Aristotle’s warning as to lust, 
ii, 680, 682. 

Self-examination, ii, 674. 

Seneca, 5, 6, 10, 14, 15; width of sea 
between India and Spain, 311; 
inundations of Nile, 340; Alexan- 
der’s conquests, ii, 634; public 
spirit, ii, 663; reverence, il, 666; 
consistency, ii, 667; reformation of 
character, ii, 669; sin, ii, 672; self- 
examination, ii, 673; training of 
young, ii, 674; exile, ii, 676, 727- 
730; insignificance of earth, ii, 676; 
gluttony, ii, 682, 683; fleshly in- 
dulgence, ii, 755; charged with in- 
consistency, ii, 761-766; corre- 
spondence with St. Paul, ii, 784. 

Sensation, one of the three modes of 
cognition, ii, 407. 

Senses, phenomena apprehended by, ii, 
423. 

Sensibilia Communia, definition of, ii, 
423. 

Sensus Communis, cerebral organ of, 
ii, 421. 

Septuagint, 77, 209, 355. 

Servius, 102. 

Shepherd, seen by Bacon, 417. 

Sibyls, 58, 69. 

Signs, zodiacal, see Zodiac. 

Simple, often surpass the learned, 24. 

Simplicity of life, ii, 683, 684, 775. 

Sin, desert of, 344. 

Sin, remission of, ii, 813. 

Smell, cerebral organ of, ii, 452; 
sense of, compared with vision, ii, 
476; propagation of, ii, 491. 

Socrates, 61 ; citizen of world, ii, 676; 
his self-restraint, ii, 702, 709; 
calmness, ii, 732, 766; behavior 
under thirty tyrants, ii, 773; re- 
laxation, ii, 784. 

Solids, regular, 180-183. 

Solinus, De Mirabilibus Mundi, 54, 
57, 164, 3573; on double pupil, ii, 
509. 

Solomon, miraculous powers, 408. 

Solon, enjoyment of wine, ii, 785. 

Solstices, variation in date of, 291. 

Sound, propagation of, ii, 475, 490. 

Southern hemisphere, probably in- 
habited, 314, 325; superiority of, 
326. 

Spain, originally continuous with 
Africa, 312. 
Spanish language substituted for 
Latin, 76. 

Species, definition of, 130; is of cor- 
poreal nature, ii, 462, 463; mix- 
ture of, in medium, ii, 464; transit 
of, occupies time, ii, 487-480. 

Sphere, stellar, force reflected from, 
162; figure of greatest content, 176; 
stellar dimensions of, 249. 

Sphericity of world, 173-179; of 
ocular structures, ii, 436-443. 

Spiritual truth underlying physical, 
50. 

Sport, laws respecting, ii, 661. 

Stars, number and magnitude, 257- 
259, 391; denser than their orbs, 
li, 518, 519; shooting, ii, 520; 
seem larger when near horizon, ii, 
532. 

Statius, 104. 

St. James, ii, 580. 

Strabismus, ii, 506. 

Sulla, exhibition of lions, ii, 746. 

Sun, magnitude of, 150; dimensions 
of sphere, 250; generative power of, 
308. 

Sur, desert of, 344. 

Syene, 324, 329, 332, 333, 339, 343. 

Syllogism, includes instinctive rea- 
soning processes, ii, 499, 544. 

Syria, 351-368. 

Tabernacle, 233. ~ 

Tana, inhabited by Jewish refugees 
with Jeremiah, 334. 

Tangut, their writing, 380. 

Taprobane, 325, 320. 

Tartars, day’s journey of, 375; de- 
struction of Cumanians, ib.; extent 
of dominion, 378 ; their origin, 384- 

C838] 

Index 

386; their astrology, 416; invasion 
of Europe, ii, 645; craving for em- 
pire, ii, 788; foul habits, ii, 789; 
recognition of one God, ii, 790, 
803; acceptance of Christian rites, 
ii, 792; retain idolatrous customs, 
li, 806 ; convoke a parliament of re- 
ligions, ii, 792, 796, 806. 

Taurus, full extent of, 360. 

Tela araneae, its function described, 

o ai, 446. 

“ Telescope, forecast of, ii, 581. | 

Temperament, affected by stellar in- 
fluence, 270. : 

Temperature of polar and equatoria 
regions, 153-156. 

Terminus (astrological), 282. 

Tetrabiblon, of Ptolemy, 265. 

Tetrahedron, 181. 

Teutonic order, oppresses Prussians, 
i, 797. 

Text, Biblical, corruption of, 87-93. 

Thales, 6o, 65; on inundations of 
Nile, 340. 

Thebit, introduced motion of trepida- 
tion, 213; on motions of Mercury, 
279. 

Theodosius on spherics, 178, 248, 310; 
ii, 437- 

Theodotian, translation of Bible, 77. 

Theology, the mistress-science, 36; 
necessary to complete philosophy, 
65; how far known to heathen, 66, 
70; must avail itself of heathen 
moralists, 72; connection with 
mathematics, 195 et seq. 

Thinking power of animals, ii, 426. 

Thomas of St. David’s, 82. 

Threshold, Tartar superstition as to, 
ii, 806. 

Tiberias, lake of, 360. 

Tides, cause of, 160-162. 

Tideus on vision, ii, 468. 

` Tigris, course of, 352, 353. 

Time, unity of, 186; relation to mo- 
tion, 187; measure of, by water- 
clocks, 253; needed for passage of 
radiant force, ii, 486-490. 

Toledo, tables of, 318. 

Training of young, ii, 674. 

Tranquillitas animi, Seneca’s 
course on, ii, 768-786. 

Transparency of medium, how affected 
by distance, ii, 481; a condition of 
Vision, ii, 484. 

Tribes (ten of Israel), positions of, 
321. 

Triplicity (astrological), 281. 

Tripoli (African), 336. 

Tripolis (Syria), .354. 

Trinity, geometrical representations 
of, 240; arithmetical, 245; appre- 
hended by non-Christian thinkers, 
li, 640-642. 

Tritonia, why Minerva so called, 54. 

Troglodytes, 331, 337. 

Troy, fall of, how far before founding 
of Rome, 57. 

Turkia, 373, 379. 

Twilight, treatise on, 251; why not 
throughout the night, ii, 519. 

Tyrannicide, ii, 662. 

dis- 

Unity of wisdom, 36; of God, man 
and universe, ii, 805. 

Universe, unity of, 185, 186; ii, 800; 
dimensions of, 249. 

Uvea, described, ii, 433, 434, 4423 
center of, ii, 438, 441. 

Vacuum, 172; none between earth and 
heaven, ii, 485. 

Valerius Maximus, ii, 669. 

Varro, ii, 720. 

Venice, position of, 390. 

Venus, dimensions of sphere, 250 

Vergil, 102; ii, 670. 

Vertical rays, preponderance of, over 
oblique, ii, 454-461; reflection of, 
133; not refracted, ii, 563, 564. 

Vertigo, ii, 507. 

Virgin, Mahommedan view of, ii, 810. 

Virginity, rule of, ii, 814. 

Virtue, superiority of heathen to 
Christian, ii, 664, 738, 739; Aris- 
totle’s theory of, ii, 664-667; the 

[ 839] 

Index 

life of man, ii, 667; its beauty, ii, 
669; its possibility, ii, 669. 

Vision, how effected, ii, 449-453; con- 
dition of rectilinear, ii, 449; com- 
pleted not in eye but in brain, ii, 
450-453; distinct, conditions of, ii, 
454-465, 473-492; of distant ob- 
jects, ii, 501-502; how affected by 
age, ii, 503; relation of, to quan- 
tity of light, ii, 504; causes of 
double, ii, 506-516; binocular, ii, 
5113; dependence of, on position of 
object, ii, 515, 516; allegorical in- 
terpretation of, ii, 578-580; see 
also Refraction and Reflection. 

Visual angle, limits of, ii, 477-480. 

Vita beata, Seneca’s dialogue on, ii, 
752-767. 

Vitreous humor, ii, 435; refraction of 
rays in, ii, 467. 

Volga (Ethilia), inundations of, 340. 

Vowels, Hebrew, 83; Greek, 86. 

War, laws respecting, ii, 662. 

Water, sphericity of, varies with posi- 
tion, 179, 180. 

Water-clocks, 253. 

William Rubruquis, see Rubruguis. 

Wisdom, unity of, 34; relation to 
felicity, ii, 653. 

Wise, seven of Greece, with which 
Hebrews contemporary, 58, 59. 

Words, operative force of, 414. 

Writing of Asiatic nations, 388, 389. 

Xaleuchus, ii, 668. 

Xenocrates, disregard of wealth, ii, 
675. 

Xenophon, reduction of personal 
wants, ii, 676; self-restraint, ii, 703. 

Year, Julian, excess in length of, 290. 

Zeno, ii, 748, 781. 

Zodiac, significance of signs, 280-290, 
392, 396. 

Zoroaster, inventor of magic, 54. 

[ 840] 

DATE DUE 

lz 

H 

Ny 
j 

e. 
D 
| f 
+ 
\ 
$ 
1. 
if 

35 
£29 
ALT | 
M 
°o 
N 
© 

' 

Ga] 
© 
N 

ae 

cs 

S a e 
= z 
=m -k 

n 
1 

Hi duit F H Hy 
: i i ores me pit "i nim 
n hii beat nn end 

si an bit La ah 
Iy it oe ra pi ii A Kan nom hid hae at inh 
7 iW) Mit i i e ; ee ip mi i nena Ha 

"i 
u 
a 

i i 
nh, 

aa DI 

is ni ei i 
k 4 + i H u 4 ni Ni 1 
: ae ee a i 

i ‘ a i 
Pa ji "i a 
J T p 

} t ‘f j WIRA HS Ley] TOR i i 
T ete j AD f Hah RU Y T A « Cite 
h 7 AnA A t ni 4 Tee A time i} w an fe nik l i NS í 7 í i ; j i i 
7 Prun ett a inh ral ow Nie i aan ue om 4 vale ENR eII Ur AN i 
saa aa PAA A A A as P A ER A o ADHS Maata DEA 
PE N EE EA oie Th 4 i FL S ea aaa eee 
aa ye Cauley i phy mi WAM AT Ih AOLA A NA e Py 
ley ' AAU I s MRL is nc EEEN a ee SU ieee ' ; me 
| oe, at E a n vein RS EE EV ma jth PT Í Mi E Í i r Ghana ag) 
ORERE A OAE oA a al L NE EETA a AN 
Tan an jae io Par Ye Ki WNR ni a, ae Lord area a lor a 
. À f f n| t j: f bet | A) i i N j l iH K W i E 
ae) KIK i WH nf i) Wan ide Th . Dy Oe) i 1 1 iy pi 
a os aed «a f ii ca aan is) yii 
AOS A T MA NANA 
g a f l i Dy E b l f al i : or Paty 
TE nia Oe = ith } ve Ae l Ye EROT i 
7 a 7 = heat " i N i TA i f Mi 4 i j i A i ns Í Ai 
a the OO E | Wh t gp y T i 
2259), oA 4 Piet tte O E Natit COREA TO faa! 
Ae ee fe A ee a rane J nt f l , ~ 
Tr Ane i AAN ees y vl 7 {i A + IA Di Oy i hal fai 7 J E 
AY K D y ps ar AN p. pa i j 7 D Ha l e = 
ih pAb t iat’ T p piye ae oi a | $ l p ivy i i i ye din = 7 E 
7 i i d EE $ hji qh Pa i : 7 N f u y ie E 7 7 E 
j _ i! pean ee ie T i ah bi} i j nice å n g 7 ra A = : 7 
een | n Bi sA 7 Wad 1 i ; > A f y E 
ee MI Ca KALA niao AEA Aa a au Tala n W a 
ERR N TA It Mer prety, Sanaa? k l 7 Di s D 
7 S P s y 2) Kep ; By); he WN bi TAG Lue b a ae = ms $ - 
ioe aD. | Pagi AA T l f hh T ù Fa [oo gi 7 
roe oh en one Se 74 i I i ! 0 g l bg] 
{ T AT i |e iy) í i { E 7 
eas f O A S ERT akun f is ij? 
Eom ren | 7 ei) Pae NR í pini l : a. 
De e & Tad f Í A = ¢ if 
rc N f SAs at i Ure ue E) l rp, R, l i P 
i í UWE b ea A Fi 0 I k 
R j : "if wo A a ial banat i i bait Paes í y Bie . 7 
$ Podl K J, i i re EN - vr D f i l ia 
R L ACA i Nhat j ARU EA E A He | ee 
Re re eat ly el 
Gia ie an Ge re Tey et a VINEE K me 
i RO LBE a et wa i unt Any S Hi HEA sini foe 
EUN Mi p lg Tat Ue ) i j ty Tar 
7 ig Í ji i a Ae H yh in J A i i à 4 f 7 if T at D 
CT REN, PRAEAN al A K l F 
l ae Hie ef Pint a eae) ial a Se Gan 
PRA A el Hay | Gi Ween att i WR nat mb dio PEU 
if Been ieee ta at ORHUN TRIPS AR aai ee 
wee Pie hy Ae th et awe Mis a it ie nt ) uit inh 
al Hil i ie or) ay ith mii Wi. D A i i Mt ae H N t | M al if EI Le ES ! i aj ff 
p kj i i mi Í Wy f M j 
R N, ua ns A ; oi ni i Rite tes i ay Me Hi i ane at i FARIN 7 
a ae) si ee i i jiji Ai Dieu Ii 
a Rik ay w : ah, W ne ip Miki Lan ne vdi pa i 
HOM i n i i Wi We ih mi M W He af Hic VAN i 
SNN f f { CENTRA 
ig nh i i a n Pi mt i k Aresa Lae 
AIN nile He La an aH HA 
i n i A 
Me l 
in 

a Hi 

NE Ss c M l ii i ut Hh H 
M Matani 1 | 

7 e pi 
as Hist | a i | Hi H | ) fa 
ee oo me i a an ie i i n i) aa il 
E illie ate HF bi nt NH i a n n n 
j lih Ha vi | aal in i at 
ait AAA i | Hi Mm HN vi