Studies in Philosophy 
and the History of Philosophy 

SCHOLASTIC 
MEDITATIONS 

Nicholas Rescher 

Volume 44 

SCHOLASTIC MEDITATIONS 

STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY 
AND THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 

General Editor: Jude P. Dougherty 

Studies in Philosophy 
and the History of Philosophy Volume 44 

Scholastic Meditations 

Nicholas Rescher 

THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA PRESS 
Washington, D.C. 

Jopyright © 2005 
The Catholic University of America Press 
All rights reserved 

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standards for Information Science—Permanence of Paper 

for Printed Library materials, ANSI 739.48-1984. 

°° 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Rescher, Nicholas. 
Scholastic meditations / Nicholas Rescher. — 1st ed. 
p- cm. — (Studies in philosophy and the history of philosophy ; v. 44) 
ISBN 13: 978-0-8132-1410-6 (cloth : alk. paper) 
ISBN 10: 0-8132-1410-6 (cloth : alk. paper) 
1. Scholasticism. I. Title. II. Series. 

B21.978 vol. 44 

[B839] 

100 s—dc22 

[1897.4] 

2004014859 

For Norris Clarke 

Contents 

Preface ix 

1. Choice without Preference: The Problem 

of “Buridan’s Ass” 1 
2. Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran: 

A Fifteenth-Century Encounter with Islam 49 
3. On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 58 
4. Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 73 

5. Omniscience and Our Understanding of 

God’s Knowledge 83 
6. Issues of Infinite Regress 92 
7. Being qua Being 109 
8. Nonexistents Then and Now 126 
g. Thomism: Past, Present, and Future 149 

10. Respect for Tradition (And the 
Catholic Philosopher Today) 157 

Index 167 

Preface 

These studies are collectively entitled Scholastic Meditations on the ob- 
vious precedent of Husserl’s Cartesian Meditations. I have also been 
tempted to entitle the book Scholastic Mediations because these studies 
endeavor to intermediate between Scholastic concerns and contempo- 
rary philosophical issues. For while the present deliberations are always 
closely linked to historical sources of inspiration, their main preoccupa- 
tion is generally with philosophical problems as such. 

From the way in which philosophers have been inclined to talk after 
the era of “modern” philosophy inaugurated by Descartes in the seven- 
teenth century, no one would guess that the Scholastic era of philoso- 
phy from Abelard (1079-1142) to Suarez (1548-1617) was one of the 
golden ages of Western philosophizing. And yet any open-minded and 
candid attention to the matter soon reveals that this was indeed the 
case. It was then, in fact, more than at any other stage of history, that 
philosophy stood at the center of academic and intellectual culture. 
And most of the complaints made about the thinkers of the era—their 
preoccupation with subtle distinctions and logic chopping, for exam- 
ple—tfail to do justice at once to the seriousness of their concerns and 
to the fact that their subtleties generally served a clear and present pur- 
pose with regard to the clarification of significant philosophical issues. 

Be this as it may, however, the studies gathered together in this pres- 
ent volume seek to do homage to the spirit of Scholasticism. They all 
address key issues relating to this important sector of philosophical tra- 
dition—partly on the historical side and partly on matters of substantive 
concern. They are written in the conviction that there is much to be 
learned from a preoccupation with the Schoolmen because even where 
one fails to agree with their positions on the issues, the methods they 
employed and their commitment to their projects have much to teach 
us about the proper conduct of philosophizing. And not only to teach, 
but to inspire as well. 

The essays comprising this volume are pretty much balanced be- 
tween historical and systematic. Five of them have their roots in earlier 
publications as acknowledged in the footnotes, while the remaining five 

xX Preface 

are quite new. The author gives thanks to the journals involved for their 
permission for this material to be included here. 

I am grateful to a reader of a draft of this text (who wishes to remain 
anonymous) for making various points that have enabled me to im- 
prove the book. And I also want to thank Estelle Burris for her patient 
help in producing a manuscript suitable for the printer’s needs. 

SCHOLASTIC MEDITATIONS 

Chapter 1 

CHOICE WITHOUT PREFERENCE 
The Problem of “Buridan’s Ass” 

A logical theory may be tested by its capacity for dealing with puzzles, and tt is a whole- 

some plan, in thinking about logic, to stock the mind with as many puzzles as possible, 

since these serve much the same purpose as is served by experiments in physical science. 
—Bertrand Russell 

In things which are absolutely indifferent there can be no choice and consequently no 
option or will, since choice must have some reason or principle. 

—G. W. Leibniz 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The idea that the reasoned life, although rewarding, is not all that 
simple is already prominent in the earliest speculations on “wisdom” 
(sophia) out of which philosophy (philo-sophia) was to grow. Nor is this 
surprising. After all, a choice that is reasoned is more difficult to arrive at 
than a choice made haphazardly when, in the blithe manner of Mark 
Twain’s dictum, “you pays your money and you takes your choice.” But 
such reflections lead to the puzzle posed by the question: How is a rea- 
soned choice among fully equivalent alternatives possible? We here con- 
front the problem of choice without preference: a reasoned choice must 
proceed from a reasoned preference, but a reasoned preference among 
fully equivalent objects is patently impossible. 

There are puzzles and puzzles—“idle” ones that can at best amuse a 
sated imagination, and “profound” ones that can lead the intellect into 
a deeper appreciation of the nature of things. The Buridan’s Ass puzzle 
of equivalent choices is of the second kind, seeing that its analysis pro- 
vides an occasion both for insight into the logic of reasoned choice and 

2 Choice without Preference 

for a better understanding of some important issues in the history of 
philosophy. 

As is generally the case in matters of this sort, it is useful to consider 
the historical background. In elucidating the substantive philosophical 
contexts in which the problem of choice without preference has figured, 
and for which it has been viewed as fundamentally relevant, a historical 
survey brings to light primarily the three following issues: first, its role in 
Greek science, originally in cosmological discussions of the Earth’s place 
in the physical universe, and ultimately in more general considerations 
regarding physical symmetries (cf. Axiom 1 of Archimedes’ treatise On 
Plane Equilibria); second, its role in philosophico-theological discussion 
among the Arabs regarding the possibility of explaining God’s actions in 
ways acceptable to reasoning men; and third, its role in the medieval 
Scholastic ethico-theological discussions of man’s freedom of the will. 

So much for a preview of the historical aspects of our problem. With 
regard to the theoretical findings of the analysis, let it suffice to note 
here in a preliminary way that a study of choice without preference 
forces upon us a clear recognition of the difference between reasons, on 
the one hand, and inclining motives, on the other. We shall see that an in- 
different choice must be made (in effect) randomly. Now, when a ran- 
dom selection among indifferent objects is made by me, I do have a rea- 
son for my particular selection, namely, the fact that it was indicated to 
me bya random selector. But I have no preference or psychological motiva- 
tion of other sorts to incline me to choose this item instead of its (by hy- 
pothesis indifferent) alternatives. Such absence of psychological prefer- 
ence does not entail the impossibility of a rationally justifiable selection. 
A choice can therefore be vindicated as having been made reasonably 
even though it cannot be traced back to any psychological foundation. 
In short, we can have reasons for a choice even where there is no inclin- 
ing motive. Thus, despite the seemingly abstruse and esoteric character of 
the issue, the puzzle of a reasoned choice among fully equivalent alter- 
natives is not lacking in instruction from both the theoretical and the 
historical points of view. 

2. THE PROBLEM 

Can a reasonable agent choose a course of action, or an object, with- 
out a preference? It certainly appears on first view that this question has 
to be answered negatively. By the very concept of a “reasonable agent,” it 
is requisite that such an individual have reasons for his actions. And when 
a reasonable choice among alternatives is made, this must, it would 
seem, have to be based upon a preference for the object actually chosen 

Choice without Preference 3 

vis-a-vis its available alternatives. Where there is no preference, it would ap- 
pear that no reason for a selection can exist, so that there apparently can- 
not be a reasonable way of making a choice. This line of reasoning seems 
to establish the precept: No reasonable choice without a preference. 

However, despite the surface plausibility of this argument, it cannot 
be accepted as fully correct. For there is a well-known, indeed notorious, 
counterexample: the dilemma or paradox of Buridan’s Ass. This mythi- 
cal creature is a hypothetical animal, hungry, and positioned midway be- 
tween essentially identical bundles of hay. There is supposed to be no 
reason why the animal should have a preference for one of the bundles 
of hay over the other. Yet it must eat one or the other of them, or else 
starve. Under these circumstances, the creature will, being reasonable, 
prefer having-one-bundle-of-hay to having-no-bundle-of-hay. It therefore 
must choose one of the bundles. Yet there is, by hypothesis, simply no rea- 
son for preferring either bundle. It appears to follow that reasonable 
choice must—somehow—be possible in the absence of preference. 

It should at once be noted that the problem of the Identity of Indis- 
cernibles, famous because of its prominent role in the philosophy of 
Leibniz, has no bearing upon the issue. For what is at stake in cases of 
choice without preference, such as the example of Buridan’s ass, is not 
there being no difference between the objects of choice (i.e., that they be 
strictly indiscernible), but merely that such differences as do admittedly 
exist are either entirely zrrelevant to the desirability of these items (as the 
mint markings of coins in current circulation have no bearing upon 
their value or worth), or else are simply unknown to the chooser. Thus 
strict indiscernability is not so much at issue here as effective indistin- 
guishability qua objects of choice—value symmetry, in short—so that 
every identifiable reason for desiring one alternative is equally a reason 
for desiring the others. There is consequently no need for the issue of 
the identity of indiscernibles to concern us in the present context. 

In the main, the problem of choice in the absence of preference is a 
theoretical, not a practical, problem. Real-life situations do not often 
confront us with strictly indifferent choices. Such situations do, however, 
appear to exist. For example, if a person were offered a choice between 
two fresh dollar bills, the only perceptible difference between which is 
that of their serial numbers, we would be greatly astonished if this selec- 
tor could offer us a “reason” for choosing one of them rather than the 
other that could reasonably be regarded as cogent. While a difference 
between the bills does indeed exist, it simply does not constitute a valid 
difference as regards their preferability as objects of choice. And again, 
when purchasing a stamp at the post office, one is utterly indifferent as 
to which one on the sheet the agent gives one (for him, to be sure, this 

4 Choice without Preference 

indifference is eliminated by such factors as ease of access, etc., so that 
the overall situation is not one of indifference). However, while situa- 
tions of totally indifferent choice are comparatively rare, the problem of 
choice without preference does, nevertheless, have the status of an inter- 
esting question in the theory of reasoned choice. And as such it also 
has—as we shall see—significant philosophical implications and conse- 
quences, as well as a venerable history in philosophic thought. 

3. THE HISTORY OF THE PROBLEM 
OF “BURIDAN’S ASS” 

The problem of nonpreferential choice has a long philosophical, 
and even literary, history. Its most noteworthy parts will be sketched in 
this section. The interest of this historical excursus lies both in the view 
that it provides of various formulations of our puzzle, and in its indica- 
tion of the alternative philosophical problem contexts in which it has 
played a significant role. 

Anaximander (ca. 610-ca. 545 B.C.) 

According to a report of Origen, certain of the early Greek cosmolo- 
gists had held “that the Earth is a celestial object [metedron], supported 
[in the heavens] by nothing whatsoever, and remaining in its place on 
account of its equidistance from all.”! From Aristotle we learn that just 
this was the position and the line of reasoning of the pre-Socratic 
philosopher Anaximander of Miletus: 

There are some who name its [i.e., the Earth’s] equipoise [homoiotés] as the cause 
of its remaining at rest, e.g., among the early philosophers Anaximander. These 
urge that that which is situated at the centre and is equably related to the ex- 
tremes has no impulse to move in one direction—either upwards or downwards 
or sideways—rather than in another; and since it is impossible for it to accom- 
plish movement in opposite directions at once, it necessarily remains at rest.? 

And this idea was endorsed by Socrates in Plato’s Phaedo: 

“I am satisfied,” he [Socrates] said, “in the first place that if [the earth] is spher- 
ical, and located in the middle of the universe, it has no need of air’ or any oth- 

1. Origin, Philosophoumena, c. 6; my translation. 

2. Aristotle, De caelo, II 13, 295b10; trans. W. K. C. Guthrie in the Loeb Classical Li- 
brary Series. Regarding this passage and its bearing on Anaximander, see E. Zeller, Philoso- 
phie der Griechen, vol. 1, 7th edition, ed. W. Nestle (Leipzig: O. R. Reisland, 1923), p. 303, 
notes. 

3. According to Aristotle (De caelo, II 13, 294b14), Anaximenes, Anaxgoras, and 

Choice without Preference 5 

er force of that sort to make it impossible for it to fall; it is sufficient by itself to 
maintain the symmetry of the universe and the equipoise of the earth itself. A 
thing which is in equipoise and placed in the midst of something symmetrical 
will not be able to incline more or less towards any particular direction; being in 
equilibrium, it will remain motionless.”4 

In the thought of Anaximander, then, that an object “placed in the 
midst of something symmetrical will not be able to incline more or less 
towards any particular direction” we have the conceptual origin, the 
germ as it were, of the problem of Buridan’s Ass.° But this is only the 
start, and a further step was required to reach our actual problem: the 
move to the concept of a psychological cancellation or balance among 
opposing motivations of equal strength, to a psychological equilibrium of 
motives, in short. This step was already taken by Aristotle. 

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) 

In criticizing as inadequate the very view we have just considered that 
the Earth is sustained in space through the equipoise of the surround- 
ing heavens, Aristotle contrasts this view with his own theory of natural 
place, to the distinct advantage of this latter theory: 

The reason [for the Earth’s position] is not its impartial relation to the ex- 
tremes: that could be shared by any other element, but motion towards the cen- 
ter is peculiar to earth. ... If... the place where the Earth rests is not its natu- 
ral place, but the cause of its remaining there is the constraint of its 
“indifference” [zsorropia] (on the analogy of the hair which, stretched strongly 

Democritus held that the Earth stays in place “owing to the air beneath, like the water in 
klepsydrae.” 

4. Plato, Phaedo, 108 E; trans. R. S. Bluck (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1955). 
This reasoning is endorsed also by Parmenides and by Democritus (see Aetios, III, 15, 7), 
who are also reported to have characterized the state resulting from the Earth’s equidis- 
tance from the cosmic extremities as one of isorropia (equilibrium; the term used by pre- 
Socratics and by Plato in the citation). Again, according to a report of Achilles (Eisagégé, 
4; ed. V. Arnim, vol. 2, p. 555), “The Stoics ... [hold that] the earth will remain in the 
center, being kept in equilibrium by the pressure of air from all sides. And again, if one 
takes a body and ties it from all sides with cords and pulls them with precisely equal force, 
the body will stay and remain in its place, because it is dragged equally from all sides.” (I 
take the reference and the translation from S. Sambursky, Jsis, vol. 49 [1958], pp. 
331-35.) Cf. the “explanation” given in medieval times by eager Christians anxious to re- 
fute the supposed miracle that Mohammed’s coffin had floated unsupported in midair: 
they claimed that it was made of iron and was supported just midway between two precise- 
ly equal magnets. 

5. Cf. Archimedes’ axiom: “I postulate that equal weights at equal distances balance, 
and equal weights at unequal distances do not balance, but incline towards the weight 
which is at the greater distance” (On Plane Equilibria, trans. Ivor Thomas, in Greek Mathe- 
matics [Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press, 1939]), vol. 2, 
p- 207, Axiom 1). 

6 Choice without Preference 

but evenly at every point, will not break, or the man who is violently but equally 
hungry and thirsty, and stands at an equal distance from food and drink, and 
who therefore must remain where he is), then they [i.e., Anaximander and the 
other supporters of this view] ought to have inquired into the presence of fire 
at the extremes. .. . Fire when placed at the centre is under as much necessity 
to remain there as earth, for it will be related in the same way to any one of the 
points on the extremity; but in fact it will leave the centre, and move as we ob- 
serve it to do, if nothing prevents it, towards the extremity. . . . 

Here, in Aristotle’s extension of the mechanical equilibrium cases into 
his example of the man torn between equal attraction to food and 
drink, the physical theme of an equilibrium of forces was first trans- 
formed into a psychological balance of motives for choice. 

The sixth-century Aristotelian commentator Simplicius offers the fol- 
lowing discussion on this passage: 

The sophists say that if a hair composed of similar parts is strongly stretched 
and the tension is identical throughout the whole, it would not break. For why 
would it break in this part rather than that, since the hair is identical in all its 
parts and the tension is identical? Analogously also in the case of a man who is 
exceedingly hungry and thirsty, and identically so in both, and identically lack- 
ing in food and drink, and for this reason identically motivated. Necessarily, 
they say, this man remains at rest, being moved to neither alternative. For why 
should he move to this one first, but not that, inasmuch as his need, and thus 
his motivation, is identical [on each side]... . The solution of such examples of 
identity is hardly surprising. For it is clear that the hair breaks. Even hypothesiz- 
ing a fictitious thing with parts thus identical, plainly an identical tension at the 
ends and the middle is impossible. As to the other example, even if the man 
were equally distant, thirst would press him more. And if neither this nor that 
presses more, he will choose whatever he first happens on, as when two pleasant 
sights lie equally in our view. Whatever happens first we choose first. For identi- 
ty does not completely obviate the choice, but simply makes the drive [toward 
one alternative] slower by the diversion of the other.” 

In his discussion of the choice problem, Simplicius rigidly preserves the 
psychological character of the example as instancing a psychological 
equilibrium of motives. Simplicius’s proposed solution to the problem 
does, however, offer, an interesting and original suggestion, namely, 
that indifferent choices can be resolved on grounds of convenience, and, 
in particular, that this can be accomplished by selecting the alternative 
upon which “we happen first.” We shall have occasion to revert to this 
suggestion below. 

6. Aristotle, De caelo, Il 13, 295b24; trans. W. K. C. Guthrie in the Loeb Classical Li- 
brary series. 

7. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, vol. 7, Simplicii in Aristotelis de Caelo Commentaria, 
ed. I. L. Heilberg (Berlin: Royal Prussian Academy, 1894), pp. 533-343 my translation. 

Choice without Preference 7 

Before the definition of the philosophic problem of choice without 
preference was to attain its ultimate logical sharpness of formulation, it 
was necessary that the mode of indifference at issue should become 
transformed from a psychological balance among diverse motivations into 
a strict logical indifference: a choice in the face of essentially identical al- 
ternatives. This was the step taken by al-Ghazali, the Algazel of the 
Schoolmen, and taken first, it would seem, by him. 

Ghazali (1058-1111) 

In his great work on the Incoherence of the Philosophers, the Arabic 
philosopher-theologian Ghazali is concerned, inter alia, to defend the 
orthodox Moslem theological thesis of the createdness of the world 
against the view maintained by the Arabic Aristotelians that the universe 
is eternal.’ One of the reasonings that Ghazali endeavors to refute is an 
argument against the createdness of the world based on a concept of 
sufficient reason: Why, if the world is the creation of God, did he elect 
to create it when he did, rather than earlier or later?? Speaking, for the 
moment, on behalf of the (Aristotelian) philosophers, Ghazali presses 
this question home against the supporters of the createdness of the 
world: 

But we philosophers know by the necessity of thought that one thing does not 
distinguish itself from a similar except by a differentiating principle, for if not, it 
would be possible that the world should come into existence, having the possi- 
bility both of existing and of not existing, and that the side of existence, al- 
though it has the same possibility as the side of non-existence, should be differ- 
entiated without a differentiating principle. If you answer that the Will of God is 
the differentiating principle, then one has to inquire what differentiates the 
will, i.e., the reason why it has been differentiated in such or such way. And if 
you answer: One does not inquire after the motives of the Eternal, well, let the 
world then be eternal, and let us not inquire after its Creator and its cause, 
since one does not inquire after the motives of the Eternal!!° 

8. Al-Ghazali, The Incoherence of the Philosophers, trans. Michael E. Marmura (Provo, 
Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1997). Ghazali’s work is quoted in extenso in Aver- 
roes’s commentary thereon, The Incoherence of the Incoherence (Tahafut al-Tahafut, trans. S. 
van den Bergh, 2 vols. [Leiden: Brill, 1954]); all further quotations from Tahdfut al-Taha- 
fut are drawn from van den Bergh’s edition. 

g. “How will you defend yourselves, theologians, against the philosophers, when they 
... [Say] that times are equivalent so far as the possibility that the Divine Will should at- 
tach itself to them is concerned .. . ?”; Averroes, Tahafut al-Tahdfut, vol. 1, p. 18. 

10. Averroes, Tahdfut al-Tahafut, vol. 1, p. 18. Cf. R. G. Collingwood’s discussion in The 
Idea of Nature (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1945): “Unless God had a reason for His 
choice [to create the world as He did], it was no choice: it was something of which we 
have no conception whatever, and calling it a choice is merely throwing dust in our own 
eyes by pretending to equate it with a familiar human activity, the activity of choosing, 

8 Choice without Preference 

In opposing this argument, Ghazali proceeds by a closer examination 
of the concept of will, seeking to establish the drastic-seeming remedy of 
a denial that the concept of a sufficient reason for action is applicable to 
the supreme being,'! whose will can of itself constitute a differentiating 
principle.!* We must accept the idea of a “mere” will—of a choice made 
not conditionally because it subserves some other willed purpose, but 
categorically—simply and solely because its willer would have it so.!° It is 
of the essence of an omnipotent will, Ghazali argues, that choice with- 
out reason be possible. The divine can provide a substitute for reason 
out of its own resources: stat pro ratione voluntas.\* 

We answer: The world exists, in the way it exists, in its time, with its qualities, 
and in its space, by the Divine Will and will is a quality which has the faculty of 
differentiating one thing from another, and if it had not this quality, power in it- 
self would suffice. But, since power is equally related to two contraries and a dif- 

which we do not in fact conceive it to have resembled. Choice is choice between alterna- 
tives, and these alternatives must be distinguishable, or they are not alternatives; more- 
over one must in some way present itself as more attractive than the other, or it cannot be 
chosen. [Cf. Averroes and Leibniz below—N.R.] . . . To speak of Him as choosing implies 
either that He chooses for a reason . . . or else He chooses for no reason, in which case he 
does not choose. And the dilemma cannot be evaded by a profession of reverent igno- 
rance. You cannot wriggle out of it by saying that there are mysteries into which you will 
not pry: that God’s ways are past finding out, or (if you prefer one kind of humbug to an- 
other) that these are ultimate problems. ... Humbug of that kind arises from a kind of 
pseudo-religiosity. ... It is humbug, because it was yourself that began prying into these 
mysteries. You dragged the name of God into your cosmology because you thought you 
could conjure with it. You now find you cannot; which proves, not that God is great, but 
that you are a bad conjurer” (pp. 40-41). Cf. Spinoza, who flatly characterizes the “will of 
God” as “the refuge for ignorance” (Ethics, bk. 1, Appendix). 

11. In Christian theology, this was the position of Duns Scotus: “If it be asked why the 
divine will is determined rather to one of two incompatables than to the other, I reply: it is 
foolish [indisciplinatus] to seek causes and demonstrations for all things ... there is no 
cause on account of which the will wills, just as there is no willing to will” (Opus oxoniensis, 
Lvii.5, 23-24). My translation is from the Latin cited by C. R. S. Harris in Duns Scotus (Ox- 
ford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1927), vol. 1, p. 181. 

In Jewish theology, this view is espoused by Moses Maimonides: “We remain firm in 
our belief that the whole Universe was created in accordance with the will of God, and we 
do not inquire for any other cause or object. Just as we do not ask what is the purpose of 
God’s existence so we do not ask what was the object of His will, which is the cause of the 
existence of all things with their present properties, both those that have been created 
and those that will be created” (Guide for the Perplexed, trans. M. Friedlander, vol. 3, p. 13 
[American edition, New York: Pardes Publishing House, 1946], p. 276). 

12. In his controversy with Leibniz, Samuel Clarke maintained just this thesis: “Tis very 
true, that nothing 7s, without a sufficient reason it is, and why it is thus rather than other- 
wise... . But sufficient reason is ofttimes no other, than the mere Will of God’ (Second Reply, 
§1). Leibniz, of course, flatly rejects this line of thought. 

13. This idea is not unfamiliar to readers of the Arabian Nights as a characteristic fea- 
ture of the type of medieval oriental despotism there depicted. When one in authority 
gives as his “reason” for wanting a thing done that “It must needs be so, there is no help 
for it,” this is to be accepted as constituting a very convincing reason indeed. 

14. Cf. note 21 below. 

Choice without Preference 9 

ferentiating principle is needed to differentiate one thing from a similar, it is 
said that the Eternal possesses besides His power a quality which can differenti- 
ate between two similars. And to ask why will differentiates one of two similars is 
like asking why knowledge must comprehend the knowable, and the answer is 
that “knowledge” is the term for a quality which has just this nature. And in the 
same way, “will” is the term for a quality the nature or rather the essence of 
which is to differentiate one thing from another.” 

Ghazali proceeds to illustrate by means of an example that this ca- 
pacity of differentiating where there is no difference is an essential 
characteristic power of all will, human as well as divine. This example is 
the focus of our present interest, and merits quotation in full: 

How, then, will you refute those who say that rational proof has led to establish- 
ing in God a quality the nature of which is to differentiate between two similar 
things? And, if the word “will” does not apply, call it by another name, for let us 
not quibble about words! ... Besides, we do not even with respect to our hu- 
man will concede that this cannot be imagined. Suppose two similar dates in 
front of a man who has a strong desire for them, but who is unable to take them 
both. Surely he will take one of them through a quality in him the nature of 
which is to differentiate between two similar things. All the distinguishing quali- 
ties you have mentioned, like beauty or nearness or facility in taking, we can as- 
sume to be absent, but still the possibility of the taking remains. You can choose 
between two answers: either you merely say that an equivalence in respect to his 
desire cannot be imagined—but this is a silly answer, for to assume it is indeed 
possible—or you say that if an equivalence is assumed, the man will remain for 
ever hungry and perplexed, looking at the dates without taking one of them, 
and without a power to choose or to will, distinct from his desire. And this again 
is one of those absurdities which are recognized by the necessity of thought. 
Everyone, therefore, who studies, in the human and the divine, the real work- 
ing of the act of choice, must necessarily admit a quality the nature of which is 
to differentiate between two similar things.!° 

Here for the first time the problem of choice without preference is 
given its ultimate logical formulation. The examples in explanation of 
Anaximander’s views involve a physical balance through the equilibri- 
um of forces; and in Aristotle’s example we have the psychological bal- 
ance of contrary drives or motivations of equal intensity. Ghazali’s for- 
mulation, however, sharpens the dilemma to its logical edge: it poses 

15. Ghazali, as quoted in Averroes, Tahdfut al-Tahdfut, vol. 1, p. 19. 

16. Averroes, Tahdfut al-Tahdfut, vol. 1, p. 21. This is Ghazali’s reply to a hypothetical 
philosopher opponent who said: “The assumption of a quality the nature of which is 
to differentiate one thing from a similar one is something incomprehensible, say even 
contradictory, for ‘similar’ means not to be differentiated, and ‘differentiated’ means not 
similar. .. . If someone who is thirsty has before him two cups of water, similar in every- 
thing in respect to his aim, it will not be possible for him to take either of them. No, he 

10 Choice without Preference 

the problem of the possibility of rational choice in the face of essentially identi- 
cal alternatives. 

Ghazali also poses the problem of an indifferent choice in relation to 
why God created the universe at one time rather than another.” His so- 
lution to the problem does not take the simpler line that the creation of 
the universe is not a creation in time but a creation of time. Rather, he 
attributes to God a special “determinative principle” (Arabic marnjah, 
i.e., preponderant) which can operate to favor one of two similar ob- 
jects.1§ 

In the Latin translation by Calo Calonymus (ca. 1340) of Averroes’s 
Tahéfut, where Ghazali’s work is cited at length, the definition of the 
will is rendered as a faculty “cutus natura sit distinguere rem ab indifferenti 
absque eo quod sit ibt approprians inclinans actionem unius duorum indifferen- 
tium prae alio.”'* This appears to be the first identifiable text in which 
the Latin term indifferentia is used in relation to the will.2° However, 
Ghazali’s prime concern is not with human free will (which he denies) 
but with the autonomy of God’s will—its being unfettered by any exter- 
nal constraints whatsoever, constraints of reason included.?! And in this 
context he put the problem of choice in conditions of symmetric indif- 
ference upon the agenda. 

By right of historical precedence, then, the problem of Buridan’s Ass 
ought perhaps more appropriately be denominated as that of “Ghazali’s 
Dates.” But it seems likely—in view of the manner in which Ghazali in- 
troduces the problem into his discussion—that he found it already in 
current consideration.?? He employs it as an example admirably suited 

can only take the one he thinks more beautiful or lighter or nearer to his right hand, if he 
is right-handed, or act for some such reason, hidden or known. Without this the differen- 
tiation of the one from the other cannot be imagined” (Averroes, Tahdfut al-Tahafut, vol. 
1, p. 10). 

17. Averroes, Tahafut al-Tahdfut, vol. 1, p. 18. 

18. See S. van den Bergh’s note in The Incoherence of the Incoherence, vol. 2, pp. 17-18, 
which traces the idea of Stoic adiaphoron. 

19. Beatrice H. Zedler, ed., Averroes’ Destructio Destructionum Philosophiae Algazelis in the 
Latin Version of Calo Colonymos (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1961), p. 89. 

20. While Colonymos’s text only became available in the 1320s, other translations of 
Ghazali’s work were available earlier. For instance, in 1278 the Spanish Dominican Ray- 
mond Martin completed a book on “The Battle of Faith against the Moors and the Jews,” 
which contained extensive references to Ghazali’s work. See B. H. Zedler, Averroes’ Destruc- 
tio Destructionum Philosophiae Algazelis in the Latin Version of Calo Colonymos, pp. 21-22. 

21. While Ghazali’s discussion in the Incoherence favors human free will, elsewhere—as 
in the Book of Faith in Divine Unity and Trust in Divine Providence—he denies a liberty of in- 
difference to human. For details, see David Burrell, “Al-Ghazali on Created Freedom,” 
American Catholic Philosophical Journal 73, (1999): 135-58. 

22. He may well have owed it to a Syriac or Arabic commentator on Aristotle, presum- 
ably in a gloss on De caelo, 295b10-35, although the Greek commentators do not seem to 
have modified Aristotle’s formulation of the example (cf. the quotation for Simplicius 

Choice without Preference 11 

to support the concept of a “mere” will—inscrutable from the stand- 
point of reasons and reasonings, capable of effecting differentiation 
where there is no difference.” 

Ghazali associates himself with the school of Moslem theologians 
called Ash‘arites, after its founder al-Ash‘ari. Opposing the rationalistic 
Muttazilites, the Ash‘arites make room for a certain irrationality, or bet- 
ter, nonrationality in matters theological, denying that reason alone is 
capable of attaining religious truths: 

The difference between the Ash‘arite and Muttazilite conceptions of God can- 
not be better expressed than by the following passage which is found twice in 
Ghazali . . . and to which by tradition is ascribed the breach between al-Ash‘ari 
and the Mu‘tazilites: 

Let us imagine a child and a grown-up in Heaven who both died in the True 
Faith, but the grown-up has a higher place than the child. And the child will 
ask God, “Why did you give that man a higher place?” And God will answer, 
“He has done many good works.” Then the child will say, “Why did you let 
me die so soon that I was prevented from doing good?” God will answer, “I 
knew that you would grow up a sinner, therefore it was better that you should 
die a child.” Then a cry goes up from the damned in the depths of Hell, 
“Why, O Lord, did you not let us die before we became sinners?” 

Ghazali adds to this: “The imponderable decisions of God cannot be weighed 
by the scales of reason and Muttazilism.”*4 

Ghazali’s position is that God’s will is omnipotent, totally self-sufficient, 
and free of all constraint—even that of reason. 

given above and also see C. A. Brandis’s edition of the Scholia in Aristotelem, published by 
the Royal Prussian Academy, vol. 4 [1836], p. 507). Thus Léon Gauthier argues that 
Ghazali must have found the example already present in Alfarabi or in Avicenna “because 
he explicitly states at the end of the first Preamble of the Tahdfut that throughout this 
work, in refuting the doctrines of the Greek philosophers, especially Aristotle and his 
commentators, he limits his considerations to those ideas taken up and endorsed by their 
two great Moslem disciples, Alfarabi and Avicenna” (“L’argument de |’Ane de Buridan et 
les philosophes arabes,” Mélanges René Basset, Publications de UInstitut des Hautes-Etudes 
Marocaines, vol. 10 [Paris, 1923], pp. 209-33; see esp. p. 224). 

23. This position was adopted by several of the Scholastics. Johannes Gerson, for ex- 
ample, says that the will est sibi frequenter sufficiens causa vel ratio and that it can choose one 
thing and reject another in such a manner that nec exterior alia ratio quarenda est: sic volo, sic 
jubeo; stat pro ratione voluntas (Opera Omnia, ed. M. L. E. Du Pin [Antwerp and Amsterdam, 
1706], vol. 3, pp. 443-44). On Gerson’s theory of the will, see Hermann Siebeck, “Die 
Willenslehre bei Duns Scotus und seinen Nachfolgern,” Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie und 
philosophische Kritik 112 (1898): 179-216. 

24.8. van den Bergh, p. x of his “Introduction” to the The Incoherence of the Incoherence. 
Cf. St. Paul: “Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing 
formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter 

12 Choice without Preference 

Averroes (1126-1198) 

In his book on the Incoherence of the Incoherence, a detailed critical com- 
mentary on Ghazali’s Incoherence of the Philosophers, Averroes undertook 
to defend the Arabic Aristotelians against Ghazali’s onslaught. It is 
worth quoting in full his criticism of Ghazali’s example of the dates: 

It is assumed that in front of a man there are two dates, similar in every way, and 
it is supposed that he cannot take them both at the same time. It is supposed 
that no special attraction need be imagined for him in either of them, and that 
nevertheless he will of necessity distinguish one of them by taking it. But this is 
an error. For, when one supposes such a thing, and a willer whom necessity 
prompts to eat or to take the date, then it is by no means a matter of distin- 
guishing between two similar things when, in this condition, he takes one of the 
two dates ... whichever of the two dates he may take, his aim will be attained 
and his desire satisfied. His will attaches itself therefore merely to the distinc- 
tion between the fact of taking one of them and the fact of leaving them al- 
together; it attaches itself by no means to the act of taking one definite date 
and distinguishing this act from leaving the other (that is to say, when it is as- 
sumed that the desires for the two are equal); he does not prefer the act of tak- 
ing the one to the act of taking the other, but he prefers the act of taking one of 
the two, whichever it may be, and he gives a preference to the act of taking over 
the act of leaving. This is self evident. For distinguishing one from the other 
means giving a preference to the one over the other, and one cannot give a pre- 
ponderance to one of two similar things in so far as it is similar to the other—al- 
though in their existence as individuals they are not similar since each of two in- 
dividuals is different from the other by reason of a quality exclusive to it. If, 
therefore, we assume that the will attaches itself to that special character of one 
of them, then it can be imagined that the will attaches to the one rather than 
the other because of the element of difference existing in both. But then the 
will does not attach to two similar objects, in so far as they are similar.* 

Essentially, then, Averroes’s position was that (1) it is necessary to grant 
the preferability of taking-one-date over against taking-neither-date; but 
(2) there would be no reasonable way of choosing one particular date 
were it actually to follow from the hypothesis of the problem that there 
is no reason for preferring one over the other; however, (3) since there 
are two distinct dates, they must be distinguishable so that there must be 
some element of difference—at least a difference in zdentity—between 
them, and the will can and must therefore fix upon such an element of 
difference as a “reason” for preference. Thus Averroes simply re- 

power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour and another unto 
dishonour?” (Romans 9:20-21). Cf. also Omar Khayyam’s Rubaiydt. 

25. S. van den Bergh, trans., Averroes, The Incoherence of the Incoherence, vol. 1, pp. 
22-23. 

Choice without Preference 13 

asserts—in the teeth of Ghazali’s example—the impossibility of choice 
without preference. And he resolves the impasse by holding that a dif- 
ference will inevitably exist to provide the “reason” for a choice.”° 

The obvious criticism of Averroes’s solution is implicit in the quota- 
tion marks that have been put about the word veason. For it is assumed 
in the defining statement of the problem that the differences between 
the objects (whatever they be) are such as to have no rationally valid 
bearing on the matter of their relative preferability. There consequently 
is, by hypothesis, no legitimacy or validity from the standpoint of reason- 
ableness, in any attempt to base a reasoned preference upon these dif- 
ferences. 

St. Thomas Aquinas (ca. 1227-1274) 

In discussing “whether man chooses of necessity or freely,” Aquinas 
employed the example of choice without preference as a means of for- 
mulating a possible objection to the thesis of freedom of the will (an ob- 
jection that he subsequently endeavors to refute). 

If two things are absolutely equal, man is not moved to one more than to the 
other; thus if a hungry man, as Plato says,?” be confronted on either side with 
two portions of food equally appetizing and at an equal distance, he is not 
moved towards one more than to the other; and he finds this the reason of the 
immobility of the earth in the middle of the world.”® Now if that which is equal- 

26. In his highly instructive footnotes on Averroes’s text, S. van den Bergh, the learned 
translator of the Tahdfut al-Tahdafut into English, writes: “Averroes misses the point here 
completely. Certainly the donkey will take one or the other of the two bundles rather than 
die, but the question is what determines its taking the one rather than the other. Obvious- 
ly it will take the one that comes first to hand; only, when there is a complete equivalence 
of all conditions, this is impossible, and Spinoza says bluntly that the donkey will have to 
die. As a matter of fact, in such cases a complete equivalence of psychological and physical 
conditions is never reached; no living body even is strictly symmetrical, and if per impossible 
such an equivalence could be momentarily reached, the world is changing, not static, and 
the donkey will move and not die” (The Incoherence of the Incoherence, vol. 2, p. 20). The 
point here is twofold: (1) that a complete equilibrium of opposing motivations can never 
actually be reached, and (2) that even if such an equilibrium, albeit impossible, were to 
be reached, such a condition would necessarily pass due to an inherent instability. The 
first of these has been asserted in the present context by numerous writers—Montaigne, 
Bayle, and Leibniz, among others—and we shall return to it below. However, van den 
Bergh is the first to urge the second thesis: that a psychological equilibrium would be in- 
trinsically unstable, and would become resolved because “the world is changing, not stat- 
ic.” However, since physical equilibrium is in theory possible in a changing world, it would 
seem that a better case must be made out for this thesis. 

27. Aristotle is apparently meant here, though there is a transition to Plato toward the 
end of this sentence. 

28. The text I am quoting reads “and he finds the reason of this in the immobility of 
the earth in the middle of the world”—which simply does not make sense. The original 
reads: “... , ut Plato dicit, assignans rationem quietis terrae in medio.” 

14 Choice without Preference 

ly eligible with something else cannot be chosen, much less can that be chosen 
which appears the less so. Therefore if two or more things are available, of 
which one appears to be more eligible, it is impossible to choose any of the oth- 
ers. Therefore that which appears to hold the first place is chosen of necessity. 
But every act of choosing is in regard to something that seems in some way bet- 
ter. Therefore every choice is made necessarily.”® 

Aquinas thus insists that “every act of choosing is in regard to something 
that seems in some way better”: the will can only choose an alternative 
adjudged superior by the intellect. (This position is often characterized 
as Aquinas’s “intellectualism.”) Observe, however, that this intellectualist 
position that one must always choose whatever reason decisively rules as 
superior does not of itself entail a rationalistic position holding that the 
will can only choose what reason prefers, so that choice is hamstrung in 
the absence of rational preferability. So even for the intellectualist, the 
Buridan-style issue remains unsettled. 

After a general discussion of determinism, Aquinas returns briefly to 
the example of choice among equals, in effect dismissing it summarily: 

If two things be proposed as equal under one aspect, nothing hinders us from 
considering in one of them some [other] particular point of superiority, so that 
the will has a bent towards the one rather than towards the other.” 

Thus Aquinas does not view the problem of choice among equals as a 
hopeless paradox that condemns its victim to utter inaction, since—so 
he insists—the intellect has the capacity of viewing them under some as- 
pect under which one of them is accorded “some particular point of su- 
periority.” 

Aquinas’s line of thought seems to be essentially as follows: Let it be 
that I offer you the choice between A and B, these being two wholly in- 
different objects of choice (be it haystacks, dates, or coins). But let it also 
be that I offer you a reward for selecting A. You now have a good reason 
for choosing A in the absence of every reason for preferring A to B. The 
operation of such an object-extraneous incentive can clearly break the 
tie for rational choice in the absence of object preferability in situations 
of symmetry. It was, apparently, the position of Aquinas—and of Aver- 
roes before him—that even in the absence of a difference between the 
objects of choice the will is always able to fix some situational difference 
to achieve a rational basis of selection. 

29. Summa theologica, I, i, 13.6; cited from the translation of the Fathers of the English 
Dominican Province (2d ed., London, 1927). On Aquinas’s views regarding free will, see 
J. B. Kowlee, “Free Will and Free Choice,” in Norman Kretzmann et al., eds., The Cam- 
bridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 

1982), pp. 629-41. 
30. Summa theologica, II, i, 13.6 

Choice without Preference 15 

Peter John Olivi (1248-1298) 

Peter John Olivi was a French-born Franciscan philosopher who ex- 
pounded an account of the will based on the liberty of indifference 
much in the manner adumbrated by al-Ghazali.*! Thus, leaning on his 
date example, Olivi writes: 

When there is some number of equivalent things that are equally useful, noth- 
ing explains the will’s adoption of one or the other of them except the freedom 
by which one is equally able to do this or that. Suppose there are two pieces of 
fruit or two people that are in every way and through all things similar and 
equivalent. Nevertheless, the will attaches itself to one of the two and leaves the 
other .. . It often happens that we want to take one of two coins. We deliberate 
and ascertain that there is just as good reason to take the one as the other. In 
these circumstances, we might think that we would be able to take and keep the 
one coin just as well as the other. Then, when we take one of the two, we mani- 
festly feel that we do this from freedom of the will alone and not from some 
greater satisfaction in the one as opposed to the other.*? 

And so Olivi employs reasoning of the Buridan’s Ass type to substanti- 
ate a tie-breaking power not for God’s will alone, as per the Arabic 
Muttazilites, but for the human will as well, albeit not for brutes. Olivi 
was apparently the first to speak explicitly and extensively about the 
will’s capacity to handle matters of indifference (indifferentia) in situa- 
tions of choice.*? (While Olivi does not flatly say that the baffled beast 
would starve, the entire tenor of his discussion implies this.**) And in 
making his point he was the first to propose coinage as a realistic, rather 
then a makeshift, instance of a situation in common life involving essen- 
tially indistinguishable objects between which choice is thoroughly in- 
different.*> (In this, as we shall see below, he anticipated Thomas Reid 
by some five hundred years!) 

31. For biographical information on Olivi, see the Stanford [Internet] Encyclopedia of Phi- 
losophy, and for further details, see David Burr, “The Persecution of Peter Olivi,” in Trans- 
actions of the American Philosophical Society 66, pt. 5 (1976). On Olivi’s position on freedom 
of the will, see Bonnie Kent, Virtues of the Will (Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University 
of America Press, 1995), and Robert Pasnan, “Olivi on Human Freedom,” in Alain 
Boureau and Sylvain Piron, eds., Pierre de Jean Olivi (1248-1298): Pensée scolastique, dissi- 
dence sprituelle, et société (Paris: J. Vrin, 1999), pp. 15-26. Olivi’s position in relation to the 
problem of Buridan’s Ass is informatively discussed in Sharon Kaye, “Buridan’s Ass and 
Peter John Olivi” (as yet unpublished), and also in “Why the Liberty of Indifference Is 
Worth Wanting,” History of Philosophy Quarterly 21 (2004): 21-42. 

32. Fr. Petrus Iohannis Olivi, O.F.M., Quaestiones in II librum Sententiarum (Quarrachi: 
Collegii S. Bonaventurae, 1924), vol. 2, Q. 57, pp. 326-27. 

33. See Sharon Kaye, “Why the Liberty of Indifference Is Worth Wanting,” 19-20. 

34. Ibid. 

35. The Skeptics of antiquity were fond of dwelling on the limitations of man’s sensory 
discriminations by adducing the issue of distinguishing between observationally identical 

16 Choice without Preference 

Dante (1265-1321) 

Our problem now for the first time steps forth upon the stage of 
world literature. The events of the Divine Comedy, Paradiso 3, bring to 
Dante’s mind two perplexing moral problems which—in Canto 4—he 
wishes Beatrice to clarify for him: Does an evil action performed under 
duress detract from the moral merit of the agent? Can a good action 
done in atonement lessen the moral onus of a wrongful deed? 

Between two foods alike to appetite, and like afar, a free man, I suppose, would 
starve before of either he would bite; 

So would a lamb, between the hungry throes of two fierce wolves, feel 
equipoise of dread, so hesitate a hound between two does. 

Whence by my doubts alike solicited inevitably, censure can be none, nor 
commendation if I nothing said. 

And I said nothing; but desire upon my face was pictured, questioning as 
well set forth more fervently than words had done. 

So Beatrice replied, and said: “These questions balance equally the beam of 
thy desire.” 

In his notes on this passage the translator aptly remarks that “[i]t is 
in artistic keeping that a Canto dealing so largely with the dilemma of 
the broken vow should begin with this ancient paradox.”*® Further- 
more, it is noteworthy that this problem context of punishment and 
reward in the world to come in which the example occurs in Dante is es- 
sentially the same as in discussions by Arabic philosophers and theolo- 
gians (see the conclusion of the foregoing discussion of Ghazali). How- 
ever, the problem as presented by Dante is that of conflict among equal 
desires (or fears—here for the first time), as in Aristotle’s formulation, 
and not that of choice between essentially identical objects, as with 
Ghazali and the Arabs. 

Duns Scotus (1265-1308) 

As was the case with various of his fellow Franciscan, the philosopher 
Scotus veers off in a different direction from that taken by Aquinas. For 
Scotus, the will is not a member of a team, geared systemically to the op- 

items, such as similar eggs and impressions of the same seal. See Augustine, Soliloquies, bk. 
1, p. 6; and cf. David Hume’s question “What so like as two eggs?” But contrast Leibniz 
and the linden-tree leaves at Herrenhausen. 

36. Dante, Divine Comedy, 2:1-26 (with deletions). I quote from the translation pre- 
pared by Melville B. Anderson for the Oxford University Press edition of the Divine Come- 
dy in “The World’s Classics” series. Many of the great philosophical problems and contro- 
versies of the age are discussed in the Divine Comedy. 

Choice without Preference 17 

eration of reason: it is an independent agent in its own right, a self- 
mover potentially in conflict with reason. On this basis the will is 
supreme in matters of decision, predominant insofar as it praecipit delib- 
erationem or eligit praevian deliberatione, a position it occupies when it acts 
freely, quia libere imperat illam deliberationeme et libere eligit.*” Scotus thus 
emphatically endorses the liberty of indifference of the human will.°* 
For, as he saw it, the will can indeed choose the lesser of otherwise simi- 
lar alternatives. 

Scotus, like Olivi, employed the term indifferentia to characterize the 
choice situation,*® contrasting the case of a stymied appetitive bull with 
that of a tie-breaking rational human being.*® His discussion of the is- 
sues has led some philosophers to credit him with priority over Buridan 
in relation to the Buridan’s Ass problem,*! though this overlooks the 
fact that Scotus’s position on the issue is substantially the same as that of 
Al-Ghazali and Olivi. 

William of Ockham (ca. 1282-ca. 1348) 

William of Ockham was another Franciscan voluntarist who, like 
Olivi and Scotus, defended the liberty of indifference.” As he saw it: 

37. Duns Scotus, Opera oxoniensia, vol. 1, d 39, qq 5, 15, and vol. 3, d 33, qq 1, 22. This 
work has been edited by P. Mrcanus Fernandez Garcia, O.F.M. (Qarrachi: Collegii S. 
Bonaventure, 1914). 

38. On Duns Scotus, see H. Siebeck, “Die Willenslehre bei Duns Scotus und seinen 
Nachfolgern,” in the Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie 112 (1898): 179-216. Etienne Gilson surmis- 
es as follows: “Mais c’est sans doute chez Duns Scot que la spontanéité du vouloir déja si 
fortement affirmé par saint Anselme, attaint son expression definitive. .. . La liberté sco- 
tiste d’indifference ne fait donc qu’un avec la spontaneité du vouloir, qui demeure le seul 
element possible de contingence devant les determinations de la raison” (Léspirit de la 
philosophie médiévale [Paris: J. Vrin, 1932], pp. 104-7). See also Mortimer J. Adler, The Idea 
of Freedom (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1958-1961), p. 524. 

39. John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones Quoadlibetales, Q. 18, n. 9g, and also QQ. 16-17. For 
the relevant texts, see Felix Alluntis and Alan B. Wolter, God and Creatures: The Quodlibetal 
Questions (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1975), esp. pp. 369-98; and Quaes- 
tiones in metaphysicam, 9, q. 15, in Alan B. Wolter, Duns Scotus on the Will and Morality (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 1980), pp. 144-73. 

40. “Nam uos vidit berbum, quae movet appetitum suum et ex illo appetitu movet pro- 
gressive ad herbam; sed in motu illo occurret objectum magis delictabile fortius movens 
appetitum, et hunc sistitur a primo motu, et tamen nos libere, quia necessario movetur ab 
illo majore delectabili occurrente, quaamquam causaliter occurat” (Opera oxoniensia, ed. P. 
Marcanus Fernandez Garcia, O.F.M. [Quarrachi: Collegii S. Bonaventure, 1914], vol. 2, d. 
25, q- 1, pp. 690-91.) 

41. See Vernon J. Bourke, Will in Western Thought (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1964), p. 
85. 

42. For his position, see G. Gal et al., eds., Ockham: Opera Theologica, 9 vols. (St. 
Bonaventure, N.Y.: Franciscan Institute, 1967ff.). For an extensive account of Ockham on 
freedom, see Marilyn McCord Adams, “Ockham on Will, Nature, and Morality,” in The 
Cambridge Companion to Ockham (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 

18 Choice without Preference 

The [human] will is freely able to will something and not to will it... . To deny 
every agent this capability for both alternatives alike is to destroy all praise and 
blame, all counsel and deliberation, and all freedom of the will [omnem liber- 
tatem voluntatis]. And then a man will be no more free by his will than an ass by 
its sensory appetite.* 

So here, the ass does at last make its appearance in the context of our 
problem. Unhappily Ockham’s passage continues “as is shown else- 
where” [sicut alias ostenditur], and this elsewhere has not as yet been 
found. And here again—as with Olivi—the dialectic is that of a defense 
of human free will through a contrast with the sensory determinism 
that is taken to prevail with brutes. The “voluntarist” position of an au- 
tonomy of the will that is a staple of Franciscan thought is once again in 
operation. 

Buridan (ca. 1295-1358) 

The French Scholastic philosopher Jean Buridan supported a middle 
way between the intellectualism of Aquinas and the voluntarianism of 
the Franciscans.“ In view of his extensive discussion of the relevant is- 
sues, it has long occasioned astonishment that Buridan’s Ass is nowhere 
to be met with in Buridan’s writings.” Among others, Bayle, Schopen- 
hauer, Sir William Hamilton, and Pierre Duhem attest to long hours of 
fruitless search.*° Bayle has even conjectured that the phrase “Ass of 

245-72. See also Marilyn McCord Adams, “William Ockham: Voluntarist or Naturalist?,” 
in John F. Whippel, ed., Studies in Medieval Philosophy (Washington, D.C.: The Catholic 
University of America Press, 1987), pp. 203-35; and Jerzy B. Korolec, “Free Will and Free 
Choice,” in The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, ed. N. Kretzman et al. (Cam- 
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 629-41. 

43. Ockham, Opera philosophia, ed. Gal et al., p. 321. 

44. On Buridan’s position regarding intellectual determinism of the will, see Jack Zup- 
ko, “Freedom of Choice in Buridan’s Moral Psychology,” Medieval Studies 57 (1995): 
75-99; and Edward J. Monahan, “Human Liberty and Free Will According to John Buri- 
dan,” Medieval Studies 16 (1954): 80-108. See also Risto Saarinen, “Moral Weakness and 
Human Action in John Buridan’s Ethics,” in Heikka Kirjavainen, ed., Faith, Will and Gram- 
mar (Helsinki: Luther-Agricola Society, 1986), pp. 109-39, and Weakness of the Will in Me- 
dieval Thought: From Augustine to Buridan (Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 161-87. See also James 
J. Walsh, “Is Buridan a Sceptic about Free Will?,” Vivarium 2 (1994): 50-61; and Jerzy B. 
Korolec, “La philosophie de la liberté de Jean Buridan,” Studia Mediewistyczne 15 (1974): 
120-51. 

45. See B. Geyer in the 11th (last) edition of vol. 2, Die Patristische und Scholastische 
Philosophie, of F. Ueberweg’s Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie (Leipzig: O. S. Reisland, 
1929), p. 597. A supposedly complete edition of Buridan’s writings was published by 
Dullard in Paris in 1500 and was reprinted in ensuing decades. 

46. Bayle writes: “The Ass of Buridan was a kind of proverb or example which was long 
used in the schools. I do not know if I have determined with precision just what it was, for 
I have found no one able to explain it to me, nor any book that enters into detail on this 
matter” (Dictionnaire, art. “Buridan”). Schopenhauer writes that “one has now been vainly 

Choice without Preference 19 

Buridan” may first have gained currency in connection with an entirely 
different point of logical difficulty or complexity discussed by Buridan 
as a pons asinorum in logic,” and subsequently the phrase came to be 
shifted in its application to the well-known ambivalence example. 

There is no question, however, but that Buridan was familiar, in 
essence, with the example to which he lent his name. In his unpub- 
lished commentary on Aristotle’s De caelo, in a gloss on the very pas- 
sage of 2:13 that we had occasion to examine above, Buridan gives the 
example of a dog—not an ass!—dying of hunger between two equal 
portions of food.°° It seems clear, however, that this transposed example 
in an obscure manuscript could scarcely have been the direct origin of 
the notorious paradox, and that it must have been associated with Buri- 
dan in some more immediate and prominent way. 

At any rate, the example of the ass fits in a very natural and congen- 
ial way into the problem context of Buridan’s theory of the will. In his 
Quaestiones on the Nicomachean Ethics, Buridan treats the problem of hu- 

searching his writings for some hundred years” for the ass of Buridan, and that “I myself 
own an edition of his Sophismata, apparently printed already in the fifteenth century... in 
which I have repeatedly searched for it in vain, although asses occur as examples on virtu- 
ally every page” (Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will, p. 58 of the original edition). Sir 
William Hamilton states that “the supposition of the ass, etc., is not, however, as I have as- 
certained, to be found in his [i.e., Buridan’s] writings” (Reid’s Works, ed. W. Hamilton, vol. 
1, p. 38, in the seventh, eighth, and possibly other editions). Pierre Duhem writes: “I have 
searched in vain for the argument of the ass in all of the writings attributed to Buridan; in 
those places where it might reasonably occur, we encounter instead wholly different ex- 
amples” (Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, 3, vols. [Paris: A. Hermann, 1906-1913], vol. 3, p. 
16). 

47. This would probably have been the set of rules for determining suitable middle 
terms in the construction of syllogistic arguments in support of a given conclusion, which 
have long been ascribed (incorrectly) to Buridan. See B. Geyer’s revision of vol. 2 of Ue- 
berweg’s Grundriss, p. 597- 

48. Bayle, Dictionnaire, art. “Buridan.” Bayle also suggests that the phrase may original- 
ly have referred to the “an” (Latin) of Buridan—along the lines of uérum as common in 
Scholastic usage—and subsequently metamorphosed into the “asne” (French) of Buri- 
dan. This “explanation” is rather far-fetched. 

49. I here refer to Buridan’s Expositio textus of the De caelo, and not to the Quaestiones 
that he also devoted to that work. The former is unpublished, and exists in only two man- 
uscript versions: Bruges 477 (210 v-238v), and Vat. lat. 2162 (57r—-79r); see Anneliese 
Maier, Zwei Grundprobleme der Scholastischen Naturphilosophie (Rome: Edizioni di storia e let- 
teratura, 1968), p. 205. The Quaestiones super libris quattuor de Caelo et mundo has been pub- 
lished by E. A. Moody (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1942). In this work 
there is, however, no mention of our example. 

50. See the article “Buridan” by L. Minio-Paluello in the Encyclopedia Britannica (1956 
edition). This almost, though not quite, bears out Schopenhauer’s conjecture that Buri- 
dan’s example was adopted from that of Aristotle’s man perplexed by a choice between 
food and drink, but that Buridan “changed the man to an ass, solely because it was the 
custom of this parsimonious Scholastic to take for his example either Socrates and Plato, 
or asinum’ (Freedom of the Will, p. 59). It might seem unseemly to present the greats in per- 

plexity. 

20 Choice without Preference 

man freedom.®! He asks: “Would the will, having been put between two 
opposites, with all being wholly alike on both sides, be able to deter- 
mine itself rather to one opposed alternative than to the other?”? As an 
illustration of a problem of this type, Buridan addresses the situation of 
two alternative routes leading to the same destination, though not, alas, 
our ass example.°? It is highly probable, however, that the example was 
given by Buridan (in its henceforth traditional description of an ass 
placed between equally appetizing heaps of hay) in some more memo- 
rable manner, possibly in one of his several yet unpublished commen- 
taries on Aristotle, or perhaps it arose in a verbal context, either in his 
influential lectures, or in oral disputation or discussion.*4 

Buridan’s answer to the problem of indifferent choice is given in 
terms of his theory of the will which sought for a middle way. As he saw 
it, neither need the will necessarily implement the evaluative rulings of 
the intellect, nor is it at liberty to overrule and contravene them: it can- 
not act against reason. Instead, it has the suspensive power of inaction, 
of deferring choice to a later stage. In its relation to the intellect, the 
will is neither bound to acquiescence and acceptance (acceptatio) nor to 
negation and overruling (refutatio), but autonomously has the power to 
suspend choice—to defer (deffere).>° For while if two objects be adjudged 
by reason as wholly equivalent, the will is unable to act independently to 
break the deadlock and opt for one or the other, nevertheless it can de- 
termine to “wait and see.” Buridan grants to the will the status of a facul- 

51. Quaestiones super decem libros Aristotelis ad Nicomachum, II, 1. 

52. Translated from the quotation given by P. Duhem, Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, vol. 
3, pp. 17-18 (reprint, Paris, 1955). This formulation of the problem of freedom derives 
from Buridan’s master, William of Ockham, who characterizes freedom as potestas qua pos- 
sum indifferenter et contingenter effectum ponere, ita quod possum eundem effectum causare nulla 
diversitate circa illam potentiam facta (Quodlibeta, vol. 1, p. 16). 

53. The instance he gives is the following: “I could go from Paris to Avignon either via 
Lyon or Dun-le-Roy.” Ludovico Molina says that “Cyril of Alexandria wrote in the third 
chapter of his four-book commentary on St. John’s Gospel: ‘Man is an animal that has 
freedom, and can choose to elect either the right or the left road (i.e., either virtue or 
vice)’” (Concordia liberi arbitrii, XIV, xiii, 23, $4). Buridan also discusses the problem of 
choice confronting the mariner in a stormy sea, agonized about whether to jettison his 
cargo or risk his life; see P. Duhem, Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, vol. 3, p. 18. 

54. This latter possibility would accord well with the oft-voiced conjecture that the ex- 
ample of Buridan’s Ass actually derives from an objection to Buridan’s views; see, e.g., B. 
Geyer’s revision of Ueberweg’s Grundriss, p. 597. Correspondingly, Sir William Hamilton 
has plausibly conjectured that “perhaps it [i.e., the example of Buridan’s Ass] was orally 
advanced in disputation, or in lecturing, as an example in illustration of his Determinism; 
perhaps it was employed by his opponents as an instance to reduce that doctrine to ab- 
surdity” (Reid’s Works, ed. Hamilton, vol. 2, p. 690). We know that for many years Buridan 
professa dans UV'université de Paris avec une extréme reputation (Bayle, Dictionnaire, art. “Buri- 
dan”). Thus Sharon Kaye, in her “Buridan’s Ass and Peter John Ollivi,” also conjectures 
that Ockham the donkey version of the problem in a public debate against Buridan. 

55- See Zupko, “Freedom of Choice in Buridan’s Moral Psychology,” pp. 94-97. 

Choice without Preference 21 

tas suspensiva which, while it cannot go counter to reason, can suspend 
action. Just this position makes it almost irresistibly tempting to see the 
ass example as the crux of an argument against Buridan.*° 

But matters are not quite so straightforward. For Buridan, ties of in- 
difference between objects of choice, while possible, will arise only be- 
cause a fallible intellect is unable to comprehend the full complexities 
of real situations. And then the agent is not stymied like the traditional 
donkey. For God has made provision that an agent “can, with everything 
else disposed in the same way, freely determine himself to either of two 
opposites.” But this self-determination is not an intellectual (rational) 
operation but “is the natural property of a voluntary agent, just as the 
ability to laugh belongs to man.”5” Brute animals have no free will be- 
cause they have no will at all: their modus operandi lies in a purely sen- 
suous appetite, whereas willing is an intellectual appetite. (He speaks of 
appetitus intellictus, qui est voluntas.)°* Buridan supports this view of the 
will by saying that those who claim free will for man but deny it to ani- 
mals find themselves in difficult straits: 

It seems to me that, to show the difference between the freedom of our will and 
the lack of freedom to which the actuating faculty of a dog is subject, it would be 
better to trust to faith than to natural reason.°? For it would be difficult indeed 
to show that when our will is wholly indifferent between two opposed acts, then 
it [in contradistinction to the actuating faculty of a dog] could decide for one or 
the other alternative without being so determined by some external factor.® 

In the context of Buridan’s theory of will, the ass example can, with its 
characteristic double-edgedness, serve possibly as a somewhat drastic 
example in illustration of Buridan’s intellectual determinism of the will, 
or alternately as an example adduced by Buridan’s opponents in an at- 
tempt to render this doctrine absurd. 

In any case, the story of “Buridan’s Ass” passed (in various guises) 
even into the popular lore of all the European peoples. I cite as one in- 
stance the Spanish folktale of late medieval vintage: 

56. See note 48 above. 57. Ibid., p. 97. 

58. Ibid., p. g5, n. 64. 

59. This is apparently Buridan’s final and considered position on the subject of the 
freedom of the will: he holds this not to be subject to philosophical demonstration or refu- 
tation, but a matter of faith. See pp. 84-85 of K. Michalski, “Les Courants Philosophiques 
a Oxford et a Paris pendant le XIV Siécle,” Bulletin Internationale de l’Académie Polonaise des 
Sciénces et des Lettres (Classe d’Histoire et de Philosophie, 1919-1920), pp. 59-88. 

60. Buridan, In Metaphysicam Aristotelis Quaestiones, quoted by P. Duhem in Etudes sur 
Léonard de Vinci, vol. 3, pp. 20-21. Duhem in this work attributes these Quaestiones on the 
Metaphysics to another John Buridan, but in the face of manuscript evidence discovered by 
himself, he subsequently reverses himself (Le Systéme du Monde, vol. 4, p. 126). 

22 Choice without Preference 

EL BURRO DE BURIDAN: Una dia el burro de un fildsofo llamado Juan 
Buridan—y por eso llamado el burro de Buridan—perece de hambre y sed. Te- 
niendo a un lado una gran cantidad de avena y otro un cubo de agua, el burro 
nunca puede saber si tiene sed o hambre. El burro no sabe que decidir: si com- 
er o beber. En esta horrible vacilaci6n le sorprende la muerte.®! 

Khédja Zadeh (1415-1488) 

The Turkish philosopher Khédja Zadeh, in his reply to Averroes’s 
criticism of the theologians, written in Arabic, again under the title of 
Ghazali’s work Tahdfut al-Falasifa, takes up the problem of choice with- 
out preference just where Averroes had left it (of course without knowl 
edge of the intervening Western discussions). Taking the part of 
Ghazali against Averroes, Khodja Zadeh argues that a genuinely “free” 
agent can ipso facto resolve the paradox of choice without preference: 

If one puts a loaf of bread before a hungry man, he will begin to eat a certain 
part to the exclusion of all others, without determination of a volition favoring 
this part to the rest. You object: “I do not grant that he will begin to eat a part 
without determination of a volition in its favour; for why would not this volition 
have for its deciding reason that one part is closer to him, or more appealing, 
or better baked?” I reply: “By hypothesis it has been assumed that all is, without 
exception, alike in each part of the loaf. And so the man either cannot start to 
eat some one particular part and will therefore starve (which is manifestly ab- 
surd), or else he will start somewhere to satisfy his desire.” 

The force of the example is thus presumably to stress the difference be- 
tween the realm of arational nature where a balance of forces creates 
equilibrium and the rational realm where a balance of reasons leaves 
room for free will. 

Khédja Zadeh then goes on to give a more sophisticated example of 
choice without preference, which is cited here in Léon Gauthier’s epito- 
me: 

If one can demonstrate ... that in some instance God [in creating the world] 
must choose among two or more strictly equivalent alternatives, one will have 
upset in one decisive stroke . . . the premiss on which the argument of the Hell- 
enizing philosophers is founded, the principle of sufficient reason. But there are 
numerous such instances. ... Thus with any of the celestial spheres (of Greco- 
Arabian astronomy) God has an arbitrary choice among an infinity of strictly 
identical alternatives in selecting the two points which serve as poles or the cir- 

61. Angel Flores, First Spanish Reader (New York: Bantam Books, 1964), p. 2. This bal- 
ancing of hunger and thirst carries us back to Aristotle. 

62. Rendered from the French of Léon Gauthier’s translation in “L’argument de 
l’Ane de Buridan et les philosophes arabes,” in Mélanges René Basset (Paris: A. Hermann), 

Pp. 209-33; See esp. pp. 227-28. 

Choice without Preference 23 

cle which serves as equator or the line which serves as axis. And again, with re- 
spect to the motion of each sphere, a direction of rotation and a particular 
speed must be chosen arbitrarily; similarly on each eccentric there is an arbi- 
trary choice of a center for the epicyclic sphere and on this sphere itself the 
place of the planet which it carries must be selected, and so on. 

In this astronomical formulation, the example is transformed from a 
choice between two indifferent alternatives into one among infinitely 
many, a complication that induces no fundamental change in our prob- 
lem. Like some Western writers, Khodja Zadeh is satisfied with insisting 
that “free will” can resolve a situation of choice among indifferent ob- 
jects, without explaining how this is possible. 

Rabelais (ca. 1490-1553) 

In Francisco Rabelais’s Gargantua and Pantagruel our example once 
again receives a literary treatment: 

At Pantagruel’s birth, none was more amazed and perplexed than his father 
Gargantua. On the one hand, he saw his wife Badebec dead, on the other, his 
son Pantagruel, large as life and much noisier. He was at a complete loss what to 
say or do. A terrible doubt racked his brain: should he weep over the death of 
his wife or rejoice over the birth of his son? On either hand, sophistical argu- 
ments arose to choke him. He could frame them capitally in modo et figura, ac- 
cording to the modes and figures of the syllogism in formal logic. But he could 
not resolve them. So there he was, fretting like a mouse caught in a trap, or a 
kite snared in a gin.®4 

Giving full play to his provocative esprit, Rabelais devised a highly dra- 
matic and characteristically tragicomic setting for this ancient problem. 

Montaigne (1533-1592) 

In his Essais, Michel de Montaigne discusses the problem of choice 
without preference—again in Aristotle’s formulation—as an intellectual 
curiosity, a difficulty of the sort that give spice and stimulus to the culti- 
vation of philosophical speculations, that curious pursuit of the para- 
doxical creature Homo sapiens: 

63. Ibid., pp. 229-30. Gauthier thinks that Khédja Zadeh derived the basic idea of his 
example from the Muslim theologians (pp. 230-31). See also Léon Gauthier, Ibn Rochd 
(Averroes) (Paris: J. Vrin, 1948), pp. 221-22. These astronomical examples are only varia- 
tions on a theme of al-Ghazali; see S. van den Bergh, trans., The Incoherence of the Incoher- 
ence, pp. 124, 144. 

64. Rabelais, Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk. 2, p. 3, translated by Jacques LeClerq 
(Modern Library edition). 

24 Choice without Preference 

It is a pleasant imagination, to conceive a spirit justly ballanced betweene two 
equall desires. For, it is not to be doubted, that he shall never be resolved upon 
any match: Forsomuch as the application and choise brings an inequality of 
prise: And who should place us betweene a Bottle of Wine and a Gammon of 
Bacon, with a equall appetite to eat and drinke, doubtlesse there were noe rem- 
edy but to die of thirst and hunger.® 

However, in condemning Buridan’s ass to death, Montaigne propos- 
es to draw the venom of the paradox, by reducing it to the status of a 
strictly abstract and purely fanciful hypothetical difficulty that could not 
possibly arise in a real or practical context. 

In my opinion, it might . . . be said, that nothing is presented unto us, wherein 
there is not some difference, how light so ever it bee: and that either to the 
sight, or to the feeling, there is ever some choise, which tempteth and drawes us 
to it, though imperceptible and not to bee distinguished. In like manner, hee 
that shall presuppose a twine-thrid equally strong all-through, it is impossible by 
all impossibilitie that it breake, for, where could you have the flaw or breaking 
to beginne? And at once to breake in all places together, it is not in nature.®” 

Montaigne’s resolution of the problem flatly maintains that strict identi- 
ty among objects “is not in nature,” so that choice among identicals be- 
comes a purely imaginary complication. 

Gataker (1574-1654) 

A most interesting discussion of the uses of random selection occurs 
in Of the Nature and Use of Lots: A Treatise Historical and Theological by 
Thomas Gataker, a sixteenth-century English scholar and divine, first 
published in London in 1616 (second edition, here cited, published in 
1627). Gataker considered a great number of historical examples of the 
use of lots in the Old and New Testaments (e.g., the selection of a suc- 
cessor to the apostle Judas, Acts 1:23-26); in the assignment of priest- 
hoods and public offices in Greece; in Hebrew, Greek, Roman, and oth- 
er legal practice; and the like. He defined a “lot” as an “event merely 
casual purposely applied to the deciding of some doubt” (p. 9), “casual 
events” being “such as might all out in like sort diversely, and are not de- 
termined by any art, foresight, forecast, counsell, or skill of those that 
either act them, or make use of them” (p. 14). Quoting with approval 
the dictum that “chance is founded, and dependeth upon Man’s igno- 
rance [fortuna in ignorantia nostra fundatur]” (p. 37), Gataker criticized 

65. Essais, bk. 2, chap. 14; cited from John Florio’s translation (Everyman’s Library 
edition, bk. 2, p. 333). 

66. Compare Leibniz’s “petites perceptions.” 

67. Essais, bk. 2, chap. 14. 

Choice without Preference 25 

the view that “a Lot discovereth to men God’s hidden will” (p. 25), and 
argued that “Lots are not to be used in [a] question of Fact past and 
gone ... for that is no ordinarie Lot able to decide; but where some 
question is who has the right to a thing; in which case, notwithstanding 
the Lot is not used to determine who in truth hath right to it, but who 
for peace and quietnesse sake shall enjoy it” (p. 148). Gataker insisted 
that “concerning the matter or businesses wherein Lots may lawfully be 
used, the rule of Caution in general is this, that Lots are to be used in 
things indifferent onely” (p. 125), for: 

... many good things there are that may at sometime be done, where of a man 
may make chose whether of them hee will doe, being not necessarily tied unto, 
or enjoyned any one of them: As for a student having divers bookes about him 
in his study, it is indifferent to choose one, this or that, refusing the rest, for 
present employment, there being no speciall occasion to urge the use of one 
more than another: Or for a man that carrieth a pair of knives about him, it is 
indifferent to draw and use either when occasion requireth (as Plutarch says, de 
Stoic, contradict.). (p. 128) 

Gataker’s distinguished clerical career was brought into jeopardy by 
accusations of favoring games of chance, growing out of his defense of 
the use of lots. He has the distinction of being the first to suggest the 
employment of random-selection devices as a means of resolving the 
problem of indifferent choice in public policy situations where some 
preferential selection is desirable “for peace and quietnesse sake.” 

Spinoza (1632-1677) 

The problem of choice without preference was taken up by Benedict 
de Spinoza as a source of possible objection to determinism. If two ob- 
jects of choice are essentially identical (so that there is no difference in 
the relevant causal factors militating for selection of one vis-a-vis the 
other), and it is granted that a selection of one of them is possible, 
would this not reveal a rift in the framework of causal determinism? If 
choice in situations of indifference were accepted as possible, would 
this not concede the operation of a free will capable of supplementing 
causal determinations in such cases, and thus possibly even supplanting 
them in others? 

68. This argument underlies use of the phrase “liberty of indifference,” regarding 
which Dugald Stewart writes: “The phrase Liberty of Indifference, . . . has been so frequently 
substituted . . . for the older, simpler, and much more intelligible phrase of Free-will. . . . It 
certainly conveys but a very inadequate notion of the thing meant;—the power, to wit, of 
choice or election; and that not only among things indifferent, but (a fortiori) between right 
and wrong, good and evil” (Active and Moral Powers, Appendix on Free Agency, iii). Insis- 
tence on the important of indifference of will for free (and thus morally responsible) action 

26 Choice without Preference 

It may be objected that if a man does not act from freedom of the will, what 
would he do if he were in a state of equilibrium, like the ass of Buridanus? Would 
he not perish from hunger and thirst? and if this be granted, do we not conceive 
him as a statue of a man or an ass [i.e., rather than as a real human being or ani- 
mal]? If I deny that he would thus perish, he will consequently determine him- 
self and possess the power of going where he likes and doing what he likes.°® 

Spinoza’s imagined opponent here presses the determinist with the ob- 
jection that surely a real agent would not rest inactive in a case of choice 
under conditions of equilibrium or stalemate among opposing determi- 
nations. Spinoza, undaunted by the objection, maintained that—howev- 
er unreasonable such inactivity might seem—it is just precisely what 
would actually have to happen: 

With regard to the objection, I say that I entirely grant that if a man were placed 
in such a state of equilibrium he would perish of hunger and thirst, supposing 
he perceived nothing but hunger and thirst, and the food and drink were equi- 
distant from him. If you ask me whether such a man would not be thought as 
ass rather than a man, I reply that I do not know; nor do I know what ought to 
be thought of a man who hangs himself, or of children, fools and madmen.” 

In Spinoza’s discussion, then, the problem of Buridan’s Ass recurs in 
its Thomistic setting, in the context of the free-will issue. With Aquinas, 
however, the example served as part of an (ultimately rejected) argu- 
ment against freedom of the will, while with Spinoza it becomes part of an 
(ultimately rejected) objection to a thorough-going determinism with respect 
to the choices of responsible agents.’! For Spinoza makes short shrift of 

goes back to Duns Scotus; see C. R. S. Harris, Duns Scotus (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 
1927), vol. 2, p. 309. 

69. Spinoza, Ethics, vol. 2, final Scholion, quoted from the translation of W. H. White 
and A. H. Stirling (Oxford, U.K.: University of Oxford Press, 1927). This passage does not 
show Spinoza at his best, since it naively depicts determinism as incompatible with “the 
power of going where [one] likes and doing what [one] likes.” Leibniz agrees with Spin- 
oza in opposition to those who hold that the locus of human liberty of will is to be sought 
in situations of indifference of choice: “We [can] become as it were masters of ourselves, 
and make ourselves think and do at the time as we should wish to will and as reason com- 
mands. But it is always through determined paths, and never without a reason, or by means 
of the imaginary principle of perfect indifference or equilibrium. ... I here say without a 
reason to mean without the opposition of other inclinations, or without being in advance 
disposed to turn aside the mind, or without any other means equally explicable. To assert 
otherwise is to revert to the chimerical, as in the empty faculties or occult qualities of the 
scholastics, in which there is neither rhyme nor reason” (New Essays, II, xxi, 47; my transla- 
tion largely follows that of A. G. Langley [LaSalle, IIl.: Open Court, various dates]). 

70. Spinoza, Ethics, vol. 2, final Scholion. “There are more things in heaven and earth, 
Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” Spinoza seemingly has the rare candor 
to admit this with respect to his own system. 

71. Note that in both instances the example is used in support of positions that the au- 
thors are endeavoring to rebut (though with contrary positions to be sure). It is interest- 
ing that the example so often occurs in this manner. 

Choice without Preference 27 

the objection, by insisting that where opposing motivations are actually 
in strict equilibrium, inaction is the only arguable result. Like Leibniz 
after him, Spinoza was willing to push the principle of sufficient reason 
to its logical conclusion. 

Leibniz (1646-1717) 
Leibniz wrote: 

We [humans] are so determined as to choose with the preponderance of rea- 
sons or grounds. . . And it is just here that our action is voluntary, for otherwise 
it is not deliberate. Thus while these determinations do not strictly speaking ne- 
cessitate, they do not fail to incline. And we will always adopt that choice where 
there is greater inclination or disposition. For the situation of a perfect indiffer- 
ence—as with the ass of Buridan, dying between two bales—is something imagi- 
nary, because a perfect equality on two sides is never to be found.” 

Two sorts of circumstances would characterize situations of symmet- 
ric choice, namely, when 

e there is no difference between the choice alternatives 
and when: 
¢ there is no known difference between the choice alternatives 

The former issue of actual (ontological) indiscernibility is one thing, 
and the second issue of cognitive (epistemic) indiscernment is another. 
As we have just seen, Leibniz holds that the former situation cannot 
arise (thanks to the Identity of Indiscernibles). Yet the imperfect condi- 
tion of humans seems to leave the second case open. However, Leibniz 
proposes to shut the door on it as well. 

The ass of Buridan is immobilized in the setting of Leibniz’s philoso- 
phy because on Leibnizian principles there must be a sufficient reason for 
all occurrences, and this condition would be violated in the example. 
Thus in his third letter to Clarke, Leibniz writes: 

My axiom has not been fully understood, and .. . the author [i.e., Clarke] while 
seeming to grant it, has really denied it. “It is true,” he says, “that nothing exists 
without a sufficient reason why it is, and why it is thus rather than otherwise,” 
but he adds that this sufficient reason is often the simple or mere will of God... . 
But this is simply maintaining that God wills something without there being a 
sufficient reason for his will, contrary to the axiom... . This is to relapse into 

72. Gaston Grua, G. W. Leibniz: Textes inédits (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
1948), p. 479. 

28 Choice without Preference 

the loose indifference which I have amply refuted [in the Theodicy] and which I 
have shown to be absolutely chimerical, even in created beings. . . . 

However, Leibniz’s Principle of Sufficient Reason would not sen- 
tence Buridan’s poor animal to death, for a way out of the impasse is 
made possible by his concept of petites perceptions, infinitesimal psychic 
occurrences beneath the threshold of any conscious awareness, which 
can act as imperceptible motivations in effecting a choice. 

All our unpremeditated actions are the result of a concurrence of petites percep- 
tions, and even our habits and our passions, which so much influence our [con- 
scious] deliberations, come therefrom. . . . I have already remarked that he who 
would deny these effects in the sphere of morals, would imitate those ill taught 
persons who deny insensible corpuscles in physics. And yet, I see that among 
those who discuss freedom of the will there are some who, taking no notice of 
these unperceived impressions which are capable of inclining the balance, 
imagine an entire indifference in moral actions, like that of the ass of Buridan 
equally torn between two meadows.”4 

And again, in the Theodicy, Leibniz writes: 

There is never any indifference of equipoise, that is [situations of choice] where all 
is completely even on both sides, without any inclination towards either. . . . By 
this false idea of an indifference of equipose the Molinists were much embar- 
rassed. They were asked not only how it was possible to know in what direction a 
cause absolutely indeterminate would be determined, but also how it was possi- 
ble that there should finally result therefrom a determination for which there is 
no source. To say with Molina that there is the priviledge of the free cause is to 
say nothing. .. . In consequence of this, the case also of Buridan’s ass between 
two meadows, impelled equally towards each of them, is a fiction that cannot oc- 
cur in the universe, in the order of Nature, although M. Bayle may be of anoth- 
er opinion. ... For the universe cannot be halved by a plane through the mid- 
dle of the ass, which is cut vertically through its length, so that all is equal and 
alike on both sides. .. . Neither the parts of the universe nor the viscera of the 
animal are alike nor are they evenly placed on both sides of this vertical plane. 
There will therefore always be many things in the ass and outside the ass, al- 
though they may not be apparent to us, which will determine him to go to one 
side rather than the other. And although man is free, and the ass is not, never- 
theless for the same reason it must be true that in man likewise the case of a 
perfect equipoise between two courses is impossible.” 

The crux is that a situation of perfectly indifferent alternatives simply 
cannot arise: 

73. §7 of the Third Letter to Clarke. 

74. G. W. Leibniz, New Essays, II, i, 15. My translation follows that of A. G. Langley (La 
Salle, Ill.: Open Court, various dates). 

75. G. W. Leibniz, Theodicy, §§46-49; I quote the translation by Austin Farrer (New 

Choice without Preference 29 

M. Bayle, subtle though he was, has not considered the matter sufficiently, for 
he believed a situation such as that of Buridan’s Ass to be possible, and thought 
that a man placed in a condition of perfect equilibrium could nevertheless 
choose. But it must be said that a situation of perfect equilibrium is a mere 
chimera that cannot arise, the universe not admitting being divided or cut into 
two equal and entirely similar parts. The universe in not like an ellipse or simi- 
lar oval which a straight line drawn through the center can cut into two congru- 
ent parts. The universe has no center and its parts vary infinitely, so that there 
will never be a circumstance where different parts are perfectly alike and make 
the same impression. And even though we cannot always consciously preserve 
all the minute impressions that conspire to determine our will, there will in fact 
always be something to decide us between two alternatives, and the situation 
will never be one of perfect equivalence between them. 

C’est ce que M. Bayle tout subtil qu’il a esté n’a pas assez consideré lorsqu il 
a cra qu’un cas semblable a celuy de I’Ane de Buridan, fut possible, et que 
homme posé dans des circonstances d’un parfait equilibre pourroit neant- 
moins choisir. Car il faut dire que le cas d’un parfait equilibre est chimer- 
ique, et n’arrive jamais, l’univers ne pouvant point ester ny parti ny coupé en 
deux parties egales et semblables. L’univers n’est pas comme une Ellipse ou 
autre telle Ovale, que la ligne droile menée par son centre peut couper en 
deux parties congruentes. L’univers n’a point de centre, et ses parties sont 
infiniment variées; ainsi jamais le cas arrivera, ou tout sera parfaitement egal 
et frappera egalement de part et d’autre; et quoyque nous ne soyons pas tou- 
sjours capables de nous appercevoir de toutes les petites impressions qui 
contribuent a nous determiner, il y a tousjours quelque chose qui nous de- 
termine entre deux contradictorires, sans que le cas soit jamais parfaitement 
egal d’un part et d’autre.” 

Thus Leibniz’s position is neatly summarized in his correspondence 
with Clarke: 

In things which are absolutely indifferent there can be no choice and conse- 
quently no election or will, since choice must have some reason or principle.” 
To say that the mind may have good reasons for acting when it has no motives, 
and when things are absolutely indifferent . . . isa manifest contradiction. For if 
there are good reasons for the course it adopts, the things are not indifferent to 
it.” 

Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1932). Cf. also §§302 ff. for Leibniz’s critique of 
Bayle’s discussion of indifference of choice. 

76. Letter to Pierre Coste of 19 December 1707 (G. P. III, p. 403). 

77. §1 of Leibniz’s fourth letter. 

78. §16 of Leibniz’s fifth letter. Cf. also the following passage: “There is indifference, 
when there is no more reason for one than for the other. The opposite is 
determination. . . . All actions are determined, and never indifferent. For there is always a 
reason inclining us to one rather than the other, since nothing happens without a rea- 
son. ...A liberty of indifference is impossible. So it cannot be found anywhere, not even 
in God. For God is self-determined to do always the best. And creatures are always deter- 

30 Choice without Preference 

Leibniz’s solution can be viewed as acceptable only if it is conceded 
that there are always bound to be actually present factors (possibly un- 
noticed) which “incline the balance” between the objects of choice. But 
what if this is not conceded, and the hypothesis of a thoroughgoing sim- 
ilarity of these objects is strictly insisted on? To avert this line of attack, 
Leibniz would fall back on his Principle of the Identity of Indis- 
cernibles, according to which no two distinct objects can be strictly com- 
parable in the requisite manner.” But this is another topic, and a large 
one, lying beyond the realm of present discussion. 

Wolff (1679-1754) 

In his Psychologia Empirvica, Christian Wolff gives as a concrete illustra- 
tion of choice without preference the example of selection of an indi- 
vidual from a species to provide a specimen to serve as a typical repre- 
sentative for scientific study: 

If we neither desire nor are repelled by a know object, we are said to be indiffer- 
ent to it, and the state of mind towards an object thus indifferently considered is 
called a state of indifference. The existence of such states of indifference is attest- 
ed by experience. For example, some one sees many small stones by a riverside, 
and regards them without either desire or dislike. He takes some of them up in 
his hand, to study them more closely, and then throws them away, having want- 
ed them solely for the purposes of examination, without singling out these as 
preferable to the others, and returning to a state of indifference among them 
from his examination of the particular specimen.®? 

Wolff rightly appreciates that feature indistinguishability is not a prereq- 
uisite for evaluative equivalency. 

Reid (1710-1796) 

One of the principal interpretations that has been placed upon the 
example of Buridan’s Ass is that an equilibrium of contrary determin- 
ing motives must, if equal in strength, result in inaction. Such reason- 
ing, according to Thomas Reid, rests upon a spurious analogy: 

mined by internal or external reasons.” From G. W. Leibniz, Philosophische Schriften, ed. by 
C. I. Gerhardt, vol. 7 (Berlin: Werdmann, 1890), p. 109; quoted by B. Russell in A Critical 
Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1900), 
PP- 193-94. 

79. Cf. §§49, 304, and 307 of the Théodicée. 

80. Christian Wolff, Psychologia Empirica, §585; my translation. 

Choice without Preference 31 

Some philosophers . . . say, that, as the balance cannot incline to one side more 
than the other when the opposite weights are equal, so a man cannot possibly 
determine himself if the motives on both hands are equal: and, as the balance 
must necessarily turn to that side which has the most weight, so the man must 
necessarily be determined to that hand where the motive is strongest. And on 
this foundation some of the schoolmen maintained that, if a hungry ass were 
placed between two bundles of hay equally inviting, the beast must stand still 
and starve to death, bring unable to turn to either, because there are equal mo- 
tives to both. This is an instance of that analogical reasoning which I conceive 
ought never to be trusted. ... The argument is no better than this—that, be- 
cause a dead animal moves only as it is pushed, and, if pushed with equal force 
in contrary directions, must remain at rest; therefore the same thing must hap- 
pen to a living animal; for, surely, the similitude between a dead animal and a 
living, is as great as that between a beast and a man.*! 

Reid rightly perceived the conceptual origin of the problem in a physi- 
cal analogy—an analogy that he regarded as altogether invalid. 

In Reid’s discussion, the example of Buridan’s Ass is treated as a pil- 
lar of support for a theory of psychodynamics, denied by Reid, which 
has it that actzon must take place in a manner proportionate with motiva- 
tion. And he treated the putative invalidity of the supporting scale/will 
analogy as destroying the case for this thesis: 

Cases frequently occur, in which an end that is of some importance, may be an- 
swered equally well by any one of several different means. In such cases, a man 
who intends the end finds not the least difficulty in taking one of these means, 
though he be firmly persuaded that it has no title to be preferred to any of the 
others. To say that this is a case that cannot happen, is to contradict the experi- 
ence of mankind; for surely a man who has occasion to lay out a shilling or a 
guinea, may have two hundred that are of equal value, both to the giver and to 
the receiver, any one of which will answer his purpose equally well. To say, that, 
if such a case should happen the man could not execute his purpose, is still 
more ridiculous, though it may have the authority of some of the schoolmen, 
who determined that the ass, between two equal bundles of hay would stand still 
till it died of hunger.* 

Reid overlooks the fact that various Schoolmen are entirely in agree- 
ment with his own position and deny choice resolution to brutes pre- 
cisely to emphasize its possession by humans. 

81. Thomas Reid, On the Intellectual Powers, vol. 1, p. 4; Reid’s Works, ed. Hamilton, p. 
238, of the seventh, eighth, and possibly other editions. 

82. Thomas Reid, On the Active Powers, bk. 4, p. 4; Reid’s Works, ed. Hamilton, bk. 2, p. 
609. 

32 Choice without Preference 

Kant (1724-1804) 

Immanuel Kant nowhere discusses the problem of Buridan’s Ass ex- 
plicitly, but it is implicitly present in a behind-the-scenes way in this dis- 
cussion of will and of the freedom of the will. Kant characterized will as 
of itself a causal agency: 

The willis a kind of causality belonging to living things in so far as they are ra- 
tional, and freedom would be this property of such causality that it can be effi- 
cient, independently of foreign causes determining it; just as physical necessity is 
the property that the causality of all irrational beings has of being determined 
to activity by the influence of foreign causes.*% 

Kant distinguished between (1) the Rational Will, which urges those 
principles of duty that reasonableness lays upon men, stipulating objec- 
tively and unconditionally how they ought to act, and (2) the Elective 
Will that is operative in making our strictly subjective day-to-day choices. 
Regarding these modes of will, Kant wrote: 

Laws proceed from the Rational Will; maxims from the Elective Will. The latter 
is in man a free Elective Will. The Rational Will, which is directed to nothing 
but the [moral] law alone, cannot be called either free or unfree, because it is 
not directed to actions, but immediately to the legislation for the maxims of ac- 
tions. . .. Consequently it [the Rational Will] is absolutely necessary, and is even 
incapable of constraint. It is therefore only the Elective Will that can be called 
free®4 

The “freedom” of the Elective Will resides in that its choice is only 
conditioned, and not wholly determined, for an individual by sensuous 
presentations relating to the objects of choice: “[The free Elective Will] 
is one which is affected, but not determined by impulses. . . . The freedom of 
the Elective Will just is that independence of its determination on sensi- 
ble impulses.”®° 

This concept of the will as a spontaneous causative agency forms the 
background of Kant’s presentation of the paradox of freedom in the 
third antinomy of pure reason: 

Thesis: To explain . . . appearances it is necessary to assume that there is also an- 
other causality, that of freedom. 

83. Immanuel Kant, Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals, vol. 3, trans. T. K. 
Abbott, in Kant’s Theory of Ethics (London, 1873), p. 65 of third (1883) and subsequent 
editions. 

84. Immanuel Kant, Introduction to the Metaphysic of Morals, vol. 4; Abbott, trans., Kant’s 
Theory of Ethics, vol. 1, p. 282. 

85. Ibid., vol. 1, p. 268. 

Choice without Preference 33 

Proof: ...We must... assume a causality through which something takes place, 
the cause of which is not itself determined, in accordance with necessary laws, 
by another cause antecedent to it, that is to say, an absolute spontaneity of the 
cause, whereby a series of appearances, which proceeds in accordance with laws 
of nature, begins of dself. . . . 

Antithesis: There is no freedom; everything in the world takes place solely in ac- 
cordance with laws of nature. 

Proof: Assume that there is freedom in the transcendental sense, as a special 
kind of causality in accordance with which the events in the world can have 
come about, . . . it then follows that not only will a series have its absolute begin- 
ning in this spontaneity, but that the very determination of this spontaneity to 
originate the series, that is to say, the causality itself, will have an absolute begin- 
ning; there will be no antecedent through which this act, in taking place, is de- 
termined in accordance with fixed laws.... Transcendental freedom thus 
stands opposed to the law of causality; and the kind of connection which it as- 
sumes as holding between the successive states of the active causes renders all 
unity of experience impossible. It is not to be met with in any experience, and is 
therefore an empty thought-entity.*® 

Since freedom of the will involves such an antinomy, its status on Kant- 
ian principles must be that of a postulate of practical reason. 

The freedom of the Elective Will from complete determination by its 
sensuous materials is the distinguishing characteristic of human as op- 
posed to animal will: 

Freedom in the practical sense is the will’s independence of coercion through 
sensible impulses, for a will is sensuous insofar as it is pathologically affected, i.e., 
by sensuous motives; it is animal (arbitrium brutum) if it can be pathologically ne- 
cessitated. The human will is certainly an arbitrium sensitivum, not, however, bru- 
tum, but liberum. For sensibility does not necessitate its action. There is in mana 
power of self-determination, independently of any coercion through sensuous 
impulses.®” 

Thus Kant returns to Buridan’s own position that humans, unlike don- 
keys, would be able to resolve Buridan-type choice situations. 

Kant’s discussion of the will and its nature thus derives all of its key 
constituent elements from the historical contexts of the problem of 
choice without preference: 

1. The nature of will as a faculty capable of playing a causal role in sit- 
uations of choice (Ghazali, etc.). 

86. Immanuel Kant, The Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N. K. Smith (London: Macmil- 

lan, 1929), pp. 409-11. 
87. Ibid. “The Antinomy of Pure Reason, Appendix III,” p. 465. 

34 Choice without Preference 

2. The concept of freedom of the will as involving a lack of complete 
dependence on the nature of its objects (Ghazali, Aquinas, and the mere 
will tradition). 

3. Absence of determination by its objects as the essential difference 
between animal and human will (Buridan). 

Schopenhauer (1788-1860) 

The problem of Buridan’s Ass was adduced by Arthur Schopenhauer 
as providing conclusive demonstration of the absurdity of the free-will 
doctrine. 

The really profound philosophers of all ages—however diverse their views in 
other respects—have agreed in asserting the necessity of acts of will in accor- 
dance with their motives, and have united in rejecting the Lberum arbitrium. The 
incalculably preponderant majority of men, incapable of real thought and ruled 
by appearances and by prejudice, has at all times stubbornly resisted this truth. 
Philosophers have therefore been at pains to express it in the most pointed and 
even exaggerated terms. The most familiar of these devices is the famous Ass of 
Buridan, for which one has not been vainly searching in his writing for some 
hundred years. . . .8° 

Schopenhauer thus maintains that the problem of Buridan’s Ass re- 
veals the untenability of the thesis of freedom of the will in showing that 
a selection unconditioned by determining factors is indefensible, in- 
deed, inconceivable. 

While the problem context of the puzzle of choice without prefer- 
ence is here again provided by its ancient setting of determinism versus 
free will, nevertheless, Schopenhauer’s particular way of using the prob- 
lem—as though it gave a plain and incontestable proof of the absurdity 
of free will—seems to have originated with himself (his claim to the 
contrary notwithstanding). 

Augustus de Morgan (1806-1871) 

It is fitting that our ancient paradox is the starting point of Augustus 
de Morgan’s Budget of Paradoxes. Here we read: 

Buridan was for free-will—that is, will which determines conduct, let motives be 
ever so evenly balanced. An ass is equally pressed by hunger and by thirst; a bun- 
dle of hay is on one side, a pail of water on the other. Surely, you will say, he will 
not be ass enough to die for want of food or drink; he will then make a choice— 

88. Arthur Schopenhauer, Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will, p. 58 of the original edi- 
tion; my translation. 

Choice without Preference 35 

that is, will choose between alternatives of equal force. The problem became fa- 
mous in the schools; some allowed the poor donkey to die of indecision; some 
denied the possibility of the balance, which was no answer at all. The following 
question is more difficult, and involves free-will to all who answer—“Which you 
please.” If the northern hemisphere were land, and all the southern hemi- 
sphere water, ought we to call the northern hemisphere an island, or the south- 
ern hemisphere a lake? Both the questions would be good exercises for para- 
doxers.... 

What we have in this somewhat different but hindered case is also a bal- 
ance of reasons via a symmetry of arguments. 

Lewis Carrol (1832-1898) 

In view of the venerable history of our problem, it is not at all surpris- 
ing that it also has received the (perhaps dubious) honor of humorous 
treatment. In Alice in Wonderland and in Through the Looking Glass, Lewis 
Carroll delights to poke fun at various old and respected pieces of 
equipment in the logician’s arsenal. The problem of Buridan’s Ass is up 
for consideration in the episode of Tweedledum and Tweedledee. 

They were standing under a tree, each with an arm around the other’s neck, 
and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them had “Dum” 
embroidered on his collar, and the other “Dee.” “I suppose they’ve each got 
“Tweedle’ round at the back of the collar,” she said to herself... . “I know what 
you're thinking about,” said Tweedledum; “but it isn’t so, nohow.” “Contrari- 
wise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it was so, it might be: and if it were so, it would 
be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.” . . . Alice did not like shaking hands with 
either of them first, for fear of hurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the best 
way out of the difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment 
they were dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered 
afterwards). . . .89 

With Rabelais, it is the ludicrous side of the puzzle that appealed to 
Lewis Carrol. 

Frank R. Stockton (1854-1902) 

Yet another literary employment of the idea of choice without prefer- 
ence is its role in providing the basis for the plot of Frank R. Stockton’s 
intriguing short story “The Lady, or the Tiger?” 

89. Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass, chap. 4. In an episode of the television sci- 
ence-fiction series Star-Trek broadcast in January 1969, the villain transforms himself into 
a duplicate of the hero, confronting the latter’s collaborators with a vexatious puzzle. 

36 Choice without Preference 

When a subject [of this mythical monarch] was accused of a crime of sufficient 
importance to interest the King, public notice was given that on an appointed 
day the fate of the accused person would be decided in the King’s arena.... 
[W]hen all the people had assembled in the galleries, and the King, surround- 
ed by his court, sat high up on his throne of royal state on one side of the arena, 
he gave a signal, a door beneath him opened, and the accused subject stepped 
out into the amphitheatre. Directly opposite him, on the other side of the en- 
closed space, were two doors, exactly alike and side by side. It was the duty and 
the privilege of the person on trial, to walk directly towards these doors and 
open one of them. He could open either door he pleased: he was subject to no 
guidance or influence. . . . If he opened the one, there came out of it a hungry 
tiger, the fiercest and most cruel that could be procured, which immediately 
sprang upon him and tore him to pieces as a punishment for all his guilt... . 
But, if the accused person opened the other door, there came forth from it a 
lady, the most suitable for his years and station that his majesty could select 
among his fair subjects; and to this lady he was immediately married, as a re- 
ward of his innocence. . . . This was the King’s semi-barbaric method of admin- 
istering justice. Its perfect fairness is obvious. The criminal could not know out 
of which door would come the lady: he opened either he pleased, without hav- 
ing the slightest idea whether, in the next instant, he was to be devoured or 
married.°” 

The choice of the accused, however conditioned by a preference as 
to ultimate results, is most clearly made without any preference between 
the doors that are the immediate objects of choice. Here it is in fact ig- 
norance that creates a symmetry of arguments; the objects are different 
enough but what we lack is differentiating information. 

Perhaps this lighter note marks a good point for concluding this sur- 
vey of the historical highlights of the problem of choice without prefer- 
ence. But please do not think, dear Reader, that that’s all there is to it. 
For it would be a grave mistake to pretend to completeness. As a quick 
look at a search engine from the World Wide Web such as Google indi- 
cates, Buridan’s Ass has been trotted out hundreds of times in the past 
few years by writers on all sorts of topics for all sorts of purposes. But 
sapienti sat. 

3. A DOCTRINAL PERSPECTIVE 

The problem of the Buridan’s Ass perplex lies in the consideration 
that either alternative choice is preferable to inaction, but neither is 
preferable to the other. The dialectical setting for the Buridan’s Ass per- 

go. Frank R. Stockton, Lady, Or the Tiger? and Other Stories (New York: C. Scribner’s 
Sons, 1884). 

Choice without Preference 37 

plex is thus set by the following aporetic group of individually plausible 
but collectively inconsistent propositions: 

1. Rational choice requires preference: where there is no deter- 
minable preferability, a reasoned choice becomes impossible. 

2. In Buridan’s Ass-style cases there just is no room for preference. 

3.In the Buridan’s Ass-style cases choice is mandatory: refraining 
from choice is not a rationally available alternative. 
Given that propositions 2 and 9 are simply “facts of life,” the inevitable 
upshot seems to be that proposition 1 must be rejected. And the ques- 
tion, of course, now becomes: Is it the case that a rational creature will 
act only where a reasoned choice of courses of action is possible? 

The doctrinal context of the Buridan’s Ass problem is set by the So- 
cratic contention that intelligent beings act sub ratione boni, shaping 
their actions in line with their judgment of what is for the best. The 
problem then is: What happens when action is clearly necessary and yet 
there just is no distinguishable best? 

As Display 1 indicates, the situation as regards the will’s capacity to 
break an evaluative tie as envisioned by reason admits of four alterna- 
tives once we grant that in matters of choice a sapient being can do 
everything a beast can, and God can do anything that an intelligent 
creature can manage: these alternative doctrinal positions range from a 
1-style across-the-board attribution of liberty of indifference to a 4-style 
across-the-board denial thereof. To all appearances, none of the Chris- 
tian medievals took a 1-style position: “Even a dumb beast would not be 
so foolish as to starve.” Most held a 2-style position that contrasted hu- 
mans and brutes. However, the Arabic theologians generally favored 3 
because they equated free choice with creation ex nihilo and saw this 
power as belonging to God alone, strictly speaking.®! Moreover, those 
thinkers who held a 4-style position—such as Averroes, Aquinas, Buri- 
dan, and Leibniz—did so by way of holding that Buridan-type situations 
of total equivalency just cannot arise either because this is inherently 
impossible (Leibniz) or because the intellect will always impose some 
preference, being able to differentiate through its own resources even 
where there is no difference in the objects of choice. 

And here the Buridan’s Ass example lends itself to three realizations, 
as follows: 

A. Even a mere beast (an unintelligent being) would break the tie. 
Therefore an intelligent agent like man certainly would. 

g1. On this issue, see David B. Burrell, “Al Ghazali on Created Freedom,” American 
Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 73, (1999): 135-57- 

38 Choice without Preference 

DISPLAY 1. Able To Tiebreak? 

Beast Man God Supporters 
(a) + + + None among the historic figures 
(2) - + + Al- Ghazali, The Franciscans, (Buridan, Olivi, 
Scotus) 
(3) - - + Arabic Muctazilites 
(4) - - - Averroes, Aquinas, Buridan, Leibniz 

B. An intelligent being like man would certainly break the tie, al- 
though a mere brute, lacking intelligence, would not and could not do 
so. 

C. Since the human will is subject to the intellect, man would be un- 
able to break the tie. Only the omnipotent will of God could break the 
tie. 

While moderns may incline to rendering A, none of the premodern dis- 
cussants did so. The medievals saw mere animals as lacking the intelli- 
gence that is required here. Thus in the Christian tradition most discus- 
sants favored rendering B. However, in the Islamic tradition (followed 
only by a few of the Christian Scholastics) there were various exponents 
of rendering C. As these C-theorists saw it, a will that refuses to subordi- 
nate itself to the rulings of intellect was not a weak will (in the tradition 
of Aristotelian akrasia) but rather a strong, powerful, autonomously in- 
dependent will. 

It is clear that in this context, Buridan’s Ass-style examples afford a 
double-edged sword that could be used to illustrate and support various 
rather different doctrinal positions. But let us now turn to a substantive 
analysis of the Buridan’s Ass puzzle problem and its resolution. 

4. CHOICE IN THE ABSENCE OF PREFERENCE 

The leading idea that underlies the sensible resolution of the Buri- 
dan’s choice perplex inheres in the similarity of logical structure be- 
tween (1) the problem of choice in the case of symmetry of knowledge, 
and (2) the problem of choice in the case of symmetry of preference. To 
establish the kinship that obtains here, let us first examine the problem 
of choice with symmetric knowledge. 

Consider the following example, a simple variant of Frank Stockton’s 
problem of the lady and the tiger: a person is offered a choice between 
two similar boxes. He is told only that one box contains some prize, and 

Choice without Preference 39 

that the other is empty. He is not told which is which. Here there is no 
problem of absence of preference: the person has a clear preference for 
the treasure-box. The only lack is one of information—the choice is to be 
made in the face of the absence of any clue as to the zdentity of this treas- 
ure-box. While they may differ in other ways (e.g., color or size), with 
regard to the crucial question—“Which box is empty and which one 
holds the prize?”—the available information about the boxes is com- 
pletely symmetric. 

This example, then, is an instance of the problem of choice under 
conditions of symmetric information with respect to a particular prefer- 
ential issue. How, in such cases, can a reasonable person go about making 
a rationally defensible choice? 

The sensible answer to this question is in fact simple, well known, 
and uncontroversial. For consider the example of the boxes. By the hy- 
pothesis that defines the problem, there is no item of information at 
the disposal of the chooser that could be embraced by him as a reason 
for selecting one box rather than the other. This person therefore sim- 
ply cannot reasonably incline toward one box vis-a-vis the other. And this 
fact of itself must accordingly characterize the manner of his choice. In 
short, if rational, he must make his selection in a manner that does not 
favor one box over against the other: he must make his selection in a 
random manner. 

This is a matter susceptible of reasoned demonstration. Assume that 
the boxes are labeled A and B. Given that (by hypothesis) the choice of 
one box produces a result preferable to the rejection of both, the fol- 
lowing three courses of action remain available and are mutually exclu- 
sive and exhaustive: 

1. To make the choice in some manner that favors selection of Box A 
rather than Box B. 

2. To make the choice in some manner that favors selection of Box B 
rather than Box A. 

3. To make the choice by means of a selection process that is wholly 
impartial as between Box A and Box B, that is, to choose randomly. 

Observe, to begin with, that probabilistic considerations as to expect- 
ed gain do not enter in at all—on the basis of the available information 
it is equally probable that Box A holds the treasure as Box B, so that the 
expected gain with any of the three procedures (1, 2, or 3) is precisely 
the same, namely, one-half the value of the treasure. Thus on the sole 
grounds of expected gain there is no difference among these alterna- 
tives. But from the standpoint of reasonableness there is a very significant 
difference among the selection procedures. For by the defining hypoth- 

40 Choice without Preference 

esis of the problem, there is no known reason for favoring Box A as 
against Box B, or conversely Box Bas against Box A. This very fact ren- 
ders it rationally indefensible to adopt 1 or 2. Per contra, this symmetry 
of knowledge of itself constitutes an entirely valid reason for adopting 3. This 
line of reasoning establishes the thesis—pivotal for present purposes— 
that: In the case of symmetric knowledge, random choice is the reasonable policy. 

It is be useful to note a corollary of this thesis. When such a problem 
of choice with symmetric information arises, there is no reason (by the 
very nature of the problem) why we ought not to regard the arrival order 
in which the choices are given in the formulation or situation of the 
problem as being purely adventitious, that is, as a random ordering. The 
following policy would thus be entirely reasonable and justified: whenev- 
er confronted with a choice in the face of symmetric knowledge, to se- 
lect that alternative that is the first®? to come to view. (Cf. the discussion 
of Simplicius given above.) Such a policy is defensible as entirely reason- 
able, since under usual circumstances the arrival order can be taken, by 
the defining hypothesis of the problem, to be a random ordering. 

It is important to note, however, that the matter of a policy of choice 
is very important in this context. When I make a choice among symmet- 
rically characterized alternatives, I can defend it, reasonably, by saying, 
“I chose the first mentioned (or the like) alternative, because I always 
choose the first-mentioned (etc.) in these cases.”*? But I cannot (reason- 
ably) defend the choice by saying, “I chose the first mentioned alterna- 
tive because this seemed to me to be the thing to do in this case, though 
heaven knows what I would do on other occasions.” 

The adequacy of such selection policies in the face of indifference 
based on “subjective convenience” (rather than on objective merit) is of 
fundamental importance because this alone averts an infinite regress of 
random selections in cases of indifferent choice. For if such choice had 
always to be made by a random device, the following regress would at 
once ensue: We are to choose between the indifferent alternatives A 
and B. We take a random instrument, say a coin, as means of resolution 
(since, by hypothesis, we must have actual recourse to a randomizing in- 
strument). We must now, however, choose between the alternatives: 

I. To associate heads with alternative A and tails with alternative B. 
II. To associate tails with alternative A and heads with alternative B. 

- Or “the last” or “the second” or “the penultimate,” etc. 
“Why?” Because this amounts to a random choice.” “Why do you choose random- 
ly” eBeeatee random choice is the only rationally defensible policy in such cases.’ 
(Why?—Reread the foregoing!) 

Choice without Preference 41 

It is at once obvious that this is itself an indifferent choice. Thus if the 
resolution of our initial indifferent choice between A and B requires use 
of a random device, we must first of all resolve another indifferent 
choice, that between the alternatives I and II, or their analogues. But 
now if this choice too must be effected by a random device, it is clear 
that we shall be faced with another analogous situation of indifferent 
choice, and so on ad infinitum. Only if we recognize that selections in 
the face of choice without preference can be effected on the basis of se- 
lection policies based on “convenience,” and do not invariably necessi- 
tate actual employment of actual random devices, can this infinite 
regress of random selections be circumvented. 

It should also be noted, however, that a systematic policy of choice 
such as, for example, invariable selection of the first-occurring alterna- 
tive is not a universally appropriate substitute for selection by actual out- 
right use of a random device or process. Consider, for example, the fol- 
lowing situation of choice. A (fair) coin is tossed. A tries to guess the 
outcome: heads or tails. B tries to guess A’s selection. If B guesses cor- 
rectly, he wins a penny from A, if incorrectly he pays a penny to him. 
How is A to chose his guesses? Clearly, it would be a poor proposition 
for A always to guess heads, even though he is in a position of total igno- 
rance and indifference with regard to the outcome of heads or tails. 
And the same holds true of any other program of choice, such as always 
guessing tails, or alternating, or the like. All of these run the risk that B 
can discern the guessing pattern involved, and then capitalize on this 
information. The only defensible course, in a situation such as this, is to 
have outright recourse to a random process or device. (This randomiz- 
ing instrument may, however, be the human mind, since people are pre- 
sumably capable of making arbitrary selections, with respect to which 
they can be adequately certain in their own mind that the choice was 
made haphazardly, and without any “reasons” whatsoever. To be sure, 
this process is open to the possible intrusion of unrecognized biases, 
but then so are physical randomizers such as coins. The randomness of 
any selection process is a matter which, in cases of importance, should 
be checked by empirical means.) 

Let us now turn from this discussion of choice in the face of symmet- 
ric knowledge to the problem of symmetric preference. It is clear upon 
careful consideration that the matter of choice without preference— 
that is, under conditions of symmetric preference—can actually be sub- 
sumed under the topic of symmetric knowledge as a special case. For in 
a case of strictly symmetric preference (two essentially similar dates, 
glasses of water, bales of hay, ears of corn, etc.), the knowledge or infor- 
mation at our disposal constrains us to regard the objects of choice as 

42 Choice without Preference 

Course of Action Reward 
(1) To select neither date 
for lack of a preference Nothing 
(2) To fix upon one of the dates One date procedure which 
by means of some selection favors one over the other 
(3) To select one of the dates at random One date 

equally desirable, because in the circumstances every possible reason 
for valuing one applies, mutatis nomine, to the other(s). So far as the fac- 
tor of their value or desirability for us is concerned, our knowledge re- 
garding each object is precisely the same.*t Problems of choice with 
symmetric valuation can therefore be regarded as simply a species with- 
in the symmetric knowledge genus owing to the equivalence of our rele- 
vant information in the symmetric value case. 

It thus follows that the device of random selection will also provide 
the means of resolution appropriate for symmetric preference choices. 
To test the correctness of this resolution, consider Ghazali’s example of 
a man who had the choice between two ostensibly identical dates. Logi- 
cally, there are three courses of action open to him, with the ensuing re- 
ward as indicated. 

It is clear that these three courses of action are mutually exclusive 
and exhaustive. But a reasonable person cannot opt for 1 because its as- 
sociated reward is of lesser value than that of its alternatives. Further, the 
defining hypothesis of the example—namely, that there is no known 
reason for preferring one date to the other—of itself constitutes a rea- 
son for rejecting 2. Random selection is the only means of avoiding fa- 
voring one alternative over the other. And just this constitutes a valid 
reason for adoption of 3. 

These considerations, then, serve to establish the proposition that: 
Random selection is the rationally appropriate procedure for making choices in 
the face of symmetric preference. The concept of random selection provides 
an answer to the problem of choice without preference which is demon- 
strably its only reasonable (i.e., rationally defensible) resolution. 

This proposed resolution of the problem of choice without prefer- 
ence is in fact substantially that which was first proposed by Gataker and 

94. It is clear, then, that this analysis does not apply in the case of the psychological 
dilemma of a balance among diverse motivations of equal force (e.g., hunger and thirst), 
but obtains solely with respect to the logical dilemma of choice among strictly comparable 
alternatives. 

Choice without Preference 43 

Bayle as a general means of solution—though in their case without any 
justifying discussion of the rationale establishing the validity of this solu- 
tion. Bayle based his suggestion on the fact that when the problem of 
choice without preference actually arises in real situations—in particu- 
lar, in the instance of court-precedence cases—resolution by chance se- 
lection is generally regarded as acceptable, and indeed has acquired the 
status of a customary official mode of resolution.” But of course custom 
conformity does not of itself constitute validation but at best supplies 
some empirical evidence in support of the reasonableness of the pro- 
posed resolution. 

5. A POSTSCRIPT ON PHILOSOPHICAL ISSUES 

In examining the substantive philosophical contexts in which the 
problem of choice without preference has figured, and for which it has 
been viewed as fundamentally relevant, our historical survey has brought 
the three following issues to the fore: 

1. Its Greek context in cosmological discussion of the Earth’s place in 
the physical universe (Anaximander, Plato, Aristotle). 

2. Its Scholastic context in ethico-theological discussion of man’s 
freedom of will (Aquinas, probably Buridan, and others). 

3. Its medieval Arabic context in epistemologico-theological discus- 
sion of the amenability of God’s choices to reason and to human ration- 
alization, that is, the possibility of explaining God’s actions in ways ac- 
ceptable to reasoning men (Ghazali, Averroes). 

The entire problem of a choice balanced among indifferent objects 
originates, historically and conceptually, in an analogy with physical 
equilibria, such as a body immobile under the pull of opposing forces 
(see Plato’s Phaedo 108 E, vice Anaximander), or a balance-bar at rest 
under the pressure of opposed, but equal weights (embodied in Axiom 
1 of Archimedes’ On Plane Equilibria). Here, the issues involved are not 
properly philosophical, and the definition of the example is still in its 
embryonic form, dealing either with mechanical equilibrium or with 

g5- According to a New York Times report (Monday, 12 January 1959, p. 6), “chance is 
the arbiter prescribed by Swedish law for breaking tie votes in Parliament.” The report 
states that “a drawing of lots may decide the fate of a controversial pension plan,” but goes 
on to observe that “legislation by lottery has never yet been necessary on any major issue.” 
Again, when Hawaii was admitted as the fiftieth state of the United States, and two new 
senators were elected, random devices were used by the Senate to decide which of the two 
new Hawaiian senators would have seniority (decision by a coin-toss), and which would 
serve the longer term (decision by card drawing). See the New York Times front-page re- 
port of 25 August 1959. 

44 Choice without Preference 

psychological balance among conflicting motivations of comparable 
strength. The problem has not yet reached its philosophically pertinent 
definition as one of selection among logically indifferent alternatives, 
which it achieved only in the Middle Ages. 

It is a common occurrence in the history of philosophical concepts 
that a purely scientific discovery or idea metamorphoses—through appli- 
cation to a novel setting in a more far-reaching context—into a matter of 
philosophical concern and significance. And just this happened with 
Aristotle’s psychological analogy in the present case. Only with the Aris- 
totelian commentators (in Islam, Ghazali and Averroes) did the philo- 
sophical problem of choice among strictly indifferent objects reach its 
ultimate logical formulation. Genetically, as already noted by Reid, the 
philosophic problem of choice without preference descends from a 
physical problem setting, deriving ultimately from analogy with mechan- 
ical equilibrium. 

With respect to the free-will context, it must be recognized that use 
of the Buridan example rests upon, and is inextricably embedded in, 
the Scholastic identification of cause and reason.°° Once we reject this 
identification, as indeed we must, the bearing of the example changes. 
For a situation of choice in which a preferring reason for a selection is 
absent need not now be one in which no cause (other than the agency 
of a “free will”) is operative in leading to choice. Thus outside the con- 
text of Scholastic presuppositions the example becomes incapable of es- 
tablishing the immobilization that it claims. 

It deserves stress that our problem serves also to highlight the differ- 
ence between reasons and motives. When a random selection among in- 
different objects is made by me, I do have a reason for my particular se- 
lection, namely, the fact that it was indicated to me by a random 
selector. But I have no preference or psychological motivation of other 
sorts to incline me to choose this item instead of its (by hypothesis in- 
different) alternatives. Such absence of psychological preference does 
not entail the impossibility of a logically justifiable selection. A choice 
can therefore be logically vindicated as having been made reasonably 
even though it cannot be traced back to any psychological foundation. 
In short, we can have reasons for a choice even where there is no motive 
for such a choice. 

We come down to the remaining context, the rationalizability of di- 
vine choice. Before entering upon a closer consideration of this matter, 
it is desirable first to take up some other preliminary observations. 

g6. Schopenhauer’s monograph on The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason 
provides an extended critique of this confusion of logical reason with real cause. 

Choice without Preference 45 

The solution presented in the foregoing section establishes the cen- 
tral role played by randomness in the theory of rational choice and deci- 
sion. A rational person must, by the very meaning of the term, fashion 
his belief and his action in tune with the evidence at his disposal. In sym- 
metric choice situations, therefore, in which the manifold of reasons— 
the available ramification—bears identically on every side, he must 
choose—as has been seen—in a random manner. In such cases, the 
“reasons” for his choice are independent of any distinguishing charac- 
teristic of the object of choice. Here, reasonable choice comes to be 
possible in the absence of preference only by essentially abdicating the 
right of choice by delegating the selection to a random process, seeing 
that there simply is no reasonably defensible way of actually “choosing” 
among alternatives in the face of symmetric knowledge. Where there is 
no basis for preferring, there can be no rational preference. We have ei- 
ther to hand the task of fixing upon a selection over to some random 
mechanism, by making it contingent upon the outcome of such a de- 
vice, or else we have to make our selection in accordance with the pre- 
script of some predetermined policy that we can defensibly construe as 
constituting a random selection process. (E.g., given the serial and se- 
quential nature of human consciousness, the governing rule could be: 
“Confronted by a choice situation with equivalent alternatives, choose 
the first that has come to view.”)%” 

In any case, in situations of this sort we can be said to have “made a 
choice’ purely by courtesy. It would be more rigorously correct to say that 
we have effected a selection—and that, of course, is the rational thing to 
do. In situations of choice without preference, a reasonable person is 
not condemned to paralysis and inaction. He can and does select, but 
does so in a random manner, and thus at the price that “his choice” is 
“his” in only a Pickwickian sense.° 

Thus, in a world in which all things are indifferent, all choices are 
random, and wisdom and morality will alike come to naught. Just this is 
the criticism advanced by Cicero against the Stoic teaching that all 
things of this world should be “indifferent” to the wise man. He wrote: 

97. We could not always and systematically delegate the choice between indifferent 
alternatives to a random decision because employment of such a method (“Heads for al- 
ternative 1, tails for alternative 2”) will always itself involve a choice between indifferent 
alternatives (why not “Tails for alternative 1, heads for alternative 2”?). So some such oth- 
er policy of choice management is needed. 

98. It should be noted that in games of chance, situations in which rational choices of 
courses of action must be made probabilistically can also arise (when the optimal strategy 
is one that is mixed). See any text or treatise on the mathematical theory of games. 

46 Choice without Preference 

If we maintained that all things were absolutely indifferent, the whole of life 
would be thrown into confusion ... and no function or task could be found for 
wisdom, since there would be absolutely no distinction between the things that 
pertain to the conduct of life, and no choice need be exercised among them.°? 

Consequently the idea of randomness must play a key part in the the- 
ory of rational choice. The concept of randomness that is at issue here 
is not that of mathematics as characterized by the criteria that govern 
the construction of random number tables. Rather, it is its logical cog- 
nate: an alternative is randomly selected (in this logical sense) if the selec- 
tion situation is such that the sum total of the weight of evidence for the 
selection of the chosen alternative is equal to the weight of evidence for 
selection of its competing alternatives. (Symmetric information or evi- 
dence is a special case of evidence of equal weight.) This concept of 
randomness as based on evidence is a wholly logical or epistemological 
concept, which relativizes randomness to knowledge and ignorance.! 

Another line of consideration is worth noting in this connection. Al- 
ready Pierre Bayle quite correctly perceived that the problem of choice 
without preference can take on two forms: (1) selection of one among 
several (exclusive) alternatives that are essentially identical as regards 
their desirability status as objects of possession or realization—that is, 
choice without preference among the objects involved (the problem of 
Buridan’s Ass); and (2) selection of one among several alternative 
claimants, whose claims are indivisible and uncompromisable, and 
whose claims are essentially identical in strength, and must therefore in 
fairness be treated alike—that is, choice without preference among the 
subjects involved. Bayle properly recognizes that the device of random 
selection provides a means of resolution that is entirely appropriate for 
both cases alike. Random selection, it is clear, constitutes the sole whol- 
ly satisfactory manner of resolving exclusive choice between equivalent 
claims in a wholly fair and unobjectionable manner. Only random, and 
thus strictly “unreasoned,” choice provides an airtight guarantee that 
there is no answer forthcoming to the question: “Why was this alterna- 
tive, rather than another, selected?” Random choice thus guarantees 
that the other alternatives might just as well (in the strictest of senses) 
have designated. Where there is no way of predicting the outcome in ad- 

gg. Cirero, De Finibus, bk. 3, § 50; I quote H. Rackham’s translation in the Loeb Classi- 
cal Library series. 

100. Cf. Hume’s thesis that “though there be no such thing as chance in the world; our 
ignorance of the real causes of any event has the same influence on the understanding, 
and begets a like species of belief or opinion” (Enquiry, bk. 6, first sentence). For further 
explanation of the concept of evidence and of measures of evidential weight, the reader is 
referred to the writer’s paper on “A Theory of Evidence,” Philosophy of Science 25 (1958): 

83-94. 

Choice without Preference 47 

vance, no charge of preferential treatment can possibly be substantiat- 
ed. Thus random choice affords the appropriate avenue of resolution 
for selection situations in which considerations of fairness leave no oth- 
er courses of immediate resolution open as acceptable or as defensible. 

This consideration has further implications of philosophical import. 
For one thing, it is surely a contingent fact that random processes and de- 
vices exist in the world: it is logically feasible to conceive of a possible 
universe without them. Now the problem of choice without preference 
is, in its abstract essentials, a theoretical and not a practical problem. It 
seems curious that the solution of this theoretical problem hinges upon 
the availability of an instrumentality (viz., random choice) whose exis- 
tence is contingent. Surprisingly, it is thus possible to conceive of circum- 
stances (specifically, symmetric choice situations) in which the possibili- 
ty of rational action depends upon an otherwise wholly extraneous 
matter of contingent fact: the availability to rational agents of random 
selection methods. (The availability of random selection policies does, 
however, blunt the concept of this consideration.) 

Now let us finally return to examining the bearing of the foregoing 
discussion upon the question—much disputed, alike in medieval Islam, 
Judaism, and Christianity—as to the reasonableness of God’s choices.!"! 
Here it is—or should be—perfectly clear that as a means of resolving 
the problem of choice without preference the proposed solution is en- 
tirely inapplicable. Orthodox Islamic theology, no less than Christian or 
Judaic theology, cannot grant that the concept of random selection has 
any applicability to the divinity. There can be no chance mechanisms or 
processes whose outcome is not known to an omniscient God, nor need 
He trouble with weights of evidence: in postulating divine omniscience, 
no possibility is left open for random choice. God’s knowledge being 
complete and timeless, selection cannot be delegated by Him to some 
contingently future outcome or to some element of fortuitous ordering, 
such as “the first” (or “the last”) alternative. 

It follows that the proposed resolution of the problem of choice with- 
out preference must be held to apply to the human sphere alone, and 
not to the divine sphere. Random selection is not an option for God. 

101. The significance of this discussion does not hinge on the issue of God’s existence. 
Its bearing is entirely hypothetical: if there were a God along the traditional lines, how 
would he function? 

102. In the “Introduction” to the Analogy, Bishop Butler writes: “Probable evidence, in 
its very nature, affords but an imperfect kind of information; and is to be considered as 
relative only to beings of limited capacities. For nothing which is the possible object of 
knowledge, whether past, present, or future, can be probable to an infinite intelligence; 
since it cannot be discerned absolutely as it is in itself, certainly true or certainly false. But 
to us, probability is the very guide of life.” 

48 Choice without Preference 

Only man’s ignorance permits him to resolve questions of choice with- 
out preference behind the veil of chance. 

Once we allow (against Leibniz) the possibility that strictly indiffer- 
ent choices can arise for the supreme being, we must, I think, be pre- 
pared to grant the right to Ghazali, against the Arabic Aristotelians. For 
here a solution is possible only in terms of an inscrutable will, capable 
of effecting out of its own resources differentiations in the absence of 
any relevant difference.!® In this regard, it is clear, we must consequent- 
ly renounce the possibility of human rationalization of divine acts. The 
problem of choice without preference was a shrewdly selected example 
in support of the position maintained by the Islamic theologians in 
their dispute with the philosophers: this problem does illustrate effec- 
tively the thesis of Arabic Scholasticism that choices made by the divine 
intellect may ultimately prove inscrutable in human terms of refer- 
ence. !04, 105 

103. Ghazali makes the point (S. van den Burgh, trans., The Incoherence of the Incoher- 
ence, vol. 1, pp. 18-19) that it is senseless to speak of God making choices by chance, for 
instead of saying, “God chose to do so-and-so in a chance manner,” one might instead just 
as well say, “So-and-so happened by chance.” 

104. Jonathan Edwards offers the following remarks: “If, in the instance of the two 
spheres, perfectly alike, it be supposed possible that God might have made them in a con- 
trary position: that which is made at the right hand, being made at the left: then I ask, 
whether it is not evidently equally possible, if God had made but one of them, and that in 
the place of the right-hand globe, that he might have made that numerically different 
from what it is, and numerically different from what he did make it; though perfectly 
alike, and in the same place . . . ? Namely, whether he might not have made it numerical- 
ly the same with that which he has now made at the left hand, and so have left that which 
is now created at the right hand, in a state of non-existence? And if so, whether it would 
not have been possible to have made one in that place, perfectly like these, and yet nu- 
merically different from both? And let it be considered, whether from this notion of a nu- 
merical difference in bodies, perfectly alike. . . . it will not follow, that there is an infinite 
number of numerically different possible bodies, perfectly alike, among which God 
chooses, by a self-determining power, when he sets about to make bodies” (A Careful and 
Strict Enquiry into the Modern Prevailing Notions of That Freedom of Will which Is Supposed to Be 
Essential to Moral Agency, Virtue and Vice, Reward and Punishment, Praise and Blame [Boston, 
1754], pt. 2, sect. 12, subsect. 1; quoted from A. N. Prior, Past, Present and Future [Oxford, 
U.K. Clarendon Press, 1967], pp. 141-42.) 

105. This essay is a somewhat expanded version of an article originally published in 
Kantstudien 51 (1959-1960): 142-75. 

Chapter 2 

NICHOLAS OF CUSA ON THE KORAN 
A Fifteenth-Century Encounter with Islam 

1. BACKGROUND 

The year 1964 saw the five-hundredth anniversary of the death of 
Nicholas of Cusa—equally well known under the Latinized name of Cu- 
sanus—commemorated throughout centers of learning in the West. 
The attention of many minds focused once more upon the work of this 
great Catholic thinker who stood on the threshold of that crucial junc- 
ture of the Renaissance, separating the medievals from the moderns. 
Scholar, philosopher, theologian, cardinal, church official, and person- 
al friend to a pope, Nicholas embodied a truly remarkable versatility of 
capabilities and achievements. On the sky map of philosophy, his star 
has gleamed brightly century after century. 

Perhaps the best way to commemorate an important thinker lies in 
taking serious account of his work rather than in simply praising it. And 
since one cannot, within the limit of a single essay, take into serious ac- 
count the vast output of such a multifaceted and productive scholar, it 
becomes necessary to confine oneself to some particular part of his 
work. Accordingly, the present discussion will deal with Nicholas of 
Cusa’s treatise on the Koran, seeing that this treatise is both of consider- 
able interest in itself and also throws an instructive light upon Nicholas’s 
tenor of thought. 

To appreciate the significance of Nicholas of Cusa’s work on the Ko- 
ran, one should begin by looking briefly at the historical background of 
the thinking about Islam in the realm of Latin Christianity. This histori- 
cal course of development may be divided into three (somewhat over- 
lapping) phases. 

The first period runs from around 1100 to somewhat after 1250. 
This period saw a great deal of interest in Islam within Latin Christen- 
dom. Many Christian scholars occupied themselves with Arabic works in 

49 

50 Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 

science and philosophy, and the period was one of active translation of 
philosophical, scientific, and even theological works from Arabic. 

It was during this period that Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny (d. 
1156), an able and farsighted scholar and friend of the eminent 
philosopher Bernard of Clairvaux, sponsored a Latin translation of the 
Koran. This translation was prepared around 1141-1143 by collabora- 
tion between a Spaniard, Hermannus Dalmata, and an Englishman, 
Robertus Angligena, “Robert the Englishman,” also known as Robertus 
Retenensis. This version, which “abounds in inaccuracies and misunder- 
standings, and was inspired by hostile intention,”! was destined to be- 
come the form in which the Koran was known in Latin Christendom. 
Numerous manuscript copies were made in medieval times, and four 
centuries later it was published by Theodor Bibliander of Zurich. 

During this first period, then, an active and intelligent, albeit disap- 
proving, interest in matters relating to Islam was manifest among Euro- 
pean men of learning. 

The second period runs from roughly 1250 to around 1400. During 
this period, with the gradual collapse of the Crusades—and the increas- 
ing stridency of the Church in keeping crusading fervor aglow in the 
face of mounting difficulties—a shrill, almost hysterical, tone comes 
into the discussion. One instance, among many, is the Gesta imperatorum 
et pontificium by Thomas of Tuscany (d. 1278). According to Thomas, 
Muhammad is a thief, a murderer, a beast in human form, a magician, 
the firstborn and emissary of Satan himself.? 

The third period runs from about 1400 to around 1500. With the 
ending of the Crusades and the waning of the crusading spirit—and the 
concomitant concentration upon domestic issues and difficulties—Eu- 
ropean interest in Islam went into a state of suspension. It was well on 
the way to atrophy when a development of political history occurred 
which is of great significance as background for Nicholas’s treatise. But 
during the first half of the fifteenth century, the eyes of thinking Euro- 
pean Christians turned once again to the East, focusing upon Constan- 
tinople. That great city had slipped by gradual stages into the state of an 
isolated enclave existing as a beleaguered Christian island within the 
hostile surrounding sea of the Ottoman Turks. This situation led, on 
the one hand, to an interest in a possible reconciliation between the 
Church of Rome and that of the East, a circumstance that took Nicholas 
himself on a mission to Constantinople in the late 1440s. On the other 

1. A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpreted (New York: Macmillan, 1955), p. 7- 
2. Nikolaus von Cues, Sichtung des Alkorans, trans. Paul Naumann (Leipzig: F Meunier, 
1943); Schriften des Nikolaus von Cues, ed. Ernst Hoffman, vols. 6 and 7), p. 26 of “Preface.” 

Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 51 

hand, the Turkish threat to Constantinople rearoused the European in- 
terest in Islam that had become dormant since the fervor of the Cru- 
sades. And the fall of the city in 1453 saw a revival in the Christian 
polemic against Islam. 

Thus, Nicholas of Cusa’s treatise on the Koran was part of the re- 
awakening of European concern about Islam that arose in the face of 
the imminent and ultimately actual fall of Constantinople to the Turks. 

2. NICHOLAS’S SOURCES 

What were Nicholas of Cusa’s sources of information about Islam? 
We are in the fortunate position of being able to answer this question 
with great accuracy. For not only did Nicholas, as a good scholar, cite 
the sources for his work, but he also left his books to the library of the 
hospital that was endowed by him at Cusa. Here the very books used by 
him are preserved and his annotations of them can be inspected by in- 
terested students. 

For the Koran, as he himself tells us in the preface of his book, Nich- 
olas used the already-mentioned translation sponsored by Peter the 
Venerable in the twelfth century. This translation was unquestionably a 
mixed asset, for although it did make it possible to have at least some 
firsthand contact with the Koran, its errors and inaccuracies were so nu- 
merous and so significant that they rendered the original quite unrec- 
ognizable. 

Apart from this deficient translation of the Koran itself, Nicholas’s 
most important—and actually more helpful—source was the treatise en- 
titled Propugnaculum fidei by the Florentine Dominican Ricoldus of 
Monte Crucis (written ca. 1310; printed Venice, 1609). Ricoldus had 
traveled extensively in the East, and had lived for some years in Bagh- 
dad. He knew Arabic and in his book cites the Koran in accurate trans- 
lations of his own. He is reasonably well informed about Islam, and 
evinces a more factually accurate understanding of Islam than virtually 
any other medieval writer on the topic. It was in large part from this dis- 
tinctly superior source that Nicholas’s understanding of the nature and 
teachings of Islam were derived; indeed, his own work draws upon that 
of Ricoldus at virtually every important point. 

Let us now turn from its sources to the work itself. 

3. See further J. S. Sweetman, Islam and Chistian Theology, part 2, vol. 1, pp. 116, 160. 

52 Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 

3. THE LEADING IDEA 

In 1461-1462, a period during which he held important offices in 
Rome under the aegis of his friend Pope Pius II, Nicholas of Cusa wrote 
his Cribratio Alchorani (Sifting of the Koran).‘ He had been equipped for 
this task by some personal experience of Islam derived from a visit to 
Constantinople in 1437-1438, in connection with a mission working in 
the interests of unity between the Eastern and Western churches. (It 
might be noted parenthetically that, in consequence of this mission, 
Nicholas himself participated in the negotiations at the Council of 
Florence in 1438 that resulted in an abortive agreement for such a 
union.) 

Over and above this brief occasion for firsthand contact, Nicholas 
was widely read in the ramified literature on Islamic matters available in 
Latin. No contemporary European theologian could match his knowl- 
edge of the Latin literature relating to Islamic philosophy and religion. 

The guiding idea of Nicholas’s Cribratio Alchorani is a shrewd and an 
interesting one. It is definitely not, as the majority of its medieval prede- 
cessors were, a blanket denunciation, but a careful attempt to sift out 
the Christian and the non-Christian elements of the Koran. (This objec- 
tive is made explicit in the very title of the treatise itself: cribrare = to sift 
out.) Rather than reject the Koran en bloc, Nicholas wants to distin- 
guish between a Muhammad who has listened to the voice of the God 
who enters into the hearts of all men, and a Muhammad who advances 
ideas and objectives of his own. 

Notwithstanding its greater discrimination, Nicholas’s Sifting of the 
Koran is avowedly a work of Christian polemic against Islam. Conform- 
ing to the tradition derived from St. John of Damascus in the eighth 
century, who classes Islam as a Christian heresy, Nicholas regards 
Muhammad as having started from a Christian position under the influ- 
ence of Christian (Nestorian) teachers, and then departing from it at 
first partly under the corrupting influence of Jews, and partly to render 
the message more readily audible to the heathen Arabs. Then, ultimate- 
ly, Muhammad made increasingly radical departures in order to exploit 
his growing following as an instrument of personal power. 

Inherent in this view is a possibility that greatly intrigued Nicholas 
and some of his friends. If Islam is a corrupted version of Christianity so 
that Christianity is the starting point of Islam—the purified proto-Islam 

4. Nicholas of Cusa’s Cribratio Alchorani is now readily accessible in a German transla- 
tion by Paul Naumann (see note 2); my discussion owes much to Naumann’s informative 
introduction. Mention must also be made of Nicholas’s tract On Peace Among the Religious 
(De pace seu concordantia fidei), translated by Klaus Berger (Vom Frieden Zwischen den Religio- 
nen [Frankfurt: Insel Verlag, 2002]). 

Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 53 

of a corrupted Koranic Islam—then a Muslim “return” to the Church 
becomes a thing conceivable. This train of thought provides the back- 
ground for that very curious document of church history, the letter of 
1461/1462 of Pope Pius II to Sultan Muhammad II calling upon the 
sultan to accept Christianity and to become the successor of the Byzan- 
tine emperors as temporal head of the Christian Orient.® This letter, to 
which the sultan did not even deign to make a reply, for a brief time 
aroused the imagination of Europe by the dazzling prospect of a reli- 
gious triumph as compensatory climax to a long course of military ca- 
tastrophe in the East. 

4. NICHOLAS’S VIEW OF THE KORAN 

Nicholas of Cusa’s conception of the Koran is, as already indicated, 
unique in its radical departure from the standard strain of Christian 
polemic against Islam. His view is as follows: 

Muhammad’s basic impulse was good—his eye was upon the path to 
God revealed to men imperfectly by Moses and fully by Christ, and he 
sought to guide the heathen Arabs to this path and make it easy for 
them. The Muslim well arose from a sound spring, even though hereti- 
cal Christians and corrupting Jews poisoned it, and the self-interest that 
made Muhammad into a tool of the devil ultimately perverted it. 

Not only was Muhammad’s starting intention valid, but the work he 
produced, the Koran, is of genuine religious merit. It contains much 
that is sound and incorporates a great deal of truth. It is a work heavily 
influenced by the Old and New Testaments, whose reflected light illu- 
minates it at many points. (The extent to which this view requires sym- 
pathetic interpretation is evidenced by the fact that the Koran contains 
but one direct quotation from the Scriptures: Koran 21:105, which 
quotes Ps. 37:29.) Of course it goes amiss at numerous and crucial junc- 
tures, and of course it contains nothing of merit over and above what is 
to be found in the Gospels. Si quid pulchri, veri et clari in Alcoran reperituy, 
necesse est, quod sit radius lucidissimi Evangelii ( Cribratio, 1.6). 

How did Nicholas explain his view that Muhammad, having caught 
many glimpses of Christian truths, went fundamentally astray? How did 
he account for the departures of the Koran from the New Testament? 
Here Nicholas has ready a threefold answer: (1) misunderstandings due 
to the impeding machinations of Nestorians and of Jews who influ- 
enced Muhammad, (2) deliberate didactic departures to adapt the mes- 
sage to the primitive and pagan Arabs, and (3) deliberate falsifications 

5. See P. Naumann, trans., Nikolaus von Cues, Sichtung des Alkorans, pp. 11-12; cf. 
Sweetman, Islam and Chistian Theology, p. 161, n. 3. 

54 Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 

to serve the self-interest of the Prophet and/or the political advantage 
of his following. 

The greater part of Nicholas of Cusa’s discussion is thus devoted to a 
detailed critique of the departures of the Koran from Christian teach- 
ings and the deployment of a Christian polemic—in its fundamentals 
along the usual lines—against the teachings of Islam, dwelling largely 
upon an apology for those Christian teachings which, like the doctrine 
of the Trinity, had formed foci of Islamic attacks on Christianity. 

On Nicholas’s view of the matter, the Koran is thus a mixture in 
which the sound grains of truth are intermingled with the chaff of falsi- 
ty. The correct Christian approach to the bible of Islam cannot be a 
complete condemnation, but should be a carefully discriminative sifting 
(cribratio) of truth from error. 

This attitude infuses and shapes the whole strategy of Nicholas’s 
polemic against Islam. It is entirely internal, taking its stand upon the 
Koran itself and that book’s own acknowledgment of the truth of the 
Gospels. As Nicholas saw the matter, the Koran, in its recognition of 
the Bible and in the acceptance of the biblical view of Jesus’ message 
and role, condemns itself out of its own mouth at all points of conflict. 
In particular, his polemic against Islam dwelt upon those matters in 
which the declarations of the Koran appeared to him as self-contradic- 
tory. (One example is Chapter 9 of Book 3, devoted to the thesis “that 
Muhammad wrote of Christ sometimes as god and man both, some- 
times only as man, and sometimes as god in the singular, sometimes in 
the plural.”) 

This point of view also provides the rationale that brought Nicholas 
to that favorite concept of our own day: the idea of a dialogue. Writing 
to his friend John of Segovia, he welcomed the idea of a conference 
with the Muslims: Non est dubium medio principium temporalium quos Teucri 
sacerdotibus praeferunt, ad colloquia posse perveniri, et ex illis furor mitigabitur, 
et veritas se ipsam ostendet cum profectu fidei nostrae. In this hopeful view of 
the constructive value of a “dialogue” (colloguiwm)—that this would miti- 
gate the furor of disputation and prove useful for religion—Nicholas of 
Cusa is perhaps more a child of our time than of his own. 

5. SOME BLIND SPOTS IN NICHOLAS’S 
VIEW OF THE KORAN 

It is, however, only just to say that—despite the fact that his judgment 
of the Koran was unusually favorable for his place and time—Nicholas’s 
view of the Bible of Islam was subject to certain sharp limitations, per- 
haps even deserving the name of blind spots. 

Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 55 

Of these, the first and most obvious relates to the literary quality of 
the Koran. The Bible of Islam is a work whose beauty of language was 
from the first accepted by Muslims as a proof of divine inspiration. This 
element was, of course, wholly lost on Nicholas, for whom the Koran 
(seen only in dry-as-dust translations) might as well have been a disserta- 
tion of Scholastic theology. 

A more crucial point is bound up with this first blind spot. Nicholas 
is able to see merit in the Koran only at those points at which it agrees 
with the Gospels. He is flatly unwilling to grant that there may be some 
special merit of insight or inspiration in the scripturally nonredundant 
parts of the Koran—not, to be sure, as regards its declarations on mat- 
ters of faith and doctrine, but in its essentially secular ordinances, for 
example, those regarding the reformation of the social or communal af- 
fairs of the Arabs. 

Moreover, in his eagerness to use the Koran itself as an instrument of 
his cause, Nicholas is occasionally led to do (no doubt unwittingly) vio- 
lence to the text in order to bend it to his objectives. Consider, for ex- 
ample, the following Koranic passage, cited in the translation of A. J. Ar- 
berry: (Surah 4, “Women,” verses 167-70): 

People of the Book, go not beyond the bounds in your religion, and say not as 
to God but the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only the Messenger of 
God and His word that He committed to Mary, and a Spirit sent by Him. So be- 
lieve in God and his Messengers. Say not, “Three.” Refrain; better is it for you. 
God is only One God, Glory be to Him. Say not that He should have a son! To 
Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; God suffices for a 
guardian. The Messiah will not disdain to be a servant of God, nor will the an- 
gels who are near stationed to Him.® 

This is an obvious piece of anti-Christian, anti-Trinitarian polemic. But 
Nicholas cites only a part of the text in isolation from its context: “Jesus 
son of Mary is God’s messenger” (Cribratio, 1.12). Taken thus, out of 
context and in deceptive translation, Nicholas uses this passage as a 
proof text to show that the Koran itself countenances a Trinitarian posi- 
tion, and acknowledges the divinity of Jesus. 

Needless to say, however, there should be no astonishment regarding 
the fact that the merits that Nicholas can find in the Koran extend over 
a limited area. The noteworthy thing is that there is any such area at all. 

6. The best English translation of the Koran is that of A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpret- 
ed, 2 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1955). Arberry’s “Preface” provides much interesting in- 
formation about the transmission of the Koran to Europe. 

56 Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 

6. THE RATIONALE OF NICHOLAS’S TREATISE 

The unique character of Nicholas’s treatise as a Christian evaluation 
of the Koran that is prepared to find in it good points as well as bad de- 
rives not from his sources—how could it?—but from his own brain. It 
developed against the backdrop of his thinking about the nature of reli- 
gion as such. 

Nicholas’s attitude toward the nature and diversity of religions is set 
forth in his important treatise De pace seu concordantia fidei (On peace or 
concord in religion).’ Here Nicholas expounds a view of religions that, 
while not (of course) overtly relativistic, nevertheless emanates a certain 
aura of relativism. The basic concept developed here may be indicated 
by the analogy of mountain climbing. The mountaintop represents the 
summit of genuine religious knowledge, and the different paths leading 
up to the same summit—some rendering its attainment easy of access, 
others rocky, difficult, and full of pitfalls—represent diverse religions. 
The analogy—here used only for explanatory purposes, it being no- 
where explicit in Nicholas’s writings—illustrates graphically the tenor of 
his thought about religious diversity within Christianity itself. For he 
views this diversity as perfectly legitimate—if not as regards the funda- 
mentals of doctrine, then at any rate as regards rite: una religio in rituum 
varietate. The positivity of Nicholas’s approach to the Koran must be 
judged—and can only be understood—within this background context 
of the generously open tendency of his religious philosophy. The com- 
prehensive philosophical perspective he brought to the particular case 
made it possible for Nicholas to see gleams of the light of Truth where 
eyes of narrower vision saw only the handiwork of the devil. 

7. CONCLUSION 

We live in an era that, whatever may be its shortcomings in other re- 
spects, is a time of increased mutual sympathy and understanding 
among diverse religious groups.’ In a domain once ruled by bitter theo- 
logical warfare, we can occasionally hear the beating of the wings of the 
dove of peace. The idea of Christianity’s reconciliation with Islam may 
even nowadays seem remote, but it cannot today be dismissed as an ut- 
ter absurdity. The thesis of St. John of Damascus that Islam is but a 

7. See further R. Klibansky and H. Bascour, Nicolai de Cusa de Pace Fidei, Supp. 3, of Me- 
diaeval and Renaissance Studies, the Warburg Institute, University of London, 1956. 

8. [Footnote added in 2003] This overoptimistic assessment was written in 1964, and 
the unhappy fact is that much turbulent water has flowed since then under the bridge 
that separates Christianity and Islam. 

Nicholas of Cusa on the Koran 57 

Christian heresy provides the continuing basis for a possible reconcilia- 
tion, at any rate on the Christian side of the divide. Nicholas of Cusa re- 
alized, more clearly than any other theologian of his day, the implica- 
tions, both theological and practical, of such a position. One cannot but 
honor him both as having a mind of great penetration and as being a 
man of goodwill, whose sympathetic vision was able to discern some 
good where his compatriots saw nothing except the unmixed blackness 
of wicked error.° 

g. This chapter is a lightly redacted version of an essay that was originally published in 
The Muslim World 55 (1965): 195-202. It grew out of a public lecture delivered at the Cu- 
sanus Commemoration Conference held at the University of Rochester on November 6, 

1964. 

Chapter 3 

ON LEARNED IGNORANCE AND 
THE LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 

1. KNOWLEDGE ABOUT IGNORANCE 

We are well advised to follow the counsel of Nicholas of Cusa and en- 
deavor to be knowledgeable about our own ignorance. For in endeavor- 
ing to get a firm grasp on the human situation, one of the most prob- 
lem-strewn regions of inquiry relates to this issue of the limitations of 
our knowledge. It is next to impossible to fathom the depth of our igno- 
rance and get a clear fix on it. After all, whatever people can know, they 
can also be ignorant about—perhaps with a handful of Cartesian excep- 
tions such as the fact that they themselves exist and can think. 

There is, of course, no difficulty about my knowing that there are 
some facts that I do not know. And there is certainly no difficulty of prin- 
ciple in your knowing in detail what some of these facts are. But my 
knowing that there is a particular fact which, as such, is unknown to me 
is impracticable for me. For there is a crucial difference between the in- 
definite “I know that there is some fact that I do not know” and the spe- 
cific “Such and such is a fact of which I know that I do not know it.” The 
first is unproblematic but the second is not, since to know of something 
that it is a fact I must know it as such, so that we have what is effectively 
a contradiction in terms. I can know about my factual ignorance only at 
the level of generalized indefiniteness, but cannot know it in concrete 
detail. I can coherently hold that 2 + 2 = 4 is a claim (or a supposed fact) 
that I do not know to be the case, but I cannot meaningfully hold it to 
be an actual fact that I do not know to be the case. For to acknowledge a 
fact as fact is to assert knowledge of it.! 

1. Factual knowledge is the central factor here. Performative knowledge is something 
else again—one can certainly know that there are various specific things we cannot do. 
Again, I can know of my ignorance of a certain range of facts (the geography of Nepal, the 
dreams of Julius Caesar, what it is that yon Urdu speaker is saying), but the specifics of 
such ignorance are bound to elude me. 

58 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 59 

The reality of it is that even knowledge about the extent of my igno- 
rance is unavailable to me. For what is at issue with extent is the ratio of 
the manifold of what I do know to the manifold of what I do not know. 
And it is impossible in the nature of things for me to determine the lat- 
ter with exactitude. After all, the actual situation is not that of a cross- 
word puzzle—or that of geographic exploration—where the size of the 
terra incognita can be somehow measured a priori, in advance of the 
details that are going to be filled in. We can form no sensible advance 
estimate of the imponderable domain of what can be known but is not. 
(We can specify various questions that we cannot answer, but we cannot 
specify any questions that have never occurred to us.) We cannot map 
the boundaries of our ignorance. 

There are, of course, finite bodies of knowledge. There is only so 
much you can know about the content of Boston’s 1995 telephone di- 
rectory, namely, the totality of what is on its pages. But this sort of thing 
can transpire only in very special circumstances and never with respect 
to fields or areas of knowledge such as medicine or physics that deal 
with the products of nature rather than with human artifice since fur- 
ther discovery is always in prospect here. 

2. SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS: DIFFICULTIES 
IN PREDICTING FUTURE KNOWLEDGE 

Our ignorance here and now is indicated in a particularly vivid way 
in relation to future knowledge.? The splendid dictum that “the past is a 
different country—they do things differently there” has much to be said 
for it. For the progressive and developmental nature of knowledge 
means that knowledge of the future is substantially unavailable to the 
investigators of the present. The prospect of present knowledge about 
future discoveries is deeply problematic because the future of knowl- 
edge is inherently impredictable. If the substance of future discoveries 
were available here and now, then these discoveries themselves would 
be made here and now and would not—contrary to hypothesis—consti- 
tute future discoveries. The details of the cognitive future are hidden in 
an impenetrable fog. 

And this is nowhere more decidedly the case than with respect to nat- 
ural science. Making scientifically responsible predictions about the fu- 

2. As the medievals saw it, even an omniscient God has problems where knowledge of 
the future is concerned. The literature of this subject is vast, but a good entry is provided 
by Calvin Normore, “Future Contingency,” in Norman Kretzmann et al., eds., The Cam- 
bridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 

1983), pp. 358-82. 

60 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

ture of science itself is an impracticable project. All that we know is that 
it will be different from the existing situation in important but unfore- 
seeable ways. The best that we can do in matters of science and technol- 
ogy forecasting is to look toward those developments that are “in the 
pipeline.” Here the reasonable extrapolation of the character, orienta- 
tion, and direction of the current state of the art is a powerful forecast- 
ing tool on the positive side of the issue. But even this conservative ap- 
proach has its problems. For since we cannot predict the answers to the 
presently open questions of natural science, we also cannot predict its 
future questions, which hinge upon those as yet unrealizable answers. 
The questions of the future are engendered by the answers to those we 
have on hand. Accordingly, we cannot predict science’s future solutions 
to its problems because we cannot even predict in detail just what these 
problems will be. 

We know—or at any rate we can safely predict—that future science 
will make major discoveries (both theoretical and observational) in the 
next century, but we cannot say what they are and how they will be made, 
since otherwise we could proceed to make them here and now. We 
could not possibly predict now the substantive content of our future dis- 
coveries—those that result from our future cognitive choices. For to do 
so would be to transform them into present discoveries which, by hy- 
pothesis, they just are not.’ In the context of questions about matters of 
scientific importance, then, we must be prepared for surprises. 

The inherent impredictability of future scientific developments—the 
fact that inferences from one state of science to another are impractica- 
ble—means that present-day science cannot speak for future science. Through- 

3. As one commentator has wisely written: “But prediction in the field of pure science 
is another matter. The scientist sets forth over an unchartered sea and the scribe, left be- 
hind on the dock, is asked what he may find at the other side of the waters. If the scribe 
knew, the scientist would not have to make his voyage” (Anonymous, “The Future as Sug- 
gested by Developments of the Past Seventy-Five Years,” Scientific American 123, [1920]: 
321). The role of unforeseeable innovations in science forms a key part of Popper’s case 
against the impredictability of man’s social affairs—given that new science engenders new 
technologies, which in turn make for new modes of social organization; see K. R. Popper, 
The Poverty of Historicism (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957), p. vi and passim. The 
impredictability of revolutionary changes in science also figures centrally in W. B. Gallie’s 
“The Limits of Prediction,” in S. Kérner, ed., Observation and Interpretation (New York: Aca- 
demic Press, 1957). Gallie’s argumentation is weakened, however, by a failure to distin- 
guish between the generic fact of future discovery in a certain domain and its specific na- 
ture. See also Peter Urbach, “Is Any of Popper’s Arguments against Historicism Valid?” 
(British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 29 [1978]: 117-30; see esp. pp. 128-29), whose 
deliberations seem (to this writer) to skirt the key issues. A judicious and sympathetic 
treatment is given in Alex Rosenberg, “Scientific Innovation and the Limits of Social Sci- 
entific Prediction,” Synthese 97 (1993): 161-81. On the present issue Rosenberg cites the 
instructive anecdote of the musician who answered the question: “Where is jazz heading,” 
with the response: “If I knew that, I’d be there already” (p. 167). 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 61 

out the domain of innovation in science, technology, and the arts we 
find processes of creative innovation whose products defy all prospects 
of predictability. The key fact in this connection is that of the funda- 
mental epistemological law that the cognitive resources of an inferior 
(lower) state of the art cannot afford the means for foreseeing the oper- 
ations of a superior (higher) one. 

Illustrations of this situation abound in historical experience. If there 
was one thing of which the science of the first half of the seventeenth 
century was unalloyedly confident, it was that natural processes are 
based on contact and interaction, and that there can be no such thing 
as action at a distance. Newtonian gravitation burst upon this scene like 
a bombshell. Newton’s supporters simply stonewalled. Roger Cotes ex- 
plicitly denied that there was a problem, arguing (in his preface to the 
second edition of Newton’s Principia) that nature was generally unintelli- 
gible, so that the unintelligibility of forces acting without contact was 
nothing specifically worrisome. However unpalatable Cotes’s position 
may seem to us as a precept for science—after all, making nature’s 
workings understandable is one of the aims of the enterprise—there is 
something to be said for it, albeit not as science but as metascience. For 
we cannot hold the science of tomorrow bound to the doctrines and 
dogmas of the science of today. The fact that science faces the ongoing 
prospect of a change of mind means that its cognitive future is inacces- 
sible to even the ablest of present-day workers. After Pasteur had shown 
that bacteria could come only from preexisting bacteria, Darwin wrote 
that “it is mere rubbish thinking of the origin of life; one might as well 
think of the origin of matter.” One might indeed! 

3. QUESTION PROPAGATION 

Cognitive progress is commonly thought of in terms of the discovery 
of new facts—new information about things. But the situation is more 
complicated because not only knowledge but also questions must come 
into consideration. For progress on the side of questions is a crucial 
mode of cognitive progress, correlative with—and every bit as impor- 
tant as—progress on the side of information, of course. The questions 
opened up for our consideration are as crucial and definitive a facet of 
a body of knowledge as are the theses that it endorses. And frequently 
the questions of the future are engendered by the answers that the fu- 
ture will give to currently unanswered questions. Accordingly, we can- 

4. Quoted in Philip Handler, ed., Biology and the Future of Man (Oxford, U.K.: Claren- 
don Press, 1970), p. 165. 

62 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

not predict science’s solutions to its problems because we cannot even 
predict in detail just what these problems will be. 

Change in knowledge carries change in questions in its wake, so the 
state of questioning this changes no less drastically than the state of 
knowledge. Any alterations in the membership of our body of knowl- 
edge will afford new presuppositions for further questions that were not 
available before. The question solved in one era could well not even 
arise in another—for example, Aristotle could not have wondered 
whether plutonium is radioactive. And it is not just that he did not 
know what the correct answer to the question happens to be: the very 
question not only did not occur to him, but actually could not have oc- 
curred to him because the cognitive framework of the then-existing 
state of knowledge did not afford the conceptual instruments with 
which alone this question can be posed. 

Moreover, questions can even disappear altogether from the agenda 
of cognitive concern. The reality of it is that we can discover: 

1. New (ie., different) answers to old questions. 

2. New questions. 

3. The impropriety or illegitimacy of our old questions, in that they 
were based on erroneous or untenable presuppositions—that is, once- 
purported “facts” that are no longer viewed as acceptable. 

With type 1 we uncover an error of commission by discovering that a 
wrong answer has been given in our previous question-answering en- 
deavors. With type 2 we discover that there are certain questions that 
have not heretofore been posed at all: we uncover an error of omission 
in our former question-asking endeavors. Finally, with type 3 we find 
that one has asked the wrong question altogether: we uncover an “error 
of understanding” in the context of our former question-asking endeav- 
ors. Thus if we abandon the luminiferous aether as a vehicle for electro- 
magnetic radiation, then we lose at one stroke the whole host of ques- 
tions about its composition, structure, mode of operation, origin, and 
so on. For such improper questions rest on incorrect presuppositions 
(and are thus generally bound up with type 1 discoveries). 

The second of these types of question-oriented discovery represents a 
characteristic phenomenon. As further lines of questioning unfold, our 
old answers can come to be seen as untenable and in need of correction 
or replacement. The course of change with respect to questions is no 
less dramatic than that of cognitive change itself, seeing that the ques- 
tions we pose at any juncture will have to be based on the presup- 
positions of the existing stage of the art. And it lies in the nature of this 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 63 

developmental process that our knowledge is incomplete at any stage— 
irrespective of what the date on the calendar may happen to be. 

The phenomenon of the ever-continuing “birth” of new questions 
was first emphasized by Immanuel Kant, who described it in terms of a 
continually evolving cycle of questions and answers: 

Who can satisfy himself with mere empirical knowledge in all the cosmological 
questions of the duration and of the magnitude of the world, of freedom or of 
natural necessity, since every answer given on principles of experience begets a fresh 
question, which likewise requires its answer and thereby clearly shows the insufficien- 
cy of all physical modes of explanation to satisfy reason.° 

The line of thought set out in the italicized passage suggests the follow- 
ing Principle of Question Propagation (Kant’s Principle): “The solution of 
any factual (scientific) question gives rise to yet further unsolved ques- 
tions.” This principle of question proliferation in empirical inquiry indi- 
cates a fact of importance for the theory of scientific progress. One 
need not claim longevity—let alone immortality—for any of the current 
problems to assure that there will be problems ten or one hundred gen- 
erations hence. (As immortal individuals are not needed to assure the 
immortality of the race, so immortal problems are not needed to assure 
the immortality of problems.) 

4. INCOMPLETENESS 

Could we ever bring our scientific understanding of the world’s ways 
to a state of completeness? This issue dissolves into a plurality of ques- 
tions: 

A. Could we ever be in a position to claim that we can predict every- 
thing that will or will not occur? (Predictive completion) 

B. Could we ever be in a position to claim that we know all the laws of 
nature? (Nomic completion) 

C. Could we ever be in a position to claim that we can explain every- 
thing that occurs? (Explanatory completion) 

D. Could we ever be in a position to answer all our scientific ques- 
tions? (Erotetic completion) 

Let us consider in turn these different modes of potential scientific 
completeness: 

5. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic (1783), sect. 57. 

64 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

A. Predictive Completeness 

The idea of predictive completeness calls for being able to predict 
everything that occurs in nature. It represents a forlorn hope. For pre- 
dictors—who are, after all, themselves part of the world—are of necessi- 
ty bound to fail even in merely self-predictive matters. Thus consider 
confronting a predictor with the problem posed by the question: 

P,: When you answer this question, will the answer be negative? 

This is a question which—for reasons of general principle—no predic- 
tor can ever answer satisfactorily. For consider the available possibilities: 

Actually 
Answer given correct answer? Agreement? 
YES NO NO 
NO YES NO 
CAN’T SAY NO NO 

On this question, there just is no way in which a predictor’s response 
could possibly agree with the actual facts of the matter. Even the seem- 
ingly plausible response “I can’t say” automatically constitutes a selffal- 
sifying answer, since in giving this answer the predictor would automati- 
cally make “No” into the response called for by the proprieties of the 
situation. 

Nevertheless, there actually is a fact of the matter here. The problem 
poses a perfectly meaningful question to which another predictor could 
give a putatively correct answer—namely, by saying: “No—that predictor 
cannot answer this question at all; the question will condemn a predic- 
tor to baffled silence.” So while the question posed in P, will be irresolv- 
able by a particular predictor, it could—in theory—be answered by other 
predictors and is accordingly not predictively intractable flat-out. 

There are, however, other questions that do indeed represent predic- 
tive imsolubilia of a more drastic sort. One of them is: 

P,: What is an example of a predictive question that no predictor will ever state? 

No doubt there are such items. But in answering this question the pre- 
dictor would have to stake a claim of the form: “Q is an example of 
a predictive question that no predictor will ever state.” And in the very 
making of this claim the predictor would falsify it. It is thus auto- 
matically impossible to effect a satisfactory resolution. However, the 
question is neither meaningless nor irresolvable. Its definitive presup- 
position, “There is a predictive question that no predictor will ever con- 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 65 

sider,” is beyond doubt true. What we thus have in P, is an example of 
an in-principle solvable—and thus “meaningful’—predictive question 
that, as a matter of necessity in the logical scheme of things, no predic- 
tor can ever resolve satisfactorily. No predictor can manage it—nor can 
the megapredictive project at issue with science-at-large. Predictive com- 
pleteness is just not in prospect. 

B. Nomic Completeness 

Let us now turn from events to laws. What of completeness in point 
of discovering nature’s laws? 

Here too the outlook is not propitious. After all, even a system that is 
finitely complex both in its physical makeup and in its functional laws 
might nevertheless be infinitely complex in the phenomena that it man- 
ifests over time. For the operations of a structurally and lawfully finite 
system can yet exhibit an infinite intricacy in productive complexity, mani- 
festing this limitless diversity in the working out of its processes rather 
than as regards its spatiostructural composition or the nomic comport- 
ment of its basic components. Even if the number of constituents of na- 
ture were small, there will be endless ways in which they can be com- 
bined to yield an emergently ever more complex lawful order. Think 
here of the examples of letters, syllables, words, sentences, paragraphs, 
books, genres (novels, reference books, etc.), libraries, and library sys- 
tems. Even a finite nature can, like a typewriter with a limited and oper- 
ationally simple keyboard, yield an endlessly varied text with unending 
strata of lawful order—even though they would not exist without them. 
And those higher level laws need not be derivable from lower level 
ones. For nature can produce a steady stream of new products—“new” 
not necessarily in kind but in their functional interrelationships and 
thus in their theoretical implications. 

And there is no need to assume a ceiling to such a sequence of levels 
of integrative complexity of phenomenal diversity. The different levels 
each exhibit an order of their own. The phenomena we attain in the 
n-th level can have features whose investigation takes us to the n+ 1 lev- 
el. As the course of cosmic evolution proceeds from physics to chem- 
istry to biology and beyond, new phenomena and new laws arise at 
every further level of integrative order. The diverse facets of nature can 
generate conceptually new strata of operations that yield a potentially 
unending sequence of domain levels, each giving rise to its own charac- 
teristic principles of organization, themselves quite unpredictable from 
the standpoint of the other levels. In this way, even a relatively simple 
world as regards its basic operations can come to have an effectively infi- 

66 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

nite cognitive depth, once the notion of a natural phenomenon is 
broadened to include not just the processes themselves and the prod- 
ucts they produce but also the relationships among them. 

Take, for example, some repeatedly exemplified physical feature and 
then contemplate the sequence of os and 1s obtained according to the 
rule that the +th entry in the sequence is 1 if this feature is exemplified 
on occasion number i, and o if not. Whenever two such feature- 
concepts, say Cand C7, generate such sequences in the manner of 

C: 0100110100... 
C%:1001011010..., 

then we can introduce the corresponding matching sequence for Cand 
C%, 0010010001 ..., which is such that its +th position is 1 if the two 
base sequences agree at their respective +th positions, and o if they dis- 
agree. Such matching sequences will have a life of their own. For exam- 
ple, even if two base sequences are random, their matching sequences 
need not be—for example, when those base sequences simply exchange 
os and 1s. (Even totally random phenomena can be related by orderly 
laws of coordination.) 

And so our knowledge of nature’s workings can in principle be end- 
lessly enhanced and deepened by contemplating an unending prolifer- 
ation of phenomenal levels that exhibit emergently novel sorts of lawful 
order. 

C. Explanatory Completeness 

Could we manage to explain everything that occurs in nature? Clearly 
not. For one thing, since nothing in nature is self-explanatory, we could 
not explain our explanations through to the bitter end. Moreover, cer- 
tain occurrences are—to all present appearances—going to be unex- 
plainable in principle in a stochastic universe: for example, why a cer- 
tain atom of an unstable transuranic element decayed at the exact time 
it did. 

The best that science can do—and the most we can ever reasonably 
ask of it—is to be able to explain everything that is explicable. And just 
here—on this issue of what is explicable—science itself must by our 
source of information. It alone can be allowed to determine the legiti- 
macy of explanatory questions. And here the present state of the art in 
science can never be accepted as altogether definitive. To determine 
that science can indeed resolve every appropriate explanatory question 
we would first have to assume a completed and perfected science to 
rule on this issue of appropriateness. And this consideration alone ren- 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 67 

ders the idea of explanatory completeness deeply problematic if not al- 
together unrealizable. 

D. Erotetic Completeness 

Could we ever possibly achieve erotetic completeness, the condition 
of being able to resolve, in principle, all of our (legitimately posable) 
questions about the world? Could we ever actually find ourselves in this 
happy position?® 

In theory, yes. A body of science certainly could be such as to provide 
answers to all those questions it allows to arise. But just how meaningful 
would this mode of completeness be? 

It is sobering to realize that the erotetic completeness of a state of sci- 
ence does not necessarily betoken its comprehensiveness or sufficiency. 
It might reflect the paucity of the range of questions we are prepared to 
contemplate—a deficiency of imagination, so to speak. When the range 
of our knowledge is sufficiently restricted, then its question-resolving 
completeness will merely reflect this impoverishment rather than its in- 
trinsic adequacy. Conceivably, if improbably, science might reach a 
purely fortuitous equilibrium between problems and solutions. It could 
eventually be “completed” in the narrow erotetic sense—providing an 
answer to every question one can pose in the then-existing (albeit possi- 
bly still imperfect) state of knowledge—without thereby being complet- 
ed in the larger sense of answering the questions that would arise if only 
one could probe nature just a bit more deeply. And so our corpus of sci- 
entific knowledge could be erotetically complete and yet fundamentally 
inadequate. Thus, even if realized, this erotetic mode of completeness 
would not be particularly meaningful. (To be sure, this discussion pro- 
ceeds at the level of supposition contrary to fact. The exfoliation of new 
questions from old in the course of scientific inquiry that is at issue in 
Kant’s Principle of Question Propagation spells the infeasibility of ever 
attaining completeness in question resolution.) 

Lessons 

Theorists from time to time indulge in eschatological conjecture by 
telling us that the scientific venture is approaching its end.’ And it is, of 
course, entirely conceivable that natural science will come to a stop, and 

6. Note that this is independent of the question “Would we ever want to do so?” Would 
we ever really want to answer all those predictive questions about ourselves and our envi- 
ronment, or are we more comfortable in the condition in which “ignorance is bliss”? 

7. This sentiment was abroad among physicists of the fin-de-siécle era of 1890-1900; 

68 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

will do so not in consequence of a cessation of intelligent life but in C. 
S. Peirce’s more interesting sense of a completion of the project: of 
eventually reaching a condition after which even indefinitely ongoing 
inquiry will not—and indeed in the very nature of things cannot—pro- 
duce any significant change, because inquiry has come to “the end of 
the road.” The situation would be analogous to that envisaged in the 
apocryphal story in vogue during the middle 1800s regarding the com- 
missioner of the U.S. Patents Office who resigned his post because 
there was nothing left to invent.® 

Such a development is in theory possible. But the fact is that we can 
never determine that it is actual. For there is no practicable way in 
which the claim that science has achieved temporal finality can be vali- 
dated. The question “Is the current state of science, S, final and alto- 
gether fixed?” is one for which we can never legitimate an affirmative 
answer since the prospect of future changes of S can never be preclud- 
ed. The evidential realities of our epistemic situation are such that we 
cannot plausibly move beyond it. A prevailing state of scientific knowl- 
edge cannot establish its own permanence. For taking this posture em- 
beds finality in completeness, and in doing so jumps from the frying pan 
into the fire. 

We can never ascertain that science has attained the w-condition of 
final completion, since from our point of view the possibility of further 
change lying “just around the corner” can never be ruled out finally 
and decisively. The reality of natural science is such that our knowledge 
of nature must ever be presumed to be incomplete. 

And so we have no alternative but to proceed on the assumption that 
the era of cognitive innovation is not over—that future science can and 
will prove to be different science and that the pool of potential discovery 
is in principle bottomless. 

5. RELATING KNOWLEDGE TO IGNORANCE 

The fact that we can never resolve all of our questions decisively 
means that we must come to terms with the unavoidability of ignorance. 
Just how serious a liability does this constitute? 

Although ignorance lies at the core of the present discussion, this 
should not be seen as an invitation to radical skepticism. After all, even 

see Lawrence Badash, “The Completeness of Nineteenth-Century Science,” Isis 63 
(1972): 48-58. And such sentiments are coming back into fashion today; see S. W. Hawk- 
ing, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?,” Physics Bulletin 32 (1981): 15-17. 

8. See Eber Jeffrey, “Nothing Left to Invent,” Journal of the Patent Office Society 22 (July 
1940): 479-81. 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 69 

in cognitive matters we can—strange to say—manage to extract truth 
from error. Accordingly, one fundamental feature of inquiry is repre- 
sented by the following: 

Thesis 1: Insofar as our thinking is vague, truth is accessible even in the face of error. 

Consider the situation where you correctly accept Por-Q. But—so let 
it be supposed—the truth of this disjunction roots entirely in that of P, 
while Q is quite false. However, you accept Por-Q only because you are 
mistakenly convinced of the truth of Q; it so happens that P is some- 
thing you actually disbelieve. Yet despite your error, your belief is entire- 
ly true. Consider a concrete instance. You believe that Smith bought 
some furniture because he bought a table. However, it was, in fact, a 
chair that he bought, something you would flatly reject. Nevertheless, 
your belief that he bought some furniture is unquestionably correct. 
The error in which you are involved, although real, is not so grave as to 
undo the truth of your belief. 

Ignorance is reflected in an inability to answer questions appropri- 
ately. But one has to be careful in this regard. Answering a question in- 
formatively is not just a matter of offering a correct answer but also a mat- 
ter of offering an exact answer. 

Thus consider the question “What is the population of Shanghai?” If 
I respond “More than ten and less than ten billion,” I have provided a 
correct answer, but one that is not particularly helpful. This example il- 
lustrates a more far-reaching point. 

Thesis 2: There is in general an inverse relationship between the precision or definiteness 
of a judgment and its security: detail and reliability—infiniteness and probability—stand 
in a competing interconnection. 

Increased confidence in the correctness of our estimates can always 
be purchased at the price of decreased accuracy. We estimate the height 
of the tree at around 25 feet. We are quite sure that the tree is 25 + 5 feet 
high. We are virtually certain that its height is 25 + 10 feet. But we can be 
completely and absolutely sure that its height is between 1 inch and 100 
yards. Of this we can be “completely sure” in the sense that we are “ab- 
solutely certain,” “certain beyond the shadow of a doubt,” “as certain as 
we can be of anything in the world,” “so sure that we would be willing to 
stake our life on it,” and the like. For any sort of estimate whatsoever 
there is always a characteristic trade-off relationship between the evi- 
dential security of the estimate, on the one hand (as determinable on 
the basis of its probability or degree of acceptability), and, on the other 

0 6 

g. Examples of this sort indicate why philosophers are unwilling to identify knowledge 
with true belief: 

70 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

hand, its contentual definitiveness by way of exactness, detail, precision, 
and the like. A complementarity relationship of sorts thus obtains here as 
between definiteness and security. 

This line of thought points toward the instructive lesson that insofar 
as our ignorance of relevant matters leads us to be vague in our judg- 
ments, we may well manage to enhance our quota of available informa- 
tion. The fact of the matter is that we have: 

Thesis 3: By constraining us to make vaguer judgments, ignorance enhances our access 
to correct information (albeit at the cost of less detail and precision). 

Thus if I have forgotten that Seattle is in Washington State, then if 
“forced to guess” where it is I might well erroneously locate it in Ore- 
gon. Nevertheless, my vague judgment that “Seattle is located in the 
northwestern United States” is quite correct. This state of affairs means 
that when the truth of our claims is critical we generally “play it safe” 
and make our commitments less definite and detailed. 

Consider, for example, so simple and colloquial a piece of factual re- 
portage as “The servant declared that he could no longer do his mas- 
ter’s bidding.” This statement is pervaded by a magisterial vagueness. It 
conveys very little about what went on in the exchange between servant 
and master. We are told virtually nothing about what either of them ac- 
tually said. What the object of their discussion was, what form of words 
they used, the manner of their discourse (Did the master order or re- 
quest? Was the servant speaking from rueful incapacity or from belliger- 
ent defiance?)—all these are questions we cannot begin to answer. Even 
the relationship at issue, whether owner/slave or employer/employee, 
is left in total obscurity. In sum, there is a vast range of indeterminacy 
here—a great multitude of very different scenarios would fit perfectly 
well to the description of events which that individual statement puts 
before us. And this vagueness clearly provides a protective shell to 
guard that statement against a charge of falsity. Irrespective of how mat- 
ters might actually stand within a vast range of alternative circumstances 
and conditions, a vague statement remains secure, its truth unaffected 
by which possibility is realized. And in practical matters in particular, 
such rough guidance is often altogether enough. We do not need to 
know the likelihood of rain to three decimal places to make it sensible 
for us to take an umbrella with us when we go out. 

Other cognate considerations also condition the pursuit of truth in 
inquiry. When we are dealing with assured truths, additional information 
cannot unravel or destabilize what we have. Since the-truth-as-a-whole 
must be consistent, truths have to be compatible with one another and 
new truths cannot come into logical conflict with old ones. Actual 

On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 71 

truths, once we have them, are money in the bank. But lékely truths— 
plausible or probable truths—are something else again. Consider the 
case of the “Lottery Paradox.” A million tickets are out there. It is high- 
ly likely that No. 1 will not be drawn. And the same with No. g—and 
with No. 3, and so on. And yet by the time we have conceived this 
process of 1,000,0o00—always ongoing while we merely obtain with what 
had gone before—we know we have falsehood on our hands. 

In theory, our putative truths are generally vulnerable. New plausible 
or probable truths can destabilize old ones. Additional evidence can un- 
ravel old conclusions. P can be probable relative to Q and yet improba- 
ble relative to Q + R. Inductive conclusions are never money in the 
bank. When what we accept is inductively derived from probabilities 
and plausibilities, it is vulnerable to unraveling. It is an ever-present 
prospect that we will have to revisit and reassess them in the light of new 
information. 

This line of thought has important implications for the applicative 
bearing of knowledge. For the reality of it is that to act with more and 
better information is not necessarily to act more effectively. One of the 
deepest ironies of the epistemic realm is represented by: 

Thesis 4: It would be an error to think that a conclusion based on fuller information is 
necessarily an improvement, presenting us with a result that cannot be false if its “inferi- 
or” predecessor was already true. 

Consider the following example, based on the question “What will 
John do to occupy himself on the trip?” Suppose that we require an an- 
swer to this question. But suppose further that the following data be- 
comes successively available: 

1. He loves doing crosswords. 
2. He loves reading mysteries even more. 
3. He didn’t take any books along. 

It is clear that we are led to-and-fro. Initially (at stage 1 of information 
access) we incline to the answer that he will be working crosswords. At 
the next stage, when item 2 arrives, we change our mind and incline to 
the answer that he will be reading. At stage 3 we abandon this idea and 
go back to our initial view. And, of course, a subsequent stage, say one 
where we have 

4. One of this fellow passengers lends him a book 

can nevertheless reverse the situation and return matters to step 2. And 
who knows what step 5 will bring? The crucial point is that additional 
information need not serve to improve matters by bringing us closer to 

72 On Learned Ignorance and the Limits of Knowledge 

the truth: more information can just as well prove misleading as inform- 

ing. 

6. LESSONS: LEARNED IGNORANCE 

And so we return to the point made at the very outset: the ironic, 
though in some ways fortunate, fact is that one of the things about 
which we are most decidedly ignorant is our ignorance itself. The doc- 
trine of learned ignorance—docta ignorantia as its originator Nicholas of 
Cusa had it—involves being learned about our ignorance through secur- 
ing a well-informed view about the prospects and shortcomings of our 
knowledge. It requires no small sagacity to form a reasonably realistic 
appreciation of the extent and nature of one’s own ignorance—and to 
know what to do about it. 

In the end, it is clear that the sensible management of ignorance 
calls for proceeding in the realm of practical considerations exactly be- 
cause the knowledge required for theoretical adequacy in matters of 
larger significance is—all too often—not at our disposal. And yet we 
nevertheless have no rational alternative but to proceed, here as else- 
where, subject to the basic pragmatic principle of accepting the best 
that we can do as good enough—while nevertheless recognizing its po- 
tential imperfection."® 

10. This chapter is a revised and expanded version of a paper of the same title that ap- 
peared in the Southern Journal of Philosophy 37 (1999): 479-93. Some considerations rele- 
vant to its deliberations are presented in the author’s The Limits of Science (Pittsburgh: Uni- 
versity of Pittsburgh Press, 1999). 

Chapter 4 

UNANSWERABLE QUESTIONS 
AND INSOLUBILIA 

1. PROPOSITIONAL VERSUS EROTETIC IGNORANCE 

The scope and limits of our knowledge is an issue that has been on 
the agenda of human concern since classical antiquity, and it is clearly 
an issue in which we have a significant stake. For insofar as there are 
such limits, our hopes of making the realm of fact intelligible to us can 
only be realized to an extent that is imperfect and incomplete. 

Personal ignorance is a matter of the shortfall of a particular individ- 
ual’s knowledge. It has two principal versions, the propositional and the 
erotetic. 

A person’s propositional ignorance is a matter of failing to realize that 
some fact or other is the case. This involves two elements: the existence 
of a certain fact (e.g., that Shakespeare wrote Hamlet) and a failure on 
the individual’s part to know this fact. 

Since Homo sapiens is a cognitively limited and imperfect being, there 
are, of course, many facts that any one of us does not know. The world’s 
complexity provides for innumerable instances, and indeed we can find 
a good many of them in the restricted confines between the covers of 
an encyclopedia. 

But while daily experience brings to my view many facts that I did not 
know, I cannot possibly give an example of a fact that I do not know. For 
when claiming something to be a fact I cannot coherently go on to 
claim that I do not know it. No doubt, you can unproblematically give 
examples of particular facts that I do not know, but I myself cannot 
manage to do it. 

To deal with one’s own case, one must look to ignorance of another 
sort, ignorance that is not propositional but erotetic. 

Evotetic ignorance is a matter of an inability to answer questions. This 
is, in effect, adverbial ignorance, consisting in an inability to answer 
questions inquiring as to who, why, when, where, whence, whither, how, 

73 

74 Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 

and so on. Thus X is ignorant with respect to the question “Who killed 
Cock Robin?” if there is indeed someone—namely Sparrow—who did 
this, and X does not know that Sparrow killed Cock Robin. In just this 
way, erotetic ignorance carries propositional ignorance on its back: it al- 
ways involves propositional ignorance of some fact. To be ignorant with 
regard to a question is to fail to know what the (correct) answer to it is. 
Accordingly, from the logical point of view, erotetic ignorance is a gen- 
eralization of propositional ignorance. With erotetic ignorance the 
knower at issue simply does not know that such-and-such a proposition 
correctly answers the question at hand. That is, there is no proposition 
such that the knower knows it to be correct, and moreover knows it to 
be an answer to the question. 

However—and this is the important point—people can be adequate- 
ly informed about their erotetic ignorance. X can realize perfectly well 
that he does not know who killed Cock Robin. What he cannot know is 
that his defect of knowledge consists in not realizing that it is in fact 
Sparrow who killed Cock Robin. To realize this he would have to know 
something which, by hypothesis, he does not. 

In regard to erotetic ignorance a few distinctions must be carefully 
heeded. One of these is that between a possible answer (which may or 
may not be correct) and the correct answer. Consider: “What is the sum of 
2 +2?” There are lots of possible responses—answers, if you will—among 
them “13.” It is just that this is not the answer, that is, the correct one. If 
little Johnny offers this response, he has indeed given an answer, but it 
happens to be one that is incorrect. He has not given us the answer. Ig- 
norance is a matter of inability to give not an answer—that is, a mere re- 
ply—but the answer to the question at hand, one that is correct. 

A second significant distinction is that between ignorance and misin- 
formation. The person who simply does not know the answer to some 
question is ignorant in this regard. The person who thinks he knows the 
answer but is wrong about it is not just ignorant but misinformed. The 
error here is not just one of omission but one of commission. 

2. CONTINGENT AND NECESSARY 
PROPOSITIONAL IGNORANCE 

There are, clearly, more facts—say, about numbers, or about the 
world—that I can come to know. So there are some facts that I will never 
learn. But, of course, my ignorance of many of these facts is shallow and 
contingent, relating to facts that I could learn—that is, would come to 
know if I took the appropriate steps. But are there also facts that I could 
not possibly come to know, facts that are beyond my cognitive reach? 

Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 75 

Let fbe one of these facts which—for contingent reasons—I will nev- 
er come to know. Then “/is a fact that Rescher will never come to know” 
is true. It represents a genuine fact. Is this a fact that I could ever come 
to know? Clearly not, seeing that “Rescher knows that fis a fact that 
Rescher will never come to know” is self-contradictory. This is some- 
thing I cannot possibly know, albeit the impossibility here is contingent- 
ly based and is consequently a hypothetical (rather than an absolute) 
impossibility. And the ignorance at issue, while indeed necessary, is so 
by a hypothetical rather than by an absolute (categorical) necessity. 

One must distinguish between shallow ignorance, a matter of what 
someone does not know, and deep ignorance, a matter of what someone 
cannot know. Merely shallow ignorance is contingent and relates to facts 
that one could possibly know but does not. Thus while I do not know 
the present number of office buildings in Shanghai, this is something I 
could, in principle, find out about. Such facts are within learning range, 
so to speak. But deep ignorance is something more fundamental and 
relates to matters outside our cognitive range. 

3. CONTINGENT VERSUS NECESSARY 
EROTETIC IGNORANCE 

There are such things as paradoxical questions—questions that just 
do not admit of a true answer. Consider, for example, the question: 
“When you respond to this question, will the answer be negative?” Con- 
sider the situation of Display 1. The inability to answer such a question 
correctly cannot, of course, be counted as ignorance: after all, the ques- 
tion has no correct answer.! This sort of thing will not concern us here. 
Our interest in ignorance relates to questions that have answers that re- 
main unknown. 

Given the cognitive situation of Homo sapiens, there are many ques- 
tions that none of us is able to answer simply due to lack of information 

DISPLAY 1. Response to the Question: “When you 
respond to this question, will the answer be negative?” 

Answer given Truth status of this answer 
YES FALSE 
NO FALSE 

1. The question is not in principle improper. In particular it does not violate the dis- 
tinction between object and metalanguage but deals with an issue of the relationship be- 
tween the two. 

76 Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 

(“Just what did Julius Caesar eat for breakfast on that fatal Ides of 
March?”). Such questions indicate our merely shallow ignorance. But 
there are also questions that none of us can possibly manage to answer 
for reasons of logico-conceptual impossibility: 

¢ What is an example of an integer nobody will ever specifically men- 
tion? 
¢ What idea has never occurred to anybody? 

Some extramundane intelligence might be able to answer these ques- 
tions correctly, but we humans certainly cannot manage it. 

4. GENERAL NECESSARY IGNORANCE 

General erotetic ignorance relates to questions no one is able to an- 
swer. This will, of course, occur contingently whenever there is some 
piece of information that people-in-general lack. We have already seen 
various instances of this (e.g., Caesar’s breakfast). The more interesting 
situation is that of those cases where no one can possibly answer the 
question at hand. 

As noted above, there are matters of which individuals are ignorant: 
propositions whose truth status a given individual cannot determine. 
But it can also be established in general that if X is ignorant about the 
truth status of some proposition p and Y is ignorant about the truth sta- 
tus of some proposition gq, then there will be a proposition that com- 
bines p and g about whose truth status both are alike ignorant. 

The crux here is that when the truth status of is unknown to X and 
that of g unknown to Y, then the conjunction of p or not-p (whichever is 
true) with g or not-g (whichever is true) will be a true proposition un- 
known to both X and Y alike, irrespective of what else it is that they do 
or do not know. But this means that in a (finite) society of individuals 
each of whom is ignorant of some fact or other, there will be a megafact 
about which all of them are ignorant. And there will thus be a universal 
puzzle-question that no one can actually answer. 

This being so, the question yet remains: Is there such a thing as gen- 
erally necessary erotetic ignorance, questions that no one can possibly 
answer? 

5. UNANSWERABLE QUESTIONS 

In inquiring into this problem area, we are not interested in ques- 
tions whose unanswerability resides merely in the contingent fact that 
certain information is not in practice accessible—for example, “Did 

Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 77 

Julius Caesar hear a dog bark on his thirtieth birthday?” There is no 
possible way in which we can secure the needed information here-and- 
now (time travel is still impracticable). But, of course, such questions 
are not inherently unanswerable and it is unanswerability as a matter of 
principle that will concern us here.” 

If such questions can indeed be adduced, then, while one cannot 
identify an unknown truth, one would be able to identify cases of un- 
specifiable truth, propositions such that either p, or not-p, must be true 
and yet nevertheless there is no prospect of determining which it is. 
Here we can localize truth by emplacing it within a limited range (one 
here consisting of p, and ~p,) but cannot pinpoint it within this range of 
alternatives. One member of the assertion/denial pair will unquestion- 
ably prove to be true, but we cannot possibly say which it is: the specifics 
of the matters are unknowable. 

There are two principal sorts of unanswerable questions: those that 
are locally irresolvable, and those that are so globally. Locally unanswer- 
able questions are those that a particular individual or group is unable 
to answer. An instance of such a question is: “What is an example of a 
fact of which you are altogether ignorant?” Clearly you cannot possibly 
manage to answer this, because whatever instance you adduce as such a 
fact must be something you know or believe to be such (i.e., a fact), so 
that you cannot possibly be altogether ignorant of it. Yet, on the other 
hand, it is clear that somebody else could readily be in the position to an- 
swer the question. Again, consider such questions as: 

¢ What is an example of a problem that will never be considered by 
any human being? 

¢ What is an example of an idea that will never occur to any human 
being? 

There are sound reasons of general principle (the potential infinitude 
of problems and ideas; the inherent finitude of human intelligence) to 
hold that the items at issue in these questions (problems that will never 
be considered; ideas that will never occur) do actually exist. And it 
seems altogether plausible to think that other (nonhuman) hypotheti- 
cally envisionable intelligences could well answer these questions cor- 
rectly. But it is equally clear that we humans could never provide the 
requisite answers. 

And looking beyond this we can also contemplate the prospect of 

2. Nor will we be concerned here with the issue of indemonstrable truths and unan- 
swerable questions in pure mathematics. Our concern is only with factual truths, and the 
issue of truth in such formal disciplines as mathematics or logic will be left aside. 

78 Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 

globally intractable questions such that nobody (among finite intelli- 
gences, at least) can possibly be in a position to answer them (in the 
strict sense described at the outset). These questions have an appropri- 
ate answer but for reasons of general principle no one—no finite intelli- 
gence, at least—can possibly be in a position to provide it. 

An example of such globally unanswerable questions can be provid- 
ed by nontrivial but yet inherently uninstantiable predicates along the 
lines of 

e “What idea is there that has never occurred to anybody?” 
e “What occurrence is there that no one ever mentions?” 

There undoubtedly are such items, but, of course, they cannot be in- 
stantiated, so that questions that ask for examples here are inherently 
unanswerable.’ With such answer-possessing but unanswerable ques- 
tions it accordingly must transpire that the answer that, abstractly speak- 
ing, has to be there is one that cannot possibly be specified by way of 
particularized identification. 

6. INTRACTABLE QUESTIONS ABOUT THE 
COGNITIVE FUTURE AND SURD GENERALITIES 

As already noted, we can move from the by-X unanswerability of: 
“What is an example of truth that you, X, do not know to be so?,” to the 
universally insoluble: “What is an example of a truth that no one what- 
soever knows to be so?” For in a finite society of imperfect knowers, the 
existence of such a truth is guaranteed by the considerations mooted 
above. But while we must suppose reality’s complexity to be such that 
there are unknowable facts, we nevertheless cannot provide any specific 
examples of them. For, as already observed, the specification of un- 
knowable facts is totally infeasible since establishing factuality would au- 
tomatically clash with unknowability. Knowledge being knowledge of 
fact, whatever instances of unknown truth that we can consider have to 
remain in the realm of conjecture rather than that of knowledge. Given 
that knowledge fails us here, the most and best we can do is to resort to 
guesswork. Accordingly, let us now explore the prospect of making an at 
least plausible conjecture at specifying an unknowable fact. 

Some questions are unanswerable for essentially practical reasons: we 
lack any prospect of securing effective means for their resolution for 
reasons of contingent fact—the impractability of time travel, say, or of 
space travel across vast distances. But such contingently grounded igno- 

3. This issue here is one of so-called vagrant predicates that have no known address. 

Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 79 

rance is not as bad as it gets. For some questions are in principle irre- 
solvable in that purely theoretical reasons (rather than mere pivotal 
limitations) preclude the possibility of securing the information re- 
quired for their resolution. Nevertheless, there is—or may be—no 
sound reasons for dismissing such questions as meaningless because a 
hypothetical being can be imagined by whom such a question can in 
theory be resolved. But given the inevitabilities of our relation as time- 
bound and finite intelligences, the question may be such that any 
prospect of resolution is precluded on grounds of general principle. 

Are there any such meaningful yet intractable questions? 

Our best strategy here is to consider the situation of natural science, 
focusing specifically on the problem of our knowledge of the scientific 
future. Clearly, to identify an insoluble scientific problem, we would 
have to show that a certain inherently appropriate scientific question is 
nevertheless such that its resolution lies beyond every (possible or imag- 
inable) state of future science. This is obviously a very tall order—partic- 
ularly so in view of our inevitably deficient grasp of future science. After 
all, we cannot foresee what we cannot conceive. Our questions—let 
alone our answers—cannot outreach the limited horizons of our con- 
cepts. Having never contemplated electronic computing machines as 
such, the ancient Romans could also venture no predictions about their 
impact on the social and economic life of the twenty-first century. 
Clever though he unquestionably was, Aristotle could not have pon- 
dered the issues of quantum electrodynamics. The scientific questions 
of the future are—at least in part—bound to be conceptually inaccessi- 
ble to the inquirers of the present. The question of just how the cogni- 
tive agenda of some future date will be constituted is clearly irresolvable 
for us now. Not only can we not anticipate future discoveries now, we 
cannot even prediscern the questions that will arise as time moves on 
and cognitive progress with it.4 

Scientific inquiry is a venture in innovation. And in consequence it 
lies in the nature of things that present science can never speak deci- 
sively for future science, and present science cannot predict the specific 
discoveries of future inquiry. After all, our knowledge of the present 
cannot encompass that of the future—if we could know about those fu- 
ture discoveries now, they would not have to await the future. Accord- 
ingly, knowledge about what science will achieve overall—and thus just 
where it will be going in the long run—is beyond the reach of attain- 
able knowledge at this or any other particular stage of the scientific 
“state of the art.” 

4. Of course, these questions already exist—what lies in the future is not their exis- 
tence but their presence on the agenda of active concern. 

80 Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 

Omar Khayyam lamented our human ignorance of what is to follow 
for us after this earthly life: “Into this Universe, and Why not knowing, 
... I know not Whither, willy-nilly blowing.” But in this regard the hu- 
man situation vis-a-vis the condition of the merely worldly future is not 
that all different from that of the afterlife. In particular, it is in principle 
infeasible for us to tell now not only how future science will answer pres- 
ent questions, but even what questions will figure on the question agen- 
da of the future—let alone what answers they will engender. In this re- 
gard, as in others, it lies in the inevitable realities of our condition that 
the detailed nature of our ignorance is—for us at least—hidden away in 
an impenetrable fog of obscurity. 

It is clear on this basis that the question “Are there nondecidable scientif- 
ac questions that scientific inquiry will never resolue—even were it to continue ad 
indefinitum?’—the Insolubilia Question, as we may call it—is one that 
cannot possibly ever be settled in a decisive way. After all, how could we 
possibly establish that a question Q about some issue of fact will contin- 
ue to be raisable and unanswerable in every future state of science, seeing 
that we cannot now circumscribe the changes that science might under- 
go in the future? Quite interestingly, this very question is self-instantiat- 
ing: it is a question regarding an aspect of reality (of which, of course, 
science itself is a part) that scientific inquiry will never—at any specific 
state of the art—be in a position to settle decisively.® 

The long and short of it is that the very impredictability of future 
knowledge renders the identification of imsolubiha impracticable. (In 
this regard it is effectively a bit of good fortune that we are ignorant 
about the lineaments of our ignorance.®°) We are cognitively myopic 
with respect to future knowledge, for were it not so, then present rather 
than future knowledge would—contrary to hypothesis—be stressed. 
And for this reason there are questions such as those instanced above 
that are inherently irresolvable. 

But, of course, educated guesswork is something else again. 

5. And this issue cannot be settled by supposing a mad scientist who explodes the su- 
perbomb that blows the Earth to smithereens and extinguishes all organic life as we know 
it. For the prospect cannot be precluded that intelligent life will evolve elsewhere. And 
even if we contemplate the prospect of a “big crunch” that is a reverse “big bang” and im- 
plodes our universe into an end, the project can never be precluded that at the other end 
of the big crunch, so to speak, another era of cosmic development awaits. 

6. That contingent future developments are by nature cognitively intractable, even for 
God, was a prospect supported even by some of the Scholastics. On this issue, see Marilyn 
McCord Adams, William Ockham, vol. 2 (South Bend, Ind.: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 1987), chap. 27. 

Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 81 

7. INTIMATIONS OF UNKNOWABLE TRUTH 

The limits of knowledge acquisition pose particularly poignant is- 
sues. It is clear that the question 

What’s an example of a truth one cannot establish as such—a fact that we can- 
not come to know? 

is one that leads ad absurdum. The quest for unknowable facts—the 
project seeking to identify them—is inherently quixotic and paradoxi- 
cal because of the inherent conflict between the definitive features at is- 
sue: factuality and unknowability. Here we must abandon the demand 
for knowledge and settle for mere conjecture. But how far can we go in this 
direction? 

To explore the prospect of identifying unknowable truth, let us con- 
sider once more the issue of future scientific knowledge—and specifi- 
cally the already mooted issue of the historicity of knowledge. And in 
this light let us consider a thesis on the order of: 

(T) As long as scientific inquiry continues in our universe, there will 
always be a time when some of the then-unresolved (but resolvable) 
questions on the scientific agenda of the day will be sufficiently difficult 
to remain unresolved for at least two years. 

What is at issue here is clearly a matter of fact—one way or the other. 
But now let Q* be the question: “Is T true or not?” It is clear that actual- 
ly to answer this question Q* one way or the other we would need to 
have cognitive access to the question agenda of all future times. By their 
very nature as such, the discoveries of the future are unavailable at pres- 
ent, and in consequence Q* affords an example of an insolubilium—a 
specific and perfectly meaningful question that we shall always and ever 
be unable to resolve decisively—irrespective of what the date on the cal- 
endar happens to read. 

But, nevertheless, the issue is certainly one that lies open to reason- 
able conjecture—something that is, of course, very far from achieving 
knowledge. And, viewed in this light, the thesis Tis altogether plausible: 
it has all the earmarks of a likely truth.’ And so it seems reasonable to 
hold that a conjecture of this sort is emblematic of the best and most 
that we can ever hope to do, given that actual knowledge in such a mat- 
ter is clearly unattainable. 

7. And, of course, there are many other plausible theses of this sort, such, for example, 
“As long as scientific inquiry continues in the universe, every scientific discovery will even- 
tually be improved upon and refined.” 

82 Unanswerable Questions and Insolubilia 

8. IGNORANCE AND ERROR 

How serious a matter in the cognitive scheme of things is mere igno- 
rance? In this regard it might seem on first thought that there is a pro- 
found difference between ignorance and error. For in relation to any 
particular truth T, it is clearly a very different matter to be merely obliv- 
ious to 7’s truth, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, mistakenly 
to see it as false by accepting not-T. But this consideration, although 
perfectly true, overlooks an important aspect of the matter. 

The reality of it is that the manifold of truth overall forms a coherent 
and cohesive system. And in such a system the erasure of a single node 
leads to erroneous impressions overall in a way that leads from igno- 
rance to error. It you are unaware of that second “e” in “tweezer,” you 
are going to spell the word incorrectly. If you do not know that John has 
joined the group, you are likely to misjudge the size of its membership. 
It you do not know that it is raining, you will form the wrong judgment 
about the state of the streets. Unknowing—mere ignorance—opens the 
doorway to error and means that in every domain of rational inquiry— 
philosophy included—we must be prepared not only for additions to our 
putative information, but for corrections as well. Our human intelligence 
is unquestionably a point of justifiable pride, but this must nevertheless 
be kept within reasonable bounds—if not by humility, then by realism. 

Chapter 5 

OMNISCIENCE AND OUR 
UNDERSTANDING OF 
GOD’S KNOWLEDGE 

The limitations of human knowledge can be brought into vivid view 
by contrasting our situation with that of God. However, the present dis- 
cussion does not propose to tangle with the atheist: the question of 
God’s existence is irrelevant for its purposes. Our concern here will be 
strictly hypothetical, taking the form: Jf there is a God conceived of 
along the lines of traditional Christian theology, then how are we to un- 
derstand what is at issue with God’s knowledge? Accordingly, the focus 
of present deliberations is a conditionalized and conceptual question: 
How are we to conceive of God’s knowledge—if he exists? 

This issue of God’s knowledge, of course, has many aspects and gives 
rise to very different questions. On the traditional approach to the mat- 
ter, some of these have seemingly straightforward answers: 

Q: What does God know? A: Everything! After all, he is supposed to be 
omniscient. Whatever the facts may be, God knows them.! 

Q: How does God come to know what he knows? A: Learning is not really 
an issue with God. His knowledge is immediate and intuitive via an “in- 
tellectual vision.” This view of the matter represents a position that, on 
the philosophical side, runs deep throughout Neoplatonism and invites 
further explanation and elaboration. But the net effect is straightfor- 
ward: if something is the case, God directly and automatically knows 
it—no process of acquisition is involved. For unlike the case with our- 
selves, nothing causes or produces God’s knowledge: it is immediate, di- 
rect, unmediated. 

1. Some theologians deny that God knows the future contingencies that hinge on yet- 
unresolved free human choices, but reconcile this view with the principle under consider- 
ation by holding that while God does indeed know all facts, with future contingencies 
there just are (as yet) no facts of the matter. This issue poses complications that will not be 
pursued here. 

83 

84 Omniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 

A big problem nevertheless remains. What form does God’s knowledge 
take? This question is going to be something of a stumbling block be- 
cause the fact of it is that we can achieve no readily available answer 
here. As St. Thomas Aquinas cogently contended, the human under- 
standing is fundamentally verbal—in regard to factual issues, with us 
intelligere, understanding, is always a dicere, a somehow verbalized affir- 
mation. But such linguistic mediation is not required for God’s under- 
standing (De veriate, 4.2.5). The mechanics of divine knowledge must 
accordingly be something which, from our human point of view, is go- 
ing to be decidedly problematic. 

Various key aspects of God’s knowledge are informatively discussed 
in Eleanore Stump’s monumental Aquinas.? However, the presently op- 
erative problem—“How is God’s knowledge formulated? When the cat 
is on the mat, just how does God’s knowledge of this fact find expres- 
sion in his mind?”—is something left untouched in this discussion as in 
others. To be sure, as already indicated, when something is so, then, ac- 
cording to Aquinas, God “sees” it by an intellectual vision. But it is not 
the cat’s presence on the mat that is then in the mind of God, but 
rather an apprehension of the fact that the cat is on the mat. And the puzzle is 
how we are to conceive of this apprehension. There is, to be sure, the 
option of saying that we don’t and we can’t—that this is just one of 
those mysteries whose resolution rests with God himself. But that is 
rather unhelpful, and certainly did not satisfy Aquinas himself. Yet the 
analogy of vision, on which he placed great weight in his epistemology 
of divine knowledge, left matters in an unsatisfactory condition here— 
as well as elsewhere (as Stump indicates). 

The limits of logic are absolute and hold for God as well as for his 
creatures. And so even as God can do only what is doable for a being of 
his nature (and thus, for example, cannot annihilate himself), so he 
can only know what is knowable for a being of his nature (which means 
that—perhaps—he cannot have knowledge of particulars or—possi- 
bly—of future contingencies, and conceivably he could have difficulty 
with nonexistents as well). But none of this affects our present problem 
of the modus operandi of God’s knowledge with respect to those things 
that he indeed knows. 

How does God get to know about us? Our actions do not affect the 
mind of God because they do not effect changes in it. Rather, his knowl- 
edge of our doings is not experiential but a priori, inhering in the fact 
that he is the author of our existence. (Of course, the fact that he is our 
creator does not make him responsible for our actions, any more than 

2. Eleanor Stump, Aquinas (London: Routledge, 2003). 

Omniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 85 

the parent of a child is responsible for his or her actions.) But still there 
are difficulties. For it would certainly seem that a God emplaced outside 
the physical framework of space-time causality would be at a stultifying 
disadvantage as regards knowledge of his creatures because while he 
would unquestionably know the whole theoretical/causal story of how 
pain occurs but, yet for lack of actual experience, he could not have ac- 
cess to the phenomenological story of what pain feels like. (From the the- 
oretician’s point of view, this could be one of the prime facets of the ra- 
tionale for the Incarnation of the second person of the Trinity.) 

Except for utter skeptics, who ex officio deny all human knowledge 
whatsoever, people can certainly say a good deal about what God knows, 
since any knowable fact is thereby known to an omniscient being. And 
this will doubtless include abstract facts of possibility and necessity. But 
while God’s knowledge of what is necessary and what is possible can 
proceed abstractly from concepts alone (even as will be the case with 
us), nevertheless his knowledge of concrete actuality must be different 
since, unlike our knowledge, it will be somehow “intuitive” rather than 
sensuously mediated.’ And this will have to be so since God as creator 
can proceed (antecedently, as it were) to envision his creation while we 
must proceed (consequently) to perceive it. But, of course, the detail of 
the matter—the how of it, so to speak—lies beyond our grasp. There is 
no gainsaying the position of Aquinas on this point: the modus operan- 
di of an “intellectual vision” is bound to be beyond our ken. While we 
can demonstrate that God, regarded through the tradition’s eyes, has 
understanding (since understanding is pure perfection), we really can- 
not grasp the how mode of this understanding so as to say what it is like 
(De potentia Dei, 8.1.12). For God’s knowledge of things is direct, un- 
mediated, and intuitive while ours is causally produced and materially 
mediated. 

So in the end we had best grasp the nettle of inapprehension here. 
For it is clear that God’s thought must proceed on a basis very different 
from ours, limited beings that we are. Philosophers sometimes speak 
of a “God’s eye view” of things. But whatever this may be, we imperfect 
humans cannot manage to see matters with God’s eyes. Our thought 
about things is mediated by language and the instrumentalities of 
symbolic representation, while God’s thought is presumably nothing 
like that. Speculation about the language of God is an ill-directed en- 
deavor. 

Of course, we humans can only learn about the world by interacting 

3. On these issues, see John F. Boler, “Instructive and Abstractive Cognition,” in Nor- 
man Kretzman, ed., The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge, U.K.: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998), pp. 460-78, esp. pp. 465-69. 

86 Ommniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 

with it. Our knowledge of concrete things and occurrences is invariably 
channeled through experiential encounters conditioned by the circum- 
stances of space, time, and physical causality, since our only access to 
facts about the world is though the window afforded us by the senses. 
But God’s knowledge about the world has to be something quite differ- 
ent, something that roots in immediate intuition. After all, he does not 
encounter the world but makes it. 

Since the world is the product of God’s free creation decisions, and 
since, clearly, God “knows what he is doing,” his knowledge of contin- 
gent fact is a straightforward aspect of his self-knowledge. As St. Thomas 
puts it: 

God himself is, through his essence, the cause of being of other things. And so, 
since he has the fullest possible cognition of his essence, we must hold that he 
has cognition of other things as well. (Summa contra gentiles, 1.49.412) 

And so, human concepts, based as they are on a level of understanding 
conformed to our cognitive capacities and our experience, are simply 
inadequate to represent the realities of the situation of a divine being. 
More generally, our concepts cannot properly—and thus correctly— 
represent God himself. And this goes specifically and particularly for 
God’s mental (cognitive) operations as well. (All this was clearly ex- 
plained and expounded in detail by St. Thomas Aquinas.) 

Accordingly, the medieval philosopher-theologians sensibly held that 
in our deliberations regarding God’s thoughts and his mode of under- 
standing we are restricted to negativities. We can say a good deal nega- 
tively about what does not hold for God’s thought, but little if anything 
about what holds positively of it. What we principally know relates to the 
things that, thanks to its perfection, it does not, will not, and cannot do. 

And there is much to be said for this view. These milestones along 
the via negativa of our access to God’s knowledge include the facts that 
it is: 

—not sensorily mediated 

—not incomplete, imprecise, inaccurate, vague 

—not representatively mediated (and so not symbolic) 

—not discursive (but direct, immediate, intentive) 

—not erroneous or incorrect 

—not involved in impossibilities (and thus not encompassing with 
matters that cannot possibly be known, such as things that are not mat- 
ters of actual fact) 

—not formed in terms of the inadequate conceptions of cognitively 
imperfect beings such as ourselves 

Omniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 87 

—not developed from a perspective based in the orders of space and 
time.* 

But, of course, all of this involves matters on the negative side of the 
ledger. As St. Thomas insisted, the positivities of God’s knowledge lie 
beyond our grasp. The long and short of it is that we cannot possibly 
know what the terms of reference are that he employs in thinking about 
things.® 

Clearly the thoughts of God cannot be made intelligible to the mind 
of man to any great extent. “They know not the thoughts of the Lord” 
(Micah, 4:12). “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my 
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts” (Isa- 
iah, 5:9). The power of the human mind is as nothing in comparison 
with that of God: “The foolishness of God is wiser than [the wisdom of ] 
men” (1 Corinthians, 1:25). Clearly, whatever truths we actually know an 
omniscient God knows as well, and indeed he knows that and how we 
know it. But while we know that he knows it, we cannot adequately an- 
swer the question of just exactly how he does so. 

For us, the pervasive aura of negativity that prevails here has omi- 
nous implications. Philosopher-theologians have long been preoccu- 
pied with the problem of how cognitively feeble man can possibly un- 
derstand the ideas and thought processes of a cognitively infinite deity. 
And the sensible response here lies in the suggestion that this can at 
best and at most be accomplished by us through the use of analogies. 

But, of course, matters are bound to stand quite differently with the 
inverse question of how God is to understand us. In addressing this is- 
sue, it just will not do to invoke the mechanism of analogy as an instru- 
mentality of God’s cerebrations. For an all-powerful mind has no busi- 
ness transacting its conceptual affairs by the use of mere analogies, 
seeing that all analogies are by nature incomplete and imperfect. God’s 
own understanding must be such as to have no use—and no need—for 
mere analogies. 

Nor is the matter of God’s knowledge of the world resolved by the 
consideration that he made it. For insofar as the it is material in nature, 
there arises the puzzle of how a being whose own nature and mental ex- 

4. See A. N. Prior, “The Formalities of Omniscience,” Philosophy 37 (1962): 114-29; 
reprinted in Prior, Papers on Time and Tense (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1968). 

5. Speaking of the fundamental or “primitive” ideas in whose terms God’s conception 
of the world is framed, G. W. Leibniz wrote (A VI, UA, 530 [C. 514]): “Non videtur satis 
in potestate humana esse Analysis aonceptuum, ut scilicet passimus pervenire ad notiones 
primitivas, seu ad ea quae per se concipiuntur” (An analysis of the concepts enabling one 
to arrive at the primitive [divine] notions, through which things themselves are [actually] 
conceived does not seem to be within human power). 

88 Ommniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 

perience is purely spiritual can possess the concepts requisite for an ad- 
equate grasp of such a material realm. How can a pure spirit proceed- 
ing without sensory interaction manage to comprehend the machina- 
tions of matter? How can a cognitively unlimited being manage to enter 
into the thoughts of a limited, imperfect, finite mind whose ideas are 
confused and whose beliefs are erroneous? How can a being function- 
ing entirely outside the physical framework of space, time, and nature’s 
causality get a mental grip on our confusion, ignorance, uncertainty, 
and the like? All this is something that is pretty well bound to confound 
us. 

Many of our concepts are vague or confused. (How many rocks does 
it take to make a “heap”? What differentiates a “boat” from a “ship”?) 
But if our thinking is muddled, how can a God who is himself incapable 
of muddled thinking possibly understand it? Can he know what we are 
thinking when we think confusedly? Can the idea of “a good many” or 
“very few” have any meaning for a being who always knows exactly how 
many and for whom every idea is clear? No doubt he can know that ’m 
confusing X with Y. But can he know what’s going on when I do this and 
comprehend the confusedness of my thought? After all, to respond to 
analogy once more, while a teetotaler can see the effects of inebriation, 
how—without the experience of drinking—can God possibly grasp not 
just what being drunk 7s but what being drunk 7s like. 

To be sure, when we address the question “How does God conceive 
our thoughts?,” this effectively comes down to “How are we to conceive 
of his doing so?” For in posing the former question we cannot manage 
to do so without in effect addressing the latter one. And so, with us the 
issue of God’s modus operandi in understanding our human thoughts 
ironically—but inexorably—returns to the previous matter of our knowl- 
edge of God’s thoughts. In consequence, analogies (however unsatisfy- 
ing) will inevitably have to come into it—though they will be our analo- 
gies and not God’s. And here perhaps the most useful analogy is that of 
the situation of a less powerful but yet finite mind as compared to a 
more powerful one. 

A fundamental law of epistemology is at issue here, to wit, that a 
mind of lesser power is for this very reason unable to understand adequately the 
workings of a mind of greater power. To be sure, the weaker mind can 
doubtless realize that the stronger mind can solve problems it itself can- 
not. But it cannot understand how it is able to do so. An intellect that 
can only just manage to do well at tic-tac-toe cannot possibly compre- 
hend the ways of someone who is an expert at chess. 

Consider in this light the vast disparity of computational power be- 
tween a mathematical tyro like most of us and a mathematical prodigy 

Omniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 89 

like Ramanujan. Not only cannot our tyro answer the number-theoretic 
question that such a genius resolves in the blink of an eye, but the tyro 
cannot even begin to understand the processes and procedures that the 
Indian genius employs. As far as the tyro is concerned, it is all sheer wiz- 
ardry. No doubt once an answer is given he can check its correctness. 
But actually finding the answer is something which that lesser intellect 
cannot manage—the how of the business lies beyond its grasp. And, for 
much the same sort of reason, a mind of lesser power cannot dis- 
cover what the question-resolving limits of a mind of greater power are. 
It can never say with warranted assurance where the limits of question- 
resolving power lie. (In some instances it may be able to say what’s in 
and what’s out, but it can never map the dividing boundary.) 

It is not simply that a more powerful mind will know more facts than 
a less powerful one, but that its conceptual machinery is ampler in en- 
compassing ideas and issues that lie altogether outside the conceptual 
horizon of its less powerful compeers. 

Of course, a lesser intellect can know various things about what ques- 
tions a more powerful intelligence can answer and may even come to be 
informed about what those answers are. (After all, even someone who 
has no clue about how to extract the square root of a number will gen- 
erally be able to check that another’s answer affords a correct solution.) 
But what an ineptling cannot do is to perform that feat of discovery on 
his own. The weaker intellect can certainly know that the stronger can 
accomplish something and yet will be unable to form even crudely any 
correct conception as to how. 

It is instructive in this regard to contemplate an analogy. We—and in- 
deed any other type of inquiring being—must in forming our scientific 
view of the world work with the resources at our cognitive disposal. And 
three prime considerations are paramount here: 

© Computing power in relation to the mechanism of calculation and in- 
ference at one’s disposal 

¢ Descriptive power in relation to the sensors for detecting the phe- 
nomena and the instrumentalities of measuring the parameters of na- 
ture 

* Conceptual power in relation to the sophistication of the available 
machinery for conceptualization and theoretical systematization 

And the last of these interpretative powers is critical. For mental capa- 
bility is preeminently of conceptualization and its lack means an inabili- 
ty to understand concepts and issues—and not just ignorance regarding 
the truth or falsity of various (understood) propositions. 

Consider an illustration. The overall state-of-the-art of science at a 

go Ommniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge 

time ¢ will depend critically on the power of the available resources in 
these regards. And nothing is clearer than that the state of science in 
the fifteenth century was vastly inferior in comparison to that of the 
twentieth century. And it is also clear that increased cognitive power in 
these regards transforms the intellectual situation of science. Consider 
the perspective of a science of the distance future, say, of the year 3000. 
There is ample reason of general principle to think that the natural sci- 
ence of this later era will differ from ours to an extent substantially less 
than that of which our science of the present day differs from that of 
the year 1700. It is critical here that scientific progress is not just a mat- 
ter of a crossword puzzle—like filling in of blanks in a fixed and un- 
changing framework. It is a matter of transforming the conceptual land- 
scape in such a way that the new situation cannot ever be understood 
from the conceptual vantage point of an earlier, less sophisticated state 
of the art. 

Now insofar as the relation of a lesser toward a higher intelligence is 
substantially analogous to the relation between an earlier state of sci- 
ence and a later state, some instructive lessons emerge. It is not that 
Aristotle could not have comprehended quantum theory—he was a very 
smart fellow and could certainly have learned. But what he could not 
have done is to formulate quantum theory within his own conceptual 
framework, his own familiar terms of reference. The very ideas at issue 
lay outside of the conceptual horizon of Aristotle’s science, and like 
present-day students he would have had to master them from the 
ground up. Just this sort of thing is at issue with the relation of a less 
powerful intelligence to a more powerful one. It has been said insight- 
fully that, from the vantage point of a less-developed technology, anoth- 
er, substantially advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. 
And exactly the same holds for a more advanced conceptual (rather than 
physical) technology. 

It is instructive to contemplate in this light the hopeless difficulties 
encountered nowadays in the popularization of physics—of trying to 
characterize the implications of quantum theory and relativity theory 
for cosmology into the subscientific language of everyday life. A classic 
obiter dictum of Niels Bohr is relevant: “We must be clear that, when it 
comes to atoms, language can be used only as in poetry.” When physi- 
cists discuss the composition, structure, and comportment of the uni- 
verse in everyday language, they proceed by putting scare quotes 
around every other word because no term continues to function in any- 
thing like its ordinary sense. After all, there is in principle no end to the 
extent to which—on the indications of contemporary physics—the 
world could manage to be bizarre. (E.g., who knows but that our entire 

Omniscience and Our Understanding of God’s Knowledge gl 

physical universe is but a subatomic particle of some unimaginably 
greater megauniverse?) Medieval theologians insisted that our descrip- 
tive predications with respect to God are always merely analogical. Mod- 
ern scientists have taken this doctrine over and apply it lock, stock, and 
barrel to physical nature. 

But, of course, the step from present-day science to future science is 
bound to be vastly less than that from present-day science to the ideal 
and perfected science that functions (so we may suppose) in the defini- 
tive thought of an omniscient intellect. If we are destined to incompre- 
hension vis-a-vis the unpredictable science of the distant future, we are, 
a fortiori, so destined vis-a-vis the perfected knowledge of an omniscient 
being. We simply have to acknowledge that the ways and means of God’s 
knowledge are literally incomprehensible to us. We just cannot expect 
to get a grasp on his thinking. And for this reason, the problem of our 
knowledge about God’s knowledge has a relatively simple solution— 
one that (as we have seen) cannot but proceed in the negative. There is 
effectively nothing we can hope to achieve here. We can only realize 
this in a dim, imperfect, inadequate, and essentially negative and there- 
by indefinite way. For—to reemphasize—the crux of it is that a mind of 
lesser power cannot get an adequate grip on that of a greater power. 

Accordingly, the salient lesson of these deliberations is that those bib- 
lical texts that were quoted above have the essentials of the matter right: 
If the aim of a “cognitive theodicy” indeed is “to render the mind of 
God intelligible to the mind of man,” than there is no sensible alterna- 
tive to seeing this project as a lost cause, destined to futility because of 
the fundamental principles that characterize the conceptual realities of 
the situation. For, in the final analysis, the inadequacy of our under- 
standing of God’s knowledge does not lie solely in considerations of 
theology, but has its roots in the fundamental principles of the theory of 
knowledge. 

Chapter 6 
ISSUES OF INFINITE REGRESS 

1. VICIOUS REGRESS 

Prominent in the argumentation of Aquinas’s “Five Ways” for demon- 
strating the existence of God is a rejection of the possibility of an infinite 
regress—be it of movers, of causes, or of necessities engendered through 
the necessity of another. Moreover, as St. Thomas saw it, the universe has 
to issue from the creative nature of God without any causal “act of cre- 
ation” on his part. For the creative act of a perfectly rational agent would 
require an additional act of deliberation, and this in turn would require 
a determinative act of its own, and so on ad infinitum. Any such an infi- 
nite regress of reasoning is impossible, as St. Thomas saw it. 

But just what is it that renders unending regression self-defeatingly 
vicious? And is this ground of infeasibility—such as it is—actually opera- 
tive in the instances addressed by St. Thomas? 

The philosophical dismissal of infinite regresses is as old as the para- 
doxes of Zeno (b. ca. 485 B.C.) and the refutatory regresses of Plato (b. 
ca. 428 B.c.).! Aristotle too regarded infinite regress as impracticable in 
various contexts of discussion,2 and recourse to the idea as an instru- 
ment of refutation served as a standard procedure with the ancient 
Skeptics.? And the medieval Schoolmen took the same line. As they saw 
it in the wake of this tradition, an infinitely iterative process of unend- 
ing antecedence is bound to be vicious (or vitiating) because its nonter- 
mination would prevent realization of the end product that is putatively 
at issue.* Thus the idea that a witness is only to be deemed reliable 

1. On Zeno, see the author’s Paradoxes (Chicago: Open Court, 2001). Plato invokes 
the futility of infinite regress in several contexts, for example, with the explanatory regress 
of definitions (Cratylus, 421d9), the functional regress of “for the sake of” purposes (Lyses, 
219e5), and—most interestingly—as an objection to the theory of ideas (Parmenides, 
130-132). 

2. See the list of references appended below, esp. the monograph by Herbert Stekla. 

3. See Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrhéneién Hypotyposeon (I.xv and ILili). 

4. The Scholastics generally spoke of a progressus in infinitum. The expressions regressus 

92 

Issues of Infinite Regress 93 

when there are other reliable witnesses who can attest to his reliability 
must be abandoned on grounds of regressive viciousness. Again, a 
regress of demonstrations would be unavailing that did not somehow 
terminate in unexplained explainers as per the axioms of Euclidean 
geometry. If before asserting something we had to assert that we were 
asserting it, nothing would ever get asserted. And an infinite definition- 
al regress is self-defeatingly vicious, seeing that the fixation of meaning 
at issue in definitions is unachievable in situations that require further 
definition of the terms being employed—continuing on without end. 

All in all, then, the philosophical tradition saw infinite regresses as 
automatically vicious. But there is in fact reason to think that the matter 
is not quite so straightforward. 

2. HARMLESS REGRESS: STRUCTURAL REGRESSION 

To begin with, it deserves note that in the domains of physical nature 
and of mathematical structure regression can in theory go on and on 
endlessly without problem. For consider the availability of an infinite 
“regress of integers,” as with: 

... 4, -3, -2,-1, 0 

Clearly, there is no limit to numerical regressiveness here. Moreover, a 
further pathway to regressive harmlessness is the prospect of conver- 
gence thanks to an endless diminution, as with: 

.. Yo, ey, Y“, Y%, 1 

Here the convergence of the regress atones for the limitation of fini- 
tude. 

These, to be sure, are mathematical examples. But in physics we can 
also manage to have an unending regression of states within the physi- 
cally structured manifold of space, time, and causality. Here too regress 
can encounter the same two avenues to harmlessness: feasible infini- 
tude and finitizing convergence. Thus, in the case of physical causality, 
the regress will be harmless if past time is infinite, or again if the opera- 
tion of earlier causes can be squeezed into an endlessly smaller times- 
pan so that convergence can result. For the purposes of illustration, 
consider the Zeno-derived paradox of motion discussed by Aristotle at 
Physics 23.9b9—109. It involves the following line of thought: 

in infinitum arose in German neo-Scholasiticism via the Metaphysica of Baumgarten, whose 
usage was adopted by Immanuel Kant. 

94 Issues of Infinite Regress 

An object can never move from one position to another. For if it starts at A and 
is to move to B, then it will have to reach the halfway point between these, say B,. 
But to reach this point it will first have to reach the halfway point to it, namely, 
B,. And so on. Since there are always prior movements to be accomplished—and 
indeed even an infinity of them—the object will never be able to get a motion 
under way at all. Hence all objects are immovable and motion is impossible. 

The previous deliberations have already indicated how it is that the 
regress at issue here is not vicious but harmless, being rooted in a series 
that is convergent. 

Moreover, in the causal commerce of things, a result R can causally 
require the requisite R,, which in turn can causally require the requisite 
R,, and so on. Such an ontological regress of causally connected prereq- 
uisites can in principle go on ad indefinitum, since here too there can 
be convergence. For an infinite causal regress can be at work even in a 
world whose history is finite in time, as is illustrated by a linear time 
manifold that is “open to the left” as per 

++— 

If the cause of the situation at any juncture is inherent in the situation 
halfway between it and that missing starting point, than an infinite num- 
ber of causes can be fitted comfortably into a finite timespan. And since 
causation is in principle infinitely compressible (unlike any cognition-in- 
volving process), there is no reason why a universe that has a finite past 
cannot accommodate infinite causal regresses. In theory, every event 
can have a cause as per the Principle of Causality. There is nothing insu- 
perably problematic here: the crux is an extratemporal inauguration- 
juncture that is not itself part of the temporal manifold. In such a set- 
ting every (temporal) event can have an antecedent cause, ad infinitum, 
and there is accordingly nothing impossible or impractical about an infi- 
nite causal regress. 

To be sure, medieval theologians—following the lead of the Church 
Fathers—sought to prove the existence of God from the impossibility of 
an infinite regress of causes.° Thus Thomas Aquinas denied the possibil- 
ity that one could “go on to infinity with efficient causes, for in an ordi- 
nal series the first is the cause of the intermediate and the intermediate 
the cause of the last” and “if there were not a first among efficient caus- 
es... . there would be no intermediate causes nor an ultimate effect.” 

5. And not Christian theologians alone. This also was the view of the Islamic philoso- 
pher-theologian al-Ghazali. See Taneli Kukkonen, “Possible Worlds in the Tahdfut al-tahd- 
jut: Averroes on Plenitude and Possibility,” Journal of the History of Philosophy 38 (2000): 
329-47; SEE Esp. Pp. 345- 

6. St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologica, Ia, 2, 3; cf. Summa contra gentiles, 1, 13; Com- 
pendium theologiae, 1, 3; and Commentary on the Metaphysics, 1, 3, 303. 

Issues of Infinite Regress 95 

And Scotus too argues (via five distinct arguments) that an infinite se- 
ries of antecedent causes is impossible.’ And just this is what the present 
perspective renders problematic. 

What this array of examples of harmless regression suggests is that re- 
gressive viciousness is not something automatic. For the real problem 
resides not in endless regression as such, but rather in envisioning the 
accomplishment of an infinite task. 

Thus, for example, the matter would be quite different with explana- 
tory grounds in the sense of reasons for being (rationes essendi).8 For 
while the reasons we can give are always finite, the reasons that these are 
need not be. After all, it is perfectly conceivable that the manifold of 
fact constitutes a dense field in that not only is every fact explicable but 
every one is actually explained by some others. It is just that we cogni- 
tive agents could not possible map out such a field. Indeed, we could 
not even trace out the explanation of one single given fact all the way 
down. (But, of course, this incapacity of ours with respect to explaining 
does not go to show that such explanations are nonexistent.) 

What these deliberations indicate is that positional regression in 
some structured domain can be quite harmless, but that performatory 
regression—requiring for some end the completion of an infinite num- 
ber of presupposed tasks—is for this very reason vicious. Let us examine 
this situation more closely. 

3. THE LOGIC OF THE SITUATION 

Basic to this discussion is the underlying idea of a regressive relation 
subject to the definition that: 

The relation R is regressive over a set S if it establishes a serial order through af- 
fording an irreflexive, asymmetrical, and transitive relation that assigns to each 
Sitem one or more other Sitems as its predecessors (or antecedents). 

On the basis of this definition, a relation R can be characterized as vi- 
ciously regressive if 

7. Opus oxoniensis, 40-42, in Philosophical Works, ed. Allan B. Wolter (London: Nelson, 
1962). 

8. For instructive discussions of the views of Aquinas and Scotus regarding infinite 
causal regress in the context of the Cosmological Argument for God’s existence, see 
William L. Rowe, The Cosmological Argument (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1975), and William Lane Craig, The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz (London: 
Macmillan, 1980). And see also Patterson Brown, “Infinite Causal Regression,” Philosophi- 
cal Review 75 (1966): 510-25. 

96 Issues of Infinite Regress 

1. Ris a regressive relation (over the set S) in the sense just defined. 

2. Rrepresents a condition of sine qua non requiredness: that is, an 
item would not exist as an Smember of relevant items if all of its Rean- 
tecedents did not exist. 

3. In the nature of the case, no Smember can possibly have an infi- 
nite number of R-antecedents. 

The viciousness at issue here lies in the fact that 1-3 are collectively in- 
consistent: when conjoined they engender a logical contradiction.° In a 
situation where 1-3 are claimed an error of some sort must have crept 
in: one of those three conditions simply has to fail. 

And so when the items that are connected by a supposed regress rela- 
tion do not constitute a clearly defined group, then viciousness is re- 
moved from the scene. The situation is not clearcut enough to make 
for contradiction. Nor is there now any need to look for a regress stop- 
per. The idea of seeking out a starting point—a first (or indeed any oth- 
er superlative)—is useless with respect to a group whose boundaries are 
not decisively and decidedly delineated.'° 

Thus three strong universal generalizations will have to obtain for 
various regressiveness to result, namely, 

1°. The relation R is defined for every member of S. 
2°. No member of S would exist were it not that... 
3. No member of Scan possibly .. . 

All of these universalistic conditions on the Sseries must hold if the in- 
consistency at issue with viciousness is to be engendered. Throughout, a 
lapse from universatility would break the chain of inconsistency. 

There are, however, two decidedly different sorts of regressive rela- 
tions R: the equivalent and the diminishing. Thus a regress of steps is 
diminishing when all members of the series are significantly smaller in 
magnitude than their predecessors. With steps there can generally be 
smaller and larger. And this holds even for cognitive regresses. Thus a 
regress of explanation can be diminishing, with earlier steps being 
somewhat less adequately explanatory than later ones. Again, consider 
the regress of ideas at issue with the thesis “Every idea emerges out of 
previous ideas” or the regress of theories at issue with “Every theory is 
the emendation of an earlier one.” As we move backward in such a 
regress, the earlier members become so diminutive (have so little 

g. The flaw at issue with vicious regressiveness is thus not an independently self-sus- 
taining fallacy of some sort, but something that comes to light through reductio ad absur- 
dum. On this point, see Clark 1988, p. 378. 

10. On these issues, see the author’s Philosophical Standardism (Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press, 1994). 

Issues of Infinite Regress 97 

ideation or theorizing about them) that we can scarce tell whether an 
idea or a theory is at issue at all. The regress peters out into an imper- 
ceptible minuteness, much like the images in two facing mirrors. Such 
diminution to a subliminal obscurity creates a regress ad indefinitum 
rather than ad infinitum, and such regression need not be logically in- 
coherent, seeing that conditions 1-3 are now not cosatisfied. 

With unending regresses we must take the idea of endlessness seri- 
ously. A nonequivalently diminishing regress that fades away by reced- 
ing into a fog of impermeable obscurity—the ancestry of a human, for 
example, as it loses its way along the evolutionary corridor of prehis- 
toric time—is indefinite rather than infinite, and thereby avoids the 
theoretical problems that could otherwise arise. In specific, when a re- 
gression has a sine qua minus rather than a sine qua non character, vi- 
ciousness fails to materialize because regression peters out into harm- 
less nothingness. 

With equivalent, that is to say, nonterminating regresses, the situa- 
tion is quite different. For instance, a regress of definitions will be 
equivalent: definition does not admit of degrees. And when the per- 
formance of a task of some sort requires (ad indefinitum) the prior per- 
formance of the same sort, and this sort of task, as actual performance, 
is not endlessly compressible—and so cannot be performed in a times- 
pan of arbitrary minuteness—then this task is impossible on grounds of 
vicious circularity. On this basis, Gilbert Ryle in The Concept of Mind ob- 
jects quite rightly to the “intellectualist legend” that every intelligent 
mental operation is itself the product of an intelligent mental opera- 
tion. This sort of thing would, of course, be vicious. Accordingly, it was 
shrewd of the sagacious Leibniz not to argue for the necessity of a first 
cause on the ground of the infeasibility of an infinite regress of causes, 
but rather to argue against the infinite regression of causal explana- 
tions.!! 

4. HARMFUL REGRESSION: 
INCOMPRESSIBLE ACTIONS 

As the preceding considerations indicate, viciousness does not lie in 
regressiveness as such, but in the nature of the regress. An infinite 
regress of stages within a larger structure is feasible, an infinite regress 
of actions within a larger process is not, since actions always require 
some finite timespan for their performance.'? 

11. “On the Radical Origination of Things” (1697), in L. E. Loemker, ed., G. W. Leib- 
niz: Philosophical Papers and Letters (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1969), pp. 486-91. 
12. This significant point is stressed in Dingler 1930, p. 578. 

98 Issues of Infinite Regress 

With structures as such there is upon the scene no such thing as a 
performative precondition. For example, in going from point 0 to point 1 
you must cross the halfway point . 

0) % 1 

This does not in fact engender an impossibility because reaching points 
is the sort of thing that is accomplished in an infinitesimal timespan. 
The process at issue is infinitely compressible. And this is practicable be- 
cause what is at issue is a series of stages and not of performances. For 
while you have to reach % and cross 4, these are mere stages and not per- 
formances, results you neither intend nor try to do. For “reaching” and 
“crossing” are accomplishment verbs that involve no conscious mental 
process, whereas anything that involves intention and trying will be 
quite different in this regard.!’ Reachings and crossings can be infinite 
in nature but intendings and tryings—and performances in general— 
cannot. The infinitism of physical structure does not recur at the level 
of mental performance. And so while structurally geared processes can 
come to terms with infinite complexity, mentally geared performances 
cannot, seeing that they lack the requisite time divisibility.' 

The viciousness of regress in matters of performance can be ex- 
plained as follows: humans are finite creatures. Anything they willingly 
do, be it physical or cognitive, has the aspect of a synoptically finite 
process that has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Accordingly, a sine 
qua non regress within the realm of deliberate human production—be it 
cognitive or physical—must ultimately terminate simply because it can- 
not go on indefinitely thanks to an insufficiency of time for accomplish- 
ing the task at issue. We can make the components of a machine or a 
building or a cake, and then make the components of these compo- 
nents, but this productive regress must terminate at some point in ingre- 
dients that are natural and unmade by human artifice. And this is just as 
true where cognitive products rather than those of physical artifice are 
at issue. Here too a productive regress must ultimately terminate in 

13. That processes involving conscious human thought cannot be infinitely regressive 
has been stressed by various writers. See, e.g., Sanford 1984, p. 105; see also Thomson 
1954-1955- 

14. This serves to explain the phenomenon (remarked upon by Clark 1988, p. 1) that 
vicious regresses figure prominently in philosophy but not in mathematics and physics. 
For intervals of numbers, time, and space are infinitely divisible into others but actions 
are not. On the other hand, regress dismissal does (or can) figure in biology. The finite 
history of the Earth means that the thesis “Humans can only spring from humans” must 
be rejected on grounds of regressive viciousness. The idea of an origin of species can thus 
be filled out with an essentially a priori validation. 

Issues of Infinite Regress 99 

something that is provided by nature rather than produced by us. In the 
final analysis, the requisites at which a productive regress in the cogni- 
tive domain terminates—alike in matters of definition, explanation, in- 
terpretation, and cognition—will have to be items that are not them- 
selves products of our own productive processes. Whenever productive 
regresses are matters of deliberate performance they must have a stop. 

The difference between structural and performatory regression is 
crucial here, seeing that the former is generally innocuous but the lat- 
ter vicious. Thus consider: it is a precondition for a proposition’s truth 
that all its preconditions are satisfied. So let 

T(p) abbreviate “p is true.” 
P(p) abbreviate “All of p’s preconditions are satisfied.” 

We now have 

pit T(p) if P(p) 

And we now embark on an infinite regress, seeing that p requires T(p), 
which requires P(p), which requires P(T[p/]), which requires P(P[p/]), and 
so fourth. But of course “precondition” here means logical precondition 
and not procedural precondition. (It is clearly not the case that to assert 
pwe must somehow first independently establish that p is true.) We are 
dealing here with a family of theses interrelated in logical “space,” and 
not with a set of performatory prerequisites. And this is not only impor- 
tant but also fortunate, seeing that if the latter were indeed at issue, the 
regress would indeed be vicious. 

The key role of the performatory aspect can be seen as follows. Con- 
sider the following theses: 

e A number (n) is an integer if one can specify another larger integer 
(n+ 1) that is its immediate successor. 

eA proposition (p) is a truth iff one can specify some other 
“stronger” truth (p+ 7) that entails it. 

These perspectives are rendered innocuous and true by the considera- 
tion that 

¢ A number (n) is an integer if there is another, larger integer (n+ 1) 
that is its immediate successor. 

¢ A proposition (p) is a truth if there is another, “stronger” truth (p + 
r) that entails it. 

Both of these generalizations are unproblematically true in virtue of the 
structure (be it mathematical or logical) of the overall manifold of inte- 
gers or truths, respectively. 

100 Issues of Infinite Regress 

However, the following specifications would at once issue in a vicious 
circularity: 

e A number (n) is an integer if one has specified another, larger inte- 
ger (n+ 1) that is its immediate successor. 

e A proposition (p) is a truth if one has specified another, “stronger” 
truth (p+ r) that entails it. 

For here the shift from structure to performance, from can be specified to 
has been specified, is fatal. For it imposes on the realization at issue (of a 
number or of a truth) the unrealizable prerequisite burden of accom- 
plishing an infinitude of tasks. 

And so it transpires in general that if a time-incompressable task is 
such that its accomplishment requires a prior accomplishment of exact- 
ly the same sort, then this task is impossible on grounds of vicious circu- 
larity. Thus consider the following theses: 

¢ To define a term, some of the terms employed in this definition 
must first be defined. 

¢ To prove a fact, some of the facts deployed in its proof must first be 
proven. 

¢ To explain an idea, some of the ideas needed for its explanation 
must first be explained. 

¢ To manufacture an item, some of its components must first be 
manufactured. 

¢ To make a plan, one must first plan out the process of doing do. 

e To decide an issue, one must first decide to decide it. 

¢ To desire something, one must first fix upon something for whose 
sake this is being desired. 

All of these specifications lead to an in principle vicious regress. 
It was in just this vein that Aristotle wrote: 

There is some end to the things we do which we desire for its own sake and we 
do not choose everything for the sake of something else. For then the process 
would go on to infinity so that our desire would be empty and vain. (Nico- 
machean Ethics, 1.2; 1094a 18-22; cf. Metaphysics, Alpha 2; 994a 1-9) 

In all such cases the accomplishment of a result requires the prior ac- 
complishment of exactly the same sort of thing by a process that is time- 
incompressible. All such tasks are impossible because they call for a pri- 
or sense of identical steps whose performance cannot be realized in an 
infinitesimal amount of time. And all such specifications can be ruled 
out on grounds of vicious circularity. For cognition-involving process- 

Issues of Infinite Regress 101 

es—such as defining, proving, and the like—just do not work like this. 
Here regression runs into the stone wall of inescapable finitude. 

In specific, with respect to explanation, it should be noted that in ac- 
counting for facts through their explanatory subsumption under gener- 
al principles, we embark on a process which, as Herbert Spencer has ar- 
gued, must inevitably have a stop: 

Can we go on forever explaining classes of facts by including them in larger 
classes. .. . The supposition that the process is unlimited, were any one absurd 
enough to espouse it, would still imply that an ultimate explanation could not 
be reached. . . . Manifestly, as the most general cognition at which we arrive can- 
not be reduced to a more general one, it cannot be understood. Of necessity, 
therefore, explanation must eventually bring us down to the inexplicable. The 
deepest truth which we can get at must be unaccountable.!® 

Cognitive accomplishments—acts of awareness, recognition, realiza- 
tion, or states of mind such as worriment or rejoicing—are never instan- 
taneous. And human consciousness is not so much a continuous stream 
as a chain of interlocked units of discrete jumps and starts—units whose 
temporal duration may be brief but never infinitesimal. And whenever 
regressive steps cannot be compressed below some finite timespan, 
however minuscule—which is certainly the case with cognitive acts of 
comprehension—then a correlative temporal regress will be vicious 
when unending. Here we arrive at the conclusion that cognitively ho- 
mogeneous (i.e., like-presupposing) cognitive actions are impracticable 
because—unlike some mathematical and physical processes—their re- 
duction in size cannot continue ad infinitum. 

A further vivid illustration of the difficulty is afforded by the so-called 
Third Man Argument against the theory of ideas addressed in Plato’s 
Parmenides. The theory at issue holds in effect that: 

To be in a position to claim that two items A and B are alike in some respect R 
requires a mediating item, X,, distinct from both A and B, such that both of 
them resemble X, in the relevant respect R. 

This formula straightaway engenders the complication of an incom- 
pletable infinite regress. 

Yet another good illustration of the impracticability of infinite cogni- 
tive regresses is provided by etymology, the explanation of word mean- 
ings in terms of changes in the meanings established in an earlier stage 
of word-usage customs. Here we cannot proceed ad infinitum because 
the establishment of a particular word-usage custom is something that 

15. Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 5th ed. (London: Appleton, 1885), pp. 62-63. 

102 Issues of Infinite Regress 

requires a substantial period of time and cannot be compressed into a 
diminutively small-time interval. 

Again consider the example afforded those probability epistemolo- 
gists such as J. M. Keynes who hold (1) that we are never entitled to 
make categorical judgments but only judgments of probability, and yet 
(2) that as regards probability assessments we can only evaluate condi- 
tional probabilities because absolute evaluations of probability are im- 
practicable. Here too we are embarked on an infinite cognitive regress, 
being put in the position that we can only evaluate p’s probability rela- 
tive to g but yet cannot determine qs probability as such but only its 
probability relative to g,, whose own probability in turn we can only eval- 
uate relative to q,, and so on. In consequence, we are launched upon an 
infinite cognitive regress whose viciousness invalidates the whole enter- 
prise. 

The pivotal issue is the same throughout such examples. For while 
structural regresses in any spacelike setting are potentially harmless on 
grounds of nonterminating divisibility, the situation is radically altered 
when we turn to action performance of any sort. For actions—of any de- 
scription, be it physical or cognitive—are never infinitely compressible 
within time. 

5. THE REGRESS OF REASONS 

In recent years a teacup storm has broken out in the philosophical 
literature regarding the viciousness of an infinite regress of reasons.!® 
Unfortunately, the achievement of clarity has been impeded here by the 
failure to draw the crucially needed distinction between 

1. the (normative) reasons that there are, abstractly speaking, for a per- 
son’s doing something—that is, available facts which, purely under- 
stood, would lead a rational person to take this course, and 

2. the de facto reasons that actually actuate a person’s doing some- 
thing—that is, the actual considerations by which the agent is moved to 
do this thing. 

And so (at least) two sorts of “reasons” come on the scene with respect 
to an agent’s acts: the good reasons that (abstractly speaking) there are 

16. See Peter Klein, “Foundationalism and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 58 (1998): 919-25, and “Human Knowledge and the Infi- 
nite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophical Perspectives 13, (1999): 297-325; Carl Gillett, “In- 
finitism Redux?: A Response to Klein,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 66 (2000): 
709-17; and Peter Klein, “When Infinite Regresses Are Not Vicious,” Philosophy and Phe- 
nomenological Research 66 (2000): 710-29. 

Issues of Infinite Regress 103 

for his performing that act, and by contrast, the actually operative rea- 
sons that actuated him in his considerations and deliberations. The log- 
ical geography of fact is a diversely connected structural network. Noth- 
ing prevents the first sort of reasons—the normative reasons—from 
forming part of an infinite manifold in which regression ad infinitum is 
innocuously possible. But, of course, the second sort of reasons—those 
that in actual fact figure explicitly in course of consideration and delib- 
eration—cannot regress unendingly. These performatory processes 
must be finite and their regress must terminate so that here infinite 
regress is inacceptable on grounds of viciousness. 

6. EXPLANATORY REGRESSION 

The critical difference between a physical and a cognitive regress can 
be instanced via the mythical Hindu cosmology that envisions the 
Earth’s position in the cosmic void in terms of its being emplaced on 
the back of an elephant that stands on the back of a tortoise that stands 
on the back of an alligator that .... (Perhaps from there on it is a mat- 
ter of “alligators all the way down.”) It is conceivable that the structure of 
the cosmos could be like that. But this would still afford no explanation 
of the Earth’s seemingly stable position in the cosmos. For a cognitive 
regress—unlike a physical one—is vitiated if it cannot be brought to a 
satisfactory termination. So while there is nothing inherently impracti- 
cable about an alligator-on-alligator-and so on cosmology, an alligator-on- 
alligator-and so on explanation of the Earth’s stability is impracticable. 

Just what is one to make of the infeasibility of regressiveness with re- 
spect specifically to explanation? When we explain one fact by means of 
others and these in turn by means of still others, where does it all end? 
Over the years, different philosophers have construed the idea of expla- 
nation stoppers in somewhat different ways: 

* propositions that are self-certifyingly necessary (Spinoza) 

® propositions that are explicitly analytic (Leibniz) 

® propositions that are necessary a priori (Kant) 

* propositions whose denials are inconceivable (Herbert Spencer) 
* propositions that are (self-)evident (Roderick Chisholm) 

But throughout this tradition people saw the explanatory regress as 
coming to a halt in a category of “ultimate” propositions that them- 
selves need no further explanation—a rock bottom of self-validating 
propositions that contain their explaining reasons within themselves— 
their own substantive nature. The problem, however, is finding some- 
thing that will do the job. This quest encounters serious difficulty. To 

104 Issues of Infinite Regress 

the extent that our beliefs are self-validating, they are bound to be ei- 
ther trivial (“Knives have blades”) or subjective (“That object looks like 
an apple to me”). And in neither case will they be sufficiently informa- 
tive to evidentiate any significant substantive conclusion. We are caught 
in a bind: to whatever extent beliefs are self-validating they are informa- 
tively too empty to evidentiate anything objective, and to whatever ex- 
tent they provide useful evidentiation they are too substantively laden to 
be self-validating. 

Such difficulties of selfevidentiation suggest shifting to a rather dif 
ferent line of approach—one that is distinctly pragmatic in its orienta- 
tion and thereby seeks to achieve explanatory adequacy without requir- 
ing a rock bottom of explanation-stopping self-evidencers. For one can 
avoid an endless explanatory regress—not through reaching a rock bot- 
tom of adamantine necessity, but simply by going back only as far as is 
contextually appropriate within a particular domain of deliberation. Here 
there is no infinite regress at all, but simply a petering out, not because 
the process of regression has hit a roadblock but because the process 
has gone on as long as need be—there is neither need nor point to con- 
tinuing the process. 

Our explanations, interpretations, evidentiations, and substantia- 
tions can always be extended. But when we carry out these processes ad- 
equately, then after a while “enough is enough.” The process is ended 
not because it has to terminate as such, but simply because there is no 
point in going further. A point of sufficiency has been reached. The ex- 
planation is “sufficiently clear,” the interpretation is “adequately co- 
gent,” the evidentiation is “sufficiently convincing.” One can indeed go 
further, but the circumstance of diminishing returns indicates that 
there is no point in doing so. With these nonvicious cognitive regresses 
termination is not a matter of necessity but of sufficiency—of sensible 
practice rather of inexorable principle (as it is with sine qua non regress- 
es). What counts is doing enough “for practical purposes.” 

The fact of it is that those “practical purposes” of the situation often 
bring a potentially infinite cognitive regress to an end fairly quickly. For 
example, you are thinking of reading a certain book or seeing a certain 
film. This being so, you would be well advised to look up some reviews. 
And when you have them at hand you would even be well advised to 
seek out some reviews of the work of those reviewers. And when you 
find these you might even want to go to the length of seeking out re- 
views of the work of the relevant reviewers of reviewers. But while this 
process can in theory be extended indefinitely, you would in practice be 
foolish—as well as unreasonable—to fail to call it a day at this stage. In 
such a process, the thread of relevancy soon peters out. 

Issues of Infinite Regress 105 

And so, regressive viciousness in explanation can be averted not by a 
recourse to self-validating basics of some sort, but rather by the consid- 
eration that the practical needs of the situation rather than considera- 
tions of general principles serve to resolve our problems here. (Just 
how such a program can be made to work out in detail is a long story 
that need not preoccupy us further here.!”) 

We are here brought to one of the key ideas of the philosophy of 
Kant. As he saw it, it lies in the nature of rationality to stake a demand 
for the completion of the regressive series of reasons. Theoretical rea- 
son, that is to say, ideally wants everything demonstrated, and in these 
demonstrative matters “[theoretical] reason demands completeness on 
the side of conditions.”!§ But at the same time—and this is to Kant’s 
mind the irony of it—reason acknowledges that a finite creature cannot 
accomplish this task: regressive completing is beyond its capacity. Ac- 
cordingly, our knowledge cannot be validated demonstratively “all the 
way through” (so to speak) and its substantiation must always ultimately 
come to a stop in a nondemonstrative resource, namely, experience. 
(Here Kant was in agreement with Aristotle.) For finite creatures, cogni- 
tive validation is thus achieved not when everything has been done to 
achieve the deductive regress ideally necessary to rational systematiza- 
tion, but when enough has been done for the purposes at hand. Since we 
cannot achieve totality, we must settle for suffictency, and this is ultimate- 
ly a practical rather then a purely theoretical matter. Thus, for Kant, the 
ultimate fruit of the unrealizability of an infinite regress in cognitive 
matters is the crucial lesson that the prioritizing of practical over theo- 
retical reason is an inescapable aspect of the human condition. 

To be sure, the situation can also be regarded in a rather non-Kant- 
ian way by simply rejecting the idea that “reason demands demonstra- 
tive completeness.” The approach now at issue would propose to see it 
as outright unreasonable to demand something that is not to be had. 
Contrary to Kant, reason would then be regarded in a more modest 
light, subject to the idea that even theoretical reason can recognize and 
acknowledge its unavoidable limitations and settle in cognitive matters 
for cogent substantiation rather than always and everywhere requiring 
categorical demonstration. And so, in the end, what matters for rational 
substantiation is not theoretical completeness but pragmatic sufficiency. 

17. For details, see the author’s Epistomology (New York: State University of New York 
Press, 2003), chap. 5. 
18. Critique of Pure Reason, A409. 

106 Issues of Infinite Regress 

7. BACK TO ST. THOMAS 

The salient lesson of the present deliberations is that regression is 
not automatically vicious. For a regressive process that merely displays 
the unending complexity of a structure (say, in arithmetic or in the case 
of a physical manifold on the order of space-time causality) can prove to 
be perfectly innocuous. However, a regressive process that looks to uni- 
formity in the performance of such actions that as, by nature, are not 
time compressible must for this very reason prove vicious. An unending 
regress of causes is conceivable, an unending regress of causal explana- 
tions is not—at least as long as those explanations are to be intelligible 
to us humans. 

What matters crucially for regressive viciousness is not merely the ex- 
istence of an infinite antecedence of prior steps but 

1. That these steps do—or are supposed to—represent indispensable 
sine qua non preconditions for reaching the prevailing position, and 

2. That the time-incompressibility of their accomplishment renders 
their realization impossible in principle. 

And so when St. Thomas maintained that an infinite regress of causes is 
impossible he treads on problematic ground. 

All the same, it appears that St. Thomas’s basic position makes good 
sense even in the face of the additional complications introduced in 
our present analysis of infinite regress. For while an infinitely powerful 
intelligent being could doubtless institute an infinitely complex uni- 
verse within which an infinite regression of movers, causes, and grounds 
would be operative, nevertheless such a world could not be domesticat- 
ed to the inherent requirements for intelligibility imposed by the limita- 
tions of finite intelligences whose intellectual processes must proceed 
discretely in time. After all, an infinite regress of humanly accessible 
causal explanations is impossible—but this is due to the time-incompress- 
ibility of explanations as a valid process, and not to the inherent impos- 
sibility of an infinitude of temporal processes as such. So as long as the 
possibilities at issue are our human possibilities, the regressive situation 
envisioned in the “Five Ways” will have to prevail. A world that is user 
friendly to finite intelligence must be such as to avert the need for ex- 
planatory regression.!° 

1g. When Leibniz later viewed the situation from the standpoint of God, he aban- 
doned the idea that an infinite regress is necessarily vicious and came to regard infinitude 
as a characteristic hallmark of divine workmanship. See the present author’s account in 
“Leibniz on God’s Free Will and the World’s Contingency,” Studia Leibnitiana 34 (2004): 
208-20. 

Issues of Infinite Regress 107 

REFERENCES 

Albert, Hans. Traktat tiber Kritische Vernunft. Tabingen, Germany: J. C. B. Mohr, 
1968 (2nd ed. 1991). See esp. pp. 13-15. 

Aquinas, St. Thomas. Summa theologica. 

Aristotle. Physics 239b9-19; Metaphysics, Gamma 4, 1066a8ff.; Posterior Analytics, 
Ag, 72b5ff. 

Bendiek, J. “Regressus/Progressus in infinitum. 
Philosophie 8 (1992): 487-89. 

Black, O. “Infinite Regress of Justification.” International Philosophical Quarterly 
28 (1988): 421-37. 

Clark, Romane. “Vicious Infinite Regress Arguments.” In J. E. Tomberlin, ed., 
Philosophical Perspectives, 369-80. Atascadero, Calif.: Ridgeview Press, 1988. 
Craig, William Lane. The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz. London: 

Macmillan, 1980. 

Dingler, Hugo. “Zum Problem des regressus in infinitum.” In F. J. Von Rintelen, 
ed., Philosophia Perennis, 571-86. Regensburg, Germany: J. Habbel, 1930. 
Fumerton, R. Metaepistemology and Skepticism. Boston: Rowman & Littlefield, 

1995. 

. “Replies to My Three Critics.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 
(1998): 927-37. 

Geach, Peter. Truth, Love and Immortality: An Introduction to McTaggart’s Philoso- 
phy. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1979. 

Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason, A512-B545. 

Klein, Peter. “Foundationalism and the Infinite Regress of Reasons.” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 58 (1998): 919-25. 

. “Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reason.” Philosophical 

Perspectives 13, (1999): 58-79. 

. “When Infinite Regresses Are Not Vicious.” Philosophy and Phenomenologi- 
cal Research 66 (2003): 718-29. 

MacKay, A. F. “Impossibility and Infinity.” Ethics go (1980): 367-81. 

Mellor, D. H. Real Time. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 

Moser, Paul. “Whither Infinite Regresses of Justification?” Southern Journal of Phi- 
losophy 23, (1985): 65-74. 

Oakley, I. T. “An Argument for Skepticism Concerning Justified Beliefs.” Ameri- 
can Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976): 221-28. 

Passmore, John. Philosophical Reasoning. 2nd ed. London: Duckworth, 1970. 

Post, J. “Infinite Regresses of Justification and Explanation.” Philosophical Studies 
38 (1980): 31-52. 

Riley, J. “Arrow’s Paradox and Infinite-Regress Arguments.” Ethics 92 (1982): 
670-72. 

Rowe, William L. The Cosmological Argument. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Universi- 
ty Press, 1975. 

. “Cosmological Arguments.” In Philip Quinn and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds., Companion to the Philosophy of Religion, 114-22. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Black- 
well, 1997. 

Ryle, Gilbert. The Concept of Mind. London: Routledge, 1949. 

Sanford, D. H. “Infinity and Vagueness.” Philosophical Review 84 (1975): 520-35. 

. “Infinite Regress Arguments.” In J. H. Fetzer, ed., Principles of Philosophi- 

cal Reasoning, 93-117. Totowa, N.J.: Rowman & Allanheld, 1984. 

” 

Historisches Worterbuch der 

108 Issues of Infinite Regress 

Sosa, Ernest. “The Raft and the Pyramid: Coherence versus Foundationalism in 
the Theory of Knowledge.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5 (1980): 3-25. 

Stekla, Herbert. Der regressus ad infinitum bei Aristoteles. Meisenheim am Glan, 
Germany: Hain, 1970. 

Thomson, James. “Tasks and Supertasks.” Analysis 15 (1954-1955): 1-13. 
Reprinted in W. C. Salmon, ed., Zeno’s Paradox, 89-102. Indianapolis and 
New York: Bobbs Merrill, 1970. 

Chapter 7 
BEING QUA BEING 

1. INTRODUCTION 

This discussion will trace out a definite story line. Initially it seeks (in 
sections 2-3) to clarify the idea of “an actually existing thing” along 
lines that combine classical philosophical approaches with contempo- 
rary analytical perspectives. It then seeks (in sections 4-5) to show how 
the resulting conception of such actually existing objects involves identi- 
fiability and intelligibility in a way that endows this idea with a mind- 
coordinated and idealistic aspect in a manner reminiscent of medieval 
conceptualism. Finally, the ensuing discussion (sections 6—7) elucidates 
the sharp contrast between actual existence and merely mind-projected 
possibilities. Overall, this discussion stresses the fact that the concept of 
existence so functions as to demand that the manifold of existing things 
must form a conceptually integrated and systemic whole. In this way, 
discussion tries to show how a proper understanding of existence that is 
faithful to the mainstream of philosophical tradition must negotiate its 
way between both idealistic and realistic approaches. 

2. DEFINING “EXISTENCE” 

Existence spreads its arms wide to embrace a great many things. But 
what can be said about reality at large—about existence in general? Is 
existence even definable? Can we devise a definition to capture the 
claim that something “is” or “exists”? 

What is a definition anyway? What is needed to define a term? On his- 
torical principles, the idea at issue is that a “definition” must provide 
two things. It must specify the meaning of the term at issue in such a way 
as to distinguish it from anything else, and it must clarify the meaning by 
making it more clear, more cognitively accessible than it was to begin 
with! Thus Dr. Johnson’s notorious “definition” of net as a “reticulated 
texture with large interstices” fails decidedly in the second respect. A 

109 

110 Being qua Being 

proper “definition” must elucidate matters; it must not explain a term 
by means of expression that is comparatively more obscure. 

On this basis, it seems plausible to say that existence is an indefinable 
term. There is nothing we can do to restate the meaning of is/exists in 
terms of reference clearer and more accessible than those of the expres- 
sion itself. 

But how can one come to grips with a term that is indefinable? The 
answer is that its meaning must be abstracted from its use. It has to be 
learned by experience that manages to draw lessons from the observa- 
tion of practice in a way that is characteristic of intelligent beings. The 
situation that obtains here is analogous to that of a skill that is learned 
by practice/doing rather than by learning and following the instruc- 
tions of some set of rules. 

3. CHARACTERIZING “EXISTENCE” 

But even though we may not be able to define is/exists/ has being—to 
restate its meaning in simpler, more accessible terms—there are various 
explanatorily helpful generalizations that we can make about it. For 
even when a term is not definable, it may be characterizable in terms of var- 
ious generalizations that can properly be made about it. 

The first and foremost thing that can be said about existence is that 
“to be is to be an item, to be a unit of some sort, however complex.” In 
other words, to claim that something exists is to claim it to be a unit. In- 
tegrity and identity are required for unity. A unit can, of course, be com- 
plicated in its natural structure and have many facets, parts, and compo- 
nents. But these must be integrated into one whole. It is accordingly 
seems in order to stand committed to the principle: 

x exists > xis a unit 

For genuine things (of whatever sort they be) must admit of counting, 
something that is clearly impossible in the absence of identifiable units. 
An item is thus a particular—something that is distinct from everything 
else. 

Of course, something can be a unit in some respect and not in oth- 
ers. The Italy of his day, so Bismark said, was not a nation but a geo- 
graphic region. It was, that is to say, not a political but a geographic 
unit. But that, of course, is enough for existence, seeing that to exist is to 
be a unit of some sori. An internally complex and disaggregated whole 
can certainty exist (e.g., the group of wives of Henry VIII). But insofar 
as what is at issue here happens to be a complex (or composite or 
group), it is one complex (or composite group) irrespective of the num- 

Being qua Being 111 

ber of its components. No doubt unity is a flexible idea, but then, of 
course, so is existence. 

On the other hand, the reverse does not seem to be the case. The 
Easter Bunny is a unit, no doubt. But it simply does not exist. The 
Scholastic dictum that being and unity convert (ens et unum convertun- 
tur) does not seem to get it right. Only a real item that figures in some 
actually realized domain can qualify as an existent. 

4. DETERMINING EXISTENCE: 
PHYSICAL EXISTENCE AS PARADIGMATIC 

Given the diversity of this idea’s applications, existence is best seen as 
a feature rather than as a descriptive property. And while the idea is not 
readily definable, there are some rather evident standards for its deter- 
mination. Paradigmatic illustrations of existing items are afforded by 
concrete physical objects (e.g., trees, rocks, dogs) and concrete physical 
processes (e.g., magnetic storms, heat waves). Then, additionally, there 
will, of course, also exist whatever items are required adequately to de- 
scribe, classify, or explain the things that exist—the things, processes, or 
features that function in an adequate account of existence. We thus ar- 
rive at an essentially “recursive” characterization of existence running 
essentially as follows: 

1. Concrete physical objects or processes exist. 

2. Whatever items (things, features, processes) are needed for an ad- 
equate causal or explanatory account of the origins, nature, or opera- 
tions of something existing—its properties, its features, and its modes of 
functioning—will also exist. 

To exist is accordingly to have some role in the world’s structural or 
processual makeup. It is to play a substantive role in the explanatory 
scheme of things. On this basis the crux for existence can be a matter of 
conception rather than perception in specific. 

This characterization of existence accordingly also links the concept 
with the issue of causality. This linkage is bound up with the traditional 
idea that only real causes can have real effects—that whatever is at issue 
with the causal origins of something existing will itself thereby be real, 
and more generally that whatever constitutes an element in the expla- 
nation of something real must for this reason also exist. And, of course, 
anything that can be successfully indicated ostensively in the public do- 
main—this pen, that page, yon thunderbolt, that color—is going to be 
real in virtue of this fact. 

Physical (spatiotemporal) existence thus provides the paradigmatic 

112 Being qua Being 

exemplification of existents. Physical existence has two definitive fea- 
tures: it is locatable in space-time, and it forms part of the world’s causal 
commerce. Whatever has being of this sort is on this account a compo- 
nent or a facet of the physical world’s manifold of space-time causality. 
And in virtue of this, any element of physical existence is, in principle, 
accessible to experience. That is, it must, by its nature, be able, in prin- 
ciple, to figure in the experience of some sort of creature or other—not 
necessarily ourselves, but some theoretically and naturally possible sort 
of creature. And, conversely, anything that figures in the experience of 
a sentient being—be it actual or possible—is actually existent as such. 
To be sure, the item at issue may be an illusion, like the pink elephant 
seen “the morning after.” But what is an illusion here is that pink ele- 
phant and not the experience itself—the phenomenal elephant sight- 
ing—which is as such (i.e., as a phenomenon) as real as could be. 

5. IS “EXISTENCE” UNIVOCAL? 

Given that the idea of existence resists definition, it is not surprising 
that there is no genus of which all existents are species. The idea is 
“transcategorematic” and is effectively applicable in every descriptive 
category of things. 

The question of whether existence/being is univocal or not—whether 
existence is strictly one sort of thing or whether an inherent diversity 
splits it into different types or modes as regards the meaning of what is at 
issue—is a question that was debated extensively among the Schoolmen. 
Duns Scotus (ca. 1266-1308) was one of the most decided univocalists. 
One of his key arguments was a reductio ad absurdum that ran essential- 
ly as follows: If being were an equivocal term admitting a plurality of ver- 
sions—so that being-1 were altogether different from being-2 in mean- 
ing—then we would not be able to say whether or not an object has 
being without fixing whether it is being-1 or being-g that is at issue, 
which (so Scotus argued) may fail to be the case. But this view of the 
matter appears to be deeply problematic. For there seems to be nothing 
of which one could meaningfully say that it had being without an at least 
tacit indication of the sort of being involved—for example, whether it is 
being-as-a-physical-object or being-as-a-number that is at issue.! 

Scotus’s argumentation was apparently based on a line of thought 
that runs somewhat as follows: Suppose that being were an equivocal 
term admitting of two altogether different specific senses, say being-1 
and being-2. Still, nothing could prevent us from amalgamating the two 

1. See Peter King, “Scotus on Metaphysics,” in Thomas Williams, ed., The Cambridge 
Companion to Duns Scotus (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 
15-68; see esp. p. 18. 

Being qua Being 113 

terms into a generic single unit via the definition that x has being szm- 
pliciter if x either has being-1 or x has being-2. On this basis, so it would 
seem, there automatically results a unified sense of being that is univo- 
cal and applies equally and alike to beings-1 and beings-2. But such a 
stratagem will not actually do the job because it is deeply problematic. 
For disjunction effects a merely formal and not a conceptually coherent 
unification. One can certainly propose the definition 

Tirgret = tiger or egret 

But this definition fails its intended purpose: it does not manage to in- 
troduce a conceptually unified and coherent mode of animal designa- 
tion into the sphere of our considerations. It is based upon a linkage 
that is nominal rather than natural—in name only rather than in func- 
tion. And to all visible appearances the same is true of the very artificial 
unification that the present approach envisions. 

Scotus also introduced a further argument for the univocality of be- 
ing that runs roughly as follows’: Existence must be universal and man- 
age to characterize—uniformly and equally—innumerable fundamen- 
tally different sorts of things. For it characterizes all concrete substances 
that are revealed by our senses. And the only factor that all such things 
have in common is the fact that they exist. Existence must therefore ap- 
ply universally across the board to all of the concrete substances that fig- 
ure in our thought and discourse. 

However, this argumentation has its problems. For the fact of it is 
that there are many other factors that all the substances that figure in 
our deliberations have in common. They all possess various features: 
they are all items that we can identify; they are all objects that figure in 
our deliberations; and so on. That commonality betokens existence is a 
very problematic idea. 

Consider the “existence” of such things as physical objects, physical 
processes, natural dispositions, trends and tendencies, natural laws, 
states of affairs, properties and qualities of physical objects, or numbers. 
With some of these it may seem more proper to say that they function 
or obtain or are operative, but the point is that they all do or can have a 
reality of sorts even though different sorts of locutions are sometimes 
used to indicate this. All of them, that is, are viable units of some sort.* 

It thus seems reasonable to say that different types of things “exist” in 
different ways or modes in such a deep-rooted way that different senses 
of the term are at issue—that the existence of numbers, for example, is 

2. Ibid. 
3. Physical objects exist (or not), states of affairs obtain (or not), solutions to problems 
are available (or not), etc. 

114 Being qua Being 

something rather different from the existence of trees. To say both “ex- 
ist,” while in a way true, manages to mask a conceptual distinction by a 
terminological uniformity. Existence is not a concept that has an essen- 
tialistic common core: it diversifies into very different modalities and 
modes of being that are at best related in something of the “family re- 
semblance” manner. Different sorts of things have such “existence” as 
they do in very different sorts of ways.* 

6. THE PASSIVE/IDEALISTIC ASPECT 
OF “EXISTENCE” 

How does existence look from the angle of mind? How does actual 
being relate to the reach of mind in the context of perception, under- 
standing, and the grasp of intelligence in general? How do matters of 
epistemology (i.e., of understanding and knowledge) bear upon mat- 
ters of ontology (i.e., of being and existence) ? 

Bishop Berkeley maintained that 

¢ To be is to be conceived. 

But unless one is, like the good bishop, prepared to press God into serv- 
ice as a philosophical resource, it would be more strictly correct merely 
to say: 

¢ To be is to be conceivable. 
Along these lines, compare and contrast the theses that: 

¢ To be is to be 

—identifiable (recall Quine’s dictum: “No entity without identity”) 
—describable 

—classifiable/categorizable 

—experienceable 

Observe that all of these purportedly essential characteristics of existing 
things have certain features in common: 

¢ They are passive rather than active. That is, they relate to what can 
be done with or to existing things, rather than to what such things 
themselves do. 

e They are mentalistic in nature, and relate to things that only mind- 
equipped beings can possibly do. 

4. To say this is not, of course, to gainsay that various appropriate generalizations can 
be made—after all, no matter how loosejointed that “family resemblance” may be, all 
members of a family can be human. 

Being qua Being 115 

It warrants note in this regard that anything characterizable as an ac- 
tivity cannot possibly be common to all existents—of whatever sort. For 
there clearly are some existents—for instance, abstract ones like num- 
bers—that never change at all. Changeability may well be a universal 
characteristic of concrete physical existents, but not one of existents in 
general. Only passive features—and cognitively geared ones at that— 
can plausibly be held to be universal among existents. What is common 
to all existents is not a matter of what they themselves do but rather of 
what can be done with them by intelligent beings engaged in apprehen- 
sion and inquiry. 

In the final analysis, it makes no sense to ascribe existence to that 
which—even in principle and in theory—lies outside the potential 
reach of mind. Whatever plays a role in the realm of the real is bound 
to be such that some possible (inarguable, conceivable) intelligence 
can come to grips with it. 

7. ABSTRACT VERSUS CONCRETE 
“EXISTENCE” (Dasein) 

Neither is all existence physical, nor yet is all physical existence con- 
crete. For something is concrete only if it both (1) has what Kant called 
Dasein, that is, presence in the world and thereby spatiotemporal loca- 
tion, and moreover also (2) does this uniquely—that is, by way of being 
a definite particular item not admitting of multiple instantiations, real- 
izations, exemplifications.» An example of physical-existence-in-the- 
world that is not concrete is afforded by the laws of nature (e.g., the Law 
of Gravitation). And facts afford another example. Such things, howev- 
er, are not concrete. For concrete physical existence is spatiotemporally 
localized—unlike the nonlocalizably diffused realities such as a proba- 
bility distribution. 

Again, certain mental events and occurrences, though realized in 
time, fail to have spatial location. One’s brain has physical location, but 
one’s ideas do not. And one’s worries and headaches, while perfectly 
real, are not concrete because they lack a position in space. Such items 
have being (existence) but not spatially a localizable being-in-the-world 
(Dasein). They are real without being concrete. The fact remains, howev- 
er, that real physical objects are invariably concrete.® 

In overview, existents over and above those that are concrete can be 
classified as follows: 

5. Use of the German word Dasein (“being there”) for concrete existence goes back at 
least to Kant. See Rudolf Eisler’s Kant Lexikon (Hildesheim, Germany: G. Olms, 1989). 

6. On the concreteness of the real, see Charles Hartshorne, Anselm’s Discovery (La 
Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1965), pp. 189-92. 

116 Being qua Being 

¢ Those that are neither spatially not temporally located (the num- 
ber 2). 

¢ Those that are located temporally but not spatially (headaches, 
thoughts, Caesar’s birthday). 

All such items have an identity but are not concrete. Concreteness is 
only achieved through spatiotemporal localization. However, not only 
physical objects can have concreteness but also states of affairs as well. The 
cat’s presences on the mat from 2:00-4:00 P.M. this afternoon is a con- 
crete state of affairs. 

8. THE COMPLEXITY OF 
CONCRETE EXISTENCE 

While abstract objects will unquestionably have existence in their 
own way and manner, nevertheless, the paradigmatic existents are the 
concretely real things of this world. And this reality is endlessly complex 
in its details. As we standardly think about particulars within the con- 
ceptual framework of our factual deliberation and discourse, any real 
concrete particular has more features and facets than it will ever actual- 
ly manifest in experience. For every objective property of a real thing 
has consequences of a dispositional character, and these are never com- 
pletely surveyable because their dispositions inevitably have endowed 
them with an infinitistic aspect that cannot be comprehended with- 
in experience.’ This desk, for example, has a limitless manifold of 
phenomenal features of the type “having a certain appearance from a 
particular point of view.” It is perfectly clear that most of these will nev- 
er be actualized. Moreover, a thing ts what it does: entity and operation 
are coordinated correlates—a good Kantian point. And this consid- 
eration that real things must exhibit lawful comportment in behavior 
means that the finitude of experience precludes any prospect of the 
exhaustive manifestation of the descriptive facets of any actual exis- 
tents.® 

7. To be sure, various abstract things, such as colors or numbers, will not have disposi- 
tional properties. For example, being divisible by four is not a disposition of sixteen. Plato 
got the matter right in Book 7 of the Republic: in the realm of mathematical abstracta 
there are not genuine processes—and process is a requisite of dispositions. Of course, there 
may be dispositional truths in which numbers (or colors, etc.) figure that do not issue in 
any dispositional properties of these numbers (or colors, etc.) themselves—a truth, for ex- 
ample, such as my predilection for odd numbers. But if a truth (or supposed truth) does 
no more than to convey how someone thinks about a thing, then it does not indicate any 
property of the thing itself. (Fictional things, however, can have suppositional disposi- 
tions: Sherlock Holmes was addicted to cocaine, for example.) 

8. This aspect of objectivity was justly stressed in the “Second Analogy” of Kant’s 

Being qua Being 117 

All concrete things not only have more properties than they ever will 
overtly manifest, but they have more properties than they ever can possi- 
bly actually manifest. This is so because the dispositional properties of 
things always involve what might be characterized as mutually preemptive 
conditions of realization. This lump of sugar, for example, has the dis- 
positional property of reacting in a particular way if subjected to a tem- 
perature of 10,000°C and of reacting in a certain way if placed for one 
hundred hours in a large, turbulent body of water. But if either of these 
conditions is ever realized, it will destroy the lump of sugar as a lump of 
sugar, and thus block the prospect of its ever bringing the other proper- 
ty to manifestation. The severally and separately possible realization of 
various dispositions may fail to be mutually compossible, and so the dispo- 
sitional properties of a real thing cannot ever be manifested complete- 
ly—not just in practice, but in principle. Our objective claims about real 
things always commit us to more than we can actually ever determine 
about them. Our information about things is always simply the visible 
part of the iceberg. 

The existence of this latent (hidden, occult) sector is a crucial fea- 
ture of our conception of a real thing. Neither in fact nor in thought 
can we ever simply put it away. To say of this apple that its only features 
are those it actually manifests is to run afoul of our conception of an ap- 
ple. To deny—or even merely to refuse to be committed to the claam— 
that it would manifest certain particular features if appropriate condi- 
tions came about (e.g., that it would have such-and-such a taste if eaten) 
is to be driven to withdrawing the claim that it is an apple. The latent, 
implicit ramifications of our objective factual claims about something 
real is potentially endless, and such judgments are thus “nonterminat- 
ing” in C. I. Lewis’s sense. The totality of facts about a thing—about 
any real thing whatever—is in principle inexhaustible and the complex- 
ity of real things is in consequence descriptively unfathomable. Endless- 
ly many true descriptive remarks can be made about any particular actu- 
al concrete object. For example, take a stone. Consider its physical 
features: its shape, its surface texture, its chemistry, and so on. And then 
consider its causal background: its subsequent genesis and _ history. 
Then consider the multitude of functional aspects reflected in its uses 
by the stonemason, or the architect, or the landscape decorator, or 
whomever. There is, after all, no end to the perspectives of considera- 

Critique of Pure Reason, although his discussion rests on ideas already contemplated by 
Leibniz. See G. W. Leibniz, Philosophische Schriften, ed. C. I. Gerhardt, vol. 7 (Berlin: Weid- 
mann, 1890), pp. 310ff. 

g. See C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 
1962), pp. 180-81. 

118 Being qua Being 

tion that we can bring to bear on things. The botanist, herbiculturist, 
landscape gardener, farmer, painter, and real estate appraiser will oper- 
ate from different cognitive “points of view” in describing one selfsame 
vegetable garden. And there is in principle no theoretical limit to the 
lines of consideration available to provide descriptive perspectives upon 
a thing. 

Our characterization of real things can accordingly become more ex- 
tensive without thereby becoming more complete. New descriptive fea- 
tures can and do ongoingly come into view with the progress of knowl- 
edge. (Caesar not only did not know, but in the then prevailing state of 
knowledge could not have known, that his sword contained tungsten.) 
Real things are—and by their very nature must be—such that their actu- 
al nature outruns any particular description of it that we might venture. 
From this angle, too, it is clear that the realm of reality-appertaining 
fact inevitably outruns the reach of our descriptive information-at- 
hand.!° 

It follows from such considerations that we can never justifiably claim 
to be in a position to articulate “the whole truth” about a real concrete 
object. The domain of thing-characterizing fact inevitably transcends 
the limits of our capacity to express it, and a fortiori those of our capacity 
to canvas it completely. In the description of concrete particulars we are 
caught up in an inexhaustible detail: the cardinal feature of reality is its 
inherent complexity. There are always bound to be more descriptive 
facts about actual things than we are able to capture with our linguistic 
machinery: the real encompasses more than we can manage to say 
about it—now or ever. The position of St. Thomas Aquinas was right on 
target in this regard, for as he saw it no concrete entity can possibly be 
described completely. The very idea of a complete description of such 
an entity is in principle impracticable. 

After all, the truth regarding any particular actual existent runs off 
into endlessly proliferating detail. No matter how much is told us, we 
can ask for yet more pertinent information and in principle expect a 
sensible and informative answer. It is a crucial facet of our epistemic 
stance toward the real world that there is always more to be known than 
what we now explicitly have. Every part and parcel of reality has features 

10. The reference to us is crucial here. Duns Scotus rejected Aquinas’s fundamental 
contention that concrete entities do not admit of descriptive completeness. To be sure, 
object description is not a finite process—and for this reason we humans could never 
manage to realize it. But God can do so. He can achieve what Leibniz was later to call the 
complete individual concept of a concrete particular. But, of course, what is possible for an 
omnipotent and omniscient God is not within our limited reach. Dealing concretely with 
nonexistents and irrealia is effectively beyond us. 

Being qua Being 119 

lying beyond our present cognitive reach—at any “present” whatsoever. 

Consider an example. On a map of the United States, Chicago is but 
a dot. But when we go to a map of Illinois it begins to take on more de- 
tail, and on a map of Cook County it presents a substantial and charac- 
teristic shape. Yet the line does not end there. We could, in theory, go 
on to map it block by block, house by house, room by room, dish by 
pitcher, molecule by molecule. And with increasing detail new and dif- 
ferent features constantly emerge. Where does the process stop? Not 
with atoms, certainly—for the impenetrable and unchanging atoms of 
the ancient Greeks have become increasingly dematerialized and ethe- 
real, in the light of modern physics even composed of ongoingly small- 
er processes. As we increase the power of our particle accelerators, our 
view of the makeup of the physical world becomes not only ever differ- 
ent but also ever stranger. There is, as best we can tell, no limit to the 
world’s ever-increasing complexity that comes to view with our everin- 
creasing grasp of its detail. To all visible appearances the realm of fact 
and reality is endlessly layered: no matter how far our descriptive char- 
acterizations go, there is always more to be said. In this setting, exhaus- 
tiveness and completion are simply not realistic prospects." 

Q. IRREALITY AND CHAOS 

All determinalism is negation, so Spinoza urged, insisting that in 
specifying what something is we thereby distinguish it from that which it 
is not. In this light it is both constructive and instructive to contrast exis- 
tents with nonexistents. 

How do actual existents compare with what is at issue with merely 
speculative possibilities regarding things that are not? The things that 
are and the features and relationships they exhibit constitute the mani- 
fold of fact and define the lineaments of truth. But what happens when 
we suppose what might have been and insert falsehoods among truths? 

From the cogntive point of view, there is good reason to think that 
the move from existence to unrealized possibility is a plunge into chaos. 

11. To be sure, someone might maintain that while it is always possible to say more 
about an existing thing, that nevertheless a Law of Diminishing Returns becomes opera- 
tive so that whatever new and additional material comes to view will after a certain point 
make only trivial additions to what has gone before, thus filling in increasingly small-scale 
details that leave the previously established “big picture” substantially intact. There are, 
however, cogent reasons why this line of thought does not succeed in the present context. 
For details, see the author’s The Limits of Science (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 
1999). On the other hand, the circumstance that there is always more that can be said 
does not contravene the fact that in the context of a particular question or issue one can 
readily reach the point where nothing further needs to be said. 

120 Being qua Being 

A chaotic condition, as natural scientists nowadays use this term, obtains 
when we have a situation that is tenable or viable in certain circum- 
stances but where a change in these circumstances—even one that is 
extremely minute—will destabilize matters with imponderable conse- 
quences, producing results that cannot be foreseen in informative de- 
tail. When a precarious condition exists, even a small change in the pre- 
vailing circumstances can produce results that are at once large and 
unpredictable. 

Historians and students of human affairs generally regard the state of 
public affairs as representing a chaotic condition of this sort. Who can 
say, they are wont to ask, what would have happened had Cleopatra’s 
nose been longer—let alone if one of Hitler’s failed assassins had suc- 
ceeded or if President Kennedy’s successful assassin had failed. The re- 
sult of changes in the historical course of things cannot be assessed with 
any reliability. Historians—and diplomats as well—are reluctant to en- 
ter into what-if speculation because the firm ground not just of reality 
but of realism is then apt to dissolve beneath their feet. 

And much the same case holds among present practitioners of astro- 
physics and cosmology. Given the structure of fundamental physical law 
as we have it, they see the universe as existing early on in a highly pre- 
carious position with respect to the value of the fundamental physical 
constants. They view the universe as incredibly fine-tuned, arguing that 
if its fundamental forces (gravitation, nuclear binding force, etc.) were 
even the least bit different, a universe of stable objects could never have 
developed.!? But exactly what sorts of conditions would have resulted if 
the universe had to evolve under different conditions (i.e., different 
laws and operating principles) is a matter of risky speculation that per- 
mits no confident resolution on the basis of our knowledge about how 
matters stand. 

To leave reality behind is thus to open the door to chaos. Every false 
supposition, every hypothetical change in the physical makeup of the 
real—however small—sets in motion a vast cascade of further such 
changes either in regard to the world’s furnishings or in the laws of na- 
ture. For as we conjure with those pebbles, what about the structure of 
the envisioning electromagnetic, thermal, and gravitational fields? Just 
how are these to be preserved after the removal and/or shift of the peb- 
bles? How is matter to be readjusted to preserve consistency here? Or 
are we to do so by changing the fundamental laws of physics? 

And what is true at the physical level holds at the ontological level as 
well. For it is readily seen that we cannot make hypothetical alterations 

12. See Martin Rees, Just Six Numbers (New York: Basic Books, 2000). 

Being qua Being 121 

in the makeup of the real without thereby setting out on a course that 
raises an unending series of questions. And not only do content redistrib- 
utions raise problems but so do even mere content erasures, mere cancel- 
lations, because reality being as it is they require redistributions to fol- 
low in their wake. If by hypothesis we zap that book on the self out of 
existence, then what is it that supports the others? Just exactly when and 
how did it disappear? And if it just vanished a moment ago, then what 
of the law of the conservation of matter? And whence the material that 
is now in that book-denuded space? Once more we embark upon an 
endless journey. 

Reality as such is something definite. And when one thing changes in 
the real world (e.g., when someone new enters the room) a definite 
course of coordinated change is set in motion. The problem with hypo- 
thetical changes in the structure of the real is that this offers reality an 
open-ended series of possible alternatives and that the responsive re- 
design of reality projects a series of in-principle possibilities so vast and 
diversified that concretization becomes impracticable. 

Thus suppose that we contemplate only a very small alteration in the 
descriptive composition of the real—say, by adding one pebble to the 
river bank. But which pebble? Where are we to get it and what are we to 
put in its place? And where are we to put the air or the water that this 
new pebble displaces? And when we put that material in a new spot, just 
how are we to make room for it? And how are we to make room to the 
so-displaced material? Moreover, the region within six inches of the new 
pebble used to hold N pebbles. It now holds N+ 1 pebbles. Of which re- 
gion are we to Say that it holds N- 1 pebbles? If it is that region yonder, 
then how did the pebble get here from there? By a miraculous instanta- 
neous transport? By a little boy picking it up and throwing it? But then, 
which little boy? And how did he get there? And if he threw it, then 
what happened to the air that his throw displaced that would otherwise 
have gone undisturbed? Here problems arise without end. To project 
hypotheses that carry us into “other possible worlds” is to enter a realm 
pervaded by regions of impenetrable darkness. 

And there is good reason for this situation. 

10. REALITY AND ORDER: THE SYSTEMIC 
UNITY OF THE REAL 

The manifold of reality is an interwoven fabric where the severing of 
any thread unravels the whole—with results and consequences that are 
virtually impossible to discern in advance. 

And this situation obtains at the deeper level of logical general princi- 

122 Being qua Being 

ples. For the fact is that the interlinkage of our beliefs about the real is 
such that belief-contravening suppositions always function within a wider 
setting of accepted beliefs B,, B,, ..., B, of such a sort that when one of 
them, for simplicity say B,, is abandoned owing to a hypothetical en- 
dorsement of its negation, nevertheless the resulting group ~B,, B,,..., 
B,, still remains collectively inconsistent. And the reason for this lies in 
the logical principle of the systemic integrity of fact. For suppose that we ac- 
cept B,. Then let B, be some other claim that we flatly reject—one that is 
such that we accept ~B,. Initially, however, since we accepted B,, we will 
certainly also have accepted B, or B,. But now consider the group of ac- 
cepted theses: B,, B, or B,, ~B,. When we drop B, here and insert ~B, in 
its place, we obtain ~B,, B, or B,, ~B,. And this group is still inconsistent. 
The structure of fact is an intricately woven fabric. One cannot sever one 
part of it without unraveling other parts of the real. Facts engender a 
dense structure, as the mathematicians use this term. Every determinable 
fact is so drastically hemmed in by others that even when we erase it, it 
can always be restored on the basis of what remains. The fabric of fact is 
woven tight. Facts are so closely intermeshed with each other as to form 
a connected network. Any change anywhere has reverberations every- 
where. And this condition of things is old news. Already in his influential 
Treatise on Obligations’ the medieval Scholastic philosopher Walter Bur- 
ley (ca. 12'75—-ca. 13.45) laid down the rule: When a false contingent propost- 
tion is posited, one can prove any false proposition that is compatible with it. His 
reasoning was as follows. Let the facts be that: 

(P) You are not in Rome. 
(Q) You are not a bishop. 

And now, of course, also: 
(R) You are not in Rome or you are a bishop. (P or not-Q) 

All of these, so we suppose, are true. Let us now posit by way of a (false) 
supposition that: 

Not-(P) You are in Rome. 

Obviously (P) must now be abandoned—“by hypothesis.” But neverthe- 
less from (R) and not-(P) we obtain: 

You are a bishop. (Not-Q) 

13. Translated in part in N. Kretzman and E. Stump, The Cambridge Translation of Me- 
dieval Philosophical Texts, Vol. 1: Logic and Philosophy of Language (Cambridge, U.K.: Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1988), pp. 389-412. 

Being qua Being 123 

And in view of thesis (Q) this is, of course, false. We have thus obtained 
not-Q where Q is an arbitrary true proposition. 

It is clear that this situation obtains in general. For let pand q be any 
two (arbitrary but nonequivalent) facts. Then all of the following facts 
will also of course obtain: ~(~p), p+ q@ pv q@ pV ~qv %~pvg~(~pt+q, 
and so on. Let us focus upon just three of these available facts: 

1. p 
2.9 
3. ~(~p + q) or equivalently pv ~g 

Now let it be that you are going to suppose not-p. Then, of course, you 
must remove 1 from the list of accepted facts and substitute: 

1 .~p 

But there is now no stopping. For together with 3, this new item at once 
yields ~g, contrary to 2. Thus that supposition of ours that runs contrary 
to accepted fact (viz., not-p) has the direct consequence that any other 
arbitrary contingent truth must also be abandoned. This circumstance is one 
of the salient aspects of the aforementioned systemic integrity of fact. 

And on this basis Burley’s Principle has far-reaching implications. In- 
serting the false among the true creates chaos. As far as the logic of the 
situation is concerned, you cannot change anything in the domain of 
fact without endangering everything. The domain of fact has a systemic 
integrity that one disturbs at one’s own cognitive peril: a change at any 
point has further reverberations elsewhere. 

We thus have little alternative but to acknowledge the systemic in- 
tegrity of the real. As Burley’s reasoning makes manifest, the realm of 
truth and fact as such is so dense as to exclude any prospect of “extrane- 
ous” additions from the realm of falsity. 

Reality, to reemphasize, is a manifest, interconnected whole. As re- 
gards its causal structure, it is an ordered series of dominos where any 
one that falls brings down others further along the line. And much the 
same holds as regards its logical structure: any hypothetical change in- 
volves an endless (and systemically imponderable) series of further 
modifications. Once you embark on a reality-modifying assumption, 
then as far as pure logic is concerned all bets are off. At the level of ab- 
stract logic, the introduction of beliefcontravening hypotheses puts 
everything at risk: little if anything is safe any more. To maintain consis- 
tency you must revamp the entire fabric of fact, which is to say that you 
confront a task of Sisyphean proportions. (This is something that peo- 
ple who make glib use of the idea of other possible worlds all too easily 
forget.) Reality has a grip upon us that it will never entirely relax: it is 

124 Being qua Being 

something too complex to be remade more than fragmentally by our 
thought, which can effectively come to terms only with piecemeal 
changes in reality, but not with comprehensive changes of reality. 

11. REAL EXISTENCE VERSUS FICTION 

In contrasting reality with fiction, the first thing to note is that the 
bottomless descriptive depth of the real inherent in its unending detail. 
Fictions, unlike real things, are descriptively limited because there are 
no (item-specific) facts of the matter about fictional items over and 
above what is overtly or implicitly said about them in their formative sup- 
positions. Accordingly, fictional, unrealized possibilities will differ from 
actual realities in this respect, that with fictions, the course of meaning- 
ful questioning must come to a stop. Did Sancho Panza trim his mus- 
tache short? And just how much of it had turned gray? Seeing that Cer- 
vantes did not tell us, there is no way of securing an answer. Fiction has 
finite cognitive depth: the quest for detail comes to an end of the line. 

The world of fiction has informative limits in a way that the real world 
does not. With concrete reality, once the resources of ostension (of 
pointing and other modes of self-correlative locating) are available, we 
can speak simply of that dog (pointing) or “the only globe in this room” 
and manage to identify an object unambiguously with a bare minimum 
of descriptive elaboration. Only when dealing with nonexistents—ob- 
jects beyond the reach of ostension—are we thrown entirely upon de- 
scriptive resources all by themselves. 

In clarifying the difference at issue it is useful to distinguish between 
two types of information about a thing, namely, what is generic and what 
is not. Generic information involves those features of the thing that it 
has in common with everything else of its kind or type. Now a key fact 
about fictional particulars is that there is only so much one can ever man- 
age to say about them. Thus there are decided limits to what we can as- 
sert nongenerically about Don Quijote: namely, just as much as Cer- 
vantes told us. A point will always be reached with regard to fictional 
individuals when one cannot say anything characteristically new about 
them—presenting nongeneric information that is not inferentially im- 
plicit in what has already been said. And this informational finitude of a 
fictional object’s cognitive depth means that where such objects are at is- 
sue the presentation of ampliatively novel nongeneric information must 
in the very nature of the case come to a stop. With veal things, on the oth- 
er hand, there is no reason of principle why this process need ever termi- 
nate. 

Again, real things always have potentialities—and counterfactual po- 

Being qua Being 125 

tentialities at that (e.g., His neighbor would certainly have recognized 
Smith if he had not been wearing that false mustache). But counterfac- 
tual reasoning about fictional objects is something else again—some- 
thing far more problematic save in the generic case. Who (possibly ex- 
cepting Cervantes) can say what Don Quijote would have thought of 
those windmills if he had not mistaken them for giants. Fiction can only 
present incomplete alternatives within reality because its very finitude 
prevents it from presenting a comprehensive alternative fo reality. 

And so while fact may or may not be stranger than fiction, it will al- 
ways be more complex. And the reason for this is straightforward. Fic- 
tions are creatures of thought, and the capacity for the management of 
complexity in thought that we finite creatures possess is limited. Nature 
is vastly more complex then our brain—if only because we ourselves are 
merely a minor constituent of nature itself. The states of affairs that our 
minds can envision are vastly fewer and simpler than those that nature 
can present. (To give just one rather obvious example, we cannot even 
begin to conceive the facts and phenomena that will figure on the agen- 
da of the science of the future.) 

The cognitive depth of fiction is always finite because fiction—unlike 
reality—is the finite product of a finite mind. It relates to a realm whose 
constituent detail is the limited creation of a limited intellect. And un- 
like the real world, the realm of fiction is accordingly bounded by the 
limits of explicitly available thought and language. Because of this, one is 
bound to reach the end of its road with a finite number of steps. But re- 
ality just is not like that. It is like an unendingly layered onion; in theory, 
and presumably in practice as well, one can always peel off further layers 
of detail without ever reaching an end. Thus reality has more complica- 
tions, more unanticipatable twists and turns, than fiction ever could 
have. It can surprise and astound us in ways more profound than fiction 
ever could. Reality is to fiction somewhat as chess is to tic-tac-toe—but a 
great deal more so. Fiction just cannot achieve the complexity-indicative 
detail needed to realize the complexity dovetailed and integrated sys- 
tematicity that does—and must—characterize the manifold of the real. 

All in all, then, the fact remains that while a great deal can be said 
about the conceptual structure of being at a considerable level of gener- 
ality, nevertheless, it really does not make all that much sense to look 
for or to expect a univocal definition of existence. Ontology—the theory 
of existence—is not rendered an impracticable enterprise by the fact 
that its pivotal conception may not be definable in the classic sense of 
the term. For here, as elsewhere, the limits of definition fortunately do 
not constitute the limits of elucidation. 

Chapter 8 
NONEXISTENTS THEN AND NOW 

1. PROBLEM: THE BEING OF NONEXISTENTS 

In matters of irreality, medieval philosophers were not much con- 
cerned with fiction as such. The prime focus of their attention was the- 
ology, and their dealings with nonexistence related to the role of such 
items in relation to the thoughts of God rather than those of man. In 
this light, the medievals approached the issue of nonexistents on essen- 
tially the following basis: 

God created the world about us. His choice to create this world was a free 
choice—had he wanted to do so, he could have created the world differently. 
The things that would have existed had he done this are, of course, nonexist- 
ent. And on this basis room must be made for such beings as a deliberative pos- 
sibility because in order to make a rational choice God had to make compar- 
isons. To assure the freedom of God’s creative choice there have to be other 
possibilities, and to implement the idea of other possibilities it is necessary to 
postulate other possibles, that is, mere possibilia. 

As the medievals saw it, in order to create his world in a manner that is 
wise and good, God had to compare his actual creation choices with 
their (inferior) alternatives. And so he therefore must, by way of con- 
trast, contemplate nonexistence and nonexistents.! 

But nonexistents are—so it would seem—in principle unknowable. 
The difficulty that arises here was contemplated by Moses Maimonides, 
whose position in this regard was summarized by Harry Austryn Wolfson 
as follows: 

Knowledge of non-existent things . . . was objectionable to the medievals on two 
main grounds. First, it was not true knowledge, if by truth is meant correspon- 
dence of the idea in the mind to an object outside the mind. Second, in the 

1. On medieval discussions of God’s ideas of things merely possible and not actually 
created, see Marilyn McCord Adams, William of Ockham, vol. 2 (South Bend, Ind.: Univer- 
sity of Notre Dame Press, 1987), chaps. 23-27. 

126 

Nonexistents Then and Now 127 

event the non-existent object became existent, it would imply a change of the 
knower.? (Maimonides, Or Adonai, II, i, 2; Milhamot Adonai, III, ii, 6). 

Given such problems, it should occasion no surprise that St. Thomas 
Aquinas grappled at some length with the issue of nonexistent possibles 
in the context of the question of God’s knowledge of things that are 
not. A synopsis of Aquinas’s general position is clearly conveyed in the 
following passage: 

The relation of the divine knowledge to other things, therefore, will be such 
that it can be even of non-existing things. .. . Now, the artisan knows through 
his art even those things that have not yet been fashioned, since the forms of his 
art flow from his knowledge to external matter for the constitution of the arti- 
facts. Hence, nothing forbids that there be in the knowledge of an artisan forms 
that have not yet come out of it. Thus, nothing forbids God to have knowledge 
of the things that are not.... Moreover, by that operation through which it 
knows what a thing is, even our intellect can know those things that do not actu- 
ally exist. It can comprehend the essence of a lion or a horse even though all 
such animals were to be destroyed. But the divine intellect knows, in the man- 
ner of one knowing what a thing is, not only definitions but also enunciables as 
is clear from what we have said. Therefore, it can know even the things that are 
not.... But not all non-beings have the same relation to His knowledge. For 
those things that are not, nor will be, nor ever were, are known by God as possi- 
ble to His power. Hence, God does not know them as in some way existing in 
themselves, but as existing only in the divine power.’ 

Thus Thomas’s position is that God has full knowledge of nonexis- 
tents, since they correspond to concepts in his intellect, which compre- 
hends all “enunciables.” And indeed God must be able to grasp these, 
for several reasons: (1) because he otherwise would not be omniscient, 
(2) because his omnibenevolence requires comparative preferences, 
and (3) because his omnipotence would otherwise be impeded as well, 
since the full exercise of any power (including creative power) requires 
knowledge of the range of alternatives lieing “within one’s power.” That 
God can consider unrealized possibilities is thus inescapable. For him, 
knowledge of irrealia is simply an aspect of self-knowledge regarding his 
own power—of considering what he could create if he chose to do so. 

But still, a theoretical difficulty remained. For, as already noted, truth 
or fact is, as the medievals saw it, a matter of correspondence with reali- 
ty. And with nonexistents there just is no reality for truths about them to 

2. Harry Austryn Wolfson, The Philosophy of Spinoza, vol. 2 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1934), p. 27. 

3. Summa contra gentiles, translated by A. C. Pegis under the title On the Truth of the 
Catholic Faith (New York: Hanover House, 1955), chaps. 58-59; but see also the wider con- 
text of those passages. 

128 Nonexistents Then and Now 

correspond to since, by definition, nonexistents are not reals. And then, 
of course, fact and truth being absent, there is no prospect of any 
knowledge. Knowledge, after all, is a matter of knowledge of truth, and 
where there is no truth, no fact of the matter, there is nothing to be 
known. 

Moreover, if there is to be a nonexistent object, then this would, as a 
proper object, have to be a unity, an unum. But medieval ontology cor- 
related being and unity—ens et unum cunvertuntur—so that only an ens, 
an existent, can truly be an unum. After all, a nonexistent object must 
be a something-or-other—f it is to be an object, it must be a single uni- 
fied item. As such it must represent a unit of being, so that it would ap- 
pear that there can be no nonexistent objects. As Fredegisus of Tours 
(an Englishman who was a pupil of Alcuin and who died in 819) had 
written in his Epistola de nthilo et tenebris: “Omnis significatio est quod est. 
Nihil’ autem aliquid significat. Igitur ‘nihil’ ejus signification est quid est, id 
est rei existentis. ”* 

To oppose such a position, Peter Abailard (d. 1142) had developed a 
rather sophisticated teaching regarding nonexistents.° He was primarily 
concerned with the question of how nonexistents can figure as subjects 
of true propositions (e.g., “Chimeras are imaginary animals”). But 
rather than establishing an ontology of nonexistents, he resolved this 
problem on strictly grammatical grounds. In the nominalistic manner 
of the Stoics, Abailard thinks that what is in question here is not an on- 
tological category of quasi-things, but a purely linguistic resource. In 
this regard, such nonexistent unreals are, according to Abailard, to be 
distinguished from fictive things (res ficta) that—like winged horses—the 
mind concocts from its experiences of the real (and which he likens to 
mirror images in that they somehow reflect actually existing things) .° 

Aquinas, however, and most medievals with him, refused to equate 
nonexistents with mere fictions and so dismiss them as empty ver- 
balisms. He—and they—sought for a via media, a middle way between 

4. “The signification of anything is something that is. But ‘nothing’ signifies some- 
thing. Therefore the signification of ‘nothing’ is something that is, i.e., an existing thing.” 
See Migne, ed., Patrologiae series Latina, vol. 105, p. 751; quoted from S. van den Bergh, 
trans., Averroes’ Tahafut al-Tahdfut, vol. 2, p. 47, and n. 61. 

5. Abailard’s theory is described in detail in Martin M. Tweedale, “Abailard and Non- 
Things,” Journal of the History of Philosophy 5 (1967): 329-42. My brief remarks here are 
based upon this valuable paper. 

6. Many other medievals discussed problems in this general area. Particular impor- 
tance attaches to the quaestio of Siger of Brabant: utrum haec sit vera: Homo est animal nullo 
homine existente? See Pierre Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et l’Averroisme latin au XIle siécle, pt. 
2 (Fribourg: Libraire de l'Université, 1899), pp. 65-70. For further interesting details, see 
Albert Zimmerman, “Eine anonyme Quaestio: Utrum haec sit cera: Homo est animal homine 
non existente,” Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie 49 (1967): 183-200. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 129 

the unavailable realm of somehow existent inexistents and an ontologi- 
cally void flatus vocis nominalism. And so they went on to hold that vari- 
ous nonexistents can have a foothold in reality through possessing a po- 
tential for existence, unlike various pure fictions. Nonentities can be 
seen as genuine possibilia. To be sure, this requires them to have an on- 
tological grounding of sorts. From whence is it to come? The answer 
that was generally given is: from God. Just as they saw the actual things 
as created by God, so the medievals saw the possibility of things as di- 
vinely provided as well. They are part and parcel of God’s consciousness 
of his own power, of his conditionalized self-awareness of what he can 
do if he so chooses. 

With regard to nonexistents, the medieval mainstream thus sought to 
effect a compromise. On the one hand, their lack of reality, of actual ex- 
istence, deprived nonentities of a self-sustaining ontological footing and 
made them into mind artifacts, entia rationis. On the other hand, their 
footing in the mind of God endowed them with a certain objectivity and 
quasi-reality that precluded them from being mere flatus vocis fictions, 
mere verbalisms that represent creatures of the human fancy. Accord- 
ingly, the “reality” of nonexistent possibilia lies in the role they actually 
play in the cognitive and productive powers of God.” 

This opened up a line of reflection that was clearly set out by Leib- 
niz, whose view of nonexistents was heavily influenced by the medievals 
and followed markedly in the footsteps of Aquinas and Scotus. The ac- 
tuality of God and his thought is thus coordinate with the realm of that 
merely possible, with the result that, as Scotus held, “that some being 
can exist leads to the conclusion that God must exist.”® For Leibniz, the 
very fact that there is a manifold of alternative possibilities constitutes 
the basis for an argument for the existence of God because God is re- 
quired for there to be alternative possibilities at all: Si nullum esset ens 
necessarium, nullum foret ens contigens. Leibniz does not adopt Berkeley’s 
maxim To be is to be concetved (by God) but espoused the far stronger Sco- 
tist idea that To be possible is to be conceived (by God). On this basis, Leib- 
niz contemplates a proof of the existence of God on the on the grounds 
of his providing an indispensable basis for possibility. Leibniz thus sup- 
plemented the Cosmological Argument that God is needed for any- 

7. For further consideration of the difficulties of the Schoolmen in coming to terms 
with a knowledge of nonexistents, see the discussion of Ockham and Scotus in John F. 
Boler, “Instructive and Abstractive Cognition,” in Norman Kritzmann, ed., The Cambridge 
History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 
pp. 460-78; see esp. 469-70. 

8. Calvin Normore, “Duns Scotus’ Modal Theory,” in Thomas Williams, ed., The Cam- 
bridge Companion to Duns Scotus, pp. 129-60; see esp. p. 151. 

130 Nonexistents Then and Now 

thing to exist by a Modal Argument to the effect that he is needed for 
anything to be possible. 
So much for the earlier situation. But what of the moderns? 

2. THE TRANSWORLD IDENTITY PROBLEM 

The reality of it is that massive difficulties arise for the moderns in 
coming to terms with the idea of nonexistent possible objects in matters 
of semantics and metaphysics. To be sure, the metaphysics of possibility 
has been a growth industry in recent years. But various perplexities have 
arisen. In particular, their preoccupation with merely possible worlds 
and individuals has impelled recent theorists concerned with semantical 
and with metaphysical issues into an extensive debate about the problem 
of the “transworld identity” of individuals—the feasibility of encounter- 
ing one selfsame individual in several distinct possible worlds.® 

Two diametrically opposed positions have been staked out in these 
recent discussions regarding the prospect of having individuals recur 
across world boundaries. One school of thought sees individuals as 
world-bound, holding that no individual can ever be reidentified with 
any individual belonging to some different possible world. The basic ar- 
gument here is that to be identified, individuals must have all of their 
features in common (“Leibniz’s Law’), and no feature is more basic, 
more essential to an individual than that of being part of the world that 
contains it. 

On the other side we find the theorists of world transcendence who 
hold that individuals can unproblematically be reidentified with others 
in other possible worlds because whenever an individual has any aspect 
of contingency about it, whenever events in its history could have even- 
tuated in a way different from the actual, then there will be another 
realm of possibility, thereby another possible world, in which that self- 
same individual actually finds itself in that alternative condition. Theo- 
rists of this school accordingly hold to a doctrine of world straddling by 
individuals on a basis rooted in their contingency. 

Which side has it right? What is the sensible line to take on the issue 
of transworld individuation? 

g. See the bibliography at the end of the article for some of the highlights of this liter- 
ature. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 131 

3. TRANSWORLD IDENTITY DEMYSTIFIED 

To clarify this issue, one does well to begin by asking how possible 
worlds could ever be arrived at by us—what sort of dealings we could 
ever possibly have with them. 

Note to begin with that a merely possible world is never given. And it 
is not something we can possibly encounter in experience. The only 
world that confronts us in the actual course of things is the real world, 
this actual world of ours—the only world to which we gain entry effort- 
lessly, totally free of charge. To move from it we must always do some- 
thing, namely, to make a hypothesis—assumption, supposition, postula- 
tion, or the like. The route of hypotheses affords the only cognitive 
access way to the realm of nonexistent possibility. For unlike the real 
and actual world, possible worlds never come along of themselves and 
become accessible to us without our actually doing something, namely, 
making an assumption or supposition or suchlike. Any possible world 
with which we can possibly deal will have to be an object of our con- 
trivance—of our making by means of some supposition or assumption. 

But once one recognizes that this is so, the matter of transworld iden- 
tity assumes a very different cast. 

Consider the following challenge posed by R. M. Chisholm: 

We will start by introducing alterations in Adam and Noah and then accommo- 
date the rest of the world to what we have done. In [our world] .. . Adam lives 
for 930 years and Noah for g50. Then moving from one possible world to an- 
other [via successive one-year age transfers], but keeping our fingers, so to 
speak, on the same two entities, we arrive at a world in which Noah lives for 930 
years and Adam for go. In that world, therefore, Noah has the age that Adam 
has in this one, and Adam has the age that Noah has in this one; the Adam and 
Noah that we started with might thus be said to have exchanged their ages. Now 
let us continue on to still other possible worlds and allow them to exchange still 
other properties. We will thus imagine a possible world in which they have ex- 
changed the first letters of their names, then one in which they have exchanged 
the second, then one in which they have exchanged the fourth, with the result 
that Adam in this new possible world will be called “Noah” and Noah “Adam.” 
Proceeding in this way, we arrive finally at a possible world w* which would 
seem to be exactly like our present world w, except for the fact that the Adam of 
w* may be traced back to the Noah of wand the Noah of w* may be traced back 
to the Adam of w. Should we say of the Adam of w* that he is identical with the 
Noah of wand should we say of the Noah of w* that he is identical to the Adam 
of we... And how are we to decide?!? 

10. R. M. Chisholm, “Identity through Possible Worlds,” Nous 1 (1967): 1-8; reprinted 
in Chisholm, On Metaphysics (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1989), pp. 
19-24, and in Kim and Sosa 1999, pp. 149-53; see esp. p. 150. 

132 Nonexistents Then and Now 

In fact, however, the answer here is simplicity itself. In such matters one 
achieves those unrealized possibilities as explicit suppositions—assump- 
tions that something or other is so. And by hypothesis it is to Adam that 
we are assigning stepwise the properties of Noah and to Noah that we are 
assigning stepwise the properties of Adam. At each step of our assump- 
tive proceedings the identity of the individual remains firmly fixed by 
the very hypothesis that we are making that it is his properties that are at 
issue—those of that very individual that we are altering. 

In one relevant discussion Charles S. Chihara has put the problem as 
follows: 

What would it be for Bill Clinton to be in another possible world? After all, Bill 
Clinton need not have, there, the properties and features he possesses in the ac- 
tual world. He need not be married, or over six feet tall, or President of the 
United States. He need not be living in the same country he does in the actual 
world; he could even be living on a different planet in a different solar system. 
He might even be living in a completely different time period from the one in 
which he actually lives. In that world, he need not be anything like he in fact is. 
Perhaps he might not even be male. Indeed, some have thought that he need 
not even be a human being (Lewis, 1986). But in that case, what would it mean 
to say that that strange thing in the other possible world ‘és Bill Clinton?! 

But what Chihara fails to acknowledge here is that once he has made 
Bill Clinton the focus of the discussion and then explicitly refers to him 
(via “he”) in his modifactory hypotheses, he has forestalled any ques- 
tion about its being Bill Clinton that is at issue. The very hypotheses he 
puts before us fix the matter in this sense. Descriptive similarity or dif- 
ference no longer has anything to do with it. An assumption on the or- 
der of “Suppose the Parthenon were the Eiffel Tower” may be crazy. But 
crazy or not, whatever “possible world” it carries us into will, come what 
may, by hypothesis be one in which the Parthenon is the Eiffel Tower. 
The question “Is it now true that: Parthenon = Eiffel Tower?” is now re- 
solved and no longer controversial within the scope of this hypothesis. 
Further objection is futile. The details of how an item is introduced into 
the arena of discussion settles its identity once and for all. 

The teacher asks little Johnny, “Suppose you had two apples and 
someone gave you two more. How many apples do you then have?” Lit- 
tle Johnny replies, “But I don’t have two apples.” Too bad, Johnny, you 
are missing the point of the exercise. And when Chihara worries about 
Bill Clinton’s identity under those hypotheses of various Clinton modifi- 
cations he too is missing the point. For with that hypothesis in place 

11. Charles Chihara, The Worlds of Possibility (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1998); 
see p. 50. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 133 

there is no longer room for any worries about the identity of who is at is- 
sue. Thanks to the nature of the very hypothesis at issue, it will—and 
must—be Clinton himself. Clearly, in such cases, we are not led to unre- 
alized individuals at all; we are dealing with hypothetical changes to per- 
fectly real ones whose identity is firmly set in place by the substance of 
our own discussion. 

But how else could those theorists have proceeded—how else could 
they have posed the problem of the identity of that hypothetically 
changed individual? Well, they couldn’t have—or at least not coherent- 
ly. If they tie the individual to a pure existing identity (say, via a proper 
name), then that settles the matter one way. If they refrain from identi- 
fication and simply proceed descriptively by property indication, then 
there is no question of re-declarification. To pose their problem they 
need to have it both ways, and that just cannot be accomplished coher- 
ently. 

Remember, we are not here talking about an actual change of an ob- 
ject’s properties over a course of time but about a hypothetical change 
in its (actual) properties over a range of mere possibility. With all such 
suppositional alterations, identification lies in the nature of the hypoth- 
esis that we are projecting about individuals, and not in the properties 
that are being assigned to them. So when by assumption that individual 
is Adam, the question of his identity is no longer open. By the time that 
individual is characterized in that specified way (as “the Adam” of that 
world), it is too late to puzzle about his being identified with Adam. The 
damage—whatever it be—is done: that specified supposition has al- 
ready settled the matter. If I project the hypothesis “Suppose that your 
cat had all the properties of this tree,” it would (strange though it might 
be) be a cat—and specifically that one—which exhibits all those treelike 
properties exactly because this acceptance is fixed by the very hypothe- 
sis that is at issue. Even if we do not particularly like what is at issue in 
an assumption in making this assumption, we have no choice but to 
take on board whatever it is that it demands. 

Again, David Lewis and Saul Kripke have debated the question of 
whether, had Hubert Humphrey won the presidential election of 1968, 
the Humphrey of the alternative world in which he is victorious would 
be the same individual who lost in this one. While Kripke sees that “al- 
ternative Humphrey” as being the same person as ours, Lewis sees him 
as merely a “counterpart” or “simulacrum” or some such. On this basis, 
Lewis presses his opposition to transworld identity via the following 
challenge: 

[Transworld identity theorists are] insisting that, for instance it is [Hubert] 
Humphrey himself who might have existed under other conditions, who might 

134 Nonexistents Then and Now 

have won the presidency, [etc.] . . . All that is uncontroversial. The controversial 
question is how he manages to have these model properties. The answer now 
mooted [i.e., favored by Lewis himself] is that he has them by being a shared 
part common to many worlds, and by having different properties relative to dif- 
ferent worlds that he is a part of. Despite its lack of supporters, this answer de- 
serves our attention . . . because it is agreeably simple.'? 

And indeed the situation here is simplicity itself there is no need to 
bring nonexistent or parallel worlds into it. For here it is clearly to 
Humphrey himself that those modally variant properties are being at- 
tributed because our view of the contingency of such matters as election 
outcomes opens wide the door to the supposition (assumption, hypoth- 
esis) that Humphrey might have been elected in 1968 instead of 
Richard Nixon. Within the actual world Leibniz’s principle holds: same- 
ness of properties (across time) entails sureness of identity. But across 
different “possible worlds” all property-based bets about identity are off. 

The real point in the Lewis example is that if it is indeed Humphrey 
whose suppositionally alternative fate is the entryway to that other 
world, then it is—by hypothesis—Humphrey who is at issue. Again the 
manner in which that world has been suppostionally generated already 
forecloses the issue of individual identity. And so when Lewis contem- 
plates his variant Humphrey (the election victor, say, with six fingers on 
his left hand) he has already—like it or not—settled the question of 
identity in the very manner of making his supposition. In speaking of 
Humphrey and his fate in the election or of the fingers of his hand that 
anaphoric back-reference ties our suppositionally varied individual irre- 
movably to the Hubert Humphrey we know and love. 

Again, in a widely discussed paper, David Kaplan deliberated about 
“(the]| doctrine that holds that it does make sense to ask—without refer- 
ence to common attributes and behavior—whether this is the same indi- 
vidual in another possible world.”!® But, of course, if it indeed is the 
case that—as per the explicitly given formulation—it is this individual 
that is to be at issue, then clearly the issue of identity is already settled, ir- 
respective of what worlds or what descriptions may be invoked. 

The crux of the issue is a matter of the range of plausible supposi- 
tions—alternative possible-but-nonexistent worlds or individuals need 
never be brought into it. Modificatory hypotheses never transform an 
item into something else but only into an alternative of itself. They do 

12. See David Lewis, in Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa, eds., Metaphysics (Oxford, U.K.: 

Blackwell, 1999), pp. 157-58. 
13. David Kaplan, “How to Russell or Frege-Church,” Journal of Philosophy 77 (1975): 

716-29; see esp. pp. 722-23. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 135 

not lead from reals to nonexistents: its identity shadows the thing wher- 
ever it goes. 

The lesson of the preceding discussion of cross-world identity for in- 
dividuals might seem to suggest that proper names are the crux, with 
named items such as Adam and Noah, Humphrey and Clinton, the 
Parthenon and the Eiffel Tower as determinative. And this impression is 
reinforced by Saul Kripke’s thesis that names are “rigid designators” 
having a fixed object of reference across possible worlds. But the issue is 
broader. For the real crux is not naming but referring and specifically 
identifying. Thus the ostensive indication of “this desk” or “yon tree” are 
every bit as impervious to designation change in the wake of property- 
altering hypotheses as is Julius Caesar or Napoleon Bonaparte. When 
we make “this desk” the object of hypothetical changes that lead one 
into “another world,” then it is this very desk that continues, ex hypothesi, 
to be at issue. 

Whenever we contemplate an “alternative possible world” by saying 
that it realizes the possibility that some thing (or things) (Caesar, that cat 
on the mat, yon tree) somehow differ from the way 7 or they actually are, 
we immediately stipulate via the anaphoric back-reference if that 7 or 
them fixes the identity of what is at issue with something (s) among the ac- 
tual formation of the world. No matter how large the difference being 
supposed, the very manner of the supposition effects a “transworld iden- 
tification.” By the very specification at issue, that supposition maintains a 
reference to the real-world item whose descriptive nature is being al- 
tered. For, in making a property-varying assumption about something, I 
clearly do not cease to tell about it—that selfsame item. If I assume that I 
might have acted otherwise in this world, then the suppositional I who 
did act differently in another possible world is clearly not somebody dif- 
ferent. (If it had to be so, determinism would be a matter of logic, not of 
metaphysics.) In sum, Leibniz’s Law that identity requires identical prop- 
erties is not a categorically iron-clad principle of identity. It can be over- 
ridden by assumptions. 

4. REFERENTIAL VERSUS DESCRIPTIVE CASES 

Yet what if we proceed not referentially but purely and solely descrip- 
tively, so that—to all appearances—reidentificatory suppositions not 
come into it at all? What if the question is simply whether some individ- 
ual X, of the merely possible world w, is or is not identical with X, of the 
merely possible world w,? Now everything hinges on how these sup- 
posed individuals are specified. If the specification assumes their identi- 
ty, then that’s that—they are identical. If not, then they cannot and 

136 Nonexistents Then and Now 

should not be identified. Thus assume that instead of saying “Suppose 
[a world in which] I were different only in being born three seconds 
earlier,” one says: “Suppose [a world in which] there is an individual 
who is exactly like me except for being born three seconds earlier—and 
whatever else that readjustment may require in the interests of coher- 
ence.” Then, clearly, we have not posed any issue of transworld identifi- 
cation, and there just is no question of reidentification here. For there 
is no reason whatsoever to think that a purely hypothetical individual 
who is like me—who resembles me in various respects, no matter how 
many—should ever be taken to be identical with me. Similarity is one 
thing and identity something quite different. The idea of zdentifying that 
otherwise anonymous but variantly described individual with me on the 
basis of the information at hand is absurd. Descriptive similarity is not 
and cannot be a basis for warranted identification—be it in this world 
or another. Nothing could be more alike than two carbon atoms. But 
that certainly does not make them the same. 

Let us contemplate the situation of an (inexistent) world supposedly 
containing an (inexistent) individual of such-and-such a description, 
and that we now postulate another inexistent world in which some- 
thing-or-other holds of 

1. this very individual 
2. yet another individual 
3. an (or some) otherwise unspecified individual(s) 

What is to be said about the cross-world identity of the individuals at is- 
sue? Clearly, three different things are at issue in our three different 
cases, as follows: 

¢ With 1, a situation of identity will obtain by suppositional stipulation. 

¢ With 2, a situation of difference, of nonidentity, will obtain—again 
by suppositional stipulation. 

e With 3, a situation of vacuity obtains with respect to identity in 
consequence of which any claim to identity or difference will be unten- 
able. 

The situation that obtains in this third case is strictly analogous to 
that of fiction. Suppose a novelist discusses a mysterious stranger in 
chapter 1 and tells us about an unidentifiably mangled corpse in chap- 
ter 5. Are they the same person? Clearly, only if the author says so— 
there are no “facts of the matter” apart from those our novelist speci- 
fies. In the absence of such specifications, all that can be said about the 
issue of identity is—absolutely nothing. And the situation with hypo- 
thetically projected possible worlds is exactly like that. Absent postula- 

Nonexistents Then and Now 137 

tional specification one way or the other, the issue of transworld identity 
simply does not arise.'4 

If we suppose that someone in another hypothetical world construct- 
ed a table, then irrespective of descriptive similarities it will not be this 
table that is at issue unless and until this identification is explicitly spec- 
ified in the world-projecting hypothesis at issue. The question “Is that 
world’s x the same as this world’s y” is uniformly negative save when a 
positive response is explicitly provided for. With respect to the question 
of what things are possible and impossible, logic is in charge. And with 
regard to the question of what sorts of things can (not just logically but 
realistically) exist or not exist in the real world, metaphysics is in 
charge. But with respect to what sorts of things we assume and suppose 
and postulate as objects of consideration—and their nature and interre- 
lationships—we alone are in charge. The objects that are projected for 
discussion are the discussant’s prerogative. For the objects of supposi- 
tions have no independent characteristics—there just are no facts of the 
matter beyond what the assumer does or does not assume. 

And just here lie the limitations, for the only possibilities with which 
we can deal are suppositional de dicto possibilities. Possibilities for ob- 
jects, de re possibilities—merely possible objects as such—lie outside our 
reach. We have no way to get there from here. For it is hypotheses and 
suppositions alone that carry us from the realm of the real into that of 
the merely possible. And such possibilities are always de dicto. 

Of course, our world is contingent. Things might have been differ- 
ent. But what is at issue here is merely a matter of supposing differences 
for things and different orders of things. It does not involve that which 
we have not, namely, the resources for introducing different nonexist- 
ent things into the realm of discussion. For there just is no alternative 
here from dealing with particulars rather than schematic generalities. 
We have no means for operating at the level of the merely possible but 
nonexistent. (This, if you will, is the privilege of God alone.) 

5. MORNING STAR/EVENING STAR 

In dealing with the real world, it makes perfect sense to inquire 
whether or not two incompletely described items such as “Emma’s hus- 
band” and “Tom’s only brother” are or are not identical. Thus take Got- 
tlob Frege’s example of whether “The Morning Star” (i.e., the star ap- 

14. If nevertheless someone insists on pressing it, then we have no choice but to an- 
swer it negatively. With assumptive scenarios as with fictions we can go on the principle 
that if the author also meant the individuals at issue in his discussion to be identified, he 
would have told us so. 

138 Nonexistents Then and Now 

pearing in such-and-such a position in the morning sky) and “The 
Evening Star” (1.e., the star appearing in such-and-such a position in the 
evening sky) are or are not one and the same star. This real-world-ori- 
ented issue poses a perfectly meaningful—and resolvable—question. 
For in the real world partial descriptions can readily identify individuals 
so that we can—giving the contingently prevailing circumstances—par- 
ticularize these incomplete descriptions by relating the items at issue to 
other, preidentified items (Tom and Emma in the one case and certain 
positions in “the sky” in the other). 

But this is something we are altogether unable to do with supposed 
individuals in putative worlds. Here we are utterly and completely de- 
pendent on our stipulative and descriptive resources, the mechanics of 
connection to preestablished existents being unavailable. The question 

Is such-and-such an (incompletely described) item the same as this-or-that one? 

can make perfect sense with respect to the real world, where its presup- 
position that definitely identified items are at issue is readily satisfied. 
But this is emphatically not the case with respect to suppositional 
“items” in putative but nonexistent “worlds.” 

And so the issue of transworld identity actually poses no real prob- 
lems: a resolution is automatically available. For in indicating that prob- 
lematic individual of another suppositional world whose identity with 
some real-world item is in question, we would have to proceed either 
descriptively or by referential stipulation. If we proceed referentially, 
the issue of reidentification is settled automatically through the refer- 
ence at work in the hypothesis at issue. And if we proceed descriptively, 
then there is no question of identity where nonexistents are concerned. 
Either way, the matter is settled automatically on the basis of the mode 
of individual specification that is at issue. And there is good reason why 
this must be so. 

6. INFINITE DETAIL: THE BOTTOMLESS 
DESCRIPTIVE DEPTH OF THE REAL 

The totality of facts about a thing—about any real thing whatever—is 
in principle inexhaustible and the complexity of real things is in conse- 
quence descriptively unfathomable. Endlessly many true descriptive re- 
marks can be made about any particular actual concrete object. For ex- 
ample, take a stone. Consider its physical features: its shape, its surface 
texture, its chemistry, and so on. And then consider its causal back- 
ground: its subsequent genesis and history. Then consider its multitude 
of functional aspects as relevant to its uses by the stonemason, or the ar- 

Nonexistents Then and Now 139 

chitect, or the landscape gardener, or whomever. There is, after all, no 
end to the perspectives of consideration that we can bring to bear on 
things. The botanist, the herbiculturist, the landscape, the farmer, the 
painter, and the real estate appraiser will operate from different cogni- 
tive “points of view” in describing one selfsame vegetable garden. And 
there is in principle no theoretical limit to the lines of consideration 
available to provide descriptive perspective upon a thing. 

Moreover, as we standardly think about particulars within the con- 
ceptual framework of our factual deliberation and discourse, any real 
concrete particular has more features and facets than it will ever actual- 
ly manifest in experience. After all, concrete things not only have more 
properties than they ever will overtly manifest, but they have more prop- 
erties than they ever can possibly actually manifest. The existence of this 
latent (hidden, occult) sector is a crucial feature of our conception of a 
real thing. Neither in fact nor in thought can we ever simply put it away. 
To say of this apple that its only features are those it actually manifests is 
to run afoul of our conception of an apple. To deny—or even merely to 
refuse to be committed to the claim—that it would manifest particular 
features 7f certain conditions came about (e.g., that it would have such- 
and-such a taste if eaten) is to be driven to withdrawing the claim that it 
is an apple. The latent implicit ramifications of our objective factual 
claims about something real is potentially endless. 

Our characterization of real things can accordingly become more ex- 
tensive without thereby becoming more complete. New descriptive fea- 
tures ongoingly come into view with the progress of knowledge (Caesar 
not only did not know, but in the existing state of knowledge could not 
have known, that his sword contained tungsten). Real things are—and 
by their very nature must be—such that their actual nature outruns any 
particular description of it that we might venture. 

But wait! What about the distinction between the “intrinsic” proper- 
ties supposed to constitute a thing’s identity and its “disposition” in hav- 
ing effects on other things. Perhaps the former are merely finite and 
open-endedness enters in only with the latter. Alas, no go. The distinc- 
tion does not work because every property of a thing marks its interrela- 
tionships with others. After all, if a property were wholly and entirely in- 
trinsic, we could never manage to find out about it. The only properties 
one can ever warrantedly attribute are those one can discern ab 
extra,and they have to be dispositional by virtue of this very fact. 

It follows from such considerations that we can never justifiably claim 
to be in a position to articulate “the whole truth” about a real thing. 
The domain of thing-characterizing fact inevitably transcends the limits 
of our capacity to express it, and a fortiori those of our capacity to canvas 

140 Nonexistents Then and Now 

completely. In the description of concrete particulars we are caught up 
in an inexhaustible detail: there are always bound to be more descrip- 
tive facts about things than we are able to capture with our linguistic 
machinery—that is, the real encompasses more than we can manage to 
say about it, now or ever. 

And so the fact remains that our actually formulated descriptions are 
always incomplete and, save for the real world alone, incomplete de- 
scriptions can never individuate. And incomplete descriptions are all 
that we can ever possibly manage! 

7. NONEXISTENTS CANNOT BE 
IDENTIFIED DESCRIPTIVELY 

It only makes sense to ask reidentification questions with respect to 
preidentified items. And the critical fact here is that we have no way to 
identify nonexistent items as particular individual things. 

To identify (to individuate) an object within this actual world of ours 
we do not require complete descriptions: very incomplete descriptions 
will do because real things can be identified by ostensive placement. 
But this, of course, is not feasible with merely possible irrealia. As such 
examples as: 

¢ that apple tree (pointing) 
¢ the cat on yonder mat (pointing) 

indicate, actual objects can be identified ostensively by pointing or using 
some other suitable ostensive gesture. But this sort of thing will not work 
with nonexistents. For partial descriptions will not do here: they yield no 
more than schemata for individuals and never individuals as such. 

W. G. Lycan proposes to identify individuals with Leibnizian com- 
plete individual concepts—that is, saturated descriptions.!° But authen- 
tic individuals could not be complete concepts, even though they should 
in theory have such concepts and be specified by them. And just here is 
where the difficulty arises because conceptual completeness is some- 
thing that we cannot manage to provide. The level of detail involved 
puts them beyond our reach. 

The difficulty with “nonexistent objects” lies not so much in their 
nonexistence as in their very identity, owing to the fact that the supposi- 
tional specifications are inevitably inadequate here. Thus consider the 
merely actuality-modifying case “Suppose one of the (perfectly real) 

15. See William G. Lycan, Modality and Meaning (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer, 
1994), Pp. 109. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 141 

coins in my pocket were placed on the table.” What shall we say of this 
coin? Is it of copper (through being a penny) or is it not? We cannot say 
either way when various sorts of coins are in my pocket. And this is not 
because a rather mysterious sort of thing is at issue—a coin made not of 
copper, nor yet not made not of copper. But as long as our descriptive 
characterization of something remains incomplete, so does our identifi- 
catory specification of the thing at issue remain unachieved. According- 
ly, if a particular nonexistent individual is to be at issue—that is, if there 
is to be genuine individuation (and not just abstract schematization)— 
then the properties of the nonexistent thing in view must be detailed 
with complete comprehensiveness. 

After all, how could the individuation of objects proceed when one 
abstracts altogether from their spatiotemporal positioning by ostension 
or otherwise? It is clear that at this point our only recourse is to proceed 
by descriptive means alone. And this means that we would have to pro- 
vide a complete description of an object for identification to be assured. 
But as long as our descriptions remain incomplete, they can never se- 
curely fix upon a particular object. 

To be sure, “Hamlet” and “Ophelia” schematize different (and dis- 
joint) possibilities for individuals but—barring historical attributions to 
actual people—they are not different individuals because such supposi- 
tional individuals are no more individuals than imaginary pigeons are 
pigeons. 

To achieve reference to a particular individual is simply impossible in 
the case of nonexistents. Merely partial descriptive characterizations 
not supplemented by the prospects of experiential contact are of them- 
selves unable to specify particular individuals. Since they are always in- 
complete—capable of even further elaboration—they cannot achieve 
individualization: the possibility of their multiple instantiation can nev- 
er be precluded. When there is any sort of incompleteness, there will al- 
ways be a plurality of alternatives—that is, a variety of different (because 
descriptively different) possible realizations of individuals that otherwise 
correspond to that incomplete description. The uniqueness essential to 
identification would be lacking, just exactly because descriptive blanks 
can always be filled in in several different ways. And just here lies the 
problematic aspect of those so-called fictional objects because descrip- 
tive completeness is something we simply cannot manage to realize.!® 

We could, of course, attempt the specification: 

16. Already in the 1920s Rudolf Carnap pressed the question “How can it be possible 
to give a characterizing identification for objects within a given object domain without 
indicating any of them by an ostensive definition?” (Logische Aufbau der Welt: The Logical 
Structure of the World [1928], trans. Rolf George [Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 

142 Nonexistents Then and Now 

Sherlock Holmes = the object that has just exactly those descriptive properties 
attributed to the protagonist of the Conan Doyle novels.!” 

But there are big problems here. One of them is that initial “the ob- 
ject,” which presupposes a unique individuation—instead of the gen- 
erosity of an object of a certain descriptive sort. And this use of the defi- 
nite article simply begs the question. The second is that “exactly” of 
“exactly those properties,” which comes to: those and only those. But, of 
course, there is not and cannot be an individual of which nothing ex- 
cept what has been explicitly specified is ttue—an individual, say, whose 
liver has no particular size or weight and whose breakfast coffee on a 
certain date had no particular temperature. 

This point here revolves about a puzzle mooted in W. V. Quine’s 
queries about the number of “possible fat men in the doorway.”!§ The 
descriptive characterization at issue—“fat man in the doorway’—just 
does not identify any single possible individual; it is a descriptive schema 
to which many such individuals might answer. This plurality is due pre- 
cisely to the incompleteness of the specification: it stems from the fact that 
we are dealing with incomplete and schematic indications. That supposi- 
tional fat man lacks descriptive substance (is he tall or short?) not be- 
cause he is a peculiar sort of man but because there is not a he—no in- 
dividual whatsoever has been identified. There just is no way to identify 
and individuate nonexistent possible individuals or worlds. 

“But don’t we get another possible world when we hypothesize just 
interchanging those two books on that shelf?” No, we don’t. For a myri- 
ad of questions now arise regarding which anything worthy of the name 
world will have to decide. How did the books get interchanged? By mov- 
ing them, by magic, by altering the fabric of nature, through changing 
the past history of the universe? What of the laws of nature that relate 
the present to the past? And what implications arise from the future 
course of events? And no matter how we decide this, a cascade of fur- 
ther questions will arise, each of which will have to be settled one way or 
another as a “fact of the matter” by any world at issue. We simply cannot 
provide the requisite detail here. The idea of a “merely possible” indi- 
vidual (or world) is something of which one cannot give even a single 
example. 

California Press, 1967], pp. 25-27.) See also Ruth Barcan Marcus, “Dispensing with Possi- 
bilities,” Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 44 (1975-1976): 
45-46; esp. pp. 45-46. 

17. Terence Parsons, Nonexistents Objects (New Haven, Conn., and London: Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1980); see p. 52. 

18. W. V. Quine, “On What There Is,” Review of Metaphysics 2 (1948): 21-38; reprinted 
in Quine, From Logical a Point of View (New York: Harper Touchbooks, 1961). 

Nonexistents Then and Now 143 

8. NONEXISTENTS AS MERE SCHEMATA 

Nonbeing, of course, contrasts with being. Now being, as it relates 
not to abstracta such as numbers or statements but to things that exist 
concretely, is a matter of participating in the world’s causal commerce. 
It is just this that makes such beings cognitively accessible to us as expe- 
riential givens. But nonexistent possible worlds and individuals are nev- 
er given to us: only the real world is ever accessible in that sort of way. In- 
sofar as we can talk about such worlds and individuals, we have to 
construct their descriptive characterization via assumptions, supposi- 
tions, hypotheses, or the like. And on this basis the only features they 
ever have are those that we impute to them—those that are explicitly or 
implicatively implied in our assumptions, suppositions, and hypotheses. 
Over and above this there just are no facts of the matter. And the cir- 
cumstance of the substantive finitude of our assumptions (suppositions, 
hypotheses) means that such things are always schematic. They lack the 
prospect of identifiability on which alone a claim to having an identi- 
ty—to being a concrete particular—could possibly rest. We can specify 
world-schematic scenarios but never merely possible worlds as specific 
particulars.!® 

Nonexistents can never be identified because with finite intelligences 
identification always calls for an element of ostension—of experiential 
contact—and only that which actually exists can figure in experience. 
The distinction between the real and the unreal is not an experiential 
but rather a referential distinction—the nonexistent cannot be experi- 
enced, it can only be thought of, talked of, and so on. In the face of the 
nonexistent we are never passive but only active: nonexistents can do 
nothing to us but we can be active in relation to them by way of conjec- 
tures, suppositions, and hypotheses. And such processes can only lead 
us to unrealized possibilities (de dicto) and never to unrealized possibilia 
(de re), thanks to the inherent inability of linguistic mechanisms to real- 
ize the specificity of objecthood. 

We are never just plunged into a merely possible realm by the pre- 
sentness of Heideggerian Dasein. For unreal possibilities are never Da. 
Such worlds are not preexisting manifolds into which—lo and _ be- 
hold!—we find ourselves plunged. As David Lewis clearly puts it, “possi- 

19. The recourse to complexes of descriptively incomplete but overlapping possible 
worlds—a superposition of full-fledged possible worlds—leads to the idea of a world type 
lacking the specificity of specific worlds. Such respect-indefinite world superpositions 
have been characterized as scenarios. See Nathan Salmon, Reference and Essence (Princeton, 
N,J.: Princeton University Press, 1981) and also Frege’s Puzzle (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1986). But note also the present author’s earlier employment of this concept in his 
The Logic of Commands (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966). 

144 Nonexistents Then and Now 

ble worlds are stipulated, not discovered by powerful telescopes.”*° And 
even this is going too far, since what we stipulate are possibilities de dicto 
and never de re objects such as worlds or individuals. Worlds and individu- 
als must have a completeness of detail that our stipulations can never 
achieve. (Joyce Kilmer wrote that “only God can make a tree,” but this 
is just as true for individuals and worlds.) 

The crucial point is that those fictional “objects” are no more objects 
than ceramic owls are owls. They are, at best and at most, schemata for 
objects. What we will effectively have here is not an incompletely described 
individual but rather a descriptively incomplete individual characterization— 
an individual schema which, in respect of certain features, is simply in- 
determinate. For that putative characterization fails to characterize an 
authentic individual through refusing to make up its mind with respect 
to a wide variety of descriptive issues, thereby doing no more than to 
present us with a blending or superposition of alternatives. 

Only a description that is saturated and complete could possibly 
manage to specify or individuate a merely possible particular individual. 
For any genuinely particular individual must be property-decisive,”! and 
a nonexistent possible individual can obtain this decisiveness only 
through the route of descriptive saturation. Accordingly, if it is to be an 
individual that is specified descriptively, then this description must be 
saturated (complete): it cannot be vague or schematic but must issue a 
commital yea or nay with respect to every property whatsoever. And no 
such descriptions can ever be provided by us. Merely possible worlds 
can only be discussed in the indefinite plural: we can never particular- 
ize. No simply particular nonexistent world can ever be specified. With 
possible worlds there is, strictly speaking, no it but only they. One can 
talk generally of a possible world of such-and-such a character, but nev- 
er of the world of a certain specific character. 

Nonexistents—as best we ourselves can ever indicate what is at issue 
here—are simply not objects. For as far as we are concerned what they 
lack, inevitably and crucially, is not just existence but identity. 

Q. INTENSIONAL OBJECTS? 

A good deal of philosophical trouble has been occasioned by confus- 
ing the verbally or mentally intended reference to an object with an in- 
tensional object. For, of course, the discussion of an object does not en- 

20. David Lewis, “Truth in Fiction,” American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978): 37-46 
(see esp. p. 44). 

21. Cf. J. M. E. McTaggart, The Nature of Existence, vol. 1 (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 1921), sect. 62. 

Nonexistents Then and Now 145 

gender a discussion-object, the hypothesis of a unicorn does not engen- 
der a hypothetical unicorn save as an item of discussion or considera- 
tion, and such a “discussion-object” is no more an object than a paper 
tiger is a tiger. 

Franz Brentano held that “John is thinking about a unicorn,” while 
informatively significant has no referential function—there is no uni- 
corn—be it real or inexistent—about which John is thinking; a contem- 
plated unicorn is not a type of unicorn.”? But Brentano’s followers were 
not always so cautious and Alexius Meinong for one endowed “inten- 
sional objects” with a distinctly problematic objectivity.*7 He was pre- 
pared (incautiously!) to move from “John is thinking about a unicorn” 
to “there is a unicorn that is the object of John’s thoughts.” But, of 
course, thought and language are not instrumentalities of thing-pro- 
duction: in supposing an object of a certain description we do not en- 
gender a discussion-object of a certain sort. 

As St. Thomas Aquinas rightly maintained, our cognitive commerce 
with nonexistents is analogous to our cognitive commerce with exis- 
tents.*4 But like all analogies the parallelism is imperfect. The statement 
“Paracelsus sought for the philosopher’s stone” does not come to 
“There is a certain object, the philosopher’s stone, for which Paracelsus 
sought,” but rather “Paracelsus thought that there is a certain object, the 
philosopher’s stone, and Paracelsus sought to find it.” And here the zéat 
issue is not the (nonexisting) philosopher’s stone, but rather the puta- 
tive item that Paracelsus (mistakenly) thought the philosopher’s stone 
to be.” A suppositional being is just exactly that, the artifact of an inter- 
personally projected supposition or assumption. And such a linguistical- 
ly engendered artifact is a pseudo-object that is no object at all. With fi- 
nite beings, thought is not creative: the imagination or illusion of a lion 
does not engender an imaginary or illusionary lion. (A putative item is 
no more an item than a supposed witch is a witch or playmoney is mon- 

ey. >) 

22. See Franz Brentano, Psychologie vom empirischen Stendpunkt (Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot, 1874; 3rd ed., Leipzig: F- Meiner, 1924-1925), and Kategorienlehre (Leipzig: F. 
Meiner, 1933). 

23. One can surely achieve an intersubjectivity of communication about a fictional be- 
ing such as Sherlock Holmes without endowing this imaginary detective with objective ex- 
istence of any sort—intensional or otherwise. 

24. De potentia, 7c; Summa theologica, 1.13.10. See also André Hayen, Saint Thomas 
d’Aquin et la vie de l'Eglise (Louvain: Publications universitaires de Louvain, 1952). 

25. On the general history of intensionality, see Herbert Spiegelberg, “Der Begriff der 
Intentionalitat in der Scholastik, bei Brentano, und bei Husserl,” Philosophische Hefte 5 

(1936): 75-91. 

146 Nonexistents Then and Now 

10. CONCLUSION 

Once merely possible individuals and worlds are abandoned as spe- 
cific items of deliberation, the entire question of transworld identifica- 
tion of nonexistents simply vanishes. Merely possible objects cannot be 
reidentified because they cannot be preidentified: in sum, they cannot 
be identified at all. And the reasoning at issue here hinges on two prem- 
ises: 

1. Descriptive hypotheses (assumptions, suppositions) afford the 
only entryway at our disposal for access to the realm of the merely possi- 
ble. 

2. Descriptive hypotheses (assumptions, suppositions) can never 
achieve the comprehensiveness of detail required to identify possible 
individuals and worlds. 

Now where identification is impossible we cannot do more than deal in 
generalities; the specification needed to deal with matters of concrete 
detail is not realizable. With individuation impracticable, we literally do 
not—and cannot—know where of we speak. If to be is to be identifi- 
able, then there just are no merely possible worlds as far as we mere 
knowers are concerned. Nonexistent worlds are nonexistent in more 
senses than one. It’s not just that they don’t exist, we cannot even man- 
age to conceive of them in the detailed specificity needed for individu- 
ating identification. 

With nonexistent worlds and individuals consigned to their merited 
nonexistence, other resources still remain at our disposal, namely, as- 
sumptions, suppositions, and so on, along with the scenarios and stories 
in which they are embodied. For merely possible states of affairs and 
scenarios are certainly things we can discuss and reason about meaning- 
fully. And on this basis we can also come to terms with possible worlds 
and individuals at the level of abstract generality. But merely possible in- 
dividuals and worlds viewed as particulars of some sort are not at the 
disposal of our latter-day modal realists; they are of such a character 
that the infinite depth of their requisite detail confines them to the 
province of God alone. Considerations of deep general principle indi- 
cate that only God can realize the idea of a nonexistent particularism. 
Possibilities are manageable but posszbilia lie beyond our reach. And in 
this regard our latter-day theorists regarding modal semantics and 
metaphysics of possible worlds and individuals are in a position of seek- 
ing to obtain by theft that which would have to be the product of au- 
thentic—and for them unachievable—toil. 

And so, back to the medievals. With regard to nonexistents the me- 

Nonexistents Then and Now 147 

dieval mainstream thinkers sought to effect a compromise. On the one 
hand, their lack of reality, of actual existence, deprived nonentities of a 
selfsubsistent ontological footing and made them into mind-artifacts, 
entia rationis. On the other hand, their footing in the mind of God en- 
dowed them with a certain objectivity and quasi-reality that precluded 
them from being mere /flatus vocis fictions, mere verbalisms that repre- 
sent creatures of the human fancy. 

Confronted with this same issue of the status of nonexistents, secular 
philosophers of our own day face a dilemma because the Thomistic 
middle road of a God-underwritten quasi-reality is not open to them as 
a pathway to possibilia. For them the choice is all or nothing: either a 
(distinctly problematic) metaphysical realism of self-subsistent possibili- 
ties or else a (somewhat unappealing) nominalism of mere verbal possi- 
bility talk, of possibility not as a matter of genuine fact but merely the 
product of an imaginative fictionalizing by linguistic manipulations. 

In effect the medievals resolved the question about the nature and 
identity of nonexistent objects with the response: God only knows. This 
is an answer that most moderns see as unavailable. But what they over- 
look in taking this line is that it effectively leaves them without any vi- 
able answer at all. Properly speaking, they have no business to conjure 
with possible individuals and worlds. All they are properly entitled to is 
possibilities (de dicto), possible objects in the de re manner (worlds and 
individuals) are beyond their reach. To secure a plausible theory of pos- 
sibility intermediate between the implausibly real and the dismissive 
imaginary, the modern secularist theorists of possible worlds and indi- 
viduals require a functionally equivalent surrogate to replace the me- 
dieval recourse to the mind of God. And it is bound to be a massively 
puzzle and perplex where, on their principles, this is to come from. 

REFERENCES 

Adams, Marilyn McCord. William of Ockham. 2 vols. South Bend, Ind.: University 
of Notre Dame Press, 1987. 

Adams, Robert M. “Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity.” Jowrnal of Philoso- 
phy 76 (1979): 5-26. [Reprinted in Sosa, pp. 172-82.] 

Chihara, Charles. The Worlds of Possibility. Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1998. 
[See especially Chapter 2 on “Transworld Identity.”] 

Chisholm, Roderick M. “Identity through Possible Worlds.” Nous 1 (1967): 1-8. 
[Reprinted in Chisholm, On Metaphysics (Minneapolis: University of Min- 
nesota Press, 1989), 19-24; also reprinted in Kim and Sosa (1999), 
149-53-] 

Forbes, Graeme. “Origin and Identity.” Philosophical Studies 47 (1980): 352-62. 

. The Metaphysics of Modality. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 1985. 

. Languages and Possibility. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1989. 

148 Nonexistents Then and Now 

Hazen, Allen. “Counterpart-Theoretic Semantics for Model Logic.” Journal of 
Philosophy 76 (1979): 319-38. 

Hintikka, Jaakko, and Merrill Hintikka. “Towards a General Theory of Individu- 
ation and Identification.” In J. Hintikka and M. Hintikka , eds., The Logic of 
Epistemology and the Epistemology of Logic: Selected Essays, 22-39. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1989. 

Inwagen, Peter van. “Plantinga on Trans-Worlds Identity.” In J. Tombenlin and 
P. van Inwagen, Alvin Plantinga: A Profile, 101-36. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 
1985. 

Kaplan, David. “Transworld Heir Lives.” In Michael Loux, ed., The Possible and 
the Actual, 88-109. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1979. 

. “How to Russell or Frege-Church.” Journal of Philosophy 77 (1975): 
716-29. 

Kim, Jaegwon, and Ernest Sosa, eds. Metaphysics. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1999. 
[See Chapters 22, 23, and 24 for papers by R. M. Chisholm, David Lewis, 
and R. M. Adams, respectively. ] 

Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University 
Press, 1980. 

Lewis, David. “Counterparts of Persons at Their Bodies.” Journal of Philosophy 67 
(1971): 203-11. 

. Counterfactuals. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1973. 

. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1986. 

Lycan, William G. Modality and Meaning. Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer, 1994. 

Marcus, Ruth Barcan. “Dispensing with Possibilities.” Proceedings and Addresses of 
the American Philosophical Association 44. (1975-1976): 39-51. 

Mondadori, Fabrizio. “Counterpuntese.” Historie, epistemologie, language 5 
(1983): 69-94. 

Parsons, Terence. Nonexistent Objects. New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press, 1980. 

Quine, W. V. “On What There Is.” Review of Metaphysics 2 (1948): 21-38. 
[Reprinted in From a Logical Point of View (New York: Harper Touchbooks, 
1961.] 

. “Worlds Away.” Journal of Philosophy 73, (1971): 859-63. 

Rescher, Nicholas. The Logic of Commands. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1966. 

Salmon, Nathan. Reference and Essence. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1981. 

. Frege’s Puzzle. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1986. 

. “The Logic of What Might Have Been.” Philosophical Review 98 (1989): 

3-34: 

. “Trans-World Identification and Stipulation.” Philosophical Studies 98 

(1989): 203-23. 

Chapter 9 

THOMISM 
Past, Present, and Future 

1. THE PAST 

The journey of St. Thomas Aquinas through the realm of philosoph- 
ical history has gone along a rocky road beset with many ups and 
downs. 

Within three years of his death in 1274, various propositions substan- 
tially identical with some of his main philosophical views were formally 
condemned as errors by Bishop Tempier of Paris. This episcopal con- 
demnation was revoked a generation later in 1325, but Thomistic 
teachings nevertheless met with severe criticism in various quarters in 
the later Middle Ages—especially among the Franciscans. However, 
since Renaissance times, most of the popes have praised Aquinas’s 
teaching, and St. Pius V provided for the first collected editions of St. 
Thomas’s works alongside those of the Franciscan St. Bonaventure, 
diplomatically proclaiming both to be “Doctors of the Church.” Already 
by the time of the Council of Trent (1545-1563) Thomas was regarded 
as the paradigm of Roman orthodoxy. 

In 1879, in his encyclical Aeterni patris, Pope Leo XII reemphasized 
the importance of the teachings of St. Thomas for Catholic thought, 
characterizing him as “the chief and master of the Scholastics.” This led 
to the establishment of the Academy of St. Thomas in Rome and of the 
Institut Superior de Philosophie at the University of Louvain, both espe- 
cially dedicated to the study of his thought. But, in consequence, 
Thomas suffered one of the most unfortunate fates that can befall an 
intellectual innovator: his ideas became orthodoxy. The crowning misfor- 
tune occurred in 1914 when a group of Catholic professors drew up a 
set of twenty-four propositions which—as they saw it—encapsulated the 
essentials of St. Thomas’s philosophy. The Sacred Congregation of 
Studies then proceeded to publish—and Pope Pius X to approve— 
these “Twenty-Four Theses” as the canonical expression of the teachings 

149 

150 Thomism 

of the Doctor of the Church. The poisoned chalice of official orthodoxy 
was pressed to the lips of academic Thomism with the unhappy result of 
a sterile formalization that has to be seen as a foregone conclusion. The 
philosophy of St. Thomas was widely accepted as standard fare in 
Catholic seminaries and institutions of learning, and its teachings were 
routinized into handbooks and manuals to create a neo-Thomism of a 
distinctly stultified character. And so matters came near to being the be- 
ginning to the end. But fortunately, as the twentieth century unfolded, 
various efforts were set afoot in Catholic intellectual circles to break out 
of this formalized and sterile mode of thinking and teaching. And while 
Catholic thinkers now also looked in other directions for sources of in- 
spiration—above all to phenomenology, to existentialism, to vitalism, 
and elsewhere—nevertheless the influence of St. Thomas survived the 
disillusionment consequent upon that ossification of his teachings. The 
displacement of Thomism from the pedestal of orthodoxy has proved 
to be its salvation. 

Just how does the matter stand at present? How fares St. Thomas in 
the contemporary marketplace of ideas? 

It must be recognized that he does very well indeed. The existence of 
institutions is one straw in the wind. In North America alone, for exam- 
ple, there is a good deal of activity including a Center for Thomistic 
Studies (in Houston, Texas), an academic journal called The Thomist, 
two Aquinas colleges and two St. Thomas Universities (in Miami, Flori- 
da, and Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada), as well as a University of 
St. Thomas (Houston, Texas) with another of the same name in St. 
Paul, Minnesota, thrown in for good measure. 

Of course, institutionalism is not the real issue. More revealing is the 
matter of intellectual engagement within the larger philosophical com- 
munity. The ongoing influence of St. Thomas is apparent not just in in- 
stitutional terms but more vividly in personal terms as well. Such out- 
standing—and outstandingly creative—Thomists as Jacques Maritain 
(1882-1973), Etienne Gilson (1884-1978), Bernard Lonergan (1904- 
1984), and W. Norris Clarke (1915— ) have produced a body of writing 
and teaching that has projected the doctrine as a live force well into the 
twentieth century through the ongoing efforts of their students, follow- 
ers, and admirers. And independently of these influences, various other 
Catholic philosophers of religion continue to lean heavily on St. 
Thomas as an energizer for their creative efforts. 

No less significant, however, is the fact that the work of St. Thomas 
has continued to exert a powerful influence on many first-rate thinkers 
who stand entirely outside the Catholic orbit. It is instructive in this re- 
gard to look at a handful of representative twentieth-century century 

Thomism 151 

classics. Such a demarche yields the following number of mentions of 
St. Thomas: 

2—A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality 
3—John Rawls, Theory of Justice 
1—Bertrand Russell, Human Knowledge 
2—Ernest Cassirer, Essay on Man 

2—John Dewey, Reconstruction in Philosophy 
5—Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method 
3—Martin Heidegger, Being and Time 

i—R. G. Collingwood, Essay on Metaphysics 
1—J. C. C. Smart, Essays, Metaphysics and Mind 
3—C. S. Peirce, Principles of Philosophy 
1—W. V. Quine, Ways of Paradox 

To give some flesh to these skeletal numbers, let us consider a sam- 
pling of how these twentieth-century philosophers have taken the ideas 
of St. Thomas into account in their diverse deliberations. 

In his classic tract on Pragmatism (1905), William James makes no 
mention of Aquinas at all. But in a fairly extensive outline for the prag- 
matism lectures that he presented at Wellesley College he cites St. 
Thomas (along with Aristotle among the ancients) among those who re- 
jected what he calls “the false opposition of philosophy and science” 
and who deserve credit for seeing natural and theoretical philosophy as 
being of a piece. 

In Process and Reality (1929), A. N. Whitehead makes two references 
to Aquinas. In the first of these St. Thomas is derogated as one of those 
philosophers who showed a prejudgment in favor of the deductive 
method of logic and mathematics. And in the second passage White- 
head contrasts his own view of the organic unity of mind and body as 
differing “from the Scholastic view of St. Thomas Aquinas, of the mind 
as informing the body” (p. 108). In both instances, Whitehead is not 
much interested in the positions of St. Thomas, but invokes his views 
simply as a reference point of contrast in expounding his own position. 

In his Essay on Man (1949), Ernest Cassirer referenced St. Thomas 
twice. In the context of setting out his own view of “The Crisis of Man’s 
Knowledge of Himself,” Cassier pictures St. Thomas as holding that the 
Fall of Man obscured the original power of mankind’s cognition, which 
now stands in need of illumination and grace, since it cannot recover its 
power and glory by use only of its own unaided resources. The second 
reference makes the supplemental point that St. Thomas sees those 
needed augmentations as avoiding and empowering reason rather than 
somehow conflicting with it: inspiration and revelation are suprara- 

152 Thomism 

tional and extrarational (and supranatural as well), but not irrational or 
antirational. It is clear from the context that Cassirer cites St. Thomas 
not to refute his views but to invoke them as affording enlightening in- 
sight into the nature of the human situation. He not only refers but de- 
fers. 

In his Our Knowledge of the External World (1929), Bertrand Russell 
mentions Aquinas only once. The relevant passage runs as follows: 

To the schoolmen who lived amid wars, massacres, and pestilence, nothing ap- 
peared so delightful as safety and order. . . The universe of Thomas Aquinas or 
Dante is as small a speck as a Dutch interior. 

All one can say here is that if the absence of safety and order in one’s 
life environment constituted a cogent ground for adopting a cosmolo- 
gy, then the injunction “Back to Aristotle and Ptolemy” would currently 
have a good deal more impetus than seems to be the case. But the fact 
remains that even the utterly unsympathetic Russell takes St. Thomas’s 
position as an orienting point of reference. 

In a footnote in his Theory of Justice (1971), John Rawls lists Aquinas 
as one among various philosophers who accept liberty, opportunity, and 
a sense of self-worth as valid human goods. Additionally, in discussing 
the value of amusements and diversion, he approvingly notes the “al- 
though Aquinas believes that the vision of God is the last end of all hu- 
man knowledge and endeavors, he [nevertheless] concedes play and 
amusement a [valid] place in our life” (p. 554). 

In discussing realism in his Essays, Metaphysics and Moral (1987), J. C. 
C. Smart wrote: 

The scientific realist [such as Smart himself] looks at the facts . . . and asks why 
they are as they are. The answer “It is just a matter of fact” does not satisfy him. 
The theologian is not satisfied with an accidental world, as the scientific realist 
is not satisfied with an accidental ... [world]. Aquinas, in his Third Way, con- 
cludes to a final cause, God, who was in some sense necessary. . . . [However,] 
Aquinas’ argument depends on a notion of necessary existence which I find un- 
intelligible. (p. 133) 

In this passage Aquinas comes off with a draw. He gets applause for in- 
sisting on an explanatory rationale for the world’s facts but draws disap- 
proval for insisting on the necessary existence of an extramundane 
world-explainer. 

But be all this as it may, our brief survey of some significant citation 
rationales indicates that St. Thomas continues to be read and noted in 
recent and contemporary philosophy. His work provides a point of ref- 
erence and an expository resource for a wide spectrum of recent 

Thomism 153 

philosophers—including those who cannot by any stretch of the imagi- 
nation be characterized as Thomists. 

2. THE PRESENT 

And so in answer to the question of where the philosophy of St. 
Thomas stands today, one could say that the issue of St. Thomas’s cur- 
rent place, like Caesar’s Gaul, has three distinct parts: 

1. With regard to present-day Thomistic studies as such, much is astir 
and well. Spread across the globe there is a lively industry of diverse in- 
stitutes, societies, journals, university departments, and the like devoted 
to the appreciation and study of St. Thomas’s works. 

2. With regard to the place of Aquinas in contemporary Catholic phi- 
losophy at large, the situation is decidedly mixed. To be sure, the hey- 
day of rampant neo-Thomism exerting a preponderant influence on 
Catholic universities and seminaries is long past. But there is still a great 
bustle of learning and study in this area—in quantitative terms perhaps 
as much as ever. However, the buoyant state of Catholic philosophy on 
many other fronts has reduced Thomism’s proportionate role to compara- 
tively modest proportions. 

3. Finally there is the matter of the place of Aquinas in secular phi- 
losophy at large. And here the issue is one of curious duality. On the 
one hand, there is a virtually total absence of secular neo-Thomists: the- 
ologically unattached philosophers who see the main source of their 
ideas and inspirations in the writings of Aquinas. But, on the other 
hand, virtually every major thinker of the period—irrespective of orien- 
tation—refers to St. Thomas in one connection or another, be it by way 
of invoking his authority or representing a position to be opposed. 
Aquinas accordingly serves as a point of reference for many—providing 
for some a signpost to truth and for others an indicator of the rocks and 
reefs of error. 

All in all, then, it is unquestionably the case that the work of St. 
Thomas continues to be very active and astir over the last century even 
in general and substantially secular philosophy. Then too it could be 
said that St. Thomas is alive and well and living in cyberspace on the In- 
ternet. After all, the volume of “buzz” that an individual creates on the 
web reflects the extent to which he is alive and striving in the public 
mind where “to be is to be mentioned.” A convenient entry into this 
Tower of Babble is afforded by such search engines as Google or Yahoo. 
And here it emerges that, as regards the Nietzchean dogma of “the 

154 Thomism 

death of God,” it is both newsworthy and noteworthy as a counter to 
such Zarathustrian arrogance that at this writing (March 2003) the 
number of Google items for Frederich Nietzsche is 170,000 while that 
for St. Thomas Aquinas stands at 190,000. 

3. THE FUTURE 

But what of the future? 

What are the prospects for Thomism? How will—or should—the 
thoughts of St. Thomas Aquinas figure in the future of Catholic philoso- 
phizing? 

In addressing this question it helps to begin with another: What is it 
that a productive philosopher of one era can derive from one of an ear- 
lier day? There are many possibilities here. The principal sorts of things 
for which someone’s own philosophical work can be indebted to a pred- 
ecessor include: 

¢ Concepts 

¢ Problems and questions 
¢ Doctrine and theses 

¢ Methods 

e Aims/goals/values 

The first thing to note about this list is that it provides for enormous 
flexibility. One can fail to agree with a single one of the philosopher’s 
doctrines and substantive conclusions and yet be deeply in his debt for 
concepts, questions, distinctions, methods, or aims. It is thus an error to 
think that Platonists alone profit from Plato’s dialogues or that Thom- 
ists alone profit from the Angelic Doctor’s intellectual toil. 

Moreover, the fact that philosophy is not merely a kind of literature 
means that Thomism is something larger than the exegetical study of 
the writings of St. Thomas. If, as is indeed the case, Thomism is actually 
to represent a philosophical position, then its concern has to be with the 
ideas and arguments at issue in solving the philosophical problems and 
answering the philosophical questions posed by St. Thomas and not 
merely with the texts in which these were set out. Texts are historical fix- 
ities: their development ends with their production. But ideas, argu- 
ments, and positions have a life of their own. They evolve over time and 
become reconfigured in the wake of the responses they evoke. When 
philosophical illumination rather than text elucidation is at issue, it is 
the impersonal matters of cogency and truth rather than the thoughts of 
a particular individual that constitute the determinative consideration. 
The crux here is a matter not just of scholarship but of inspiration. 

Thomism 155 

Moreover, philosophical doctrines and positions as such have a life of 
their own beyond the control of their inaugurators. They admit of re- 
finement and development both in response to misunderstanding or 
criticism and in response to intellectual innovation on relevant issues. If 
they are not to be a mere piece of flotsam and jetsam of the past washed 
up on the shore of the present—inert driftwood, ready for decorative 
display—then they must be reexamined, refurbished, and reworked to 
meet the needs and opportunities of changed conditions and altered 
circumstances. Any Thomism worth its salt should be able to emerge 
healthy and fortified from an intellectual encounter with the ideas and 
methods produced elsewhere in the philosophical mainstream. A posi- 
tion of perennial value must not only be restated in the changed condi- 
tion of a later different thought world, it must be reconstituted as well. 

And one important consideration in particular must be stressed in 
this regard. There is one aspect of St. Thomas’s great project that is 
clearly of transcendent value and ubiquitous utility, namely, its commit- 
ment to rational systematization. This theory and practice in the refusal 
to exile reason from philosophical theology carries a wider lesson. This 
may be favored in a regulative maxim: “Do not fragment and compart- 
mentalize your thinking. Whenever there is no necessity for doing so, 
do not divide your thinking into separate and disjoined compartments. 
Develop your thought systematically, keeping all of its elements in pro- 
ductive contact and interaction with the rest.” This is assuredly a posi- 
tive and productive policy from which nothing but good can come. 
Commitment to cultivating the integrative unity of thought is of ever 
increasing value in an age of specialization and division of intellectual 
labor. If philosophers do not strive for a synoptic perspective in the realm 
of human understanding, then who will? And just here we encounter 
one of the prime object lessons of Thomistic philosophizing. 

Moreover, one of the most illuminating contrasts of medieval/ 
Scholastic thought is surely that between the Thomistic emphasis on 
the power of reason and the seemingly contrary emphasis of Nicholas 
of Cusa on the inherent limitation of the human intellect. But just here 
one can also see an ironic testimonial to the doctrine of the “unity of 
opposites” of my great namesake, since it must surely be counted as a 
remarkable token of the power of reason that it is able to recognize and 
clarify its own limitations and to elucidate their source and nature. 

Of course, the future’s detail is impossible to predict in intellectual 
and creative matters. Who can foresee where philosophy—or indeed 
even science—is going? The cognitive innovations of the future are hid- 
den from present view. But one thing is clear. While the details of the 
future reception of Thomistic doctrines are well nigh impossible to 

156 Thomism 

foresee, the ongoing commitment to Thomistic ideas and methods of 
thought can be confidently expected. 

Contemporary philosophers sometimes regard the pursuit of philo- 
sophical wisdom as aiming at “a form of understanding that should 
bring mankind peace of mind.” But this envisions the decidedly unreal- 
istic prospect of a completion or perfection. The reality of it is that the 
human situation cries out to be seen in a less optimistic light as a stage 
of struggle and striving. The battle against the forces of ignorance and 
incomprehension is unending. And, no less importantly, intellectual in- 
novation also brings new challenges. Behind every “solution” there lurk 
further difficulties, behind every answer come further questions. The 
incompletability and imperfectability of our philosophizing is some- 
thing with which we must come to terms. For in the intellectual as in 
the moral life we cannot manage to achieve perfection. The cognitive 
condition of man in this vale of tears is something we may come to view 
with resignation (Gelassenheit) but never with rational contentment 
(Zufriedenheit). And so, while it is assuredly the case that Thomism can 
and will make ever-continuing contributions to the ongoing develop- 
ment of philosophy, nevertheless this does not—and cannot—alter the 
fact that there are no altogether permanent victories to be won in man’s 
intellectual struggle for understanding.! 

1. This section is an expanded and revised version of an essay originally published in 
New Blackfrairs 80 (1999): 199-202. 

Chapter 10 

RESPECT FOR TRADITION 
(And the Catholic Philosopher Today) 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Once upon a time one friend promised another that he would intro- 
duce him later that day to Grimsby, the versatile musician. The next 
day—after the foreshadowed encounter had transpired—that second 
friend reproached the first, saying: “How could you say that Grimsby is a 
versatile musician: on his own telling he can only play ‘Chopsticks’ on 
the xylophone.” “Ah,” replied the friend, “but his musicianship shows it- 
self in the fact that he plays it well, and his versatility is manifest in his 
ability as a chef, a chessmaster, and a connoisseur of the metaphysical 
poets.” 

This odd little story conveys a lesson. It is one thing to be versatile 
and a musician, and another rather different thing to be versatile asa 
musician, that is, to be a versatile musician. And just this distinction ap- 
plies in the present context as well: it is one thing to be a Catholic anda 
philosopher but something rather different—and more—to be a 
Catholic philosopher. 

And the telling question that arises is: Wherein does this “something 
more” consist. What is it that is required for being a Catholic philoso- 
pher, and in particular for being a Catholic philosopher in our present 
place and time: in twenty-first-century America? 

The issues raised by this question are complex and many-sided. The 
present discussion will address only one small part of the problem. 

2. RESPECT 

What is it that will nowadays demarcate the Catholic philosopher as 
such? In reading a philosopher’s work, what features would lead one to 
suspect that it has issued from the pen of a Catholic philosopher? It 
seems appropriate here to single out five features above all: 

157 

158 Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 

1. Awareness of and respect for the great tradition of Catholic philos- 
ophy from the Church Fathers to the present day. 

2. Concern for the big issues of philosophy and mindfulness that at- 
tention to matters of detail will exist for their sake. A reluctance to be 
caught up in the fashions of the moment. 

3. A humanistic preoccupation with matters of morality, ethics, and 
philosophical anthropology—that is, with the fundamentals of how life 
should ideally be lived. 

4. Care for the classics: special attention for the philosophers, moral- 
ists, and thinkers of Greco-Roman antiquity and their subsequent Lati- 
nate continuations. 

5. Breadth of sympathies: A positive inclination to look for merit in 
the work of other philosophers at large. And correspondingly, a certain 
skeptical self-restraint through absence of cocksure certitude in philo- 
sophical matters. 

What is at issue here is not, to be sure, a set of necessary and sufficient 
conditions for being a Catholic philosopher. But, nevertheless, taken to- 
gether in collective conjunction, these items constitute a pretty strong 
evidential indication. 

Thanks to the fundamental contrast between faith and philosophy, 
two distinct questions arise in the context of present concerns: 

¢ Question 1: What does a Catholic philosopher owe to the Church 
and its teachings? Answer: Allegiance and acceptance. 

¢ Question 2: What does a Catholic philosopher owe to the tradition 
of Catholic philosophy? Answer: Not allegiance and acceptance, but 
something else and rather different, namely, respect. 

And, on this telling, the prime and paramount factor that character- 
izes the Catholic philosopher is a respect for the tradition. Accordingly, the 
focus of these deliberations will center on the question of just what this 
factor of respect for tradition is and what it involves. 

The ancient Romans paved the way for the English verb “to respect” 
via their verb revereor, to stand in awe (or even in fear) of someone, to 
revere, and—in effect—“to look up” to him. However, with us mod- 
erns—who live in a society less given to hierarchy and subordination— 
the idea of respecting someone is something a bit different. It calls not 
so much for being awed by him as for being prepared to acknowledge 
his claims to some merit or positivity. Respect, as so construed, is thus 
less a matter of looking upward to something placed upon a pedestal, as 
one of esteem for what is at issue. “Respect” accordingly represents a 
value concept. “Io respect” something or someone is to prize it or him 

Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 159 

in the way of admiration, as indicating the direction of what is to be 
striven for or emulated. 

Respect even in this relatively modest sense is a concept that is not 
particularly popular among philosophers nowadays. In fact, they incline 
to preoccupy themselves with this conception today only and exclusively 
in one context—that of the Kantian issue of respect for personhood. A 
look at philosophical indices, textbooks, and handbooks shows that it is 
here and virtually here alone that respect figures on the philosophical 
agenda of the present day. 

Now it must, to be sure, be recognized and acknowledged that re- 
spect for persons as beings created in the image of God is a central pre- 
cept of the Judeo-Christian tradition. And this insistence on respecting 
the special dignity of the human person continued in the more secular 
age of the Enlightenment, where recognition of persons as the distinc- 
tive bearers of inalienable rights served as a focal idea. (Think especial- 
ly of Kant in this connection.) All this, however, is a matter of an ethical 
respect of persons-in-general that abstracts from the issue of the distinc- 
tive particular individuals. And so this important issue of respect for 
personhood is not and cannot be the end of the matter. For it is—or 
should be—clear that we can and should respect not only personhood 
in general but also various people in specific. Such respect is a matter of 
the recognition of worth and merit—of the claims of other particular 
people to our recognition and consideration not on the basis of what 
they are but on the basis of what they do. 

Those who by dint of talent, effort, and seized opportunity manage 
to accomplish great and good things in this world deserve not just our 
admiration but our respect as well. To be sure, such respect need not be 
indiscriminate; it can and should be more narrowly targeted. We can re- 
spect an individual as a talented musician while nevertheless deploring 
his bumbling incompetence in matters of social interaction. We can re- 
spect the able actor while condemning the unscrupulous womanizer. 

And, of course, respect of this sort is not a matter of selfpromotion. I 
can respect another not because of those features in which he agrees 
with or resembles me but because of features he may have that I neither 
do nor even want to have for myself. Personal respect is a matter of rec- 
ognizing and appreciating someone’s commitment to his project, not of 
vaunting my commitment to mine. 

All the same, respect imposes a limit of egocentrism. After all, re- 
spect is the very reverse of self-aggrandizement and self-glorification. 
For insofar as we acknowledge the merits of others and their achieve- 
ments, we cannot see the doings of ourselves and our congeners, co- 
horts, and contemporaries as holding a monopoly on worth and value. 

160 Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 

To respect another is to admit that one is not oneself the pivot around 
which everything revolves—that others may have claims to a merit that 
is coordinate with and perhaps even superior to our own. In acknowl- 
edging the claims of others we assume the mind-set of being pre- 
pared—at least in principle—to see ourselves in a more humble light. 

Respect, however, is not just a matter of subordination, submission, 
or obsequiousness. To respect someone is not automatically to see our- 
selves as their inferior. It is, rather, to see him as a bearer of value and 
thus in some respect as worthy of emulation. People we respect are 
those we are apt to see as role models. Respect is thus not a matter of 
self-debasement and kow-towing. This, after all, is not authentic respect, 
for in the end the only sort of respect worth having is the respect of 
those who respect themselves. 

Then too individual persons quite apart, we can respect an Office. 
Such respect may be marginal when the individual comes by the office 
without any specific merit-based claims—by lot, say, or by inheritance. 
But when the office is one that must be earned on the basis of talent 
and effort, and represents a locus of responsibility and trust, then that 
office as such merits respect independently of the flaws and frailties of 
its transitory occupants. 

In general, then, respect will have a rationale since there will and 
must be factors of general principle that rationally call it forth. Specifi- 
cally three sorts of considerations are paramount here: 

1. Respect for what a being is by nature (e.g., a rational being) or by 
fate (e.g., a mathematical genius) 

2. Respect for what a person is by office either natural (e.g., a parent), 
or customary (e.g., a king), or earned (e.g., a teacher or a magistrate) 

3. Respect for what a person achieves by effort—dedication to the real- 
ization of positive objectives as instanced by such diverse personalities as 
St. Thomas and St. Francis 

Of course, to respect a person or an office we need not agree with him 
or it. Respect does not demand endorsement. What it does call for is 
taking that individual seriously, exhibiting concern for his views, taking 
them under sympathetic advisement, seeking out and emphasizing the 
good strong points, the instructive lessons, the constructive examples. 
What respect demands, in sum, is not agreement but seriousness of af- 
firmative response: it is not an alignment of opinion that is at issue but a 
consilience of values. 

Yet another, more figurative, mode of the concept relates to respect 
for a principle, such as the law or the custom of the country. This is the 
sort of “respect” whose manifestation consists in “honoring” those laws 

Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 161 

and customs by way of following or obeying them. This should be seen 
as a figurative use of the term that rides in the analogy of emulating the 
practices and behaviors of those persons whom we respect—taking 
them as our role models, as it were. 

There is, however, yet another potential focus of respect—over and 
above persons and offices—that needs to be taken into account. For 
there is reason for this narrowing of perspective. For while all of us 
should—and ethically sensitive people indeed will—respect rational be- 
ings as such, nevertheless, respect is possible and indeed required in 
other contexts as well. And it is this candidate for respect that will be 
the special issue for concern in our present context, namely, respect for 
a tradition. Let us take a closer look at this issue. 

3. TRADITION 

Just what is a tradition anyway? In general, tradition is a set of social 
practices hallowed by persistence over time. But what concerns us here 
is specifically an intellectual tradition. Such a tradition is defined by two 
interrelated components: (1) a set of texts (in the broadest sense of the 
term) constituting a commonality of knowledge, and (2) a set of issues, 
ideas, theses, and arguments that constitute a historic commonality of 
concern. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that a crucial feature of a 
philosophical tradition relates not just to teachings but also to problems 
and questions. For constituting the agenda of concern is as much a 
valid and proper form of traditionary commitment as is endorsing par- 
ticular doctrines. ! 

Now in this regard what is definitive for the Catholic philosophical 
tradition is the unfolding of thought defined by the writings of Aristo- 
tle, his Christianizers among the Church Fathers, the systematizers of 
these ideas among the medieval Schoolmen (above all St. Thomas), as 
well as the host of Catholic thinkers from those distant times to the days 
of Jacques Maritain, Etienne Gilson, Bernard Lonergan, and beyond 
who strove to refurbish the relevant ideas of the bygone greats to the 
changed ethos of a modern world based on science, technology, and so- 
cial massification. 

What integrates this large manifold of thought and writing into a tra- 
dition is not its doctrinal uniformity but rather both a mutuality of con- 
cern on the part of the later workers for the work of the earlier workers 
and also—in a larger sense—a mutuality of involvement in a common 

1. On the formative role of tradition in inquiry, see Alasdair MacIntyre, Whose Justice; 
Which Rationality? (South Bend, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988). 

162 Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 

project. This project is perhaps best defined through contrast and what 
it is not. It is not the Comtean project of dismissing religion as the char- 
acteristic product of an outdated era antecedent to the Age of Reason, 
nor yet the Kantian quest for a religion developed within the limits of 
reason alone, nor yet an “Averroism” that sees the work of religion and 
reason as “separate but equal” as it were, operating apart in distinct and 
disjoint jurisdictions of their own and having no bearing upon one an- 
other. Rather, it is the project of developing a perspective that enables 
reason and religion to exist in a holistic unicity that fructifies each 
through its interaction with the other. 

4. RESPECT FOR A TRADITION 

Against this background, then, there inevitably arises the question: 
What does a Catholic philosopher of the present day owe to this great 
tradition? 

And here it seems sensible to take the stance that what we owe to the 
tradition of Catholic philosophy is not so much agreement as respect. 
Once nature and nurture have so conspired as to make someone both a 
Catholic and a philosopher, it is only right and proper that the great tra- 
dition of Catholic philosophy should to some extent engage this indi- 
vidual’s interest and respect. And loyalty comes into it as well. Why, after 
all, should one align with any tradition at all? The answer is that this is 
part of our identity definition, of our self-definition as the individual we 
are. For being a person is a matter of having a personality—of acquiring 
an identity. And attachment to a tradition is one important pathway 
leading to this distinction of personality definition. After all, even those 
who might wish to avoid any such affiliation through this very circum- 
stance take their place within the tradition of eccentrics and individual- 
ists. In philosophy, as in life, what sort of person one is is in the first in- 
stance a matter of how one relates to others. And here proverbial 
wisdom is right: “Birds of a feather flock together”—by their cohorts 
and fellow travelers shall ye know them. The situation of traditionary at- 
tachment is akin to that of a family, where even if we do not agree with 
one another we nevertheless do—or, ideally, should—respect and care 
about one another. 

In sum, what the Catholic philosopher owes to these great figures of 
the tradition is not necessarily agreement with and endorsement of 
their teachings, but the sort of respect that any intellectual owes those 
whose talents and efforts have paved the way for his own work. One’s 
duty as a Catholic philosopher, that is to say, is not so much to endorse 
this or that particular thesis or teaching espoused by the great figures of 

Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 163 

our tradition, as it is to adopt a certain stance as regards the relation- 
ship between their work and our own. In sum, what we owe to the 
shapers of our tradition is not so much to see them as fonts of authorita- 
tive truth as to see them as role models in defining the key issues and 
guiding us to ways in which they can be profitably addressed. 

We need not agree, but we must seek out and draw upon threads of 
relevancy. When we respect a tradition we must be prepared to see the 
work of those who labor under its aegis as relevant to our own. We must, 
that is, be prepared to devote to the work of its exponents attention, 
consideration, sympathetic response, and, above all, care. 

But just how is such care to manifest itself? 

In addressing this issue it is useful to begin with an analogy, namely, 
that of architecture. How can one honor an architectural tradition? 
There are three prime possibilities here: 

1. Restoration: reconstituting or re-creating a timeworn structure of 
the past with faithful reliance on traditional materials and modes of 
workmanship. Examples: colonial Williamsburg or Warsaw. 

2. Preservation: reinforcing a structure with modern techniques. The 
visible finished result is virtually identical but the substructure is wholly 
different. Examples: fitting out the White House or Frank Lloyd Wright’s 
“Falling Water” with an entirely new steel substructure. 

3. Inspiration: creating entirely new structures but in a way that revises 
the sprit of the past. Examples: Prince Charles’s support for traditional 
architecture in Britain or the “modern village” movement among so- 
phisticated property developers in the United States. 

And in philosophy too it seems that there are three substantially 
analogous approaches to the appreciation of past work: 

1. Restoration and revival: rejuvenation of its thesis and doctrines in a 
changed environment. 

2. Preservation of issues: reopening and reexamining its questions; ad- 
dressing its issues and problems with the methods and techniques of a 
later day. 

3. Inspirational revivification of its spirit: working in the same spirit and 
with the same style of concern and the same objective in view. 

It makes sense to think that all three of these approaches—preserva- 
tion, restoration, and inspiration—are perfectly appropriate and valid 
ways of honoring a tradition—an intellectual tradition included. Re- 
spect for tradition is in this regard a large tent that can accommodate a 
substantial variety of tenants. None has a monopoly of the project and 
there is ample room for difference. And irrespective of which approach 

164 Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 

we ourselves favor, there is no need and no justification for looking 
askance at those who have chosen to take a different approach. All 
three of these approaches seem to afford thoroughly appropriate and 
fitting ways of showing respect for the great tradition of Catholic philos- 
ophy. 

How should a Catholic philosopher react when discord arises be- 
tween hoary tradition and the moderns between the teachings of the 
past and the ideas of the present? What is appropriate here is a perhaps 
odd-sounding mixture of trust and skepticism. The larger issues of phi- 
losophy and philosophical theology are so deep and complex that we 
do well both to view our own ideas with some degree of skeptical tenta- 
tivity and to expect instruction and insight from those whose thought 
and work has paved the way for our own. 

To reemphasize, then, the unifying thread throughout is a matter of 
caring—of bringing to one’s work a sense of communion with these ear- 
lier thinkers in the common endeavor of bringing reason to bear on is- 
sues that are figuring an intelligible framework of understanding in the 
realm in which we have been placed by nature and nature’s God. 

And here it must be noted that the concept of authority impacts upon 
that of tradition in a complicated way. For authoritativeness is a force 
that can flow in different channels. Perhaps the most familiar of these is 
the probative authoritativeness bound up with the idea of a proof text. 
Here an authority is someone whose say-so functions evidentially: what 
such an authority says is something that the rest of us incline to accept 
as true for this very reason. But over and above such an authoritative- 
ness of truth there is also an authoritativeness of value. The issues that 
such an authority considers ought for this very reason to figure on our 
agenda of sympathetic concern: we need not necessarily agree with the 
theses of such an authority but we should be drawn sympathetically to 
the orientation and spirit of his discussion. The dicta of the authority 
will in this case constitute grounds for concern and consideration 
rather than grounds for endorsement and reiteration. 

5. THE ASPECT OF VALUE 

There are, after all, two somewhat different sorts of authority, to wit, 
authoritativeness with respect to fact and authoritativeness with respect 
to value. We can credit a person with sagacity—that is, see him as exten- 
sively informed with respect to certain issues. But we can also credit a 
person with wzsdom or good judgment—that is, see him as having sound 
insight as to what the important issues are, what we would be well ad- 
vised to attend to and think about. Both of these issues are aspects of 

Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 165 

authoritativeness in a larger sense. And so insofar as respect is a funda- 
mentally evaluative matter, honoring a tradition involves prizing its con- 
cerns and in consequence looking to it both for ideas and for guidance 
for the conduct of our own philosophical efforts. 

Respect for the tradition accordingly demands a sense of solidarity 
and colleagueship with those great thinkers who have formed this tradi- 
tion that we respect. This certainly does not require agreement with the 
shapers of the tradition, who, after all, all too often do not even agree 
with one another. Rather, as with any colleagueship, we feel affectively 
engaged. To see them slighted and marginalized—let alone scorned—is 
something we feel offensive to ourselves. Allegiance to tradition is in this 
way not a doctrinal stance but a matter of community and spiritual affin- 
ity—of colleagueship and collaboration in a common effort at rational 
inquiry under the aegis of shared values. The situation is much the same 
as it is—or should be—with that of our teachers or our senior colleagues 
in our own fields of endeavor. We do not owe them agreement and an 
endorsement of their opinions but rather the respect that is due to 
those who have labored to make it possible for us to be who we are. 

And so in essence what we owe to the great tradition of Catholic phi- 
losophy is a matter of acknowledging it as the source not only of a sub- 
stantial problem agenda for philosophical inquiry but also as a role 
model for us in our efforts to grapple with the problems it poses. 

An important aspect of the idea of colleagueship and community 
that should be at work here lies in the inherent implications of these 
very conceptions. For any sort of meaningful collaboration is predicated 
on foregoing any pretence to facile self-insufficiency in acknowledging 
that we ourselves are not the pivotal end-all and be-all around which it 
all revolves, but are only limited creatures constrained by difficult cir- 
cumstances to do the best we can with all the help that we can get. 
There is a due sense of fallibility and incompleteness that recognizes 
that we are engaged in a large and difficult enterprise in which our own 
modest efforts are by themselves unavailing. In such a collaborative set- 
ting, we are prepared to welcome whatever help we can get in our at- 
tempts to wrestle with the difficult and challenging issues that preoccu- 
py us in our philosophical concerns. 

The salient point is that we do not merely inherit a tradition but that 
we must work to appropriate it. As T. S. Eliot puts it, “Tradition by itself is 
not enough; it must be perspectivally criticized and brought up to 
date.”2 And here, as I see it, we have the crux of what the Catholic 

2. T. S. Eliot, After Strange Gods: A Primer of Modern Heresy (New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and Company, 1934). 

166 Tradition and the Catholic Philosopher Today 

philosopher owes to the tradition, namely, a caring that requires a per- 
haps somewhat confused-sounding mixture of metaphors, namely, a 
recognition and acknowledgment that we both stand on the shoulders 
of those who have formed our tradition and follow in their footsteps 
along a road of deliberation and investigation for which they have 
paved the way.® 

3. This chapter served as the author’s 2004 presidential address to the American 
Catholic Philosophical Association. 

Index 

Abailard, Peter, 128, 128n5 

Achilles, 5n4 

Adams, Marilyn McCord, 17n42, 18n42, 
8on6, 126n1, 147 

Adams, Robert M., 147, 148 

Adler, Mortimer, J., 17038 

Al-Ashcari, 11 

Albert, Hans, 107 

Alcuin, 128 

Alfarabi, 11n22 

al-Ghazali, 7-11, 7n8, 9n15, gn16, 10n19, 
10N21, 11N22, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 22, 
23n63, 33, 34, 42, 43, 44, 48n103, 
94n5 

Alluntis, Felix, 17n39 

Anaxgoras, 4n3 

Anaximander of Miletus, 4, 4n2, 5, 43 

Anaximenes, 4n3, 

Anderson, Melville B., 16n36 

Angligena, Robertus, 50 

Aquinas, St. Thomas, 13-14, 14n29, 16, 
18, 37, 43, 84-87, 92, 94, 94n6, g5n8, 
106,107, 118, 118n10, 127-29, 145, 
149-55, 161 

Arberry, A. J., 50n1, 55 

Archimedes, 2, 5n5, 43 

Aristotle, 4, 4n2, 4n3, 5-7, 6n6, g, 10n22, 
11n22, 19n27, 16, 19, 19N50, 22n61, 
23, 43, 44, 62, 79, 92, 93, 100, 107, 
151-52 

Ayerroes, 710, 8n10, 9n15, 9n16, 10, 
10n16, 10n17, 12, 12n25, 13, 13n26, 
22, 37,43, 44, 945 

Avicenna, 11n22 

Badash, Lawrence, 68n7 

Baumgarten, A. G., 93n4 

Bayle, Pierre, 19n26, 18, 18n46, 19n48, 
28, 29, 29N75, 43, 46 

Bendiek, Johannes, 107 

Berkeley, Bishop, 114, 129 

Burley, Walter, 122, 123 

Bernard of Clairvaux, 50 

Bismark, Otto von,110 

Black, O., 107 

Bohr, Neils, go 

Boler, John F., 85ng, 1297, 

Bourke, Vernon J., 17n41 

Brandis, C. A., 11n22 

Brentano, Franz, 145, 145n22 

Brown, Patterson, g5n8 

Buridan, John, 18-22, 18n44, 18n45, 19, 
19n46, 19n47, 19n48, 19n49, 19N50, 
20, 20N52, 20N53, 20N54, 21, 212N59Q, 
33> 34> 37, 43> 44 

Burr, David, 15n31 

Burrell, David B., 10n21, 37n91 

Butler, Bishop, 4’7n102 

Calonymus, Calo, 10 

Carnap, Rudolf, 141n16 

Carrol, Lewis, 35, 35n89 

Cassirer, Ernest, 151, 152 

Cervantes, Miguel de, 124, 125 

Chihara,Charles S., 132, 132n11, 147 

Chisholm, Roderick M., 131, 131n10, 147, 
148 

Cicero, 45, 46n99 

Clark, Romane, 96ng, 98n14, 107 

Clarke, Samuel, 8n12, 27, 28n73 

Clarke, W. Norris, 150 

Collingwood, R. G., 7n10, 151 

Coste, Pierre, 29n76 

Cotes, Roger, 61 

Craig, William Lane, 95n8, 107 

Cyril of Alexandria, 20n53 

Dalmata, Hermannus, 50 

Dante, Alighieri, 16, 16n36 

de Morgan, Augustus, 3.4, 35 
Democritus, 5n3 

Dewey, John, 151 

Dingler, Hugo, 97n12, 107 

Duhem, Pierre, 18,19n46, 20n52, 21n60 

Edwards, Jonathan, 48n104 
Eisler, Rudolf, 115n5 
Eliot, T. S., 165, 165n2 

168 INDEX 

Flores, Angel, 22n61 
Forbes, Graeme, 147 
Fredegisus of Tours, 128 
Frege, Gottlob, 137 
Fumerton, Richard, 107 

Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 151 

Gal, G., 17n42 

Gallie, W. B., 60n4 

Garcia, Marcanus Fernandez, 17n40 
Gataker, Thomas, 24, 25, 42 

Gauthier, Léon, 11n22, 22n62, 29n63 
Geach, Peter, 107 

Gerson, Johannes, 11n23 

Geyer, Bernard, 18n45, 19n47, 20n54 
Gillett, Carl, 102n16 

Gilson, Etienne, 150, 161 

Grua, Gaston, 27n72 

Guthrie, W. K. C., 4n2 

Hamilton, Sir William, 19n46, 20n54 
Harris, C. R. S., 8n11, 26n68 
Hartshorne, Charles, 115n5 

Hayen, André, 145n24 

Hazen, Allen, 148 

Heidegger, Martin, 151 

Hintikka, Jaakko, 148 

Hintikka, Merrill, 148 

Hume, David, 16n35, 46n100 

Iohannis, Fr. Petrus, 15n31 

James, William, 151 
Jeffrey, Eber, 68n8 
John of Damascus, 52 
John of Segovia, 54 
Johnson, Samuel, 109 

Kant, Immanuel, 32-34, 32n83, 32n84, 
33n86, 63, 63n5, 67, 93n4, 105, 107, 
115, 115n5, 116n8 

Kaplan, David, 134, 134n13, 148 

Kaye, Sharon, 15n21, 15n33, 20n54 

Kent, Bonnie, 15n31 

Keynes, J. M., 102 

Khayyam, Omar, 12n24, 80 

Kilmer, Joyce, 144 

Kim, Jaegwon, 147, 148, 131n10 

King, Peter, 112n1 

Kirjavainen, Heikka, 18n44 

Klein, Peter, 102n16, Peter, 107 

Korolec, Jerzy B., 18n42, 18n44 

Kowlee, J. B., 14n29 

Kripke, Saul, 133, 148 

Kukkonen, Taneli, 94n5 

Langley, A. G., 26n69, 28n74 

Leibniz, 1, 3, 8n1o, 8n12, 13n26, 16n35, 
29n66, 26n69, 27-30, 28n74, 28n75, 
29n75, 29077, 29n78, 30078, 37, 
87n4, 97, 106, 117n9g, 118n10, 129, 
134, 134N12, 135 

Leo XII, 149 

Lewis, C. I., 117, 117ng 

Lewis, David, 133, 143, 144n20,148 

Lonergan, Bernard, 150, 161 

Lycan, William G., 140, 140n15,148 

MacIntyre, Alasdair, 161n1 

MacKay, A. F., 107 

Maier, Anneliese, 19n49 
Maimonides, Moses, 8n11, 126, 127 
Mandonnet, Pierre, 128n6 

Marcus, Ruth Barcan, 142n16, 148 
Maritain, Jacques, 150, 161 

Martin, Raymond, 10n20 
McTaggart, M. E., 144n21 
Meinong, Alexius, 145 

Mellor, D. H., 107 

Michalski, Konstanty, 221n59 
Minio-Paluello, L., 1gn50 

Mohr, J. C. B., 107 

Monahan, Edward J., 18n44 
Mondadori, Fabrizio, 148 
Montaigne, Michel de, 13n26, 23, 24 
Moody, E. A., 19n49 

Moser, Paul, 107 

Muhammad II, 53 

Naumann, P., 53n5 

Newton, Isaac, 61 

Nicholas of Cusa, 49-57, 524, 58, 72 
Nietzsche, Frederich, 154 

Nikolaus, von Cues, 50n2 

Nikubam Kydivucim g0n53, 

Normore, Calvin, 59, 129n8 

Oakley, I. T., 107 

Ockham, 129n7 

Olivi, Peter John, 15, 15n31, 17, 18 
Origen, 4, 4n1, 

Parmenides, 5n4 

Parsons, Terence, 142n17, 148 
Pasnan, Robert, 15n31 
Passmore, John, 107 

Pasteur, Louis, 61 

Peirce, C. S., 68, 151 

Peter the Venerable, 50 

Pius I, 52, 53 

Pius V, 149 

Pius X, 149 

Plato, 4, 5ng, 5n4, 13n27, 19N50, 43, 92, 
g2ni, 101, 1167, 154 

Plutarch, 35 

Popper, K. R., 6on3, 

Post, J., 107 

Prior, A. N., 48n104, 87n4 

Ptolemy, 152 

Quine, W. V. O., 142, 142n18, 148, 151 

Rabelais, Francisco, 23, 23n64, 35 
Rackham, H., 46ng99 

Ramanujan, 89 

Rawls, John, 151, 152 

Rees, Martin, 120n12 

Reid, Thomas, 15, 30, 31, 31n81, 31n82, 

Ad 
Rescher, Nicholas,148 
Retenensis, Robertus, 50 
Ricoldus of Monte Crucis, 51 
Riley, J., 107 
Rosenberg, Alex, 60n3 
Rowe, William L., 95n8, 107 
Russell, Bertrand, 1, 30n78, 151, 152 
Ryle, Gilbert, 97, 107 

Saarienen, Risto, 18n44 

Salmon, Nathan, 143n19, 148 

Sambursky, S.5n4 

Sanford, D. H., 107 

Schopenhauer, Arthur, 18, 18n46, 19n50, 
34, 34n88, 44ng6 

Scotus, Duns, 8n11, 16, 17, 17n37, 17n38, 
17n39, 26n68, 95, g5n8, 112, 118n10, 
129, 129N7 

Sextus Empiricus, 92n3 

Shakespeare, William, 73 

Siebeck, Herman, 11n22, 17n38 

Siger of Branbant, 128n6 

Simplicius, 6, 10n22, 40 

Sir William Hamilton, 18 

Smart, J.C. C., 151, 152 

INDEX 

Socrates, 4, 19n50 

Sosa, Ernest, 108, 131n10, 147, 148 
Spencer, Herbert, 101, 101n15 
Spiegelberg, Herbert, 145n25 
Spinoza 8n10, 25-27, 26n6g, 26n70, 119 
St. John, 20n53 

St. Paul, 11n24 

Stekla, Herbert, g2n2, 108 

Stewart, Dugald, 25n68 

Stockton, Frank R., 35, 36, 36ngo, 38 
Stump, Eleanore, 84, 84n2 
Sweetman, J. S., 51n3, 

Tempier, Bishop, 149 

Theodor Bibliander of Ztrich, 50 
Thomas of Tuscany, 50 

Thomson, James, 98n13,108 
Tombenlin, J., 148 

Twain, Mark, 1 

Tweedale, Martin M., 128n5 

Ueberweg, Friedrich, 20n54 
Urbach, Peter, 6on3, 

van den Berg, Simon, 10n17, 11n24, 
13n26 
van Inwagen, Peter, 148 

Walsh, James J., 18n44 

Whitehead, A. N., 151 

William of Ockham, 17-18, 17n42, 
18n43, 20n52, 20n54 

Wolff, Christian, 30, 30n80 

Wolfson, Harry Austryn, 126, 127n2 

Wolter, Alan B., 17n39 

Zadeh Khodja, 22, 23, 23n63 
Zedler, Beatrice H., 10n2g0 
Zeller, Edward, 4n2 

Zeno, 92, 92n1 

Zimmerman, Albert, 128n6 
Zupko, Jack, 18n44, 20n55