PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA 
Oration on the Dignity of Man 

A NEW TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY 

Edited by 
FRANCESCO BORGHESI 

MICHAEL PAPIO 
MASSIMO RIVA 

more information - www.cambridge.org/9781107015876 

Pico della Mirandola Oration on the 
Dignity of Man 

This is a new translation of and commentary on Pico della Mirandola's 
most famous work, the Oration on the Dignity of Man. It is the first English 
edition to provide readers with substantial notes on the text; essays that 
address the work”s historical, philosophical, and theological contexts; and a 
survey of its reception. Often called the “Manifesto of the Renaissance,” 
this brief but complex text was originally composed in 1486 as the 
inaugural speech for an assembly of intellectuals that could have produced 
one of the most exhaustive metaphysical, theological, and psychological 
debates in history had Pope Innocent VIII not forbidden it. This edition of 
the Oration reflects the spirit of the original text in bringing together 
experts in different fields. Not unlike the debate Pico optimistically 
anticipated, the resulting work is superior to the sum of its parts. 

Francesco Borghesi teaches in the Department of Italian Studies at the 
University of Sydney in Australia. Among his publications are Concordia, 
pietas, docta religio (2004) and the forthcoming Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola (2013). 

Michael Papio is an Associate Professor of Italian Studies at the University 
of Massachusetts Amherst. He is the author of Keen and Violent Remedies: 
Social Satire and the Grotesque in Masuccio Salernitano' Novellino (2000) 
and the translator of Boccaccio' Expositions on Dante Comedy (2009). 

Massimo Riva is a Professor of Italian Studies at Brown University. He has 
also taught at the University of Sydney in Australia, Northwestern 
University, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Among his recent 
publications are Italian Tales: An Anthology of Contemporary Italian 
Fiction (2004) and 11 futuro della letteratura (2011). 

Pico della Mirandola 

Oration on the Dignity of ManA New Translation 
and Commentary 

Edited by 

Francesco Borghesi 

University of Sydney 

Michael Papio 

University of Massachusetts Amherst 

Massimo Riva 

Brown University 

35 CAMBRIDGE 

“a EY UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sáo 
Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City 

Cambridge University Press 
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA 
www.cambridge.org 
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107015876 
O Francesco Borghesi, Michael Papio, and Massimo Riva 2012 

This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the 
provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of 
any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge 
University Press. 

First published 2012 
Printed in the United States of America 
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library. 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 1463-1494. 
[De hominis dignitate. English € Latin] 

Oration on the dignity of man : a new translation and commentary / Pico 
della Mirandola ; [edited by] Francesco Borghesi, Michael Papio, Massimo 
Riva. 

p. cm. 

English and Latin. 

Includes bibliographical references (p.) and index. 

ISBN 978-1-107-01587-6 (hardback) 

1. Philosophical anthropology — Early works to 1800. 2. Philosophy — Early 
works to 1800. I. Borghesi, Francesco, 1974— II. Papio, Michael, 1967— 
III. Riva, Massimo. IV. Title. 

B785.P52E5 2012 
128-dc23 2011046648 

ISBN 978-1-107-01587-6 Hardback 
Additional resources for this publication at 
http://www.brown.edu/Departments/Italian_Studies/pico/ 

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or 
accuracy Of URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to 
in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such Web 
sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. 

Contents 

Acknowledgments 

Part I. Preface, Introductions, Overview 
Preface: History of the Pico Project and Criteria for the Current Edition 
Massimo Riva 
The Historical and Biographical Background of the Oration 
Pier Cesare Bori 
Chronology 
Francesco Borghesi 
The Oration's Printed Editions 
Michael Papio 
Interpretations 
Francesco Borghesi 
Overview of the Text 
Francesco Borghesi, Massimo Riva, Michael Papio, Saverio 
Marchignoli, Giorgio Melloni, and Dino Buzzetti 
Part II. Text 
Part III. Images 
Bibliography 
Index of Names 

Acknowledgments 

The editors would like to thank the original members of the Brown 
University—-University of Bologna Pico Project for their collaboration in the 
preparation of this edition. In particular, thanks go to Pier Cesare Bori and 
the Feltrinelli Publishing House of Milan for permitting the inclusion of a 
translated chapter from Pluralita delle vie (O Giangiacomo Feltrinelli 
Editore Milano; Prima edizione in “Campi del Sapere” aprile 2000) and to 
the Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze, which permitted the 
reproduction of four images from the Palatino 885 manuscript. We would 
also like to thank Sarah Christopher for her contribution to the translation of 
Pier Cesare Bori's introductory piece, as well as Helen Freear-Papio, Lesley 
Freeman Riva, and Leanne Kilroy Borghesi for their invaluable help in the 
preparation of the final manuscript. Further thanks go to Francesco Bausi, 
whose Latin critical text is adopted for the present edition, and to Cristiana 
Facchini. Both read and commented on the manuscript at various stages. 
Brown University and the Brown—Bologna Exchange Fund have provided 
financial and logistical support for the Pico Project since its inception, as 
they have for this edition. We would additionally like to acknowledge the 
National Endowment for the Humanities for its generous support of the 
Pico Project, now part of the Virtual Humanities Laboratory at Brown. 

Part I Preface, Introductions, Overview 

Preface: History of the Pico Project and Criteria 
for the Current Edition 

Massimo Riva 

This edition of Giovanni Pico della Mirandola's discourse known as Oratio 
de hominis dignitate (On Human Dignity) is the product of teamwork 
performed by several scholars who participated in the Brown University— 
University of Bologna Pico Project. The project began in 1997 as an 
experiment in collaborative scholarship born out of a seminar on Pico given 
by Pier Cesare Bori, then a visiting professor at Brown. Bori was 
particularly interested in Pico*s thought within the framework of his own 
reflection on human rights and the “pluralistic” convergence and potential 
consensus among diverse religious and ethical traditions. As a direct result 
of Bori's seminar, it became clear that a new edition of the Oration was 
desirable and that the new medium of electronic publishing could provide 
an interesting testing ground for our collaborative effort. 

The original team who contributed to this first stage of the project 
included a group of scholars of differing backgrounds and disciplinary 
orientations, working in both Europe and North America.' The Web site of 
the Pico Project provided a shared platform for their work. We began by 
reproducing in digital form the text of the Oration from the incunabula of 
the editio princeps (edited by Pico?s nephew, Gianfrancesco, and published 
in Bologna by Benedetto Faelli in 1496) held at the Biblioteca Universitaria 
in Bologna, at the Biblioteca Comunale dell*Archiginnasio in Bologna, and 
at the John Hay Library at Brown, knowing that the latter two incunabula 
are counterfeits of the princeps, both made in Lyon in 1498. We then 
proceeded to transcribe the text from the Biblioteca Universitaria copy of 
the princeps. 

A further necessary step was the examination of an anonymous partial 
manuscript by an unidentified author, possibly Giovanni Nesi,? held at the 
National Library in Florence (misc. Palatino 885, discovered by Eugenio 
Garin) and generally held to represent the first draft of the Oration (an 
image of the manuscript is also available on our Web site). After this 
preliminary phase was completed, we were ready for the collaborative work 
envisioned as the core of our Brown—Bologna Pico Project. 

Over the following years, the transcription of the text was augmented 
with footnotes and annotations; new translations into Italian, English, and 
Spanish were completed; and some auxiliary documents were added to the 
site, such as a presentation of the project (in Italian, English, and Latin), a 
chronology of Pico's life, a bibliography of his works, a guide and 
templates for potential collaborators (composed by Michael Papio), and an 
essay by Pier Cesare Bori outlining his interpretation of Pico, which was 
later expanded into a book published in Italy by Feltrinelli im 2000 
(Pluralita delle vie. Alle origini del Discorso sulla dignita umana di Pico 
della Mirandola — Plurality of Paths. The origins of the Discourse about 
Human Dignity of Pico della Mirandola). This book, a portion of which is 
excerpted here, included the Latin text of the Oration as an appendix, 
accompanied by the Italian translation, the result of the collaborative work 
done on our site and edited by Saverio Marchignoli. Marchignoli's notes 
(also partially based on the work of our team) included the variants from 
both the manuscript fragment (contained in the misc. Palatino 885) and 
Pico*s Apologia (Apology), published in Naples by Francesco Del Tuppo in 
1487, and a synopsis of the parallel sections of the manuscript and the 
princeps. 

This “hybrid” publishing method, relying on the electronic medium for 
the preparatory materials, remains one of the essential features of this 
expanded English edition. Compared with Marchignoli”s Italian edition, the 
text of the Oration is accompanied here by an extensive apparatus of 
philological and interpretive footnotes and annotations. These identify 
sources previously unidentified, suggest intertextual links to other works by 
Pico or by other authors, and take into account, as much as possible, 
previous editions (mostly Italian or English). This includes, most 

importantly, the most recent Italian edition by Francesco Bausi, published 
in 2003, to which our Latin text conforms. What appears here in print is 
thus the product of a collaborative effort whose results-in-progress were 
first presented online. Meanwhile, the Web site of the Pico Project (now 
part of the Virtual Humanities Lab at Brown and including an annotated 
edition-in-progress of Pico's Conclusiones Nongentae)? will continue to be 
updated and augmented, providing readers of this book with access to even 
more extensive resources that cannot easily be printed, such as a complete 
set Of images from the manuscript and incunabula, as well as additional 
extensive quotations from Pico”s texts and other identifiable or conjectural 
sources, quoted in their original languages (Greek, Hebrew, or Latin).* 

This “hybrid” publication method represents a new and recent phase in 
the history of scholarly editions. It is quite common nowadays to complete 
preparatory work in electronic form for eventual publication in print, 
allowing scholars who collaborate all the communicative possibilities 
offered by email and the Internet, and the genesis of this edition as an 
online resource is thus reflected not only in the general spirit that informs it 
but also in some of its specific features. One could even suggest a historical 
analogy between Pico*s time, when the transition from manuscript to the 
print medium was taking place, and our time, five hundred years later, when 
a new transition from print to the electronic medium is under way that 
allows new methods of testing and disseminating ideas. Such an analogy 
could indeed provide an opportunity for a reflection on the role of 
technology in the making (and remaking) of textual traditions; this, 
however, is outside the scope of this preface. 

As far as the Pico Project is concerned, since the beginning our intention 
has been to make the Oration widely available on the Internet as a resource 
for a wider community of scholars and readers, an essential step toward a 
better understanding and reappraisal of a legendary episode of the 
Renaissance: Picos project to defend his nine hundred theses or 
conclusions before a council of theologians, designated by Pope Innocent 
VIII and charged with confronting him in a debate open to philosophers and 
publicly advertised and “broadcast” through the new medium of print (the 
incunabula containing the Conclusiones, now lost with the exception of two 

extant copies, one at the Vatican Library and the other at the British 
Library).? Pico's partially aborted effort at publishing and defending his 
theses is thus the symbol of an almost “heroic” humanistic enterprise, one 
which still resonates with us in these times of ideological and religious 
conflict: the (re)discovery of, and fostering of, an open dialogue among the 
most ancient religious and philosophical doctrines, widely perceived as 
antagonistic but instead embraced by the young Pico, in an extraordinary 
effort at reconciling different paths toward a common (human and divine) 
truth, according to his idea of philosophical concordance and peace. 

From this point of view, Pico's system of thought and his method of 
quoting and editing his sources, by connecting and “linking” them in short, 
synthetic aphorisms, may also resonate with us, inspiring a comparison 
between Pico*s “concordistic” way of synthesizing diverse traditions and 
ideas and our own post-modern way of retrieving and reconstructing them, 
both philologically and theoretically, from the depths of the historical 
archive. 

As a true product of teamwork, a collective enterprise, and not the work 
of a single scholar, as is usually the case, this edition of the Oration also 
reflects the new collaborative paradigm emerging alongside the introduction 
of new technologies that not only make possible but actually impose new 
habits and methodologies of collaboration on scholars in the humanities, 
who have traditionally been more reticent in adopting them than their 
colleagues in the sciences. Some specific features of this edition can be 
considered a direct or, at the very least, an indirect result of this new 
approach, and it is worth outlining them here. For instance, the division of 
the text into six sections, each edited, translated, annotated, and introduced 
by one of the original team members and then revised by others, provides a 
multi-faceted perspective on the Oration, reflecting the points of view of 
the various editors with their specific backgrounds and interests (theology 
and philosophy, cultural history, philology and literature).? Moreover, the 
further subdivision of each section into numbered paragraphs and 
subparagraphs corresponding to each separate sentence in the princeps, 
maintained here in print, can be traced back to a suggestion by Pier Cesare 
Bori at the very beginning of the project and was meant to facilitate the 

close reading process and the collaborative commentary that the scholars 
participating in the project were about to tackle. 

Such an analytical subdivision of Pico's text, while perhaps arbitrary 
from a strictly philological point of view, also provides a useful layout in 
print for a fine parsing of a text which, although conceived by its author as 
a unified discourse to be pronounced in public (an introduction meant to set 
the tone of the debate about his nine hundred conclusions or theses), has 
also produced over the centuries a large archive of interpretations while 
maintaining its integrity as a philosophical text in its own merit, read by 
many as a veritable “manifesto” of Renaissance thought. Readers of this 
edition will have access to both the original discourse in Latin and its new 
English rendition, as well as the detailed commentary produced by the 
small community of scholars participating in the Pico Project. 

In short, a trace of the specific interface of the online edition can be 
found in this editorial choice. This methodology is bound to evolve even 
further: in the second phase of the Pico Project, a more interactive, dynamic 
interface (part of the Virtual Humanities Lab) will allow a broader group of 
collaborating scholars to expand their annotations and translations to Pico*s 
other texts as well as related texts by other authors. It is foreseeable that 
new printed editions of these texts will also take advantage of these further 
collaborative efforts, while the work in progress on our project's Web site 
will allow continuous updating and further integration of both existing and 
forthcoming printed editions, including the present one.” 

In this transition from a traditional idea of the scholarly (critical) printed 
edition as potentially definitive to a more dynamic idea according to which 
the life of a text is inseparable from its successive readings, interpretations, 
and reinterpretations (that is, from the historical communities of scholars 
who “produce” them), perhaps the major .methodological (and 
typographical) burden is on the footnote and the annotation.? 

Born within print culture, in the digital medium the footnote undergoes a 
true “renaissance” and metamorphosis. Whoever is familiar with textual 

traditions knows that over time annotations can acquire scholarly value in 
their own right. As Anthony Grafton puts it, in his “curious” history of this 
“minor” scholarly genre: “Footnotes buttress and undermine, at one and the 
same time.”? Of course, the (modern) historian “does not cite authorities but 
sources,” writes Grafton. In an age in which authorities have been 
superseded by Wikipedia, the notion of “source” itself is undergoing a 
radical change, often morphing into a collective, almost anonymous, 
pseudo-authority (or a “crowd,” to use a current term, as in 
“crowdsourcing”). According to this model, successive annotations to an 
original text may actually produce an entirely new text. Yet, with all its 
novelty, the transformation of the footnote and rhizomatic proliferation of 
the gloss in the age of digital inter- or hypertextuality is reminiscent of the 
way medieval scholastic culture functioned. Within this new technological 
context, the legacy of Renaissance humanism, representing the work of the 
humanities as a continuous rediscovery of and dialogue with the distant 
past, is still extremely relevant. If the humanistic networks of the past relied 
on letter writing and print for disseminating their ideas, contemporary 
networks rely on the even more powerful networking tools provided by 
digital technology. 

Picos own theses can be seen as his synthetic glosses on the whole 
archive of “knowledge” known to him, and his glosses have somehow 
become independent from the texts they were originally linked to, standing 
on their own and ready for scrutiny on their own merits. This is particularly 
true of the Conclusiones. Yet, in order to judge Pico*s ideas on their own 
merits, it is necessary for us to rediscover once again the sources that 
nourished his thought (thus “following up on one of the basic notions of 
Picos own philosophy,” as Paul Kristeller (1965, 41) once wrote). This is 
the inescapable “recursive” (and stratified) nature of humanistic knowledge. 
In the feedback loop between print and digital text, the gloss, the humble 
footnote, may evolve from a parasitic to a symbiotic component of the text 
but remains our way of accumulating (critical) knowledge about the past 
while engaging in an everlasting dialogue with the perennial sources of our 
cultural legacy. 

The praise and defence of “(human) dignity,” the philosophical concept 
and moral ideal that gives Pico's Oration its spurious title and everlasting 
fame, is certainly one of the tenets of the humanistic legacy in our 
contemporary world. Clearly, a wide historical gulf separates the notion of 
“dignity” as it is articulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(1948), harkening back to the radical modern transformations brought about 
by the American and French revolutions, and Pico's ideas.*% Yet, the 
contemporary fortune of Pico”s text, its “rediscovery” in the 1930s and 40s, 
is undoubtedly linked to the historical context in which it took place: a time 
when “human dignity” was being trampled to the point of leading even 
some of its defenders to question “humanism” itself as a misleading, self- 
referential ideology.*! The same can be said for the current revival of 
interest in Pico”s thought. If contemporary scholarship (as witnessed by this 
edition) is less interested in perpetuating old schemes and interpretations 
than offering a critical reevaluation of the Oration's authentic historical 
roots, it cannot ignore the renewed debate about the concept of “dignity” in 
our post-Kantian and “post-humanist” context.'? In this debate, new 
definitions come along in the attempt to suggest a broader notion of 
“dignity” conceived, for example, as a “(modern) virtue.”** Such an 
evolving, “virtual” meaning of “dignity” cannot ignore its classical and 
religious roots, particularly in a world in which the confrontation and 
dialogue among religious traditions and beliefs are crucial to a pacific 
coexistence. From this point of view, there is no doubt that the legacy of 
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Count of Concordia, is still with us. 

1 In addition to Pier Cesare Bori (History of Theology and Moral 
Philosophy, University of Bologna) and Massimo Riva (Italian Studies and 
Modern Media, Brown University), the group included Dino Buzzetti 
(History of Medieval Philosophy, University of Bologna), Karen de León- 
Jones (Italian Studies, Université de Savoie, Chambery), Saverio 
Marchignoli (Indian Philosophy and History of Orientalism, University of 
Bologna), Giorgio Melloni (Italian Studies, University of Delaware), and 
Michael Papio (Italian Studies, University of Massachusetts Amherst). 

Francesco Borghesi (Italian Studies, University of Sydney) joined the 
project in 2001. 

2 Franco Bacchelli has identified the hand of Giovanni Nesi. See Bori 
(2000, 31n61). 

E http://www.brown.edu/Departments/Italian_Studies/vhl_new/. The 
Conclusiones are now available in a complete Spanish translation (the first 
such translation of Pico”s text) edited by Ernesto Priani Saisó (Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico) and Silvia Magnavacca 
(University of Buenos Aires, Argentina). 

4 The most notable recent addition to the project's site is a sample from the 
first Chinese translation of Picos Oration, published by Peking University 
Press, which was the product of a team of scholars at Beida (Peking 
University) with an introduction in Chinese and Italian by P. C. Bori, Lun 
ren de zun yan, Beijing: Beijing da xue chu ban she, 2010. 

5 For an English edition of this work, see Farmer (1998). 

6 Respectively, Pier Cesare Bori, 8891-23 (introduction by F. Borghesi and 
M. Riva); Massimo Riva, 8824-50 (introduction by M. Riva); Michael 
Papio, 8851-102 (introduction by M. Papio); Saverio Marchignoli, 88103 
41 (introduction by S. Marchignoli); Giorgio Melloni, $8142-—70 
(introduction by G. Melloni, M. Papio, and M. Riva); Dino Buzzetti, 
88171-233 (introduction by D. Buzzetti); Karen de León-Jones, $8234-68 
(introduction by M. Riva). In order to avoid excessive disruption while 
reading Picos Oration, all of the above-mentioned introductions are 
collected in a single Overview of the Text, which precedes Pico”s text. 

7 The first results of this process are Boccaccio (2009), edited and 
introduced by Michael Papio, and a forthcoming edition of excerpts from 
Giovanni Villani*s thirteenth-century Cronica, edited by Rala Potter Diakite 
and Matthew Sneider, whose preparatory materials have also been 
processed at the VHL. 

8 See the Open Anmnotation Collaboration 
(http://www.openannotation.org/). 

9 Grafton (1999, 32). 

10 Cf. Copenhaver (2002a, 58): “[T]he Oratio is not about dignity and 
freedom as any modern or post-modern reader would understand these 
terms.” 

11 This historical context is evoked by Garin in his introduction to a 1994 
revised edition of the Oration (Pico 1994). 

12 Cf. Fukuyama (2002, 148—77); Habermas (2003, 29-37). 

13 Meyer (2002, 195-207). I have addressed this and other related ideas 
about Pico*s legacy in Riva (2008). 

The Historical and Biographical Background of 
the Oration 

Pier Cesare Bori 

The year 1486 was an extraordinary one for young Pico della Mirandola. In 
March, at twenty-three years of age, he returned from Paris to his friends 
Poliziano, Lorenzo de?” Medici, and Marsilio Ficino in Florence. On 8 May, 
Pico departed for Rome, where he intended to prepare for a debate on his 
philosophical theses with learned men from all corners of the world, invited 
at his own expense. 'Two days later, in Arezzo, he unsuccessfully attempted 
to carry off Margherita, wife of Giuliano de” Medici, an event that caused 
no small amount of scandal. However, the ensuing period of isolation, spent 
mainly in Fratta, between Perugia and Todi, was exceptionally productive 
for Pico. He wrote the Commento sopra una canzona de amore (a gloss on 
the poem written by his friend Girolamo Benivieni) and collected his 
theses, or Conclusiones, some nine hundred of them, in anticipation of the 
debate that was to take place at the beginning of the following year. For the 
introduction to this grand event, he also composed an elegant Oration, 
whose title afterward assumed the “epithet” On the Dignity of Man. By 7 
December, he was in Rome, where the publication of the Conclusiones 
immediately received very negative reactions. At the beginning of 1487, 
Pope Innocent VIII called off Pico?s public debate and convened a 
theological commission that, some months later, would condemn some of 
the theses. At the end of that same year, Pico decided to return to Paris. 

Is there a connection between the series of events that occurred between 
May and autumn 1486 and Pico”s exceptional intellectual accomplishments 
of that time? In order to hazard an answer, one must go over those events 
more analytically, beginning with the incident in Arezzo.! By 1486, 

Margherita, the wealthy widow of “un Costante spetiale, che teneva cavalli 
per correre palii” [“a Costante, spice merchant, who kept horses to run in 
palios”], had remarried the not so wealthy Giuliano di Mariotto de? Medici, 
an Aretine tax collector, and had gone to live with him in Arezzo. 

According to the account of the Estes? Florentine envoy Aldobrandino 
Guidoni, which survives in his letter of 12 May 1486 to Duke Ercole l, the 
young Pico, admired by the whole of Florence for his erudition and honesty 
of demeanour, had declared a few days earlier his desire to go to Rome. 
Having already sent his luggage on ahead toward Perugia, he left Florence 
accompanied by a fitting escort and stopped in Arezzo, where he attempted 
to carry off the lady. The letter reads: 

Questo signor conte e stato in questa cita cum tanta reputatione, cum 
tanta magnificentia et cum una universale bona expectatione di facti 
suoi, quanto che homo che mai fusse qui in questa cita, pero che parea 
veramente non potesse essere possibile la doctrina et scientia che era in 
lui. 

ll povero signore levo la voce, a questi di, de volere andare a Roma; et 
parve che facesse caricare tute le robe sue et adviarle verso Perosa. Poi 
lui seguito cum tuta la famiglia, che erano de le persone a piedi et 
cavallo, da 20; et haveva dui balestrieri a cavallo; et andaro ad Arezo, 
ove era ita una sua amorosa bellissima.? 

[This signor Count enjoyed in this city great distinction, prestige and 
universal confidence in his deeds, more so than any other man who 
had ever lived here in this city; hence, it truly seemed that his erudition 
and knowledge were beyond belief. 

The poor Count made it known in those days that he intended to travel 
to Rome; and it seemed that he had loaded up all of his things and sent 
them toward Perugia. Then he followed afterward with all of his 
servants, and there were twenty people on horseback and on foot; and 

he had two crossbowmen on horseback; and they went to Arezzo, 
where his most beautiful beloved had gone.] 

According to Giuliano (the offended husband), Margherita had been 
abducted on the morning of 10 May against her will. He writes to his cousin 
Lorenzo de? Medici: 

lermattina andando la Margherita, mia donna, colla serva pigliare 
recreatione al Duomo Vecchio da fuori d'Arezo, fu da gente del 
signore della Mirandola, contra sua volonta, presa e messa a cavallo et 
in groppa a gente di sua famiglia colla quale era il decto signore; che 
per questo era venuto la sera dinanzi qui agli alberghi d*Arezo, con 
circa 20 cavagli et con balestrieri acti a far male; et menorronla via, 
cavalcando quanto potevano.? 

[Yesterday morning, as my lady Margherita was going with her servant 
to the Old Duomo outside Arezzo for a stroll, she was taken against 
her will by the Count of Mirandola's men, was put on a horse and was 
carried off with some of his servants in the company of the 
aforementioned Count who, for this purpose, had lodged the previous 
evening in Arezzo with about 20 horses and crossbowmen ready to 
Cause harm. They led her away, galloping as fast as they could. ] 

Giuliano also laments the betrayal of one of his young subordinates who, 
moreover, supposedly stole more than 80 florins from him. Even the letter 
of the Signoria of Arezzo to Lorenzo de? Medici on 10 May reports that 
Margherita “fu a tradimento, et armata manu [...] et per forca messa a 
cavallo” [“was betrayed and forcibly put upon a horse by armed men”].* 

According to Aldobrandino Guidoni, however, the lady had left the city 
of Arezzo “infogata de lo amore del Conte” [“inflamed with love for the 
Count”].? Luigi della Stufa similarly informs Lorenzo de” Medici that the 
woman, “come innamorata e ciecha di si bel corpo, volontariamente montó 
a Cavallo in groppa a uno de” due mandati” [“in love and blinded by such an 
attractive man, voluntarily mounted the horse of one of the two men who 

had been sent for her”].£ Stefano Taverna, the Milanese envoy in Florence, 
said that the Count had been “provocato da una femina formosa impazita di 
luy” [“provoked by a shapely woman who was mad about him”].” Giovanni 
Pico's sister, Costanza Bentivoglio, wrote to her brother Girolamo di 
Piacenza that “la femina lo seguiva volontariamente” [“the woman followed 
him voluntarily”].2 

The accounts of what happened next are consistent. Filippo Carducci, 
head official and podesta of Arezzo (as he explained to Lorenzo de” Medici 
on that very afternoon), had the bells rung and ordered that the Count be 
tracked down by his men, who were joined by as many as two hundred 
volunteers. Pico was captured near Marciano, on the border with Siena. 
According to Luigi della Stufa: 

gli aretini hebono piú gente. [...] N?amazorno XVIII et il magnifico 
signore fu ferito malamente et se non si fussi stato il buon chavallo che 
haveva sotto, rimaneva anche lui in compagnia de” 18.* 

[the people of Arezzo had more men. [...] They killed eighteen and the 
magnificent Signore himself was seriously wounded; and if he hadn*t 
had a good horse beneath him, he too would have found himself in the 
company of those eighteen.] 

The Aretine Council of Ten ordered that Pico and his secretary, Cristoforo 
da Casale Maggiore, be held in the custody of the man who, working with 
the pursuers, had captured him (a certain Giovanni Nicolacci da Marciano), 
and that the things remaining on the small battlefield be retrieved. Not long 
afterward, however, the Count was released by his guard in exchange for 
one hundred florins. For this, Giovanni Nicolacci was fined in January 1487 
by the council of the Otto di Guardia of Florence, while Pico's secretary 
was punished as “colui da cui era derivato tutto il male” (“the man from 
whom all the trouble stemmed”).*% 

Had anyone else perpetrated such an offence against the Medici, justice 
would have been meted out quite differently. Behind the scenes of this 

privileged treatment was Lorenzo de” Medici himself, who wrote to 
Arezzo*s Signoria on 13 May to express his regret for the “ingiuria fatta a 
Giuliano de? Medici” [“injustice done to Giuliano de” Medici”], albeit 
without mentioning the responsible party.*! Lorenzo's desire to pardon and 
protect his young friend was shared by Ercole 1 d*Este, who answered his 
envoy, Aldobrandino Guidoni, saying that he was very sorry about what had 
taken place, “perché teneramente amamo epso magnifico conte Zohane” 
[“because I tenderly love this magnificent count Giovanni”], and begged 
him to see to Pico”s liberation as if he were “nostro fratello” [“*my brother”]. 
Ercole I forgave Pico, citing biblical precedents, “che certo le sono cose che 
anche Salamone, che fue tanto sapientissimo, incorse anchora lui alcuna 
volta in simile trasgressione; si che, il gli e da havere compassione” [“for, in 
truth, even Solomon, for all his wisdom, sometimes committed similar 
misdeeds; thus, one should have compassion for him”].* 

The Count's public image nonetheless suffered a great deal on account of 
the “chaso atroce” [“atrocious event”] of Arezzo.*? Aldobrandino Guidoni 
wrote from Florence to Duke Ercole l: 

Et veramente questo caso e di natura che a tuta questa citta rencresce 
perché questo conte Zohanne havea in questa cita uno nome del piú 
docto homo che fusse uno buon pezo; et era reputato uno sancto; ora 
ha perso la reputatione et conditione sua.** 

[And, truly, the nature of this event is such that the whole of this city is 
saddened, for this Count Giovanni had the reputation of being the most 
learned man that there had been in this city in a long time. He was 
deemed a saint; now he has lost his good name and position.] 

Other documents give us additional, sometimes detailed, information on the 
aftermath of the event. Some regard the recovery of things that were lost or 
stolen during the skirmish: 

Restaci un cavallo di quelli del Signore appresso l'oste; una cappa 
rosata foderata di panno verde, due balestre d'acciaio con un 

martinecto; et un turchasso con sette passatoi; una cappetta di tane 
trista,'” con capperuccia foderata di damaschino pagonazzo; un giacho 
di maglio et una cintola di cuoio di pesce fornita d'ariento.** 

[One of the Count's horses was left behind with the innkeeper. Other 
items include a rose-coloured cape lined with green cloth, two steel 
crossbows with a gaffle, and a quiver with seven arrows, a small cape 
of cheap russet with a little hood lined with purple damask, a mail 
tunic and a fishskin belt embellished with silver. ] 

But of the Count himself during those days and months that followed, we 
have no news. And regarding Margherita, we know only that she was 
returned to her husband. However, from a comment made by Flavius 
Mithridates — Pico*s principal colleague, of Jewish origin, who enriched his 
translations of cabalistic texts with poignant personal observations — it 
seems we can gather that Margherita, at the end of 1486 or the beginning of 
1487, would have been willing to join the Count in Rome, even if she were 
pregnant. Indeed, she would have been able to do so had Pico so desired.*” 
But for Giovanni Pico, several months had passed and meanwhile several 
important changes had occurred. 

After a few months of silence, starting in September of the same year,** 

news of Pico began to reappear in letters.*? Marsilio Ficino wrote to Pico on 
8 September 1486, asking him to return his Arabic Koran.* In Pico*s 
reply,*! he promised to return it to Ficino shortly, as soon as he could return 
to Perugia, which he had left on account of the plague. He wrote to Ficino 
enthusiastically about his linguistic studies. He was making progress in 
Arabic and Aramaic, after acquiring a fair knowledge of Hebrew (a 
language in which it seems he would have been able to compose a letter). 
Pico could not believe that such extraordinary things had happened to him 
by chance; they must have taken place in accordance with divine will and 
with the consent of a celestial being who benevolently assisted him in his 
studies,*? which were facilitated by “the leap of the soul, work and 
diligence, despite a certain physical weakness.” He enthusiastically read 
writings of the Chaldean wise man, who was useful in clarifying what the 

Hellenic tradition presented in an incomplete and imperfect form (see Bori 
2000, 63-68). 

Pico read Arab authors, such as “the letters of Mohammed of Toledo and 
Abulgal, who studied with Averroes, and the questions of a certain 
Adelando [...] who philosophized under Ammonius, Plotinus?s teacher in 
Egypt.”29 Pico found these works so stimulating, full as they were of 
“Pythagorean concepts and replete with ancient notions and esoteric 
thought,” that they convinced him to study those languages in order to have 
direct access to the texts. Ficino seems to have encouraged Pico to resume 
his study of Plotinus. Pico assured him in his reply that he had never 
abandoned Plotinus and, indeed, would continue to study him.?* 

Pico was enthusiastically enraptured by his discoveries. Swept up by a 
kind of hermeneutic ecstasy, he applied to himself the words of Saint Paul: 

Hic est Marsili meus cupido, hi mei ignes, qui non fluxam et vanam, 
sed firmam mihi non pollicentur iam, sed praestant voluptatem, veram 
imaginem futurae gloriae, quae revelabitur in nobis.?” 

[This, Marsilio, is my passion, these are the flames with which 1 burn, 
and for me there is not only the promise, but the gift of joy, which is 
not fleeting and vain but stable: the true image of the future glory that 
will be revealed in us.] 

We are witnessing here the original “nucleus” of the Oration; through eros 
(that is, fire), Pico has at this point attained divine glory by way of a 
spiritual journey in which this intellectual quest of his plays a central role. 
Pico hoped that there would also be some public recognition: in the solitude 
of Fratta, he put the finishing touches on the speech with which he would 
make public his discoveries in Rome. There, he would break with the 
customary esoteric discourse that characterized a great part of the traditions 
with which he was concerned.?* 

Thus, the certainty of eschatological glory was mingled with the 
expectation of present glory. The upcoming philosophical debate in Rome 
occupied his every thought. Pico placed enormous importance on the event: 
a triumph would follow his heroic and intellectual deeds and would erase 
the dishonour of the undertaking in Arezzo. This theme was frequent in the 
letters of the period. Pico also spoke of it in a brief undated letter to Taddeo 
Ugolino, written “ex Fracta”: “Romam propero” [“I am hurrying toward 
Rome].”?” 

What did Pico have in mind? What should have happened in Rome? Pico, 
speaking in his Oration of the future debate, says: 

Sunt qui hoc quidem exercitationis genus non improbent, sed in me 
nullo modo probent, quod ego hac aetate, quartum scilicet et 
vigesimum modo natus annum, de sublimibus Christianae theologiae 
mysteriis, de altissimis philosophiae locis, de incognitis disciplinis, in 
celebratissima urbe, in amplissimo doctissimorum hominum consessu, 
in apostolico senatu disputationem proponere sim ausus. (8154) 

[There are also others who, though not critical of this kind of exercise 
in itself, entirely disapprove of it in me who, born just twenty-four 
years ago, have at my age dared to propose a discussion on the sublime 
mysteries of Christian theology, on the most profound questions of 
philosophy and on unexplored fields of knowledge, all in such a 
famous city, before a vast assembly of learned men and in the presence 
of the apostolic senate. ] 

Perhaps Pico was thinking precisely of the College of Cardinals, presided 
over by Innocent VIII, to whom in the preface to the second part of the 
Conclusiones he solemnly entrusted the verdict on his own Christian 
orthodoxy.?% The interest in debates, born in the context of the medieval 
university, was still very much alive, and Pico's initiative took its place in 
that framework. It was not, therefore, the idea of a debate but rather the 
number of the theses, the vastness and novelty of their themes, and the 

figure of Pico himself that attracted attention and rendered the episode 
exceptional in the eyes of his contemporaries. 

In the same period, Pico wrote from Fratta to Baldo Perugino, who 
remained in Perugia, the city from which Pico had fled on account of the 
plague. In this letter, Pico sends him a Carmen pro pace, recently written 
amid rumours of war.?? He tells Baldo Perugino: “cecidit et per hos dies 
etrusca lingua de amore carmen, quod cum illo venit, a paucis, nisi fallor, 
intelligendum: est enim pluribus ex secretiori antiguorum philosophia 
mysteriis refertum” [In these days, a poem on love written in the Tuscan 
language has fallen upon me, one that came with it and, unless I am 
mistaken, is accessible to very few men: indeed, it is replete with many 
mysteries from the most secret philosophy of the ancients]. These are 
difficult lines to interpret and to translate. It would be nice to think that the 
Tuscan poem “on love” that reached him during those days in Fratta was 
the Canzona de amore by Girolamo Benivieni, a work that was becoming 
ever more closely connected to his Commento sopra una canzona de amore, 
itself very difficult to understand insofar as it is full of the philosophic 
mysteries of the ancients. But could this be the meaning of “cecidit” [“has 
fallen”] and “venit” [“came”]? In any event, it seems clear to me that we are 
dealing here with the same social and philosophical context in which the 
Commento was taking shape, for during that period Pico was engaged in 
nothing other than literary “otium.” 

We can now better understand the letter?s final humorous allusion: 

Faciam quod mones, ne, si quam forte Dianam viderim, quod de 
Tirhesia scribit Callimacus mihi eveniat. 

[I will follow your warning not to go too often to bathe in Fratta so 
that, if perchance I saw a Diana, what Callimachus writes of Tiresias 
will not happen to me.] 

Callimachus's hymn In lavacrum Palladis had not long before been 
translated from Greek by Poliziano. In it, we read of how Tiresias was 

blinded as punishment for having dared to look at Pallas bathing but 
received the gift of prophecy in return (vv. 75ff.).90 

On 15 October, in a long letter to Andrea Corneus (of Cornia), Pico spoke 
of the events of May. He rejected Corneus”s suggestion that he dedicate 
himself with increased vigour to the active life, protesting in favour of the 
contemplative life and the practice of philosophy as a man of his class, a 
prince, rather than as a paid professor of philosophy. His friend would soon 
see the extraordinary, and also public — even clamorous — results of Pico*s 
solitary studies (see Bori 2000, 73-84). At the letter”s close, Pico spoke “de 
re uxoria” of the event in Arezzo: 

Quod amicum illum tuum, cui in amore res male cessit apud 
Floreanum nostrum excusaveris, ex officio fecisti, habet ille quidem et 
ex historiis, et ex poetis, ex ipsa etiam philosophia unde se a nota 
criminis vendicet, habet unde magnorum se hominum praeiudiciis, 
Davidis praesertim Salomonisque tutetur, ut Aristotelem taceam, qui 
dum nonnullas etiam meretrices saepe deperibat, suorum de moribus 
praeceptorum nil meminit, quando amatae foeminae uti Cereri 
Eleusinae sacra fecit. Sed ille haec tutamenta, et quasi propugnacula 
sui facinoris, non amplexatur modo, vel amat, sed odit, et reiicit, et 
recusant; iacturam queritur suma, non culpam deprecatur, dolet quod 
peccavit, non defendit. Et mihi quidem vel hoc nomine caeteris 
excusandus, quod ipse se nil excusat, nihil homine imbecillius, nihil 
amore potentius. Hieronymi illa invicta et inconcussa mens, dum coelo 
tota inhaeret, puellarum choris intererat. Quae illum pestis potuit vel 
infestare, quem non edomabit? Si hoc amor in eremo, in humo collisis 
membris, in hebdomadarum potuit inedia, quid in pluma, in umbra, in 
omni deliciarum affluentia non poterit? Accedit quod ille nunc primo 
cecidit ruinae huius alioquin insolens et ignarus. De Neptuno conqueri 
potest, qui semel tantum naufragium fecit. Si ad eundem iterum 
offenderit lapidem, nemo manum porrigat, nemo misereatur. Nunc non 
excusari jure non potest, quem ita facti poenitet, ut favore excusationis 
se dignum ipse non existimet. Sed haec etiam nimis, quando amicus 
tuus huiusmodi facti memoriam, non solum aliquo modo literas tradi, 
sed quod sequens vita eius faciat obliterari penitus cupit.?* 

[You felt the need to pardon your friend for his misfortunes in love in 
our Floreanus (Arezzo). He could indeed find in history, in poets, and 
even in philosophy itself examples with which to pardon himself and 
defend himself, with the authority of great men, especially David and 
Solomon, to say nothing of Aristotle, who, while often flirting even 
with prostitutes, completely lost sight of the moral lessons he gave 
whenever he was sacrificing to his beloved as if to Eleusinian Ceres. 
But your friend not only does not share or appreciate but indeed hates, 
rejects, and refutes this kind of pardon and defence of his crime. He 
regrets the damage he has done; he does not flee his error. He suffers 
for having sinned; he does not defend himself. Others will be able to 
pardon that which he in no way pardons in himself. Nothing is weaker 
than man; nothing is mightier than love. Jerome's unconquerable and 
unshaken mind, while wholly focused on heaven, participated in the 
girls? dances. If this plague could threaten such a man, who else could 
it not have conquered? If love could obtain so much from him who 
slept on the bare earth of his hovel and fasted for eight days, what will 
it not be able to do to one who sleeps on feathers, in the shade, and 
lives amidst a great abundance of delights? What is more, he fell the 
first time, for he was unaccustomed to and ignorant of such precipices. 
He who has shipwrecked only once can cry out to Neptune. If he falls 
again and strikes the same rock, no one will offer a hand or have pity 
on him. Now, he who so repents of what he has done that he does not 
deem himself worthy of being pardoned may be justly forgiven. This is 
all the more the case when your friend not only wishes somehow to 
entrust to the written word the memory of that event but also desires 
that the rest of his life serve completely to blot it out. ] 

There were, indeed, those who had laughed at the event, for example his 
friend Alessandro Cortesi, who had written to his brother, “we laughed at 
Paris and Helen: sometimes philosophers go mad”).*? There were those 
who had wanted to pardon Pico, such as Ercole I, who cited Solomon, and 
Andrea Corneus, too. Even Marsilio Ficino had written a short “Apology on 
the Rape of the Nymph Margherita by the Hero Pico,” using mythological 
motifs (Paris and Helen, Theseus and Ariadne, Hercules and lole, Pluto and 

Proserpine, Jove and Europa) as well as evangelical ones, such as the 
parable of the merchant who acquires a precious pearl, “inventa pretiosa 
margarita” [“having found a precious margarita (“pearl or Margherita”)”]. 
In his apology to Pietro Leone, Ficino had also affirmed that: “It is not 
abducting to receive or take a nymph who has fallen prey to someone and 
desires to be abducted; it is instead a liberation from her abductors.”* 
Flavius Mithridates had also spoken about it in the same ironic tone in the 
margins of a passage in his version of the Bahir, an ancient source of 
Jewish esotericism.?* 

Pico had set out on a path that would change his life. Here, illustrious 
examples are not enough to remove the onus of responsibility. He suffered 
for his sin, hated it, detested it, publicly admitted his fault, repented, and 
firmly resolved never to repeat it: “dolet quod peccavit, non defendit” [“he 
suffers for having sinned; he does not defend himself”], “facti poenitet” 
[“he repents”]. It is the Christian language of conversion, confession, and 
penitence that confers a certain note of sincerity to Pico?s humanistic Latin, 
together with echoes of Psalm 50 (51 in Protestant versions), which the 
Bible attributes to David. 

In his commentary on Psalm 10 a few years later, Pico himself, speaking 
perhaps in the spirit of Savonarola, would condemn: 

de nostri temporis tepid[e]s qui sub caerimoniarum religionisque 
praetextu sanctitatem mentiuntur et simplices et rectos corde, a spiritu 
et veritate deterrentes, ad propriam vanitatem trahere satagunt.*? 

[the tepid people of our time who, under the pretext of ceremonies and 
devotion, feign holiness, distract the simple and honest at heart from 
the spirit and the truth and, bustling about, draw them into their own 
vanity. ] 

Gianfrancesco echoes this passage with the same reference to the “worship 
in spirit and in truth” (the important passage of the Gospel according to 

John)" as he describes Pico in his Biography of Pico della Mirandola, 
which precedes Pico*s writings in the first Bolognese edition of 1496: 

Esterioris latriae cultus non multum diligens fuerat; non de eo 
loquimur, quem observandum praecepit Ecclesia (gestasse hunc quippe 
prae oculis eum vidimus) sed de his ceremoniis mentionem facimus, 
quas nonnulli posthabito vero cultu Dei, qui in spiritu et veritate 
colendus est, prosequuntur et provehunt.?” 

[He was not very diligent about outward observances. 1 do not refer to 
what the Church prescribes (we saw him practice it with our own eyes) 
but to those ceremonies to which some people dedicate themselves, 
neglecting the real worship of God, Who should be adored in spirit and 
truth.] 

It is likely that Picos penitential attitude during autumn 1486 was 
accompanied by the corresponding sacraments, but of this we cannot be 
sure. Nevertheless, it is certain that he took it on himself to read a page of 
the Gospel every day. 

It is interesting to note — though I believe no one has yet done so — how a 
final page of the Commento sopra una canzona de amore, which Pico 
probably finished in the days when he wrote to Corneus, reflects a similar 
state of mind: pain, repentance, a firm desire to change his life. In the 
Commento, while following Benivieni's verses, Pico revisits the motif of 
“the ladder of amorous degrees” of Plato's Symposium with a nod, however 
provocative, to Marsilio Ficino”s recent De amore. Indeed, Pico explicitly 
wrote to Domenico Benivieni that the Commento sopra una canzona de 
amore should be followed by a full-fledged commentary on the 
Symposium.**? Describing the first, lowest rung of this ladder, he states that 
it is superior to “bestiale furore” [“bestial fury”], which is not actually love. 
Pico speaks of this type of emotion with a harshness and realism 
reminiscent of his letter to Corneus, which is again brought to mind by 
Picos rejection of the facile consolation derived from examples of 
illustrious sinners, such as David, Solomon, Jerome, and Aristotle: 

Chi e nel primo grado tanto e felice quanto l'amato gli e presente, 
condizione in ogni modo assai migliore di quello bestiale furore e non 
amore, el cui bene non puo se non per piccolo tempo durare e non puo 
non lassare dopo sé se non longissima amaritudine e penitenzia; il che 
doverebbe essere a ciascuno sufficiente stimulo a farlo con celerrima 
fuga da questa essecranda voluttá rimuovere?? e con festinatissimo 
corso a quel celeste amore properare ove niuno vestigio di miseria, ma 
ogni plenitudine di felicita si truova. Né debbe allettare veruno a 
questa misera volutta 1*essere stati molti e per santita e per prudenza e 
per dottrina celebratissimi uomini da quella presi, anzi questo debbe 
essere a ciascuno invece di ragione efficacissima a mostrare che quella 
in tutto si debba con ogni ingegno fuggire. Perocché se questo male e 
si pestifero e velenoso che abbia in si forte e perfette anime potuto 
generare egritudini quasi incurabili, debbe ciascuno indubitamente 
persuadersi che nella sua abbia a partorire letale al tutto e mortifero 
morbo: di che meritamente si puó concludere, chiunque in tale 
precipizio ruina, di sé medesimo e de” suoi mal composti pensieri, da 
Dio correzione e paterna punizione, dagli uomini forse non meno pietá 
e compassione che biasimo meritare. 

[A person who is in the first stage of love is happy as long as his 
beloved is in his presence, a condition much better in every way than 
that of animals, which is lust rather than love. The pleasure of lust lasts 
only a short time, and it inevitably leaves behind it endless bitterness 
and repentance. This fact ought to be sufficient deterrent to make 
anyone get away from this despicable form of desire as fast as possible 
and hasten by the fastest route to heavenly love, in which there is no 
trace of misery but rather the most complete bliss. No one should be 
attracted to this wretched form of desire by the fact that many men 
have been overcome by it who were famous for their sanctity, 
prudence, and learning. On the contrary, this fact ought to be instead a 
most persuasive argument to everyone that he should avoid lust 
entirely. For, if this evil is so pestiferous and poisonous that it has been 
able to produce an almost incurable disease in such strong and able 
souls, certainly everyone else ought to be persuaded that it is likely to 
produce an utterly lethal and deadly disease in his own soul. Thus we 

may justly conclude that anyone who falls over such a precipice 
deserves from God fatherly punishment for himself and correction for 
his confused thinking; from men perhaps he deserves more pity and 
compassion than blame.] 

(Pico 1984, 167) 

On the subject of “bestiale furore” [“bestial fury”], a further passage from 
the Commento is worthy of note: 

L”opposto e nello amore celeste, nel quale non e questo pericolo, ma 
tutto tende alla bellezza spirituale dell*animo e dello intelletto, la quale 
molto piú perfetta si truova ne” maschi che nelle donne, come d'ogni 
altra perfezione si vede. Pero tutti coloro che di questo divino amore 
sono stati accesi hanno la maggior parte amato qualche giovane di 
indole generosa, la cui virtú e stata ad alcuni tanto piú grata quanto l'e 
stata in un bel corpo, e non si sono effeminati drieto ad un armento di 
meretrice, le quali non solo non inducono l'uomo a grado alcuno di 
spirituale perfezione, ma, come Circe, al tutto lo trasformano in 
bestia.*! 

[The opposite is true in heavenly love: heavenly love involves no 
danger of coitus but rather is directed entirely toward the spiritual 
beauty of the soul, or the intellect. This spiritual beauty is much more 
perfect in men than in women, as is true of any other attribute. This is 
the reason why most men who have been affected by heavenly love 
have loved some young man of virtuous character (the more beautiful 
his body, the more attractive his virtue) rather than become effeminate 
and pursue a flock of harlots, who not only do not lead a man to any 
degree of spiritual perfection but, like Circe, completely transform him 
into a beast.] 

(Pico 1984, 133) 

With regard to this passage, which recalls the description of man's protean 
character from the beginning of the Oration, Erwin Panofsky noted that 

Ficino, faithful to the Symposium and to its two Venuses, fails to attribute to 
any Venus amor ferinus, which is equated with folly.*Y Pico, on the 
contrary, conflates the heavenly Venuses in order to attribute to the earthly 
Venus the abovementioned evils. One may ask if this choice, beyond being 
a reflection of different theoretical orientations (as Panofsky maintains), 
could be a consequence of Pico's recent experience, which leads him to 
misogyny and to privilege male friendships, and his friendship with 
Benivieni above all.*% Even more pertinent here are Edgar Wind's 
conclusions, which describe how Pico broke with Ficino's hedonistic 
triad, Pulchritudo-Amor-Voluptas (“Beauty-Love-Pleasure”), still present 
on his medal (datable to around 1484-85), in order to move on to the more 
austere Pulchritudo-Intellectus-Voluntas (“Beauty-Intelligence-Will”)% 
(one remembers the severe treatment of pleasure in the previously 
mentioned passage of the Commento and also the authentic “gioia non 
fugace e vana, ma stabile” [“joy that is not fleeting and vain, but stable”] in 
the letter to Ficino of September 1486). 

Nevertheless, the tone of these passages lets us glimpse how much Pico 
himself was involved in the Commento sopra una canzona de amore di 
Benivieni (which could imply his rereading of the Symposium). Certainly, 
Pico explicitly chose to compose the Commento “according to the thoughts 
and opinions of the Platonists.” The work has as its model the conversion 
(periagogé) of the soul (Republic) and its ascent (the Symposium's 
anagogé), while in the letter to Corneus the concept of penitence, together 
with its concomitant biblical language (e.g., metánoia, “conversio mentis ad 
Christum” [the conversion of the mind to Christ]), takes centre stage. In the 
first linguistic and theoretical model, conversion is toward Christ; in the 
second, it is toward beauty, personified by the Celestial Venus. (Botticelli?s 
Birth of Venus was also finished in 1486.**) Pico addresses the same subject 
(his own moral transformation), turning to two religious, cultural, and 
linguistic models: Plato and the Bible. I would propose the hypothesis that 
it is precisely in this “bilingualism”?” that we see the first and most original 
manifestation of his “multifaceted philosophy,” his pluralistic theoretical 
perspective, and his capacity to see reality in the light of innumerable points 
of view.*? 

All that has been said up to now throws light on Pico?s most important 
text of this period, the Oration on the Dignity of Man. The first part of the 
Oration is dominated by the theme of eros according to the Platonic- 
Dionysian model of conversion-ascent. It is quite probable that Pico”s 
personal experiences performed an important function in his decision to 
employ this model. It seems that he speaks in the Oration from a personal 
perspective, moving from his newly acquired awareness of the dangerous 
ambiguities (but also of the extraordinarily constructive power) of eros. To 
Corneus he had written, “nihil amore potentius” [“nothing is mightier than 
love”]. Having learned to control the power of eros, Pico would be able to 
push himself to the most arduous intellectual discoveries in order to open 
the way toward becoming one with an ineffable absolute. 

That Pico is in some way speaking of himself in the Oration and 
describing something that concerns him personally is especially clear in his 
letter to Girolamo Benivieni of 12 November. There is little time left now 
before his departure for Rome. Two days earlier, on 10 November, he wrote 
to an unnamed friend that he was unable to provide a certain bit of 
information, as his books had already left for Rome and he himself had 
already put on his hat and boots for the journey (“petasatus iam et 
caligatus”).*? Meanwhile, the material to be presented in Rome continued to 
increase: 

Disputanda per me publice dogmata ante tuum a me discessum 7001 
claudebantur. Postquam abisti, ad 900* excreverunt 
progrediebanturque nisi receptui cecinissem, ad mille. Sed placuit eo 
numero, utpote mystico, pedem esistere. Est enim (si vera est nostra de 
numeris doctrina) symbolum animae in se ipsam oestro Musarum 
percitae recurrentis. Accessit et orationi id quod ad te mitto. Cum enim 
statutum sit mihi ut nulla praetereat dies quin legam ex Evangelica 
doctrina, incidit in manus, postridie quam decesseras, illud Christi: 
“Pacem meam do vobis, pacem meam do vobis, pacem relinquo 
vobis.” Tllico subita quadam animi concitatione de pace quaedam ad 
philosophiae laudes facentia tanta celeritate distavi, ut notarii manum 
precurrerem saepe et invertirem. Desideravi, quod et semper desidero, 

vel tunc maxime [te] mecum esse, ut recens opus auribus, quasi e 
gremio editum infantem, benignius auditor exciperes.>% 

[The theses to be discussed before your departure were contained 
within 700. After your departure, they increased to 900, and they 
would have grown to 1000 had I not sounded the retreat. But 1 wanted 
to stop at that number, as a mystic number. If my doctrine of numbers 
is true, 900 is the symbol of the soul that recedes into itself, struck by 
the incitement of the Muses. What I am sending you has been added to 
the oration. I resolved not to let a day pass without reading something 
from the Gospels” teachings and, the day after your departure, what 
Christ said fell before my eyes: “I give you my peace, l give you my 
peace, peace I leave you.” Immediately, I then excitedly dictated some 
things on peace and in praise of philosophy, and I did it with such 
haste that I often outpaced and confused the hand of the secretary. 1 
wished, as I always do, that you were there with me (but especially so 
at that moment) so that you yourself could listen benevolently to the 
new text that, almost like a newborn child, had just issued from the 
womb.] 

In this period, Pico reads the Gospel every day, and a new passage of the 
Oration is born from his reading of John 14:27. Pico speaks about it with 
emotion, as if it were a birth: the scribe?s pen cannot keep up with him.?* 
This passage is probably itself linked to the reference, in the earlier version, 
to the strife between hatred and love, a conflict from which Empedocles 
laments “being tossed upon the seas, driven by conflict and discord like a 
madman and banished from the gods” (cf. Oration 886). But in the new text 
the idea of war becomes more concrete. Pico knew not only intellectual 
battles; he also knew what war was, for Italy was then wholly consumed by 
it. Shortly before, Pico had written his Carmen pro pace in the hopes that 
God would avert a war that was roaring throughout all of Italy, in which 
“everything is laid waste, the sword destroys all.””? 

War was practiced by the Pico clan almost as if it were the family trade, 
and it raged among Picos relatives as well. His brothers Galeotto and 
Anton Maria fought ferociously with each other to secure the family 
patrimony, while Pico renounced his rights in favour of Gianfrancesco.?? 
Pico”s mother had nursed other ambitions for him,”* and he was spared the 
violence of conflict until a few months before, when he himself was the 
cause of bloodshed. Pico now knew from personal experience that at the 
root of all things lay man's natural disposition. Peace, he wrote, must be 
achieved through self-discipline. Such would be the peace that “will ratify 
an everlasting pact of the most holy peace between the flesh and the spirit.” 

On the basis of this personal revelation, then, it is a scientific approach to 
natural philosophy that “will allay the differences of opinion and 
disagreements that vex, perplex and afflict our restless soul from all sides.” 
But since nature, according to Heraclitus, was created from war, this 
yearned-for peace will be attained only by embracing Wisdom, who cries 
out: 

Venite [...] ad me qui laborastis; venite et ego reficiam vos; venite ad 
me et dabo vobis pacem quam mundus et natura vobis dare non 
possunt. ($93) 

[Come to me, you who exert yourselves in vain; come and I will 
restore you; come to me and I will give you that peace which the world 
and nature cannot give to you.] 

Behind this exhortation lies perhaps the nucleus of Giovanni Pico's 
experience on the morning of 12 November 1486. After months of “long- 
lasting bitterness and repentance,” he expresses a sense of recovery and 
reconciliation: 

Haec est illa [...] pax quam facit Deus in excelsis suis, quam angeli in 
terram descendentes annuntiarunt hominibus bonae voluntatis, ut per 
eam ipsi homines ascendentes in caelum angeli fierent. Hanc pacem 

amicis, hanc nostro optemus seculo, optemus unicuique domui quam 
ingredimur, optemus animae nostrae, ut per eam ipsa Dei domus fiat. 
(8895-96) 

[This is the [...] peace which God makes in His heavens, which the 
angels who came down to earth announced to men of good will so that 
these men would, ascending to heaven, be transformed by it into 
angels. Let us desire this peace for our friends, for our times; let us 
desire it for whatever home we enter. Let us desire it for our soul so 
that in her may be made a house of the Lord. ] 

It is not without reason, then, that in his Vita Gianfrancesco Pico revisits 
and clarifies in Christian terms the motivations for Pico”s letter to Andrea 
Corneus. He speaks of Pico*s “conversion to Christ” and how he had moved 
away from earthly pleasures. Passing over the incident in Arezzo, 
Gianfrancesco asserts that the greatest influence on Pico's state of mind 
after his conversion was “simultas,” the animosity of the Roman 
environment, against which his expectations of glory were shattered. It was 
only at that point, and not immediately after the Arezzo incident, that, 
according to Gianfrancesco, Pico awoke and understood the vanity of 
human glory: 

Prius enim et gloriae cupidus et amore vano succensus, mulieribusque 
illecebris commotus fuerat: foeminarum quippe plurimae, ob vanustate 
corporis orisque gratiam, cui doctrina amplexaeque divitiae et generis 
nobilitas accedebant, in eius amorem exarserunt; ab quorum studio non 
abhorrens, parumper via vitae posthabita, in delicias defluxerat: verum 
simultate illa experrectus, diffluentem luxu animum retudit et convertit 
ad Christum, atque foeminea blandimenta in supernae patriae gaudia 
commutavit, neglectaque aura gloriae, quam affectaverat, Dei gloriam 
et ecclesiae utilitatem tota coepit mente perquirere, adeoque mores 
componere, ut post hac vel inimico iudice comprobari posset.?? 

[Earlier, desirous of glory and inflamed by vain love, he had let 
himself be moved by feminine allurements. The attractiveness of his 

body and the charm of his appearance, in addition to his erudition, 
great riches, and family*s nobility, had caused many women to burn 
with love for him. Not being averse to such desires of theirs, he had 
abandoned himself for a bit to wantonness and had neglected the true 
way of life. But having been awoken by this confusion, he set aright 
his mind, which had languished in pleasures, and turned it to Christ. 
What is more, he transformed feminine flatteries into the joys of the 
supernal fatherland. Heedless of the gleam of glory for which he had 
yearned, he took to seeking with all the powers of his mind the glory 
of God and the service of the Church, and righted his ways such that 
even those who were his enemies would approve of him.] 

In light of my earlier suggestion that Pico probably considered the 
success of the debate to be extraordinarily important to the reconstruction of 
his own image, one can see how the failure of this undertaking may have 
weighed on him. Moreover, it is clear that this failure could then have 
occasioned yet another period of maturation for him, the one culminating in 
that complete “conversion” of which Gianfrancesco Pico wrote. 
Nevertheless, in order to protect his uncle”s reputation, Gianfrancesco both 
avoids mention of the “atrocious event” of Arezzo and omits significant 
reflections on Picos life and works. 

Since his premature death, the figure of Pico has continued to live on in 
the popular imagination and to attract scholarly attention. There has been a 
great deal of research on Pico in the last century, especially between the 
500-year amniversaries of his birth and death. There have been important 
conferences; new editions and translations of his works have appeared; and 
his sources have been minutely researched.?? Amidst this flurry of scholarly 
activity, there persists a decades-old division between the two fundamental 
interpretive schools of thought related to Pico and, in particular, to his 
works of 1486 (the Commento, the Theses, and above all the Oration). The 
dominant tendency in Pico studies begins with Burckhardt, is carried on by 
Gentile, Garin, Cassirer, and Kristeller, and is currently represented by 
some recent contributions to Picos thought on magic, astrology, the 
esoteric, the Cabala, and syncretism. The other tendency sees in Pico?*s 

works a continuation of the theological tradition, from the Bible to the 
Church Fathers and Scholastic theology. Among its representatives, De 
Lubac stands out with his Pic de la Mirandole (1974) for genuine pathos 
and a high degree of erudition. In his Freiheit zu Gott (1989), Reinhardt 
likewise insisted, but with a different style and with different sensibilities, 

, 113 

on the pre-modern character of Pico's “systematic” way of thinking.>” 

Giovanni Pico did not circulate the Oration. Not until 1496, two years 
after Pico's death, did his nephew, Gianfrancesco, publish in Bologna, 
among his uncle's other works, that “elegantissima orazione” [“most 
elegant oration”], which would receive the subtitle “De hominis dignitate” 
beginning with the Strasbourg edition of Picos works in 1504. Both the 
Commento, published only in 1519 among the works of Girolamo 
Benivieni, and the Conclusiones, after its publication on 7 December 1486 
in Rome prior to the debate that never took place, remained out of 
circulation for a very long time. One can understand why Giovanni Pico 
wanted to move beyond the painful events of 1487 and to set aside these 
texts once and for all. 

Our conjecture regarding the composition of the Oration is that it was 
carried out in four stages. The first phase can be dated to mid-September 
1486, with Pico”s letter to Marsilio Ficino mentioned earlier, which attests 
to Pico*s philological enthusiasm above all for the “Chaldean” (actually 
Aramaic) sources. This phase corresponds, almost directly, to the beginning 
of the second short part of the Oration in the version documented by the 
manuscript Palatino 885 (P).”% In the middle of September, Pico was 
perhaps also beginning the Commento sopra una canzona de amore (see the 
letter to Baldo Perugino). In this period of enthusiasm, he must have 
circulated among his friends this first version, which also survived for a 
while afterward, at a time when he would have wanted to erase every trace 
of the failed debate and its distressing aftermath. The manuscript Palatino 
885 bears witness to this first phase, although the copy is rather imperfect 
and damaged (begging the inevitable comparison with R, the edited version 
of the text), consequences of a wide circulation regardless of Pico*s 
intentions.?? 

The structure of the text in P (Palatino 885) is simple. The first part 
fundamentally coincides with the edited text R: the dignity of man consists 
of an itinerary, which, like that of the angels, can unite him with God. This 
path is threefold, and the intermediate stage is based on contemplation and 
philosophy, in accordance with numerous traditions, both biblical and 
otherwise. The second part (Oration 88147-90) is very short"? and explains 
two points of Picos method. In order “to obtain fully” the philosophy that 
he “ardently pursues,” two things are of utmost importance: full knowledge 
of the sources and the ability to engage in debate, an activity in which 
“there is profit even in defeat.” 

The second phase in the history of the composition of the Oration — 1 
surmise — consists in the addition of a defence of philosophy and the 
contemplative life (Oration 88142-50). The addition can be dated to the 
middle of October 1486 and is contemporary with the letter to Corneus (see 
the overview of 88142-70), on which it directly depends.** This letter 
reflects Pico*s anxiety as the date of the debate approaches, an anxiety that 
is intensified when Corneus reproaches him for having renounced the active 
life. 

The third phase coincides with Pico”s letter of 12 November to Girolamo 
Benivieni, in which he himself states that he added the passage “de pace” 
[“on peace”] (Oration 8888-97). He also adds about two hundred theses, 
increasing their total number to nine hundred. 

The fourth phase consists of the detailed defence of his work, with 
particular attention to his wide range of sources (magic, the Cabala, etc.). 
This important expansion can be dated to his time in Rome.*? The second 
part of the Oration is now practically self-standing and easily transformed 
into the Apologia, which Pico wrote quickly, drawing on the Oration itself, 
and published in May 1487. This is the only part of the Oration, one could 
say, whose publication Pico personally oversaw. Thus, the Apologia, 
together with P, lends fundamental insights into the accuracy of R.*? 

This hypothesis also permits us to recognize the diverse meanings that 
Pico progressively attributed to the Oration and consequently also the 
Theses. He began with the justification of philosophy as a calling set within 
a mystical conception of human dignity, which is conceived as a threefold 
itinerary as represented in the principal traditions. To this end, he developed 
a methodology for his philosophical endeavour that comprised a thorough 
knowledge of the sources in consideration of the “immensitas” of Truth and 
the opportunity for debate. 

The original plan, however, rapidly became complicated. On the one 
hand, Pico discovered more clearly the theological and perhaps 
ecclesiological importance of his enterprise, and decided to return to the 
Oration in order to bestow on it this meaning as well (the fragment “de 
pace” introduced in mid-November). On the other hand, it soon became the 
target of objections (evident in his reply to Andrea Corneus in mid- 
October), which became serious accusations after the publication of the 
Conclusiones in Rome. As a result, Pico was forced to defend himself by 
attenuating the Oration's controversial tone and softening it with 
conciliatory passages. 

In spring 1487, Pico ultimately put aside the original nucleus of the 
Oration and preserved only those parts useful for his self-defence against 
the accusations of heterodoxy. 

(Translation by Michael Papio and Sarah Christopher.) 
This introduction, which appeared in an earlier form in Bori 2000 (11-33), 
is reproduced here by permission of the publisher. 

1 The documents were collected by M. Del Piazzo (1963, 271-90), but 
Berti (1859) is still useful, as is De Lubac (1977, 398ff.). 

2 Del Piazzo (1963, 279). 

3 Del Piazzo (1963, 276). 
4 Del Piazzo (1963, 274). 
5 Del Piazzo (1963, 280). 
6 Del Piazzo (1963, 277). 
7 Del Piazzo (1963, 281). 

8 Del Piazzo (1963, 284). On account of an ironic comment made by 
Picos colleague Guglielmo Raimondo de Moncada, known as Flavius 
Mithridates, it was thought that Margherita was not the only woman 
enamoured of Pico. Nevertheless, this was an extreme case. 

9 Del Piazzo (1963, 277). According to Stefano Taverna, “they cut about 
fourteen of the count's men to pieces and wounded him as well” (“hanno 
tagliato a pezi circha 14 di quelli del conte e luy ferito”). According to 
Guidoni, “even Signor Giovanni's servants killed some of them in the 
brawl” (“la famiglia del signor Zohanne nella zuffa, pur amazorno anchora 
lor qualche uno”). 

10 By 12 May, Guidoni had already surmised that, although the Count 
would not face negative consequences, “the secretary will come to a bad 
end because it is believed that he was a rogue and the source of all the 
trouble” (*?1 canzelero ne fará male, perché e reputato che ?l fusse uno 
capestro, da cui sia processo ogni male”). See Del Piazzo (1963, 280). 

11 Del Piazzo (1963, 282). 
12 Del Piazzo (1963, 284). 

13 This phrase is used several times in the letter of the Signoria of Arezzo 
to Lorenzo in the description of the incident. Cf. Del Piazzo (1963, 274— 

75). 

14 Del Piazzo (1963, 280). 

15 That is, a colour between red and black, and denoting inferior quality. 
16 Del Piazzo (1963, 285). 

17 Flavius Mithridates writes: “On account of his [Pico*s] handsomeness, 
women nowadays compete with one another to be with him, especially 
Margherita, whom some man is willing to take tomorrow to Rome, should 
Pico so desire, though she may be pregnant.” [Hodie propter cuius 
pulchritudinem mulieres concurrunt ut coeant secum, precipue Margarita 
quam unus se offert homo mane ducere eam usque Romam si voluerit Picus 
quamvis sit praegnans] (Cod. Vat. Ebr. [Vatican Hebrew Codices] fol. 1571r). 
Cf. Wirszubski (1989, 17-18). Mithridates was writing while in Rome at 
the end of 1486. Hence, strictly speaking, one cannot confirm, as does 
Zambelli, that the woman was pregnant when Pico kidnapped her (Zambelli 
1995, 11). The comments in the margins of the text are of great interest not 
only for dating the translations but also for understanding the figure of 
Margherita and the very special relationship she had with Pico. Mithridates 
jokingly writes about Pico several times regarding his real abilities as a 
literary interpreter (“Pico, do you think you can understand without 
Mithridates?” [“putasne Pice sine Mithridate intelligere posse?”], 
(Wirszubski 1989, 72); his wealth (“if Pico were poor, he wouldn't get such 
honours from Rome” [“si Picus esset pauper tot honores Romae non 
haberet”] (Wirszubski 1989, 16); and the unfortunate outcome of his 
undertaking in Rome, alluding to the pope and the cardinals (“Pico was put 
in gaol in Castel Sant'Angelo because he wished to reveal secrets that 
wisemen concealed in mystery and that are not to be given away to asses” 
[“Picus est carceratus in castri Sancti Angeli quia voluit revelare secreta 
non revelanda asinis que non sine misterio occultarunt sapientes”] 
(Wirszubski 1989, 17). He also alludes to what occurred between Pico and 
Margherita (“And this is the field where acts of illicit intercourse and 
turpitude took place, near Lucignano, where Pico was caught with 
Margherita” [“Et hic est ager in quo reuelantur turpitudines et fiunt coitus 

illiciti prope Lucinianum ubi captus fuit picus cum margarita”] (Wirszubski 
1989, 17). Flavius Mithridates expected to be able to return to Rome 
(“Think about it, Pico, and you”1l understand. I won't teach you unless 1 go 
back to the city” [“Vide Pice et intellege. Ego autem noli tibi expondere nisi 
rediero ad urbem”] (Wirszubski 1989, 72). He also has other requests: only 
if a (or the) “handsome boy” arrives will he teach Pico the Aramaic 
language (“which Pico would never know if not for the arrival of a [or the] 
na?ar ¡iafe [handsome boy]” [“quam numquam Picus sciet nisi venerit naar 
iafe”] (Wirszubski 1989, 72-73). B. Schefer, in his recent edition of the 
Theses (Pico 1999, 258), indicates, following Kieszkowski (in Pico 1973, 
52), that “dominum naris” [lord of the nose], which refers to God, in the 
fortieth thesis according to the opinion of the cabalists (1.28.40), could be 
assonantal with na'ar. It is not certain, however, that Pico read these notes, 
which are datable to the end of 1486 or to 1487. It was probably because of 
the erratic personality of his colleague, though he was also fond of Pico and 
hard-working, that Pico excluded the mention of Flavius Mithridates from 
the definitive edition of the Oration. 

18 According to F. Bausi's recent, well-argued thesis (Bausi 1998b, 7-57), 
the letter to Lorenzo de” Medici can be dated to July 1486. The Capponi 
manuscript dates the letter “florentie, idibus iuliis 1486” (that is, 15 July 
1486), and one may assume that Gianfrancesco backdated his letter to 1484 
in order to avoid showing that Giovanni Pico was still interested in 
vernacular poetry during a period in which he should have been otherwise 
occupied. Pico, like Poliziano in his Nutricia, would have praised, even if 
merely out of gratitude, Lorenzo de? Medici's Comento de” miei sonetti, 
which was then the model for Picos contemporary Commento sopra una 
canzona de amore. Consequently, there would then be continuity and 
coherence between the letter to Lorenzo and the attention that was 
dedicated to rhetoric in the Oration, a subject to which we shall return 
shortly. 

19 On Pico's letters, see Garin (1961, 261). I am reading Pico's letter 
according to the edition of the Opera omnia in Pico (1971, 1:367-68), 
keeping in mind the Bolognese incunabulum of 1496, except for those 
letters published by Leon Dorez (1895, 353-59). 

20 Cf. Piemontese (1996). 

21 Opera omnia (Pico 1971, 1:367-68). Ficino”s letter is in Ficino (1937, 
1:34-35). 

22 Cf. Pico (1971, Opera omnia 1:367). 
23 On these problematic authors, see Zambelli (1995, 28-29). 

24 “This I know: Plotinus has not left my thoughts. Not only do 1 have his 
works at hand, but I feel obliged to study him as well. 1 have always 
admired him just as I do now” [“Hoc scio, non excidisse mihi Plotinum, 
quem non in manibus habendum modo, sed discendum adeo mihi, et 
semper censui, et nunc quoque censeo”], Pico (1971, Opera omnia 1:368). 

25 To be compared with Rom. 8:18-19: “For I reckon that the sufferings of 
this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come, that shall 
be revealed in us. For the expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
revelation of the sons of God” (cf. 1 Cor. 11:7: “vir imago et gloria Dei est” 
[“Man ... is the image and glory of God”]). F. Bacchelli also turned his 
attention to this passage (with results as yet unpublished), as has S. A, 
Farmer: the concluding section of the nine hundred theses “contains his 
grand plan for the conversion of the Jews, last item on the medieval agenda 
before the coming of the millennium” (Farmer 1998, 42-43). 

26 Cf. the final passage of the Commento sopra una canzona de amore 
(“Fu opinione degli antiqui teologi non si dovere temerariamente publicare 
le cose divine e” secreti misterii,” in Pico 1942, 580-81): “It was the 
opinion of the ancient theologians that one should not rashly make public 
the secret mysteries of theology” (Jayne trans. in Pico 1984, 169). This 
passage will be included in the Oration, applied only to the Cabala. Farmer 
speaks about the contrast between Picos “eagerness to reveal his hard-won 
knowledge and his equally strong hesitations to do so” (Farmer 1998, 71). 

27 “I am hurrying towards Rome where my studies are endangered, or 
rather where 1 have put them in danger. If I am successful, it is thanks to 
God, His glory and His grace. Should 1 fail, only my own ignorance is to 
blame” [“Romam propero ubi de nostris studiis periculum, vel cum pericolo 
faciemus. Si quid profecerimus, dei est munus, illi laudes et gratiae. Si quid 
defecerimus, nostra est imbecillitas nobis imputata”]. See Pico (1971, 
Opera omnia 1:366). He speaks of it again in letter 42 to Domenico 
Benivieni (Pico 1971, 1:382). 

28 This is the hypothesis of Farmer, author of a recent and important 
edition of the nine hundred theses, who notes that the phrase “in apostolico 
senatu” (“in the apostolic senate”) is missing in the Apologia (which Pico 
wrote a few months after the failure of the debate in Rome) and that Pico 
speaks of a debate “inter paucos et doctos secreto congressu” (“among few 
learned men, convened privately”). See Farmer (1998, 4-9). 

29 In all probability, this is the Latin poem Ad Deum deprecatio ut bella 
tollat, quae per totam fremunt Italiam; see Bausi (1996, 95-96). The 
identification of the Oration on the Dignity of Man with the Carmen pro 
pace is incorrect. 

30 Dorez (1895, 357-58). 
31 Cf. Pico (1971, 378-709). 
32 Garin (1961, 262). 

33 Ficino (1937, 1:56-57). 

34 So I understand his note on Habacuc 3:2: “*In medio annorum suorum 
vivifica illud”: scilicet in medio illius margaritae (Qualis est Pici) generantis 
annos vivifica illud” [““In the midst of one”s years, bring it to life”: that is, 
in the midst of that year-giving margarita (like Pico”s), bring it to life”]. 
The comment is in the margin of 849 of the edition edited by Gershom 
Scholem (1980, 50), which speaks of a precious stone, the tenth sephira, 

loved by a king. It speaks of precious stone (margarita), light, sun, day, and 
year (Gen. 1:3,15); this is why “in the midst of the years” is tantamount to 
“in the midst of the margarita.” The allusions are unclear. Chaim 
Wirszubski (1989, 204-5) recalls that J. Gaffarel, in his Codicum 
Cabalisticorum Index (1651), recounts having held in his hands a 
translation of Recanati?'s Commentary on the Pentateuch, in which there 
appeared, written by Mithridates in the second half of 1486, the names of 
Giovanni Pico and Margherita, with evident signs that someone had 
attempted to rub them out, an event that could only point to Pico himself. 

35 Pico (1997, 92). And again, on Psalm 11, “quoniam qui se Dei legem 
custodire fatentur, ad hippochrisim lapsi, humanis divina confunduntur, et 
inanibus caeremoniis freti, verum Dei cultum profanaverunt, simplices, 
puros et spiritu pauperes corruperunt [...] Veros adoratores in spiritu et 
veritate orare oportere” [“For those who profess to be guardians of God's 
law, having lapsed into hypocrisy, confuse divine things with the human 
and, relying on meaningless ceremonies, render profane the true worship of 
God. They have corrupted those who are simple, pure and poor in spirit. 
[...] True worshipers must pray in spirit and in truth”] (Pico 1997, 116). 

36 Cf. Bori (1996a). 
37 Giovan Francesco Pico (1963, 74). Cf. De Lubac (1977, 420-21). 

38 “Commentariolum nostrum non est quod admireris, ociosi cum esse 
voluimus, et omnino nihil agere, id egimus, animum remittentes potius 
quam intendentes. Omnino praeludium est commentariorum, quae in 
Platonis Symposium meditamur. Erit in illis quod tu saltem ames et laudes, 
qui omnia nostra amas et laudas. [...] Ex Fracta 10 Novembris 1486” [I 
wrote the little commentary of mine that you admire when I wished to relax 
and to do absolutely nothing so as to refresh my mind rather than to exert it. 
It is only a prelude to the commentary 1 am planning to write on Plato*s 
Symposium, in which there will be something for you, who in any event 
love and praise all my works, to love and praise] (Pico 1971, 1:382). 

39 Instead of “rimanersi,” I choose “rimuovere,” from the Giunta edition 
published in Florence in 1519. 

40 Commento sopra una canzona de amore (Pico 1942, 578). 
41 Pico (1942, 537-38). 

42 The earthly Venus is human love; the heavenly Venus, divine love (see 
Pausanias 180c-185c). See Panofsky (1962, 140ff.). 

43 Another difference with respect to Marsilio Ficino could perhaps 
depend on the same experience, which Pico affirms “che in Dio non sia 
bellezza, perché la bellezza include in sé qualche imperfezione” (“beauty is 
not in God, because beauty contains in itself some imperfection”). See 
Commento (Pico 1942, 495); cf. Toussaint (1989, 56-57). 

44 Wind (1968, 46ff.). 

45 Cf. Pico, Commento (1942, 509). “Letizia” [“happiness”] is mentioned, 
but does not pertain to the three graces. 

46 Cf. Panofsky (1972, 191ff.). 

47 Dionisotti (1968) reflected much on this theme. Stéphane Toussaint 
speaks of “bilinguismo filosofico di Pico, da un lato avvolto nei misteri 
della Qabbala e delle teologie poetiche, dall*altro esposto alla cruda luce di 
una ragione che osava criticare l”astrologia cosi cara al Ficino” [“Pico*s 
philosophical bilingualism, on the one hand wrapped in the mysteries of the 
Cabala and in poetic theologies and, on the other hand, exposed to the harsh 
light of reason that dared to criticize the astrology that was so dear to 
Ficino”] (Toussaint 1998, 3). 

48 Hence, that secundum “according to,” which quite frequently 
distinguishes the Conclusiones: according to Aquinas; according to Duns 

Scotus; according to Plato, Aristotle, the theology of the ancients, the 
Chaldeans, and others. 1 owe this important observation to Carlo Ginzburg. 

49 Pico (1971, Opera omnia 1:385). Here there is probably an allusion to 
Mercury*s petasus, and to Pico's role as mystagogue and a new Hermes 
(Bori 2000, 57n67). 

50 See the letter from Fratta to Girolamo Benivieni (Dorez 1895, 358). 

51 Perhaps Pico had in mind the inspired writer of Ps. 44.2: “Eructavit cor 
meum verbum bonum [...] lingua mea calamus scribae velociter scribentis” 
[“My heart hath uttered a good word [...]. My tongue is the pen of a 
scrivener that writeth swiftly.”]. In his Vita, Giovan Francesco Pico (1963, 
22) mentions Giovanni's “nimia in commentando velocitas” [“exceptional 
speed in glossing”]. 

52 “Omnia vastantur, omnia ferrum corripit, omne/iam latus Ausoniae 
fremit armis” [“Everything is laid waste, the sword destroys all, all of 
Ausonia already roars in battle”] in Kristeller (1965, 1:99). It should be 
noted that the last verse, “iungant caesa fodera porca” [“the parties come 
together with the immolated sow”], is echoed in the Oration, 889: “quippe 
quae cesa utraque bestia, quasi icta porca, inviolabile inter carnem et 
spiritum foedus sanctissimae pacis sanciet” [“indeed, both beasts having 
been sacrificed like a stuck sow, it will ratify an everlasting pact of the most 
holy peace between the flesh and the spirit”], and also, in an analogous 
context, the fragment “de pace quaedam,” which he speaks of in the letter to 
Benivieni of 12 November 1486. In 1486, the marquisate of Saluzzo is 
occupied by Charles 1 of Savoy. Duke Alfonso of Calabria, allied with the 
Orsini against the Colonna, who are on the side of Innocent VIII, invades 
the papal territories. 

53 Ceretti (1878). 

54 See the episode narrated by Giorgio Merula in a letter written around 
1483. He remembers how he had visited Mirandola a little less than twenty 

years before, deviating from his route toward Bologna. Giovanni Pico”s 
mother, Giulia Boiardo, was alone with her three children, Caterina, 
Lucrezia, and Giovanni, because her husband, Giovanni Francesco, was at 
war in Calabria. Giorgio Merula recalls how the nurse, bringing Giovanni, 
who had just been born a little while before, into the dining room, jokingly 
asked: “What shall we do with this baby?” “Arma an litteras sequetur”? 
[*will he be a soldier or a scholar?”]. Merula adds that the nurse guessed 
perfectly (Dorez 1895, 356). Gianfrancesco affirms in the Vita that 
Giovanni “odiava la milizia secolare e il vincolo della vita coniugale” 
[“hated the secular militia and the ties of married life”], and the first even 
more than the second (G. F. Pico 1963, 72). 

55 Giovan Francesco Pico (1963, 40-42). Sorbelli here translates 
“simultas” as “smarrimento” (“confusion”), whereas he had translated it 
just before (ibid., 36-37) as “animosita” (“animosity””). 

56 The combative but often inadequate study of W. G. Craven (1981), 
however, constitutes an introduction to the historiographical debate around 
Pico and especially around the Oration. 

57 See also Reinhardt's “De illis Pici vestigiis quae in regno theologiae 
[...] supersunt” (1994). Among those who continued this tradition are 
Dulles (1941), Di Napoli (1965), and Roulier (1989). 

58 See the letter to Ficino in Opera omnia (Pico 1971, 367) (“[...] in 
quibus et illa quoque, quae apud Graecos mendosa et mutila circumferuntur, 
leguntur integra et absoluta” [“[...] there [in their homeland] and in the 
works [of the Chaldeans], which are circulated among the Greeks in a 
defective and damaged state, [the Oracles] are read whole and complete” |) 
and the Oration: “Quando permulti hique pretiosiores eorum libri ad 
nostros nullo interprete pervenerunt, et horum qui pervenerunt tum plures 
perverterunt potius quam converterint illi interpretes, tum certe omnibus 
eam caliginem obscuritatis offuderunt, ut quae apud suos facilia, nitida et 
expedita sunt, apud nostros scrupea facta laciniosa studiosorum conatum 
eludant plurimum atque frustrentur” [“When these far more precious books 
of theirs came to us without translation, many of them were too corrupt for 

the translators to repair. It is certain that at that point they were darkened by 
the shadows of obscurity such that what was easy, clear and free to them 
became among us difficult and thorny subjects that eluded many scholars 
and frustrated their attempts to unravel them”] (in Garin 1961, 239). 

59 I owe to Franco Bacchelli, to whom 1 am very grateful, the important 
information that the copy of the Oration contained in the Palatino 885 
manuscript was written by Giovanni Nesi, the author of the Oraculum de 
novo saeculo (1497), pronounced from the grave by Giovanni Pico. On this 
“familiare di Marsilio Ficino e devoto di Frate Girolamo” [“relative of 
Marsilio Ficino and devotee of Brother Girolamo”], see Vasoli (1997, 68), 
who defines him precisely in this way. The edition of the Oraculum begins 
on p. 110. On Nesi, see also Walker (1972, 51-58). In a singular fusion of 
prophetism and hermeticism, the Oraculum exalts in Savonarola, in the 
voice of Giovanni Pico, the complete realization of a Gnostic-prophetic 
ideal, whose greatest prototype for Nesi had been precisely Giovanni Pico, 
in particular with his Oration. In an initial comparison between the Oration 
and the Oraculum, one's attention is particularly drawn to the portrait of 
Savonarola, possessor of the “multiplex philosophia” (“multifaceted 
philosophy”) that stretches upward to “theologia domina” (“Lady 
Theology”) at the top of Jacob*s ladder; see Oraculum, 40v-41r (in Vasoli 
1977, 114). “Multiplex philosophia” is also in 73r, 126 (see Oration 8$887— 
97), and on Christ “tam benigne vocantem” [“so gently called”] (73r, in 
Vasoli 1977, 126; cf. Oration 818 R, “Tam blande vocati, tam benigniter 
invitati” [“so gently called, so calmly invited”], with the same evangelical 
reference: [“Come to me”] Matt. 11:28). Nesi's interest in the Oration was 
not casual since he copied at an earlier time a defective version, then put it 
aside in order to draw on the Oration for his Oraculum de novo saeculo, 
which had just been published by Gianfrancesco. 

60 Around 5,000 characters compared with 28,000 in R, which as a whole 
contains around 52,000 characters. 

61 Pico writes to Corneus: “Exitialis haec illa est et monstrosa persuasio, 
quae hominum mentes invasit, aut non esse philosophiae studia viris 
principibus attingenda, aut summis labiis ad pompam potius ingenii, quam 

animi cultum vel ociose etiam delibanda. Omnino illud Neoptolemi habent 
pro decreto, aut nil philosophandum, aut paucis [...] ergo vicio alicui 
vertetur, et virtutem ipsam virtutis gratia nil, extra eam quaerens perpetuo 
affectet et prosequatur quod divina mysteria, naturae consilia perscrutans, 
hoc perfruatur ocio, caeterarum rerum despector et negligens, quando illa 
possunt sectatorum suorum vota satis implore. Ergo illiberalem aut non 
omnino principis erit non mercenarium facere studium sapientiae. Quis 
aequo animo haec aut ferat aut audiat?” [“Men's minds have been invaded 
by the ruinous and monstrous conviction that noblemen ought to refrain 
from philosophical studies or, at most, that they should taste them only with 
the edge of their lips in order to show off their intelligence rather than 
putting them into practice, in peace, so as to better themselves. They 
wholeheartedly consider Neoptolemus”s saying as a decree: no one, or just a 
very few, should engage in philosophy. [...] Even the virtue of one who, for 
love of virtue, seeks nothing other than virtue, lovingly pursues the divine 
mysteries, fathoms the plans of nature and enjoys this leisure, neglecting 
and despising all other things, is therefore transformed into some vice even 
though these things are enough to satisfy the needs of those who pursue 
them. Would it therefore be ignoble or wholly improper for a nobleman 
gratuitously to pursue wisdom? Who could hear or tolerate such a thing 
without irritation?”] (Pico 1971, 1:377). Compare this with the Oration 
(88153-55): “Ita invasit fere omnium mentes exitialis haec et monstrosa 
persuasio, aut nihil aut paucis philosophandum. Quasi rerum causas, 
naturae vias, universi rationem, Dei consilia, caelorum terraeque mysteria, 
pre oculis, pre minibus exploratissima habere nihil sit prorsus, nisi vel 
gratiam inde aucupari aliquam, vel lucrum sibi comparare possit. Qui eo 
deventum est ut iam (proh dolor!) non existimentur sapientes nisi qui 
mercennarium faciunt studium sapientiae” [“Thus, nearly everyone?s mind 
has been invaded by the ruinous and monstrous conviction that either no 
one or only a very few may study philosophy. As if having before our eyes 
and at our fingertips the causes of things, the ways of nature, the logic of 
the universe, the divine plan and the mysteries of Heaven and Earth were a 
thing of very little worth, unless accompanied by the possibility of 
garnering some favour or making a profit. Instead, it has now reached the 
point (what sorrow!) where only those who reduce the study of wisdom to a 
business are considered wise”]. Cf. Bori (2000, 73-75). 

62 Bausi (1996, 111) indicates as terminus a quo 7 December 1486, the 
publication of the Theses, and as terminus ante quem 20 February 1487, 
when it was clear that the debate would not take place because Innocent 
VIII prohibited it and called a committee of inquiry. 

63 Given that it is possible to compare R (1496) with P (1486) for the first 
part and with the Apologia (1487) for the second part, eventual minor 
editorial interventions not by Giovanni but by Gianfrancesco Pico do not 
emerge, in my opinion, as a subsequent phase in the history of the draft 
(Bori 2000, 82-83). 

Chronology 

Francesco Borghesi 

1463 

On 24 February, Giovanni Pico dei Conti di Mirandola e Concordia was 
born in the castle of Mirandola. On that day — according to the tale related 
by his nephew Gianfrancesco — a circle of fire appeared for a split second 
over his mother”s bed. Of his two sisters, Caterina and Lucrezia, the first 
married Lionello Pio da Carpi in 1473 and the second Pino Oderlaffi da 
Forli in 1475. His brothers, Galeotto and Anton Maria, were perpetually 
fighting over the estate, nurturing a family feud that would one day cost 
Gianfrancesco his life. 

Giovanni's father died soon after his birth, and he was raised by his 
mother, Giulia Boiardo, who wanted him to pursue an ecclesiastical career. 

1477 

Pico departed for Bologna at the age of fourteen to study canon law in 
accordance with the wishes of his mother, who died in August 1478. 

1479 

Uninterested in the political and financial squabbles that divided his 
brothers after his mother”s death, Pico decided to pursue activities that were 
more in line with his own budding interests. In late May, he found himself 
in Ferrara, where he began to study philosophy at the faculty of arts and 

also to learn ancient Greek. It was in Ferrara that Pico met two important 
figures: Battista Guarini, who later became his teacher, and Girolamo 
Savonarola, whom Pico impressed with his erudition in the public debate 
that, as protonotary, he held with Lorenzo Nogarola. 

1480 

Fifteen months later, in 1480, Pico, barely eighteen, was in Padua, 
broadening his knowledge of philosophy at what was then Italy?s most 
famous university. He remained there for two academic years, making 
important contacts and studying Aristotle and his commentators, especially 
Averroes. It was this discovery of Arabo-Judaic thought that led to his close 
ties to a group of intellectuals who were actively disseminating such ideas 
throughout Italy, including Girolamo Ramusio and, particularly, Elia del 
Medigo. 

Another noteworthy individual whom Pico met in Padua was the 
Aristotelian Nicoletto Vernia, a scholar of Averroes who, unlike Elia del 
Medigo, could only read his works in Latin translation. 

1482 

Pico spent the summer of 1482 in his castle in Mirandola, departing in the 
fall for Pavia, where he decided to dedicate himself to the study of 
philosophy, Greek, and rhetoric. There he also studied late Aristotelian 
texts, such as those of the calculatores (the students and theorists of logic 
and language and some of the followers of Richard Swineshead, the 
fourteenth-century theological master at Oxford). Picos reading of the 
calculatores is still evident in one of his late works, the Disputationes 
adversus astrologiam divinatricem. 

Through Angelo Poliziano, whom he met in Mantua in 1472, Pico began 
to take an interest in the Florentine literary movement; indeed, it was then 
that he asked Marsilio Ficino for a copy of his Theologia Platonica. Once 

again, under the influence of Elia del Medigo, he read and meditated on the 
work of John Philoponus and revised the amorous lyrics that he had begun 
composing several years earlier. 

1483 

In 1483, an agreement on the division of the family estate having been 
reached between his brothers, Pico at the age of twenty became one of the 
wealthiest men in Italy and free from all petty worries. 

While dedicating himself to philosophy in Padua and Pavia, Pico had 
carried on with his poetry. In May, he sent some of his compositions to 
Poliziano, who subsequently invited him to Florence. A new and decisive 
stage in the intellectual life of the Count of Mirandola and Concordia was 
initiated in the city of Lorenzo the Magnificent. 

1484 

In 1484, Pico read the Theologia Platonica of Ficino, who later recalled 
how Pico, seized by enthusiasm, had forced him to tackle Plotinus shortly 
after he had published his translation of Plato. Nevertheless, Pico took pains 
to assure his friends that he had not deserted the Aristotelian school but was 
simply an explorer (explorator) of new territory who was still dedicated to 
the ideas of the ancients. A crowd of various characters gathered around 
Pico: physicians and Jewish philosophers, Aristotelians, Platonists, and 
poets, as well as scholars of Dante and Petrarch. Chief among all these 
relationships was the protective and generous friendship of Lorenzo de” 
Medici. Even Elia del Medigo followed Pico to Florence, where he 
continued to work for him, translating from Hebrew Averroes”s paraphrase 
of Plato's Republic as well as some of his logical quaestiones. One of 
Ficino”s letters likewise informs us that Elia often held debates in Picos 
house on philosophical and religious matters with another converted Jew, 
Guglielmo Raimondo de Moncada, also known as Flavius Mithridates. The 
latter soon began teaching Hebrew to Pico, who was impatient to learn the 
language of the Bible. It appears that Mithridates was a rather peculiar 

character with a difficult personality. In fact, he once demanded that Pico, if 
he wished to continue his lessons in Aramaic (Pico?s “Chaldean”), serve as 
a go-between with a youth from Faenza called Lancillotto, whom 
Mithridates desired as a lover. 

1485 

Emphasis is often placed on Giovanni Pico's “official” entrance on the 
Italian cultural scene in 1485 with his polemic against Ermolao Barbaro, 
who taught Aristotle in Padua. Toward the end of 1482, Pico wrote Barbaro 
a letter expressing his admiration for the man's learning and his own regret 
that he had not had a chance to meet him during his sojourn in Padua 
(Barbaro had been in Venice at the time). The two began exchanging letters, 
which led to Barbaro's critique of the so-called barbarous philosophers, 
who used plain, overly technical, and dry language. Nowadays, Pico?s 
response, in the celebrated letter entitled De genere dicendi philosophorum, 
is viewed as one of the greatest examples of Renaissance rhetoric. In it Pico 
proclaims that philosophical research need not conform to a single, 
harmonious style if such an approach impedes the pursuit of truth. 

Pico likewise dealt with the relationship between content and form in a 
long missive to Lorenzo the Magnificent, praising him for a collection of 
poems written in the vernacular. Having exalted the poetic works of the 
young prince, Pico set up a comparison between Dante and Petrarch. 
Inasmuch as Petrarch was lacking in content and Dante in form, the author 
of the letter clearly expressed his preference for Dante. Indeed, Petrarch 
comes across as a virtuoso, an artist, but not as a thinker; he was too self- 
satisfied, whereas Dante, who exhibited a very different nature, presented 
his material with great vigour. Initially fascinating, Petrarch's poetry 
ultimately proved less satisfying than Dante”s profundity. Pico's argument 
appeared to be based on the philosophical leanings of all three authors. Pico 
praised Lorenzo not so much for his poetry, however, as for his ability to 
expound Aristotle's Physics, Ethics, and De anima and the ideas of the 
Platonists. In addition, Pico laid stress on the analytical aspects of 
Lorenzo”s annotations in prose that appeared in the margins of his sonnets, 
which were meant not so much to delight as to heighten consciousness. 

1485-1486 

Constantly on the move, Pico appeared in Paris in July 1485 at the 
Sorbonne, where he remained until the beginning of the following year. 
Although information on this period is scarce, the experience of studying in 
the most important university in the world was no doubt a positive one, so 
much so that Pico often boasted of his skill at using the disputative style of 
the “celebratissimorum Parisiensium disputatorum.” It is not unreasonable 
to assume that it was in Paris that Pico came up with the idea of putting his 
own philosophical and theological positions — as well as his political project 
— to the test in a public debate, even though such an event would have 
differed from traditional university debates in scope and significance. 

1486 

Picos reentry into Florence marked what could be called the most 
tormented period of his brief life. In fact, 1486 was an extraordinary year 
for the young scholar. Having just completed his studies in Paris, the 
twenty-three-year-old returned in March to Florence, where he stayed 
among his friends (Lorenzo de” Medici, Angelo Poliziano, Marsilio Ficino, 
and Girolamo Benivieni) until 8 May, when he left for Rome. "Two days 
later, he caused a remarkable scandal in Arezzo when he attempted to 
abduct Margherita, wife of Giuliano di Mariotto de” Medici, from her home. 
Distraught by the experience, he retired to Perugia, whence he proceeded to 
Fratta on account of the plague. There he finally managed, through work 
and penitence, to overcome the bitterness and shame of the deplorable 
affair. 

He wrote a commentary on a canzone written by his friend Girolamo 
Benivieni, collected nine hundred theses, or Conclusiones, meant to be 
discussed at a conference on philosophical peace that was to be held in 
Rome in January 1487 (to which scholars would be invited at his own 
expense), and composed an introductory Oration to the Conclusiones. By 7 
December, he was in Rome, where the Conclusiones were set in print. At 
this point, another scandal erupted: the commission appointed to examine 

the theses condemned some of them, and Pope Innocent VIII cancelled the 
upcoming conference. Pico defended himself in the Apología, into which he 
incorporated large sections of the Oration. By this time, however, the 
momentous year of 1486 had drawn to a close. 

1487 

It is clear that Pico felt he had much to offer to the Church of Rome and 
believed that his theorizing in no way ran counter to the principles of 
Christian theology. Fortified by these convictions and by the confidence of 
youth, Pico rededicated himself to the preparation of the Roman event. 

By November 1486, the Conclusiones had been prepared. The text was 
published on 7 December in Rome at the press of Eucharius Silber. Pico, as 
stated previously, invited theologians and philosophers for the days 
following the Epiphany of 1487. Nevertheless, his arrival in Rome was 
immediately complicated by voices of dissent that definitively convinced 
the pope to suspend the debate. The papal brief, Cum injunctio nobis, of 20 
February 1487, encharged Giovanni Monisart, Bishop of Tournai, with the 
task of organizing a commission of seven bishops (among whom was Pedro 
Garcia), two generals of religious orders, and eight theologians and canons. 
The commission convened from the second to the thirteenth of March 1487. 
Pico was present at the debate, but only for the first five days. After that, he 
was no longer allowed to participate. Seven theses were immediately 
condemned, then another six. After a more thorough analysis, the first 
seven were condemned absolutely, while the other six were only censored. 
The secretaries of the trial, Johannes Cordier, a theologian from the 
Sorbonne, and the ailing Marco de Miroldo, were not favourably disposed 
to Pico. 

Exasperated and convinced of the correctness of his own reasoning, Pico 
quickly drafted an apologia in which he treated and clarified the thirteen 
contested theses. Once again, the effect was not what he had hoped for, and 
the Roman Curia viewed the publication of the Apologia on 31 May 1487 
as an act of insubordination. In a brief dated 6 June, Innocent VIII 

summoned the tribunal of the Inquisition, and on 31 July Giovanni signed 
an act of submission that granted permission for the copies of the 
Conclusiones to be burned at the stake, but the bull Et si injuncto nobis, 
dated 4 August, absolved him personally of all condemnation. It is 
interesting that the bull was not publicized until 15 December, together with 
the warrant for his arrest. Pico saw no alternative but to flee from Rome. 

1488 

Pico was seized at the beginning of 1488 between Grenoble and Lyon, 
whence he was escorted to Paris under the supervision of papal nuncios. All 
the same, he was protected by the king, who confined him in the castle of 
Vincennes lest he be turned over to the Vatican. In the end, Pico was able to 
leave France unharmed, thanks to a special royal permit. He returned to 
Florence in April of the same year. 

After Pico returned to Florence, we come across another erudite Jew, R. 
Yohanan Alemanno, a physician raised in Tuscany in a family of bankers. 
Many scholars consider Alemanno one of the most widely learned Jewish 
intellectuals among Pico's circle of collaborators, capable, among other 
things, of reading Arabic sources in Hebrew. Pico found himself writing his 
commentary on the Song of Songs in a thoroughly homogeneous 
intellectual climate: Ficino had written his commentary on Plato's 
Symposium and Girolamo Benivieni his Canzone d'amore, afterward 
annotated by Pico. 

1489 

With his return to Florence, Pico entered an extremely productive period 
that would result in the publication of the Heptaplus and De ente et uno as 
well as the composition of the Disputationes adversus astrologiam 
divinatricem and the great moral letters to his nephew Gianfrancesco. Most 
likely, this new impetus in his studies was motivated by his need to 
overcome the bitter vicissitudes of Rome and perhaps also by his desire for 
spiritual redemption. Both in a letter to Andrea Corneus of 1489 and in the 

preface to the Heptaplus, he announced that he was working on a 
systematic commentary on the Psalms, which, however, he never carried to 
completion. The Heptaplus came out in print in summer 1489 and was 
financed by Roberto Salviati. The idea behind this work is that “the seven 
days of creation” contain all of nature?s secrets and that in his books Moses 
had revealed all of human wisdom and all that the spirit of God had told 
him. 

In this same period, Pico also conceived and wrote De ente et uno, which 
circulated in Florence in manuscript form. This work was dedicated by Pico 
to his friend Poliziano, who had insistently asked him to intervene in a 
dispute between the Platonists — in the persons of Lorenzo de” Medici and 
Marsilio Ficino — and the Peripatetics or those who, like Poliziano, had 
always studied the texts of Aristotle. In reality, Pico seemed to disagree 
with the very principles of the debate and used the invitation as an occasion 
to articulate in public his theories on concord. To set Plato against Aristotle 
had long been one of the most arduous intellectual tasks, so much so that 
the ideology of humanism had come up with two diverse cultural strategies 
for dealing with, and certainly two different models of understanding, the 
two philosophers. Pico did not succeed in bringing the enterprise to a 
conclusion, but he left in De ente et uno a very interesting model of how he 
would have proceeded. 

Final Years 

In 1492, Giovanni wrote important moral letters to his nephew 
Gianfrancesco, the first from Ferrara, dated 15 May, and the second written 
on 2 July, which was followed by a third on 27 November. In these letters, 
Pico laid out the balance of existence itself and attempted to summarize all 
its precepts: it was not the world that was the adversary here but those 
things in it, such as ignorance, insanity, and greed, that needlessly wear out 
man's soul. One had to know how to liberate oneself from these afflictions. 
This, essentially, was his advice to his nephew. 

In the final years of his life, Pico seems to have directed his intellectual 
energy toward theological and spiritual studies, the mystery of life and 
grace, and the figure of the cross. He followed the sermons of Savonarola, 
toward whose arrival in Florence he himself had contributed. Pico's final 
work was conceived in the silence and solitude of his villa in Fiesole. This 
was the unfinished Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem, the 
most comprehensive of all his projects. Published posthumously by his 
nephew Gianfrancesco in the 1496 edition of Picos works, the 
Disputationes did not fail to arouse interest and stimulate much discussion. 
The subject was at the centre of the period's cultural debates: Girolamo 
Savonarola immediately prepared a compendium in Italian, and Giovanni 
Mainardi and Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa praised it; however, others, such 
as Giovanni Pontano, Luca Bellanti, Girolamo Torrella, Pietro Pomponazzi, 
and Jean Bodin, criticized it in various ways, sometimes severely. The 
Disputationes appeared just as interest in astrology was being reawakened. 

Death 

Giovanni Pico died amid uncertain circumstances in Florence on 17 
November 1494, with Girolamo Savonarola at his side. By this point, his 
estate had been granted to charitable institutions and his nephews, and his 
well-stocked library to his brother Anton Maria. On the same day, Charles 
VIII entered Florence. 

The Oration”s Printed Editions 

Michael Papio 

Like all great works of philosophy and literature from the past, the Oration 
on the Dignity of Man has a publication history that reflects the importance 
accorded to it by its readers over the course of time. When its themes are of 
greatest relevance, it appears more frequently in print. A glance at this 
record for the text from the 1400s to the present reveals two distinct periods 
of production, separated by three hundred years of “silence.” Between the 
appearance of the editio princeps in 1496 and Heinrich Petri's 1572-73 
reprint of Pico?s Opera, the Oration appeared ten times in the company of 
Pico*s other works and once alone. Between 1905 and the publication of the 
volume you now hold in your hands, it appeared roughly another fifty 
times, both in the original Latin and in translation into modern languages, 
including (from the greatest to the fewest in number) Italian, English, 
Spanish, German, Portuguese, French, Swedish, Danish, Hebrew, 
Romanian, Catalan, Finnish, Serbo-Croatian, Dutch, Japanese, and Chinese. 
Naturally, one may expect a work such as this to be rather widespread 
among the generations immediately following that of its author, but the 
reasons that lay behind this feverish “rediscovery” in the second half of the 
twentieth century are not as clear. Perhaps its newfound relevance since the 
second half of the twentieth century is a response to the violence of war, the 
philosophical exigencies of human rights and decolonialization, or a 
combination of these and other motives as well. Whatever the causes, it is 
undeniably true that there is something in the Oration that is pertinent, even 
necessary, to the thought of our times. 

The various phases of the Oration's original composition have been 
reconstructed by scholars who, though occasionally in disagreement, have 
succeeded in providing the historical and biographical contexts that 

influenced Pico*s decisions regarding which elements to include and which 
to modify or discard altogether.? Our purpose in these few pages, however, 
is to review what took place once the text first appeared in print. Unlike 
some of his other works, the entire Oration was never published during 
Pico's lifetime.? Although parts of it were included in the Apología, it was 
not until 1496, two years after his uncle”s early death, that Gianfrancesco 
Pico included it in the posthumous Opera printed in Bologna by Benedetto 
(di Ettore) Faelli.? In that edition, Gianfrancesco wrote: 

Leges [...] orationem elegantissimam, iuvenili quidem alacritate 
dictatam, sed a doctoribus prae doctrinae et eloquentiae fastigio 
saepius admiratam; nec te moveat si plurima in eius calce convisuntur 
quae et in Apologiae sunt inserta proemio, quando illud foras 
publicaverit, hanc domi semper tenuerit, nec nisi amicis comunem 
fecerit.* 

[You will read [...] a most elegant oration, dictated in fact with 
youthful alacrity but very often admired by learned men for the 
loftiness of its doctrine and eloquence. Do not be put off if much of 
what is treated at its close is also to be found in the Apologia's proem, 
for he would have published it had he not kept it private and had he not 
[already] made it available to his friends. ] 

This oratio elegantissima (“most elegant oration”) still had not taken on 
the title by which we have come to know it.? Pico, as far as we know, never 
gave it a precise name; it has been suggested that he originally intended to 
Call it the Oratio ad laudes philosophiae (“Oration in Praise of 
Philosophy”),* but the evidence for this is slight. 

Not long after the Bolognese edition of 1496, though we cannot know 
precisely when,” there appeared another publication of Pico's Opera, which 
is no more than a reproduction of the editio princeps. Though it, too, bears 
the colophon of Faelli, scholars have identified it as a product of Jacobino 

Suigo and Nicolas Benedict, who had it printed in Lyon.? The third instance 
of the Oration's publication, this time in Venice, dates from 1498 and, with 
the exception of the order in which some of the works are presented, is 
essentially the same as the first two. Indeed, although some of the extant 
copies carry the Bernardino Vitali colophon, others are attributed directly to 
Faelli. The actual editor, it would seem, was not Vitali (who apparently 
employed the same character set nowhere else) but Antonio Moretus.? The 
fourth publication of Picos Opera was put together by Jakob Wimpheling 
and Hieronymus Emser (two men who, curiously, had conflicting views on 
Lutheranism) and completed in 1504 by Johann Priiss*s press in Strasburg. 
It was in this version that the Oration (still called Oratio quedam 
elegantissima in its index) appeared for the first time with the subtitle de 
hominis dignitate (“on the Dignity of Man”).*% It is worth noting that such a 
title actually refers most precisely only to the first section of the work (881— 
50), while the remainder would in fact seem to be best described as an 
encomium of philosophy. Two years later, Pico"s Opera was printed yet 
again, and in this version, printed in Reggio Emilia by Ludovico Mazzali!' 
five months after the press's completion of Guarino Veronese's Regulae 
grammaticales, the Oration resumed what had been until then its traditional 
title. In 1517, the Oration was included in the first compilation of the Opera 
to be printed outside of Italy: the Parisian version of Jean Petit.!? The 
Oratio quedam elegantissima followed on the heels of the De ente et uno, 
just as it had done in all previous versions of Pico”s collected works. In 
1519, the Opera was published again by the Venetian press of Guglielmo da 
Fontaneto,!* which in the same year also put out copies of La uita el 
transito et gli miraracoli [sic] del beatissimo Sancto Hieronymo doctore 
excellentissimo, the pseudo-Augustinian Soliloquia animae ad Deum, and 
Priscian's Grammar with the glosses of Johamnis de Aigre. These titles, and 
the fact that the pseudo-Cyprian Carmen de ligno crucis was presumably 
bound accidentally within Pico?”s works, lead one to assume (correctly) that 
this was no great step forward in Pico studies. 

The year 1530, however, marks an interesting moment for the Oration, 
inasmuch as it was printed for the first time independent of Pico's Opera 
omnia, a decision taken much earlier for other works, such as the Apologia 
and the Epistles. The place was Basel, Switzerland, and the printer Heinrich 

Petri!* (direct ancestor of the owners of the modern Schwabe publishing 
house — the oldest still in existence). On the frontispiece of this edition, the 
Oration, which appears with Pico's glosses on Psalm 15 and two other 
works, bears the impressive title Oratio de homine Joannis Pici 
Mirandulae, ubi sublimiora et sacrae et humanae philosophiae mysteria 
explicantur (“Giovanni Pico della Mirandola's Oration on Man, in Which 
are Explained the Most Sublime Mysteries of Both Sacred and Human 
Philosophies”). Petri was also responsible for the following edition of the 
Oration, contained in Picos Opera of 1557,*” for which the publisher this 
time returned to the 1504 Strasburg edition for its title: Oratio de hominis 
dignitate. This appended phrase is one that has stuck with the work to the 
present day. Unfortunately, however, Petri took the text from 
Gianfrancesco's 1496 editio princeps, which contained several 
typographical errors. Despite the fact that many of them were corrected in 
the errata corrige of Pico's nephew, Petri?s editors seem not to have 
noticed. Given the great influence of the Petri editions over the centuries, 
this is an oversight that produced substantial defects in subsequent 
editions.'? Of particular interest to anyone concerned with publishing 
history is the intriguing tidbit that this is the first edition of the Opera to 
contain Johann Reuchlin's De arte cabalistica (ad intelligenda loca 
quaedam Pici, magno usui futura lectori [“for the comprehension of those 
passages of Pico*s that will be of great use to the reader”]). One may well 
wonder what role Johannes Herold, the volumes” erudite humanist editor, 
played in this choice. In addition to being responsible for the fourth edition 
of Petrarch's collected works for Petri in 1554, Herold was a Swiss-German 
polyglot and editor with a taste for syncretism in his own right. His studies 
ranged from the Greco-Roman to the medieval, to Italian humanism, to 
Zoroaster and the Middle East.!” Essential to a full understanding of the 
dynamics here in play is the fact that the Basel humanists (such as 
Reuchlin, Lefévre, and Beatus Rhenanus, to name but a few) were deeply 
concerned with Pico and the concept of human dignity. It is by no means a 
coincidence that Erasmus's language often echoed that of these Basel 
scholars in their programme of Christian humanism.*? In Italy, during that 
same year of 1557, the Milanese editor Girolamo Scoto produced his own 
edition of Picos Opera in Venice.*? A musician and bookmaker generally 
concerned with the texts of Alexander of Aphrodisias (Aristotelian 
philosopher, fl. 198-211 AD) and Alessandro Achillimi (1463-1512, 

professor of philosophy at the University of Bologna), Scoto seems to have 
enjoyed some success with this publication, insofar as the number of his 
tomes that remain extant is roughly the same as that of Petri. This is a fact 
that may, however, say more about the eagerness of the reading public of 
1557 than about the quality of Scoto's edition. On the frontispiece, the 
Oration is entitled Oratio quedam elegantissima de Hominis celsitudine € 
dignitate (“A Certain Most Elegant Oration on the Excellence and Dignity 
of Man”), which may suggest some partial influence exercised by (the 
success of?) the Petri edition. Scoto*s edition, despite its claim to present a 
complete corpus of Pico?s work, omits the Commento and the Esposizione. 
We owe the final two pre-modern editions of the Oration to the Petri 
publishing house as well. The first of these, published in Basel in 1572-73 
by Heinrich Petri, describes the work in both its index and its document 
header with the title De hominis dignitate (“On the Dignity of Man”).?0 
Worthy of note is the fact that the editors elected to put Picos works into 
the first volume and an incomplete collection of his nephew's into the 
second.?! Like its 1557 predecessor, this edition also contains Reuchlin*s 
De arte cabalistica. "The next and last early edition is that of 1601, 
published in Basel by Sebastian Henricopetri, the son of Petri who, upon 
being knighted in 1556 by Charles V, had assumed this new cognomen for 
his descendants.?? 

While the Oration was never the most popular among the works selected 
for publication between the end of the 1400s and the 1900s (this honour 
belongs to Pico?s Epistles), its absence from the bibliographic record 
between 1601 and 1905 is a symptom of the waning interest in Pico”s 
writings as a whole rather than in this specific text. The 1700s produced 
nearly nothing of particular value in editions of Pico?s writings, and the 
century that followed, in which the publishers” interest turned principally to 
Pico*s neglected works (such as his vernacular and Latin verses and some 
previously unpublished letters), overlooked the Oration altogether. The 
nineteenth century, however, would indeed prove invaluable for the initial 
appearance of what we would now call serious scholarship (e.g., Massetani, 
Di Giovanni, and even Oreglia), which in turn would set the stage for the 
veritable boom in editions in the twentieth. The first modern translation was 
published in 1905 in a volume of Pico's selected works edited by Arthur 

Liebert, a member, like Cassirer, of the Neo-Kantian Marburger School.?? 
Semprini's 1936 study, entitled La filosofia di Pico della Mirandola, 
contained in its appendix the first Italian translation of the Oration, 
unaccompanied by the original text.?4 Herbert Werner Riissel produced 
another translation of the work into German in 1940, prefaced it with a brief 
essay on humanistic theology, and included some of Thomas Mores 
translation of Gianfrancesco's biography (also in German).?” In that same 
year, Charles Glenn Wallis published his own translation, under the title The 
Very Elegant Speech on the Dignity of Man,?? the first to appear in English 
and one in which the historical uncertainty of the title is visible. Indeed, in 
this initial edition, reproduced from typewritten copy, we read: “The first 
translation into this language of Oratio elegantissima de dignitate hominis.” 
Wallis, poet and translator of Latin, Greek, and French, had already 
prepared English versions of works by Baudelaire, Plato, Porphyry, Kepler, 
Copernicus, and Grosseteste before turning his hand to Pico. In 1941, 
Bruno Cicognani's translation appeared,?” followed a year later by that of 
Eugenio Garin,?? whose text was used by Elizabeth Livermore Forbes in 
her translation of selected passages from the Oration in The Journal of the 
History of Ideas 3 (1942): 347-54. Forbes went on to publish a complete 
translation of the work in 1948 for the very widely circulated volume of 
Cassirer, Kristeller, and Randall entitled The Renaissance Philosophy of 
Man.?? Thus, in this short war-torn span of about twelve years (1936-48), 
the Oration — after having lain nearly untouched for three centuries — was 
translated three times into Italian, twice into English, and once into 
German. The third English translation, that of Robert Caponigri, appeared 
in 1956. The Wallis-Forbes-Caponigri triad of English editions has been 
reprinted since then in various forms by various publishers without any 
substantial changes.?* 

The last fifty years have witnessed great advances in the publication of 
Picos short speech, most notably represented in the Italian editions of 
Tognon (1987) and Bausi (Pico 2003). Unfortunately, however, none of this 
progress has been reflected in any English translation until now. The 
present edition not only brings much of the scholarship of the last half- 
century into the Anglophone debate over this important work but also 

contributes substantially in its own right to the study and interpretation of 
the text. 

1 E.g., Garin (1961, 231-33), Bori (2000, 30-33, 73-84), and Bausi (1996, 
108-16). 

2 Pico's decision not to make its entire contents public was no doubt 
influenced by the events described by Pier Cesare Bori in his introduction 
to the present volume. 

3 The 1496 edition is described in detail by Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 
101-10), who have provided the most complete index of Picos works. 
However, one may also wish to consult the standard repertories as well as 
Pico (1942, 89-99), Valenziani (1950), and Ludovici (1963). 

4 Cited from Garin (Pico 1994b, xxii-xxiii). 

5 The Oration begins on folio QQ2r and is there entitled simply “Oratio 
Iloannis Pici Miran. Concordiae Comitis.” On the index page, the work 
bears the title “Oratio queedam elegantissima” (“A Certain Most Elegant 
Oration”), which establishes de facto the convention followed in the work”s 
appellation until 1504. 

6 See Farmer (1998, 18-19). 
7 Aquilon (1971, 113). 

8 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 110-18). The Oration begins on folio 
T4v, 28. 

9 The Oration begins on folio S6r. Evidence gleaned from the characters 
used in the printing of quinternions P and Q suggest that their production 

was entrusted to Cristoforo de” Pensi. See Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 
119-25). 

10 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 175—76). 

11 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 176-78). The Oration begins on folio 
S4r. 

12 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 17880). The Oration begins on folio 
edr. 

13 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 180-82). The Oration begins on folio 
N3r. 

14 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 192-93). It should not escape our notice 
that Basel and Strasbourg traditionally considered themselves rival centres 
of humanistic publishing. Thanks largely to Petri, the former held sway in 
the production of Pico”s texts. 

15 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 182-84). The Oration begins on folio 
Ddir. This Basel edition of 1557 was reprinted in Pico (1969b). 

16 See Garin's introduction to his edition of Picos works (in Pico 1942, 
54-55). 

17 See Burckhardt (1966) and Bietenholz (1959). 

18 See Bietenholz (1971), and see also Francesco Borghesi's introduction 
in the present volume. 

19 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 184-88). The Oration begins on folio 
l1v. 

20 Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 188-91). The Oration begins on folio 
Ddir. This Basel edition of 1572-73 was reprinted in Pico (1971, Opera 
omnia). Basel, a fiery centre of Reformation humanism, is responsible not 
only for the most important pre-modern editions of Pico but many other 
intimately related texts as well (e.g., Plato, Plotinus, and Ficino). 

21 See Garin's notes in Pico (1971, 1:vii). 

22 The history of the Petri family was traced by Cullman (1913) and the 
family business by Hieronymus (1997). The edition is described by 
Quaquarelli and Zanardi (2005, 301-4). 

23 Pico (1905). 

24 The Oration appears on pp. 219-41 and bears the title Orazione sulla 
dignita dell*uomo. 

25 Pico, Uber die Wiirde des Menschen (1940). 

26 Pico, The Very Elegant Speech (1940). 

27 Pico (1941). This edition was reprinted in 1942 and again in 1943. 
28 Pico (1942). 

29 Pico (1948). See also Pico (1953). 

30 Pico (1956). 

31 The most significant among the slight modifications made to any of 
these translations since their original publication were those of Paul J. W. 
Miller, who inserted corrections into Wallis?s version for the 1965 edition 
(see Pico 1998). For the sake of completeness, mention must also be made 

of the otherwise unremarkable translation of Fallico and Shapiro (Pico 
1967). 

Interpretations 

Francesco Borghesi 

Ever since it began circulating at the end of the 1480s, the meaning of the 
Oration on the Dignity of Man has been open to debate. One of the 
problems related to a proper interpretation of Giovanni Pico”s thought has 
been the absence of critical editions of his works and the relatively small 
number of in-depth investigations of his sources. In more recent years, 
especially after the five hundredth anniversary of his birth in 1963, a 
number of new studies and commented editions of his texts have appeared, 
offering new grounding for a theoretical assessment of his opus. 

The most influential interpretations in Pico studies are represented by 
scholars such as Giovanni Gentile, Ernst Cassirer,? Eugenio Garin,? and 
Paul Oskar Kristeller,* who, in different ways, have seen in Pico a 
“modern” philosopher. Others, such as Frances Yates,” Paola Zambelli* and 
Brian Copenhaver,” have emphasized his interest in magic and astrology, as 
well as his close ties to the esoteric and cabalistic strains of the 
Renaissance. In opposition to these tendencies, there is yet another that 
places him in the theological continuum that began in the Scriptures, 
continued in the Church Fathers, and culminated in Scholasticism. This 
position is represented by the studies of Giovanni Di Napoli, Henri De 
Lubac, Heinrich Reinhardt, Fernand Roulier, Antonino Raspanti, Walter 
Euler, Pier Cesare Bori, and Louis Valcke.? While these authors” arguments 
can vary a great deal,? they remain in agreement on the theological 
relevance of Pico?s work. 

At stake in these studies is more than the relevance of the Oration alone; 
rather, they take into consideration a comprehensive interpretation of 

Giovanni Pico”s thought and its relation to the meaning of Renaissance 
humanism. It is interesting to note, however, that in a very recent biography 
of Pico, Louis Valcke dates the history of the myth of Giovanni Pico back to 
the classic study of Jacob Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance 
in Italy (1860). Valcke writes that Burckhardt, in interpreting Renaissance 
humanism as a phenomenon presenting all the characteristics typically 
attributed to the modern period (such as a conceptual divide with the 
Middle Ages and an exaltation of man's freedom from a superior 
ontological order), makes reference to a passage of Picos Oration. In 
Valcke's view, later interpretations, such as those of Ernst Cassirer and 
Eugenio Garin, have followed Burckhardt's footsteps in presenting Pico*s 
Oration as the manifesto of the Renaissance. These interpretations made 
possible the building of a mythical image of a Promethean Pico as the 
symbol of his age and are likely to have provided the grounding for a 
“modernizing” idea of Renaissance humanism.*% 

The contentious passage originally quoted by Burckhardt concerns the 
interpretation of the section of the Oration that deals with the story of 
Creation. According to Pico, the dignity of man — opus indiscretae imaginis 
(“a creature of indeterminate image”) and thus an image of God — lies in his 
Calling to transcend all images by following a path that involves three 
stages: ethical transformation (action), intellectual research (reflection), 
and, finally, perfection through his identification with the ultimate reality. In 
Pico*s interpretation, this paradigm must be considered universal insofar as 
it exists in every philosophical and theological tradition that was known to 
him: Christian, Jewish, Hellenistic, Islamic, Hermetic, and “Chaldean.” 
This “path” derives from the conjunction of the Platonic and Stoic traditions 
in Philo of Alexandria but also depends on both Pseudo-Dionysius and 
Origen, the latter of which preserves the Solomonic roots of this 
arrangement in the prologue to his Commentary on the Song of Songs. 
Solomon is the author of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, 
which respectively represent moral, natural, and contemplative modes of 
thought and, according to Origen, would have been the conduit through 
which this scheme was transmitted to Greece. Pico significantly omits the 
importance of Solomon and separates the second stage from the pessimism 
of Ecclesiastes, insisting in a very original fashion on the religious dignity 
of man's intellectual vocation. The Oration begins by declaring that the 

dignity of man, of which both biblical and philosophical traditions speak, is 
not sufficiently proven by the argument that man has a special, dominant 
position over creation. To understand the true nature of human dignity, Pico 
writes, one must turn to the story of Creation. He relates this story in his 
own way, explaining that the human being, unlike all other creatures, must 
define his own nature, in which the seeds of all beings are present; the 
human creature may thus either degenerate or realize his true calling.*! 

One will recall that, after studying in the most important scholarly centres 
of northern Italy, Pico came to Florence in the 1480s with the intention of 
applying every known intellectual tool and philosophical tradition to 
biblical exegesis. From 1484 to 1485, he focused on Ficino's pia 
philosophia while continuing to study Western and Eastern philosophy, 
neglecting neither the filosofi barbari (whom he defended in a famous letter 
directed against Ermolao Barbaro)!? nor Hebrew and Arabic sources. It was 
during this period that Picos growing knowledge of a vast speculative 
corpus convinced him that concordia among philosophical and religious 
doctrines was not only possible but crucial.?* 

Over thirty years after Nicholas of Cusa's De pace fidei (1453) and nearly 
fifty years after the Council of Ferrara-Florence, the young philosopher 
attempted to promote his own version of Cusa's “peace of faith.” Pico*s 
concordia revealed his belief that the major doctrines of antiquity and the 
Middle Ages were essentially in harmony and that reconciliation was 
desirable wherever there were apparent differences of position. The 
outcome of this belief appears in his insistence on the possible attainment of 
a concordia in which religious and philosophical disagreements can be 
reconciled in order to achieve a “superior unity.”!* This perspective was not 
new in that it had already been addressed in, for example, the philosophical 
programme of Boethius. Pico was essentially reformulating a well-known 
theme in medieval philosophical and theological thought by proposing the 
agreement of every philosophical and theological system in the pursuit of 
the unity of truth. His ultimate goal was to reveal that the ancient 
philosophical concept of the “One” is the “One Itself” or, more simply, 
“Being Itself.” 

Werner Beierwaltes claimed that Pico*s identification of the “One” with 
“Being” derived from his interest in demonstrating the concordia of 
Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy. According to Picos metaphysical 
interpretation of Plato?s Parmenides, the “One” of the first hypothesis is 
God; nevertheless, God as pure reality, according to Aristotelian theology, 
is “Being Itself” (“totius esse plenitudo, plenitudo ipsius esse”). What 
remains to be proven is that this “One” is and that pure “Being” not only is 
the “One” but also the “One Itself.” It is certainly true that for Pico the 
sense of the proposition that God “is above Being” — a thesis maintained by 
Plato's Academy and by later Platonists — is not only transcended by this 
identity but, more importantly, is legitimized from a Platonic and 
Aristotelian point of view. The assertion “super ens, super unum, super 
verum” applied to pure “Being,” identical to the “One Itself,” meant 
unequivocally that the divine principle is not any particular, determined, 
concrete “Being” or “One” but rather “Being” and the “One Itself.” These 
claims of unity had already been anticipated by Pseudo-Dionysius, who 
offered a definition of God as the “One above Being” in the sense of 
Exodus 3:14, “ego sum qui sum,” and equally as pure “Being” — a further 
demonstration of Picos thesis.'” According to Pico's own words in the 
Heptaplus: 

Hoc distamus a caelo, quod illum naturae necessitate, nos pro nostra 
libertate movemur. Pulsat enim assidue animum tuum spiritus motor. 
Si obaudias, tibi relinqueris tuo torpori, tuae infirmitati, miser et 
infelix. Si admittas, statim Deo plenus per orbem religionis ad Patrem, 
ad Dominum reportaris, in eo vitam semper possessurus, in quo et 
semper, etiam antequam fieres, vita fuisti. Haec est vera felicitas, ut 
unus cum Deo spiritus simus, ut apud Deum non apud nos Deum 
possideamus, cognoscentes sicut e cogniti sumus. Ille enim nos, non 
per nos, sed per se ipsum cognovit. Ita et nos cognoscemus illum per 
ipsum et non per nos. Haec est tota merces, haec est vita aeterna, haec 
est sapientia quam sapientes saeculi non cognoverunt, ut ab omni 
multitudinis imperfectione redigamur in unitatem per copulam 
indissolubilem cum eo qui est ipsum unum. 

[We differ from the heavens in that they are moved by the necessity of 
their nature and we in proportion to our freedom. The moving spirit 
knocks unremittingly at the door of your soul. If you fail to hear, you 
will be left wretched and unhappy in your own torpor and weakness. If 
you let it in, you will be carried back at once full of God, along the 
orbit of religion to the Father, to the Lord, to possess life forever in 
him, in whom you always had life even before you were made. This is 
true felicity, to be one spirit with God, so that we possess God in God, 
not in ourselves, but in himself, knowing him just as we are known. 
For he knows us not in ourselves, but in himself. Likewise we shall 
know him in himself and not in ourselves. This is our whole reward, 
this is the eternal life, this is the wisdom which the wise men of this 
world do not know, that from every imperfection of multiplicity we are 
brought back to unity by an indissoluble bond with him who is himself 
the One.] 

(Expositio septima de felicitate, quae est vita aeterna, Proemium libri 
septimi, Pico 1998, 152; Pico 1942, 336) 

This excerpt can be related to the passage in the Oration in which Pico 
writes: 

Qui enim se cuipiam ex philosophorum familiis addixerunt, Thomae 
videlicet aut Scoto (qui nunc plurimum in manibus) faventes, possunt 
illi quidem vel in paucarum questionum discussione suae doctrinae 
periculum facere. At ego ita me institui, ut, in nullius verba iuratus, me 
per omnes philosophiae magistros funderem, omnes scedas excuterem, 
omnes familias agnoscerem. Quare, cum mihi de illis omnibus esset 
dicendum, ne, si privati dogmatis defensor reliqua posthabuissem, illi 
viderer obstrictus, non potuerunt, etiam si pauca de singulis 
proponerentur, non esse plurima quae simul de omnibus afferebantur. 
Nec id in me quisquam damnet, quod me quocumque ferat tempestas, 
deferar hospes. Fuit enim cum ab antiquis omnibus hoc observatum, 
ut, omne scriptorum genus evolventes, nullas quas possent 
commentationes illectas preterirent [...]. Et profecto angustae est 
mentis intra unam se Porticum aut Achademiam continuisse; nec 

potest ex omnibus sibi recte propriam selegisse, qui omnes prius 
familiaritates non agnoverit. Adde quod in una quaque familia est 
aliquid insigne, quod non sit el commune cum caeteris [...]. Quid erat 
si Latinorum tantum, Alberti scilicet, Thomae, Scoti, Egidii, Francisci 
Henricique philosophia, obmissis Graecorum Arabumgque philosophis, 
tractabatur, quando omnis sapientia a barbaris ad Graecos, a Graecis ad 
nos manavit? (88179-93) 

[This is because those who have devoted themselves to any one of the 
schools of philosophy, siding for instance with Thomas or with Scotus, 
who are now most in fashion, can surely put their doctrines to the test 
in the discussion of but a few questions. As for myself, however, 1 
have resolved — in order not to swear by the words of another — to pore 
over all masters of philosophy, to examine every page and to become 
acquainted with all schools. Therefore, since 1 was to speak of all of 
these doctrines (lest 1 seem committed to advocating one in particular 
as a result of having neglected the others), it was impossible for there 
not to be very many questions concerning all of them together, even if 
only a few questions were proposed in regard to each. Nor should 
anyone condemn me on this account, for “wherever the tempest carries 
me, there I am brought as a guest.” For it was a rule observed by all 
the ancients in studying every kind of writer never to pass over any 
commentaries they were able to read [...]. And confining oneself 
within a single Porch or Academy certainly does show narrowness of 
mind. Nor can anyone rightly choose his own doctrine from them all, 
unless he has first made himself familiar with each of them. In 
addition, there is in each school something distinctive that is not 
shared in common with any other [...]. Inasmuch as all wisdom has 
flowed from the barbarians to the Greeks and from the Greeks to us, 
what would have been the point of dealing only with the philosophy of 
the Latins, that is, of Albert, Thomas, Scotus, Giles, Francis and 
Henry, while leaving the Greek and Arab philosophers aside?] 

Pico was pursuing religious unity, not merely the harmony of Platonic 
philosophy with Christianity. His aim was more ambitious than Marsilio 

Ficino's in that he intended to demonstrate — on textual and philological 
grounds — the fundamental harmony of all philosophical and religious 
doctrines. In doing so, Pico did not mean to say that everything these 
doctrines taught was fully true but that each one contained elements of 
truth, some of which could be called universally true.** As Charles Schmitt 
notes, Pico “considered many roads to lead to the truth, parallel paths, as it 
were, which all lead to the same end, but which may reach it in different 
ways. He further considered all philosophical systems and all religions to 
contain a portion of truth, which would prove beneficial to those who 
studied them.”?” 

Comparing Pico's and Ficino's ideals of “concord” might help further 
clarify the matter. Frederick Purnell, Jr., who did extensive work on the 
history of the concordia Platonis ac Aristotelis of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, analyzed Ficino*s “concordism.” Purnell regarded “concordism” 
as “one of the contexts in which many Renaissance philosophers, including 
Ficino and his closest followers, interpreted Plato”s thought.” With the term 
“philosophic concord,” Purnell referred 

to the tendency to view Plato*s teaching as fundamentally in harmony 
with those of other major thinkers and to strive to effect a 
reconciliation wherever there are apparent differences of position. The 
culmination of this tendency may be found in the claim made by 
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and others that a true concordia 
philosophica is possible, in which many, if not all, philosophical 
disagreements can be shown to be merely verbal or else reconciled by 
placing the discordant position in proper perspective.** 

According to Purnell, two major traditions influenced “concordism” and 
exerted a significant influence on Ficino: the prisca theologia (also known 
as pia philosophia) and the comparatio of Plato and Aristotle. The former 
entails the belief in a tradition of ancient wisdom traceable to the sages of a 
remote past and was elaborated in the writings of George Gemistus Pletho, 
the Byzantine scholar of Neoplatonic philosophy. Purnell writes: “The 

acceptance of this tradition of ancient wisdom carried with it an inherent 
predisposition toward concordism. Since Plato was heir to the accumulated 
wisdom of his predecessors within the tradition, Ficino was naturally led to 
stress the points of agreement.”!? The second tradition that influenced 
Ficino, the comparatio of Plato and Aristotle, refers to the history of the 
interpretation of the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle and addresses the 
extent to which the two thinkers are ultimately reconcilable. Some have 
suggested that such reconciliation can be extensive, illustrating the 
fundamental unity of outlook between Plato and Aristotle on many central 
philosophical issues. Others have regarded such a harmonization as 
something impossible to achieve without damaging the philosophers” core 
beliefs.%% 

While both of these trends have found advocates throughout the history 
of Western philosophy, Purnell analyzes the contribution of Ficino to the 
former, stressing the crucial influence of Henry Bate of Malines”s Speculum 
divinorum et quorundam naturalium (composed between 1281 and 1305) 
and Gemistus Pletho's De differentiis Platonis et Aristotelis (1439) on 
Florentine Platonism. In this perspective, Pico, with Francesco da Diacceto, 
is seen as representing one of the first attempts to effect an overall 
harmonization of the views of Plato and Aristotle, thanks to the stimulus his 
project received from Ficino”s acceptance of a place for Aristotelian natural 
philosophy within an overall Platonic program. The tradition of prisca 
theologia and the comparatio are singled out as the two main influences on 
Ficino*s “concordism.” Ficino, in return, is viewed as having a profound 
influence on the diffusion of both traditions.?* 

Although influenced by Ficino”s treatment of the subject, Pico?s argument 
aims to exceed the boundaries of his discourse on “concord.” In the 
interpretation by Pier Cesare Bori, Picos human dignity consists in the 
mystical vocation of the human creature, as a creature of indeterminate 
image, to transcend any image, becoming one with the divinity that is 
beyond representation, and human vocation is a mystical vocation that has 
to be realized following a three-stage way, which necessarily comprehends 
moral transformation, intellectual research, and final perfection in the 
identity with the absolute reality. According to Bori, who accentuates the 

mystical aspect, this paradigm is universal because it can be retraced in 
every tradition.?? Thus, Picos thought is pervaded by a pluralistic 
perspective: many are the ways that lead to the same goal, although Pico 
professes one of these, the Christian way. 

If Pico is to be considered a “concordist,” it is reasonable to assume that 
his conception of Christianity was “inclusive” and should therefore be 
opposed to another conception that could be called “exclusive.” The 
“exclusive” conception of Christianity says that what is “different” cannot 
be included in the Christian tradition and therefore cannot be saved; hence 
the necessity of, for instance, conversion. An “inclusive” conception of 
Christianity would tend to include what is “different” in that even those 
who do not belong to the Christian religion would not necessarily be 
considered in error and therefore on the wrong “way.” Thus, the Christian 
way would have to be considered one of a number of possible ways leading 
to the ultimate truth. In this sense, all philosophical systems and religions — 
all “cultures,” we might say — may contain a portion of truth and may lead 
to the same end, which can be reached through different ways. 

Although Pico never provides a definition of concordia, many scholars 
refer to his “concordistic” tendencies.?? Indeed, it may sound surprising that 
there is a lack of agreement on what concordia actually is. In some cases, 
the reference seems to be made to an “inclusive” idea of concordia; in 
others, scholars seem to make reference to a “reductionist” notion of 
concordia, such as that of “concordia Platonis ac Aristotelis,” on which 
Purnell expands.** 

The notion of an “inclusivist” concordia, such as Bori's, belongs to the 
tradition of a pluralistic Christian theological doctrine that looks to include 
other (and apparently conflicting) theologies. This tradition helps better 
define Pico*s “concordism” by way of the notion of “religious pluralism.” 
In this perspective, Pico?s idea of man's freedom is a power situated in what 
recently has been called a “theological teleology.” The purpose of such 
freedom is to allow the human person to ascend to a higher place and, 
ultimately, to become one with God the creator. Pico?s ontology implies a 
potential for diverse viewpoints without abandoning the Christian truth. The 

human person is capable, by virtue of his freedom, of viewing the world 
from different perspectives. This possibility is an empirical fact that 
presents the challenge of finding unity in diversity. Let us not forget that 
what we are concerned with here is a search, a dynamic process, and that, 
for Pico, despite the multiplicity of perspectives, truth is ultimately one. 
According to this critical stance, the oneness of truth reflects the deeper 
unity of things, as all multiplicity has originated from the One.?? 

If this perspective is sustainable, we encounter the question of religious 
diversity. Simply put, if there is one God, why are there so many different 
religious traditions? From the point of view of “religious pluralism,” the 
fundamental fact is not religious diversity. Rather, it is a single truth 
expressed through multiple human ideas and languages.*? Consequently, 
placing Pico within the Christian tradition as a “religious pluralist” does not 
seem to raise any issues: he is not standing outside the Christian faith 
looking for a general truth to be found in all religions. This is why Pico can 
argue without embarrassment that the truth of non-Christian religious 
traditions confirms Christian truth in a Christological perspective. 

From a hermeneutical point of view, the subject gives rise to a 
methodological problem. The notion of concordia may be considered from 
either a “historical” or a “structural” perspective. It is possible to consider 
Pico?s attitude within the context of the relationship of the various religious 
confessions of his time, as has been done by commentators such as Eugenio 
Garin and Cesare Vasoli, who have preferred to assume a “historical” 
stance. It is equally possible, however, to consider the structural 
relationships between mysticism and religious experience within different 
traditions according to a “structural” or “meta-historical” perspective, as 
Fernand Roulier, Stéphane Toussaint, and Pier Cesare Bori have done.?” 

From a theological point of view, Jacques Dupuis has recently raised the 
question as to whether religious pluralism can be accepted or tolerated as a 
de facto reality in our world or whether it can be seen as existing de 
jure. “Perhaps the issue was not dissimilar in Italy toward the end of the 
fifteenth century: a period full of ecumenical hopes in which numerous 
developments that, only a few decades later, would appear unthinkable 

might have felt possible. In the case of Giovanni Pico, the problem is 
whether his thought can be considered at once a real “pensée de la 
différence” ante litteram as well as a form of “universalism.” 

In some cases, Pico?s expectation is to “reach the absolute”; in others, it 
is to “come to know all schools.” Whenever the reference is to 
transcendental truth and man's foundation in divine nature, the former 
prevails; when it relates to various doctrines that contain portions of truth, 
the latter takes over. The Neoplatonists, for instance, and, above all, 
Plotinus, reason in a “meta-historical” way and look at the agreement 
between Plato and Aristotle as a “structural” fact. The agreement comes to 
an end when, in their opinion, Aristotle is in error: his doctrine of Noús is 
correct, but he considers Noús, “Intelligence” intended as intuition, the first 
principle and not a derivative one. Plotinus claims not to be proposing 
anything new because the foundation of truth is transcendent and divine. 
But, after this suggestion, he continues on with a doxographic examination 
of the doctrines of different philosophers (Enneads V.1.8-9).?? 

It is not that one aspect is true and the other false; they are simply two 
different levels of reading and should be kept separate. Pico, in whose work 
it is possible to find both attitudes, held that every major theological 
tradition contained elements of truth and that these elements could be 
combined into a grand synthesis that was at the same time compatible with 
orthodox Christianity. Like Nicholas of Cusa in his Cribratio Alchorani 
(1460-61), he believed that previous theologians” understanding of the 
sources of their own theological traditions was not necessarily correct. In 
fact, his aim was to construct a new theology using material from existing 
historical theologies as building blocks. This “new” theology would be 
superior to those already in existence because it would give a richer 
understanding of Christian truths. This is not to imply that Pico was 
interested in directly challenging Christian dogmas. But he did wish (like 
many humanists) to move Christian theological speculation beyond the 
circle of traditional authorities. 

This is the background of an interpretive approach that, to a certain 
extent, has informed the work of most members of the Bologna—Brown 

Pico Project. It is, of course, not the only possible approach. Shortly after 
the appearance of the edition of the Oration by Saverio Marchignoli, 
another, by Francesco Bausi, was published. Bausi's is now considered the 
standard edition of the Oration, as it makes available the best Latin text, a 
very reliable translation in Italian, and invaluable commentary. It also offers 
a very interesting basis for comparison with the Marchignoli edition. In a 
way, this comparison can be appreciated as the perfect case study for the 
relationship between philology and interpretation insofar as the two editions 
are both based on solid textual ground while the authors” interpretations 
could not be more different. 

In the introduction to his edition, Bausi explains his interest in the 
Oration as a literary text. Thus his analysis, concerned with the stylistic, 
rhetorical, and linguistic aspects of the text, does not attempt to identify 
sources that can be only hypothetically considered as such. Instead, it aims 
to trace sources that have an impact on the textual fabric. He refuses the 
idea of proposing an interpretation of the Oration but makes clear that his 
study is geared toward establishing a textual basis on which to base a 
hermeneutical discussion. 

Bausi further argues that the Oration should be classified as belonging to 
the literary genre of the humanistic prolusiones: he clarifies that this would 
not diminish its importance, but it would underline the occasional character 
that it had in Pico”s mind. In fact, Pico wrote the Oration as an introductory 
piece to the Conclusiones Nongentae, the nine hundred theses to be debated 
in Rome during a “council” organized by Pico in the presence of Pope 
Innocent VIII. He did not intend to give it any special theoretical 
meaning.?! However, Bausi seems to bring his opinion a step forward when 
he claims that, since it was so clearly linked to the project of the Roman 
dispute, the Oration is not — and was not considered by its author — a text 
with a theoretical independence of its own.”? 

This view is perhaps as extreme as the interpretation of those scholars 
who regard the Oration as carrying the seeds of Pico*s “concordistic” ideal 
and believe that it can be taken seriously from a theoretical point of view, 
but it is nevertheless based on solid textual ground. An opposition to it can 

only rely on the same tools, which is what has been attempted by Pier 
Cesare Bori and the members of the Pico Project, who, despite the evident 
differences in their ways of approaching the same text, acknowledge the 
importance of Bausi's work and have addressed the present edition in open 
dialogue with it. 

The fact that Pico attempted to propagate his “concordistic” theology 
among authorities in Christendom through the Conclusiones Nongentae and 
the Oration becomes significant in that it suggests that Giovanni Pico had 
transformative aims as radical as those of the religious reformers of the 
succeeding generation. This notion should not sound too surprising, as the 
connection between humanist and Reformation thought has long been 
acknowledged by studies in both fields. Delio Cantimori noted that in 
Pico*s writings one can retrieve several topics that will make an appearance 
in the radical reevaluation of the principles of theoretical speculation and 
civic life that informed the aspirations of Italian heretics in the sixteenth 
century.” Eugenio Garin and Cesare Vasoli have emphasized several times 
the irenic significance of the Oration, in which peace and concordia are not 
only meant in a moral and philosophical sense but also in an ecclesiastical 
and civic one.** 

According to Charles Lohr, “[alfter Pico, the history of metaphysics 
shifted from the problem of God to the problem of being. It is no accident 
that the Fifth Lateran Council determined not only the supremacy of the 
pope to the councils, but also the metaphysical demonstrability of man's 
immortality.”9 

In recent years, a number of important editions of previously unknown 
texts have appeared concerning Pico's Hebrew and Arabic sources. These 
newly available texts cast light both on the way Pico was operating as a 
scholar of biblical, theological, and philosophical literature and on his 
philological methodology. They show how Pico's reading of Hebrew and 
Arabic texts was scarcely based on his own linguistic skills but rather 
dependent on the knowledge of his tutors, such as the Jewish intellectuals 
Flavius Mithridates and R. Yohanan Alemanno. The importance of these 
texts derives from the fact that they demonstrate how Pico used them, as 

well as from the influence that they had on both his own scholarship and the 
intellectual climate of European culture. The studies by Michela Andreatta 
on Mithridates? Hebrew—Latin translation of the Commentary on the Song 
of Songs by Gersonides;?? by Giulio Busi, Saverio Campanini, and 
Giacomo Corazzol on Picos cabalistic library;?? by Fabrizio Lelli on 
Alemanno;*% and by Angelo Michele Piemontese and Benoít Grévin on 
Mithridates” and Picos Korans” bring to attention a great wealth of 
materials which will help to further contextualize Pico*s thought in the 
realm of religious pluralism. These materials still require extensive analysis 
but might end up providing historical and philosophical studies with a new 
image of Renaissance humanism. 

1 Gentile (1968; originally published in 1916). 
2 Cassirer (1942). 

3 See especially Garin (1937, 1950, 1963) but also Garin (1965, 1995). For 
the complex interpretation of Giovanni Pico provided by Garin, see Vasoli 
(2003). 

4 Kristeller (1965). 

5 Yates (2002, originally published in 1964). For some recent assessments 
of the “Yates thesis” concerned with the fundamental value attached by 
Renaissance thinkers to the Hermetic-magical tradition, see the introduction 
by J. B. Trapp to Yates (2002, xvii-xxvi), and Idel (2001, 2004). 

6 Zambelli (1995). See also Zambelli (1991, 251-327) and, for the 
hypothesis suggesting that the scientific revolution was promoted by, 
among other things, the Hermetic idea of man who is “magnum 
miraculum,” see Rossi (1974, first edition published in 1957). 

7 Copenhaver (2002a), but also Copenhaver (2002b). 

8 Di Napoli (1965), De Lubac (1974), Reinhardt (1989), Roulier (1989), 
Raspanti (1991), Euler (1998), Bori (2000), and Valcke (2005). Valcke has 
written a great deal on Pico, but this last volume seems to summarize his 
interpretation. 

9 For instance, while Reinhardt emphasizes the pre-modern character of 
Pico*s “systematic thought,” De Lubac sees him as a lay theologian who 
began but never completed the task of reconciling every human civilization 
with God through Christ. 

10 While overstated, Valcke?s point provides an idea of the magnitude of 
the issue. See Valcke (2005, 13-25). 

11 Bori (1998, 464). But see also Lohr (1988, 578-84) and Dougherty 
(2008, 124-32). 

12 See Bausi (1998a). 

13 “Concord” has to be preferred over the notion of “syncretism,” which is 
not part of the philosophical and theological dictionary of Pico and lacks 
specificity. Used in a broad sense, the term causes semantic confusion, as in 
Farmer (1998, ix-x, 18-29). 

14 Vasoli (1991, 114-17) and Vasoli (1985, 264), but also Purnell (1986). 
15 Beierwaltes (1985, 217-19). 

16 See Euler (1998, 226-28). 

17 Schmitt (1965, 305). 

18 Purnell (1986, 397-98). 

19 Purnell (1986, 398, 400). On prisca theologia, see Schmitt (1970) and 
Walker (1972). 

20 Purnell (1986, 402) and Mahoney (2004, 10-13). 

21 Purnell (1986, 408-15). On Henry Bate and his Speculum, see Nardi 
(1945, 173-79), Gregory (1961), and Bate (1960, xiti-xxviii, but also 
xxxvi-xxxvii on Pico?s manuscript containing Henry Bate*s Speculum). On 
Pletho's De differentiis, see Kristeller (1972, 86-109), Monfasani (1976, 
201-29), Hankins (1990, 193-208), and Monfasani (2002). This treatise, 
written in Greek, although mostly known by its Latin title, is the summary 
of a series of lectures given by Pletho in 1439 while a member of the Greek 
delegation to the Council of Florence. 

22 Bori (1998, 464), but also Bori (2000, 85-94). 

23 In the writings of Eugenio Garin, this notion has always been present, 
perhaps even central. At times, concordia is referred to as a Renaissance 
topos; see Hankins (1990, 64n79), who remarks that a forceful defence of 
philosophical “concord” was widespread among Renaissance humanists. 

24 On the comparatio tradition, see Purnell (1971). 
25 Sudduth (2008, 72-73). 
26 Sudduth (2008, 74—75). 

27 Roulier (1989), Toussaint (1995), and Bori (1998, 2000). On 
“historical” and “meta-historical” perspectives, see Borghesi (2003, 101—7). 

28 See Dupuis (1997, 386-87). But see also Dupuis (2001, 15-35) 
regarding the debates raised by Dupuis (1997), and Ruggieri (2007) for a 
recent assessment of the challenges that Christian theology is facing in an 
age of diversity and radical pluralism of cultures, religions, and values. 

29 I am grateful to Dino Buzzetti, with whom 1 had several conversations 
that were of great help in better understanding the theoretical aspects of 
these matters. 

30 Bausi's is the Latin critical text that is used in this edition. 
31 Pico (2003, xi). 
32 Pico (2003, xv). 

33 Cantimori (1939, 4): “negli scritti [...] di Pico della Mirandola si poteva 
raccogliere piú di un motivo atto a essere svolto nel senso di quella radicale 
rielaborazione dei principí della vita sociale e dei presupposti speculativi, 
filosofici come teologici, di essi, che era 1'aspirazione degli eretici italiani, 
e che informa di sé tutte le loro dottrine.” But see also Cantimori (1975, 
145): “Dapprima e un'aspirazione. Per il Quattrocento italiano, e per gli 
uomini che vivono negli anni precedenti il sacco di Roma, la riforma 
religiosa e una grande speranza che si formula istituzionalmente nelle 
critiche del Valla, ma soprattutto filosoficamente nello sforzo del Ficino per 
creare una nuova dottrina apologetica del cristianesimo [...]. Questa 
aspirazione trova la sua espressione piú viva e immediata nelle fervide 
speranze destate dal Concilio lateranense del 1512; ma la sua soddisfazione 
piena nello spiritualismo cristiano di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, che 
assieme al pensiero del Ficino costituisce la sostanza delle idee e delle 
suggestioni diffuse in tutta Europa da [...] Erasmo da Rotterdam.” This 
previously unpublished paper by Cantimori was written in 1938. For Pico*s 
influence on Huldrych Zwingli, see Schindler (1996). 

34 See, for instance, Garin (1952b, 137-39) and Vasoli (1985). Vasoli's 
remarks are highlighted by Bori (2000, 80-81). See also Garin (1966, 474): 
“Il rinnovamento savonaroliano era un rinnovamento morale e politico, con 
preoccupazioni sociali, collocato in un'ampia prospettiva religiosa; quello 
auspicato da Pico era totale, investiva tutta la vita dell'uomo, tutta la societa 
umana, anche se si esprimeva soprattutto in termini intellettuali, anzi 
filosofici. Savonarola, quando lo tentera, limitera il suo esperimento a 

Firenze, pur presentandola come la nuova Gerusalemme; Pico sogna un 
messaggio universale, un apostolato irenico tra tutti gli uomini.” 

35 Lohr (1988, 584). On religious reform, in a different but converging 
perspective, see Bori (2007), to be read with Bori (2008). 

36 Andreatta (2008) and Gersonide (2009). 

37 Respectively, Mithridates (2004), Mithridates (2005), and Recanati 
(2008). See also Corazzol (2012). 

38 Lelli (1994, 1997) and Alemanno (1995). But see also Genazzano 
(2002). 

39 Piemontese (1996, 2008) and Grévin (2008 and 2012). See also 
Piemontese (2012), in which the author identifies the Abdala Sarracenus 
mentioned at the beginning of Pico's Oration as *Abd-Alláh b. al Tamir, 
head of the Christian community of Nagran (Yemen) and famous in 
medieval Islamic literature because of his martyrdom in 523 AD. 1 wish to 
thank Mauro Perani and Giacomo Corazzol for providing me with the 
abovementioned 2012 papers presented at the second international 
conference on Flavius Mithridates in 2008 before the publication of the 
proceedings. 

Overview of the Text 

881-23 (Francesco Borghesi and Massimo Riva) 

The opening section of the Oration contains what could be called the 
original myth of humanism: the praise of man as a unique being, at the 
boundaries of the natural (earthly) and the supernatural (heavenly) realms. 
Pico begins his address by quoting an unidentified Arabic source in which 
he has read how a certain Abdallah (*Abd-Alláh = servant of God) praises 
man as the most wondrous creature on all the “world's stage” (81).? He 
finds the same praise in a famous Hermetic text (Asclepius) that had 
recently been translated into Latin by Marsilio Ficino.? Yet Pico is 
dissatisfied with these commonplaces regarding man's supremacy in 
creation that he finds in biblical and other religious and philosophical 
traditions (he also mentions the Chaldean “oracles” or Persian “magi”) as 
well as in the recent humanistic literature praising the dignity of man (e.g., 
Fazio, Manetti): man as “king of the creatures beneath him,” “poco minore 
che gli angeli” (“a little less than angels,” as Dante says,? quoting, like 
Pico, Ps. 8:6); man as microcosm, copula or hymeneum mundi (a link and 
an intermediary among creatures), “the midpoint between fixed eternity and 
fleeting time [...] (as the Persians say)” (83). 

To understand the truth of the human condition (“a condition to be envied 
not only by beasts but even by the stars and the intelligences dwelling 
beyond this world,” 86), says Pico, one must resort to the story of Creation. 
However, in his retelling of Genesis (which informs the entire structure of 
the first part of the Oration) Pico distances himself from traditional 
versions. His establishing “scene” is based not only on biblical sources but 
also on Platos Symposium and Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite's De 
mystica theologia (which Pico read in Ficino*s translation). In short, his 
staging conflates three garden images into one: the Garden of Eden (Gen. 
2), the garden of Zeus (from the Symposium), and the paradise of angels 

(from Dionysius).* From the Bible comes the sequence of creative acts that 
puts Adam at the centre of an already completed Creation, although the 
creative process is inverted. Picos account begins in the heavens and 
moves downward toward earthly things (a sort of ontological degradation 
reminiscent of Neoplatonic doctrines): God first created the supercelestial 
sphere, then the moving stars, the animals on earth, and, last of all, the 
human being, created in order to ponder “the meaning of such a magnificent 
achievement, to love its beauty and to marvel at its vastness” ($12).” The 
scene of God's speech to man is also based on the Bible, although its 
content is remarkably different: there is no prohibition against approaching 
the Tree of Life but an invitation to direct knowledge, desire, and one's 
whole being toward the highest goal, “to be reborn into the higher orders, 
those that are divine” (823). This transcendental goal — not simply 
obedience to God's commandments — is man's true vocation. (One may 
well detect here a positive reference to Gen. 3:21: “Behold Adam is become 
as one of us, knowing good and evil.”) The theme of the image of man is 
again based on the Bible, yet according to Pico man is not created in God's 
likeness but is opus indiscretae imaginis, the work of indeterminate image 
(a term not necessarily to be interpreted as the equivalent of nature), “so 
that [he] may, as the free and extraordinary shaper of [him]self, fashion 
[him]self in whatever form [he] prefer[s]” (822). This is a leitmotif that will 
be developed in the section immediately following (8813-23). 

Pico takes this stance not only in order to exalt man's free will, flexibility, 
and perfectibility but also, and especially, in order to argue that the ultimate 
goal of man is the attainment of a reality that transcends every image, so 
that humans become in effect the image of a nonimage. As a result, the 
biblical idea of man's dominion over all creatures — the very idea that was 
so important, by contrast, in Giannozzo Manetti's De dignitate et 
excellentia hominis and for Marsilio Ficino (in whose work Giovanni 
Gentile saw the first conception of regnum hominis: “the kingdom of 
man”?) — has here but a secondary role. The main justification for human 
dignity and excellence is not horizontal primacy but vertical tension.” We 
could say then that the dignity of man consists of the mystical vocation of 
the human being, as a creature of indeterminate image, to transcend all 
states (vegetal, animal, rational, intellectual) and to become one with the 

divinity that is beyond representation (Plotinus, Enneads 6.9, 8.20). We can 
detect here a polemical note aimed at Ficino*s Theologia Platonica (1482), 
with its insistence on the idea of human dignity as identified with the 
immortality of the soul, in its intermediate position between the body and 
“Quality” on the one hand and angels and God on the other? Pico's 
emphasis is different: man's freedom must fulfil itself through 
transcendental tension, with a dynamism not present in the static condition 
of the biblical Paradise, a dynamism that Pico finds instead in another 
garden. 

While the presence of the myth of Epimetheus (from Platos Protagoras 
321) has been noted, it is remarkable that such a fundamental influence as 
the Symposium (interpreted by Ficino in his De amore and by Pico in his 
Commento in the same fateful year of 1486) has not yet been analyzed in 
depth. And yet, in the Oration, as in the Symposium, we find Eros and 
Adam celebrated not for their present excellence but for a sort of 
intermediate and imperfect condition, “neither of heaven nor of earth, 
neither mortal nor immortal” (literally stated in both the Symposium and the 
Oration 822). Precisely as a “medium” (Oration), or as a “metaxu” 
(Symposium), the human creature may, if so inclined, reach the supreme 
reality through the love of knowledge and wisdom. The Symposium account 
is well known: Eros was conceived in the garden of Zeus by Póros 
(resource) and Penía (poverty) the day Aphrodite was born. Eros receives 
his imperfect nature from this intermediate position between ignorance and 
knowledge, and from his constant search for the latter (Symposium 203d— 
204c). Both in the Oration and in the Symposium, therefore, we find: (a) a 
character — man and Eros, respectively — praised for his potential capacity 
to reach the highest ends; (b) someone who is in an intermediate condition, 
neither mortal nor immortal, neither of the earth nor of the heavens 
(Symposium 203€); (c) someone placed in mundi meditullio (“in the middle 
of the world”), capable of reaching, through the love of knowledge, the 
supreme reality (Symposium 202d); (d) the primacy of love, desire, and the 
will as the final essence of the human being, while the intellectual element 
is not opposed to but a part of spiritual development, supported by the 
dynamics of desire (and here we note a parallelism between the ascent 
described at the end of Diotima's speech in the Symposium and the exit 

from the cave described in Plato's Republic 7).? This direct Platonic source 
alone is nevertheless insufficient to explain the particular attributes and 
articulation of this vertical tension. Pico relies on an additional model, that 
of the three-stage mystical ascension (purgation, illumination, perfection) 
set forth by Proclus and, most importantly, by the Neoplatonic Pseudo- 
Dionysius the Areopagite. Because Pico, along with his contemporaries, 
still believed Dionysius had been converted by Paul at the Areopagus (the 
source of the enormous reverence for Dionysius throughout the Middle 
Ages), he faithfully accepted Dionysius*s explanation of the mystical ascent 
in terms of the vertical movement that Paul describes instead of as forward 
spiritual tension (Phil. 3:13: the so-called epektasis) or “running” (1 Cor. 
9:24ff.). In the majestic opening of the Oration, we may detect as well the 
presence of Plotinus, taken both directly and through Marsilio Ficino. In his 
Commentary on Plato's Symposium (6.7),1% Ficino provided a detailed 
exegesis of Eros”s birth, which occurred on the same day that Venus was 
born. In Pico's Commentary on a Love Song by Girolamo Benivieni, we 
find an entire section (2.13) in which he speaks “Del nascimento di Amore 
e quello che si intende per li orti di Giove, per Poro e per Penia e per i natali 
di Venere” (“Of the birth of Love and what is meant by the gardens of Jove, 
by Póros, by Penía and by Venus's birthday,” translation ours).*! In short, 
we may conclude that in the opening scene of the Oration, the son of Póros 
and Penía, Eros, coalesces entirely with the creature made of earth and 
spirit, Adam, a being without archetype, an image of his own. His itinerary 
will consequently take Eros-Adam through every image, beyond all images, 
finding fulfilment only in the final identity with Him Who, being the source 
of all images, dwells in obscurity.*? 

How is it possible to reach such a fulfilment? One suggestion comes from 
Pico*s portrayal of the angelic court; that is, the third garden (based on 
Pseudo-Dionysius's De mystica theologia). Man's task lies precisely in the 
emulation of the angels and in what they represent: the thrones, more 
distant from God, represent peaceful action and judicious discipline; the 
cherubim symbolize contemplation through dialectics and philosophy; and 
the seraphim, the nearest to the Godhead, represent unity with God through 
love. In this perspective, philosophy achieves its supreme meaning, and the 
Oration becomes a justification of philosophy as the intermediate stage — 

the “cherubic stage” — of the mystical process. In sum, a careful reading of 
the opening section of the Oration suggests that man's vocation, according 
to Pico, is a mystical one that must be realized through a threefold path that 
necessarily comprises moral transformation, intellectual inquiry, and a final 
perfection in the union with absolute reality. This paradigm is universal; it 
can be found in every tradition. Such a conclusion can be confirmed and 
illustrated by carefully examining Pico?s treatment of his disparate sources 
and by pointing out the significant twists to which they are sometimes 
subjected in order to make them compatible with his particular intentions. It 
is essential, therefore, to place in the foreground the very foundations that 
support Picos thought in the Oration rather than concentrating on the 
innumerable authorities from each tradition to whom he makes reference or 
on the myriad other quotations, allusions, and mythological images with 
which he adorns his speech. 

8824-50 (Massimo Riva) 

Pico begins this portion of the Oration with emphatic praise for God's 
“liberality” in the creation of man. Man's happiness depends on God's 
generosity, and the emblematic sign of God's supreme benevolence toward 
His creature is the creative freedom that He bestowed upon the human 
being: the freedom to obtain what one wishes and to become what one 
wants. As Pier Cesare Bori underlines in his commentary on the previous 
sections, this dual emphasis on desire and free will is crucial for Pico, who 
clearly moves beyond the Ciceronian tradition of gubernare terrena (“the 
governing of earthly affairs”), a concept that was central to the civic 
thought of the first half of the fifteenth century, toward a theological- 
metaphysical horizon. However, this horizon is deeply rooted in the 
anthropological tradition of Florentine humanism (from Petrarch to 
Manetti).** Human beings must make the most of God's gifts by freely 
developing the divine seeds planted in them. This is an idea of great 
suggestive power if translated (albeit anachronistically) into our 
contemporary context, in which ideas about “intelligent design” and the 
human capacity (and responsibility) to manipulate “the seeds” of nature are 
hotly debated. 

Metamorphosis is the master metaphor of this whole section of the 
Oration: the freedom to change ourselves and to shape our own ontological 
destiny is an intrinsic and essential quality (dignity and potentiality) of 
human beings, so much so that we are distinguished and defined, among all 
creatures (including angels), by our lack of a precise and limiting image or 
identity. As a direct consequence of our freedom, however, we may resign 
ourselves to existing in a vegetative state (like plants), degrade ourselves to 
the behaviour of animals, or elevate ourselves to the point of transcending 
our human condition and reaching for the heavens, provided that we 
exercise in full our active intellect, which for Pico is superior to individual 
reason. Reaching for the heavens means becoming like angels and true 
“sons of God” (829). Yet, as Pico seems to suggest, an even higher and 
exquisitely human goal can be achieved: mystical inspiration is easily 
detectable in this hymn-like and visionary crescendo designed to set the 
(lofty, if not hyperbolic) tone of the debate with the pope”s theologians over 
his Conclusiones, his ambitious attempt at reconciling all ancient 
theological and philosophical traditions in a common path toward wisdom, 
or better, toward an active knowledge of the divine within us. 

Here, in this segment of the Oration, Pico is trying to communicate to his 
intended audience his own deeply felt enthusiasm, his own vision and 
comprehension of the divine as a transformative, metamorphic power, 
directed both outward and inward.'* To this end, he adopts a highly 
metaphorical language, borrowing from a variety of sources, in order to 
convey their common, fundamental message, which coincides with the 
inner spirit of his enterprise. In short, Pico delves into the various fragments 
of a prisca theologia, including his biblical exegesis (Heptaplus and 
Expositiones in Psalmos), guided by the intent to reconnect the mysteries 
and hidden truths scattered throughout them, always aiming at a spiritual 
interpretation of sacred or pagan texts through their literal, allegorical, 
moral, and anagogical meanings.!” In the Apology (1487), Pico compares 
these four levels, in the Christian way of reading and explaining the 
Scriptures, with the Hebrew [sic] Pesat (literal meaning), Midrash 
(allegorical meaning), Sechel (tropological meaning), and Cabala 
(anagogical meaning), thus confirming that this procedure informed his 
approach to different textual traditions.*'? An ambivalent, exegetic, and 

esoteric aim therefore informs his reading strategy and his references to his 
various (reliable or unreliable) sources, all culminating in the anagogical (or 
cabalistic) meaning, the spiritual goal of man, or how man can become one 
with God.?” 

As noted, a fundamental source for the Oration as a whole is Pseudo- 
Dionysius the Areopagite's De mystica theologia (read through Marsilio 
Ficino). In the first section of this work (1.1), the author describes the 
condition of one who faces God sine interprete (“without intermediary”) 
(Garin 1972, 239). We can say that Pico puts himself in the same position; 
adopting Dionysius's imagery, based in turn on several passages from 
Scripture, he speaks of “darkness” as a divine attribute (like the night of 
Orphic mysteries and the Ein Soph of the Cabala)*? and “blindness” as the 
necessary, paradoxical medium of human knowledge of the divine, a 
“seeing that consists in not seeing.” This paradoxical imagery returns also 
in Picos Neoplatonic sonnets, written in the same years, along with his 
commentary on Girolamo Benivieni's Love Song, a text in which Pico 
strives to embrace the true and full meaning of Eros.!” 

The changing nature of man (Eros and Adam) as an emanation of God's 
creative gift is illustrated in the simile of the chameleon, perhaps the most 
famous and enduring image used by Pico in the Oration. Aristotle used the 
simile of the chameleon in his Nicomachean Ethics, where he spoke of 
happiness as the product of perfect virtue and an accomplished life, 
measured against the instability of man's “fortunes.” While Aristotle uses 
the term in a negative sense, pointing to the instability of the human 
condition, Pico positively emphasizes the transformative nature of the 
human being.*” Closely related to, in fact coupled with, the image of the 
chameleon is the reference to Proteus. Taken together, these terms illustrate 
the central idea of this segment of the Oration, the Protean capacity of 
human beings to fashion themselves as they please. This idea must be 
understood in the light of Pico”s appropriation (through Ficino) of another 
textual tradition, the Hermetic. “The form of humankind is multiform and 
various...,” we read in Asclepius.?* To add another layer to this already 
complex web of references, in Picos Conclusions on the Ways of 
Interpreting Orpheus? Hymns According to Magic, we find the following 

aphorism (n28): “He who cannot attract Pan approaches Proteus in vain.”?? 

Edgar Wind explains this obscure passage as follows: “Mutability, 
according to Pico, is the secret door through which the universal invades the 
particular. Hence Proteus transforms himself continuously because Pan 
[A11] is within him.”?* This enigma seems to describe the unique situation 
of the human being in relation to the divine. As a chameleon and a Proteus, 
capable of changing shape (the Latin word is effingere) as well as imitating 
all images and forms, assuming all “names,” the human being is thus 
effectively an agent of the imageless God: his “demiurgic” (or magical) 
abilities reflect a degree of free will and free choice, which is, as we have 
seen, God's supreme gift to man.?* Commenting on this passage, Wind thus 
qualifies Picos radical mysticism: “This doctrine provides a convincing 
mystical justification for an eminently rational mental state.” Again, we 
are faced with the fundamental ambivalence of Picos philosophical 
mysticism, which quite possibly provides a reason for our modern 
fascination with his thought. 

What follows is one of the most enigmatic passages of the Oration, full 
of intricate references to biblical (albeit apocryphal) and cabalistic sources 
that address the angelic metamorphosis of Enoch-Metatron. Second- and 
third-century Church Fathers such as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origen, and 
Clement of Alexandria all make reference to the Book of Enoch. Though it 
is difficult to say precisely to which text or texts Pico refers here, his 
library, acquired after his death by Cardinal Grimani and later dispersed, 
was rich in cabalistic works in Hebrew, many sine titulo and some simply 
forgeries (see both Kibre?s and 'Tamani's reconstructions). Yet at least one 
important reference can be identified: in the commentary of Abraham 
Abulafia (Pico?s major cabalistic source) to Maimonides” Moreh Nevuchim 
(Dalalat al-há“irinn, The Guide of the Perplexed), entitled Sitre Torah (The 
Secrets of the Law) and included in both Kibre?s and Tamani's lists, we 
read, “And they say that Enoch is Metatron and so says lonethes Chaldeus 
[...]” (translation mine).?* 

In the Third Book of Enoch, or Book of Enoch of the mystics of the 
Merkabah (chariot or throne of God), the elevation of Enoch has two 
versions. In the second of these versions, Enoch is “taken with the 

Shekhinah” and “transfigured” as Metatron (“Methathronius”; i.e., he who 
is next to the throne of God, according to the prevailing, yet probably 
inaccurate, Greek etymology). After a devout life on earth, Enoch was 
elevated to the rank of the first angels and Sar ha-panim (literally “prince of 
the divine visage,” or divine presence or countenance). Shekhinah, 
originally the female manifestation of God in man, is often identified with 
the Holy Ghost and the Epinoia, the feminine manifestation of God's mind, 
of which the Gnostic Valentinus spoke.?” This intricate constellation of 
possible cabalistic (and Gnostic) references, not precisely identifiable with 
a direct quotation of the Ethiopic (Third) Book of Enoch, hints at the 
complexity of Picos angelology, as articulated in the Oration and the 
Conclusiones.“ Here too, as Wirszubski first suggested, we find the 
(missing) term Metatron in the Conclusions according to Themistius 
(1.19.2): “I believe that the active intellect that in Themistius is only 
illuminating is the same as Metatron in the cabala” (translation mine). It 
also appears in the Cabalistic Conclusions Confirming the Christian 
Religion 2.11.10: “That which among the cabalists is called [INUDN] 
Metatron is without doubt that which is called Pallas by Orpheus, the 
paternal mind by Zoroaster, the son of God by Mercury, wisdom by 
Pythagoras, the intelligible sphere by Parmenides” (Farmer, trans., 1998, 
525). All these symbols, according to Farmer, would syncretically refer “to 
the intellectual nature of the angelic mind” (Farmer 1998, 70). 

Yet, in its formulation in the Oration, this supreme synthesis has the 
quality of a vision rather than a detached philosophical conclusion, 
informed as it is by a profound aspiration to a transcendental unity of all 
symbolic knowledge (the only knowledge of the divine allowed to man).?? 
Again, mystical and intellectual, spiritual and rational (or magical) 
meanings are inseparable in Pico's words, which is precisely what creates 
the suggestive nature of this text and gives the reader and the interpreter a 
choice: either follow Pico in his mystical flight (reshaping man into angel 
or pure spirit) or patiently try to extract the inner kernel of philosophical 
(intellectual) wisdom from the ancients? most mysterious messages through 
the painstaking recomposition of its scattered sources.*% 

Next, we return to what we may Call Picos pre-modern (pre- 
evolutionistic) idea of a dynamic unity of all living things, earthly and 
celestial. It is the vision articulated by Pythagoras at the end of Ovid's 
Metamorphoses (15.160 ff.): “omnia mutantur, nihil interit...” (“all things 
are changing; nothing dies...”).2 Pico's thought seems inspired by the 
Pythagorean idea of transmigration: man as a microcosm, containing in 
himself the seeds and stages of all creation. This idea can also be found, 
with differing nuances, in many of the traditions he quotes, but it acquires 
new shades of meaning in his writings. The operations of the soul, its ascent 
or descent through the various stages and realms of the cosmos, can be 
envisioned from multiple points of view, including the practical theology of 
the Cabala (or the doctrine of the sefirot). The ambivalent tension inherent 
in the unity of body and soul, leading “upward” or “downward,” is directly 
linked to the concept of man as a microcosm, a mirror of the whole of 
creation, and therefore capable of imagining, transforming, and reshaping 
(effingere) himself in the image of all other creatures (beasts or angels). 
Particularly effective is Picos iterative and emphatic use of three almost 
synonymous terms in order to articulate man's specific and unique 
capability. The most interesting of these terms is effingere, from ex fingere, 
which has two fundamental meanings: (a) to form, to procreate with artifice 
(found in Tacitus, Pliny, Tertullian, and others); and (b) to imitate or 
imagine (again found in Tertullian). This dual semantic value, linked as it is 
to both a practical (magic?) and an imaginative (theoretical) meaning, sums 
up Pico”s multilayered idea of man's creativity. 

Again, this definition of a human being can be found at the core of all 
religious-philosophical traditions (prisca theologia), all confirming, in the 
eyes of Pico, the biblical narrative of Genesis, including the suras of 
Muhammad (the Qur'an) and the so-called Chaldean Oracles. In the latter, 
Pico supposedly found the adage that “Man is by nature diverse, multiform 
and inconstant” (19 9 1911 N97NNI TTAI IN YN YA0N IN 1 WINA), a 
sentence absent from the editio princeps but present in the Palatino 
manuscript, and, according to Wirszubski, possibly written in a mixture of 
Hebrew and Aramaic, in Ethiopic script (Wirszubski 1989, 241-44). 
According to Farmer, it was taken by Pico from a version of the Oracles 
provided to him by Flavius Mithridates and was most likely a forgery 

(Farmer 1998, 146, 344-45). Whatever the source, the important question 
for modern readers remains: are these words to be understood for their 
moral and spiritual meaning (like Picos implicit reference to the 
Pythagorean doctrine of metempsychosis), or are they the foundation of a 
different view of humanity, justified by effectively positioning the human 
being at the top of creation (summing up in himself all its various realms 
and creatures)? 

The imaginative and transformative power of the human being may be a 
source of spiritual transcendence (emulating the “dignity” of angels, 
“unwilling [...] to yield to them and unable to endure second place”); it can 
also be a source of narcissistic contemplation, or, even worse, “will to 
power” ante litteram. Many modern interpreters have indeed emphasized 
the latter subtexts. This ambiguity is implicit in a passing reference to the 
nature of demons that we find in the Palatino manuscript but is erased from 
the princeps: “If [man] cultivates his rational seeds, he will become a 
demon or a heavenly animal. If he cultivates his intellectual seeds, he will 
be an angel and a son of God.”** Interestingly enough, in his Platonic 
Theology 14.3, Ficino connects “the life of demons” to the contemplation of 
mathematics, the rational order of celestial bodies (with their astrological 
symbols). This seems to be Picos meaning as well, as though among the 
possibilities open to man there exists an imperfect metamorphosis into a 
celestial “demon,” provided he raises himself to the contemplation of the 
cosmos as the theatre of his metamorphosis, without reaching for a superior, 
intellectual, and spiritual dimension. 

In conclusion, man's lack of an image (or fixed identity) is both a 
prerogative and a liability: human dignity and freedom can be celebrated in 
one way (as gifts from God used to glorify God's creation) or the other (as 
the essence of our autonomous, self-fashioning being); that is, according to 
either religious or secularized principles. Yet in either case our freedom is 
insufficient and can even lead us astray if unaccompanied by the awareness 
of our responsibility, the unique privilege, and the burden of our peculiar 
mission to cultivate (in ourselves) all the seeds of creation: “Thus may we 
avoid abusing the most indulgent liberality of the Father by transforming 

the free choice He bestowed upon us from something beneficial to 
something harmful” (846). 

8851-102 (Michael Papio) 

In the first part of this section (8851-62), Pico moves toward an apparently 
more concrete plan of action as he continues his exhortation to men to fulfil 
their highest potential, the perfection of the self through the inspiration of 
the three highest classes of angels: the cherubim, seraphim, and thrones. In 
Picos representation of these angels, the thrones are judgment, the 
cherubim intelligence, and the seraphim love (854). This arrangement is 
Pseudo-Dionysian, as Pico himself tells us, but corresponds even more 
precisely to one of the standard interpretations of the Christian mystics. 
Some three hundred years before Pico, Bernard of Clairvaux (1976) had 
already laid out this same scheme with perfect clarity in his advice to Pope 
Eugenius III: 

Putemus Thronos alto etiam ab his evolasse recessu, qui ex eo quod 
sedent, Throni dicuntur; et ex eo sedent, quod sedit in eis Deus. Neque 
enim sedere in eis qui non sederent posset. Quaeris quid [al. quam] 
illam sentiam sessionem? Summam tranquillitatem, placidissimam 
serenitatem, pacem quae exsuperat omnem intellectum. Talis est qui 
sedet in Thronis Dominus sabaoth, judicans omnia cum tranquillitate, 
placidissimus, serenissimus, pacatissimus. Et tales sibi constituit 
Thronos, simillimos sibi. Putemus Cherubin ex ipso sapientiae fonte, 
ore Altissimi haurientes, et refundentes fluenta scientiae universis 
civibus suis. Et vide ne is sit, quem propheta loquebatur, “fluminis 
impetus laetificans civitatem Dei.” Putemus Seraphin, spiritus totos 
divino igne succensos, succendere universa, ut singuli cives singulae 
sint lucernae ardentes et lucentes; ardentes charitate, lucentes 
cognitione. (De consideratione 5.4, PL 182.792c-793b) 

[Let us suppose that the Thrones have ascended to recesses even 
higher than these, and that they are called Thrones because they are 
seated and they are seated because God is seated upon them. For he 

could not be seated upon those who are not seated. Do you ask what 1 
judge this sitting to be? Supreme tranquility, most placid serenity, 
peace which surpasses all understanding. Such is he, the Lord of 
Sabbaoth, who sits upon the Throne, judging all things with 
tranquility; he is the most placid, most serene, most peaceful. And he 
has established those as Thrones for himself which are most similar to 
him. Let us suppose the Cherubim drink from the very font of wisdom, 
the mouth of the Most High, and pour forth a stream of knowledge to 
all the citizens of heaven. And see if it is not this which the Prophet 
speaks of: “The stream of the river makes the city of God joyful.” Let 
us suppose the Seraphim, spirits totally enkindled with divine fire, 
enkindle all so that each citizen is a lamp burning and shining: burning 
with love, shining with knowledge. ] 

The parallelisms between Pico and Bernard are striking, but despite the 
close similarities it would be difficult to claim with confidence that Bernard 
is our author”s direct source. This sort of angelogical exegesis was present 
as well in other writers, such as Augustine (De trinitate 10.9), Gregory 
(Homilies on the Gospels 34.7, 10-14), Peter Lombard (Sententiae 2.9.2), 
and Bonaventure (Itinerarium mentis in Deum 4.4). What is certain, 
however, is that Pico made use of existing allegorical tropes in order to 
illustrate his own personal syncretic vision of the contemplative soul's 
ethical and erudite journey to God. Neatly woven into this already allusive 
fabric of Christian mysticism are strands of Neoplatonism, cabalistic 
symbolism, and ancient philosophy. Just as in Pico's references to the 
enigmatic Metatron, what may appear at first glance to be a haphazard 
combination of images is in effect a well-planned kaleidoscopic vision that 
joins the common with the exotic, the general with the specific. Just as 
elsewhere in the Oration, Pico here distils complex notions into their most 
essential emblems and combines them in such a way as to produce an 
intriguing composite that is just as suggestive as it is difficult to pin down. 
Such a technique would no doubt have been an extremely successful way to 
pique the interest of his intended audience. Among the most meaningful 
concepts he means to highlight in this segment of the Oration are the 
fundamental collaborative interaction of intellect, love (caritas), and 
wisdom; the inherent dignity in the individual's path to enlightenment; the 
omnipresent danger to one's spiritual well-being present both in the innate 

weakness of the soul and in the chaotic nature of the universe; the 
immeasurable importance of peace (pax philosophica); and the requisite 
epistemological steps for attaining theological solace. 

If we are to attain this ultimate goal, Pico explains, we must first learn 
God's ways or laws, a task we may accomplish by consulting those who 
have already experienced the direct vision of God. The examples he gives 
are Moses, who spent forty days in communion with God after the third 
month following the Exodus (Exod. 24:15-18), and Paul, who writes in his 
second letter to the Corinthians that he was raised up to heaven (2 Cor. 
12:2-4). We who yearn to follow their example and become fortified by 
God's justice must prepare our souls through love and the illumination of 
the intellect. The figure of the cherub is particularly important in this 
extended metaphor. The cherubim traditionally guard the Tree of Life in 
Eden”? (Gen. 3:24; cf. Ezek. 28:14, 16), stand alongside or support God's 
throne (Pss. 80:1, 99:1; Isa. 37:16), or serve as Yahweh's divine chariot (cf. 
the Ficinian reference to nectar in 898). They were also, as Pico naturally 
knew, a fundamental part of the tabernacle, the construction of which 
Moses oversaw (Heb. 9:5). In 2 Chron. 3:14, we read that they were 
depicted on the veil of the adytum (the Temple's innermost chamber), 
mentioned in 8101. However, Pico principally plays on the traditional 
Augustinian interpretation of cherubim as representing plenitudo scientiae 
(“a fullness of knowledge”), which is ultimately derived from Philo's gm 
yvooic kal gmotríun roMñ (“recognition and full knowledge”) and 
foreshadowed by Jerome's multitudo scientiae (“a wealth of knowledge”).** 
As such, they are an ideal role model for the contemplative man (859) 
insofar as the cherubim allow access to theological knowledge — and 
therefore to God — through love.** 

In cabalistic thought, moreover, the cherubim represent the mysterious 
union of the earthly with the heavenly. The cherubic image was used by the 
Psalmist in the celebration of David's thankfulness after being delivered 
from his enemies. In Pico's re-elaboration of the motif, man's greatest 
enemy is the darkness of ignorance (871). Augustine explains in his sermon 
on Psalm 17 that God, while flying above the cherubim, is 
incomprehensible to man; He is hidden in His dark waters and dark 

tabernacle (Ps. 17:11-12).2%% In order to attain illumination, one must 
nurture his faith, even in the absence of awareness (cf. Rom. 13:10; 2 Cor. 
5:7; and 863), until he has been given the gift of spiritual sight. If Pico”s use 
of the highest order of angels is less than elaborate here, one would do well 
to consider the rather more concrete explanation in his moral exposition on 
Psalm 17 (Raspanti in Pico 1997, 166-68). There we read that the thrones” 
steadfastness bolsters our resolve and aids us not to be chased away ex sede 
nostrae dignitatis (“from the seat of our dignity”). The cherubim are the 
plenitudo scientiarum (“fullness of the sciences”) (a pluralizing twist on 
Augustine that allows for more specificity, as we shall see), which helps us 
to avoid falling victim to the veri ignorantia (“ignorance of the truth”). 
Lastly, the seraphim, with the fire of love, completely purify our will and 
keep us from sinning through malice or improper choices. 

At the close of this portion of the Oration (8859-60), Pico makes specific 
references to God as moving/hovering/brooding above the waters of 
creation. Pico is here alluding to the “separation of the waters” (Gen. 1:7-—9) 
into the upper and the lower (cf. Exod. 20:4 and Ps. 148:4). The upper level, 
as he explains in the Heptaplus (see especially 3.3), is the supercelestial 
realm, associated with the cherubim (Hep., proem 2), the seraphim, and the 
thrones (Hep. 3.3).?7 The lower waters were originally the seven planets, 
which were collected together and brought forth the seas and the ocean 
whence, as the Chaldeans held, came the nutritive elements that give rise to 
growth and regeneration in plant and animal life (Hep. 2.3, 3.4). 
Metaphorically, they also come to stand for the sensual and sensory 
characteristics of man (Hep. 4.3). The waters over which the “Spirit of the 
Lord” flies here are the upper. This “Spiritus Domini” is in the Heptaplus 
synonymous with the Spirit of Love (Hep. 3.2) and with God's illumination 
of our intellect (Hep. 4.2, 5.1, and 6.2) as well as Creator of form (Hep. 
1.2).% In the Commento (2.17a), Pico mentions that the upper waters are 
the living fountain, which slakes man's thirst forever.% According to 
cabalistic teaching (e.g., Zohar 1.16a ff.), the light and the darkness of the 
first day were the “upper waters,” from which the “lower waters” were 
separated, thanks to the largely negative sefirah known as Geburah (Force, 
Left). Most important to our considerations here are the general concepts of 
“Superior” and “inferior.” Pico intends in these lines to associate the three 

highest angels with specific functions of the individual mind (intellection, 
love, and wisdom) and, at the same time, to underline their relationship to 
the original supernal forms of creation. God and His influences exist, above 
the upper waters, in a perfect state from which mortals, residents of the 
lower waters, may glean salvific inspiration. In order to reach the ultimate 
mystical union with the Godhead, we must strive to transform ourselves 
according to Its threefold revelation. 

The following sections (8863-72) contain a plan for our approach to the 
Godhead. One who wishes to realize his potential to reach a state of 
illumination (the second stage in Pseudo-Dionysius”s tripartite path: 870) 
must recognize his innate capacity to imitate the function of the cherub 
(871), which is the epitome of proper cognitive activity. By way of cherubic 
contemplation, the believer may then bring to fruition that link between 
love (the seraphim, Isa. 6) and justice or law (the thrones),* which Pico 
describes as the order of Pallas (8865-66) or, we may say, the intellectual 
nature that leads to wisdom, inasmuch as the Orphean Pallas is associated 
with Metatron (the intellectual nature of man).*! Here again the reader finds 
an appeal to the transcendent powers of philosophy, this time wrought with 
allusions to a later phase of Neoplatonic mystical thought. There is a long 
tradition of seeing the cherubim as ideal representatives of studied 
contemplation, especially among the Christian mystics of the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries;** hence the evocation of Moses (864), who is the 
contemplative exemplar of the acceptance of God's ways (i.e., laws and 
judgment), and, by extension, Paul ($69).4 Pico's use of these two figures, 
one from the Old Testament and one from the New, is in no way haphazard. 
Moses, as the author of the Pentateuch, was the most important prophet and 
the one who best exemplified the internalization of God's will; Paul, the 
principal single author of the New Testament, could be seen to be Moses”s 
anagogical double. Both succeeded in communing directly with God, and 
both sought to teach His ways to others. Indeed, the link between the two 
was made quite explicit as long ago as the works of Gregory of Nyssa. The 
mystical union of the soul with God is the responsibility of all who would 
be followers of Moses (8102). Just how this is implemented, however, has 
been the subject of numerous theological approaches. Pico returns through 
Paul to the Areopagite (870), whose insistence on the boundless 

significance of hierarchies is in perfect harmony with his own perception. 
“If one talks then of hierarchy,” Pseudo-Dionysius writes, “what is meant is 
a certain perfect arrangement, an image of the beauty of God which 
sacredly works out the mysteries of its own enlightenment in the orders and 
levels of understanding of the hierarchy, and which is likened toward its 
own sources as much as is permitted” (Pseudo-Dionysius 1987, Celestial 
Hierarchy 165b-<). 

Pico responded with great enthusiasm both to the notion that the role of 
the supernal angels was to assist man in his ambitious struggle for 
perfection and to the similarities between this hierarchy and the rather more 
detailed chain of being, or gradation of emanations, that is of such profound 
meaning in the cabalistic texts. Dionysius”s practical implementation of this 
threefold way (Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 536d-37a), however, is rather less 
inspiring than Pico's. In 8871-72, one of the most thought-provoking 
sections of the Oration, Pico overlays on Dionysius”s threefold path a 
surprisingly less mystical process than one might expect: dialectics is 
related to purification, natural philosophy to illumination, and theology to 
perfection. Whereas previous generations had hotly debated the role of 
dialectics (one need only think of the antagonistic relationship between 
Abelard's dialectics and Bernard of Clairvaux?s mysticism), Pico 
syncretically embraces the best of the Logica antiqua and Logica 
modernorum. Indeed, Abelard*s willingness to consider seriously the truths 
present in non-Christian traditions is embraced in the Oration alongside the 
mystical tendencies of the Cistercians and the Franciscans.** What emerges 
is a mode of thought that seems to succeed in blending Neoplatonism and 
Aristotelian Scholasticism quite productively ($890-93). One of the most 
remarkable aspects of Pico's system lies in its openness both to Aristotelian 
concepts, such as those of Aquinas or Duns Scotus, while simultaneously 
admitting Augustinian ideas, such as those of Bonaventure or Henry of 
Ghent. Dialectics, Pico promises, will cut through sophistic reasoning, and 
natural philosophy will provide all the knowledge required to begin the 
process of theological enlightenment. Just how the mechanisms of 
intellectual cognition were to play out and whether this theology was based 
on reason or revelation remained to be seen, we must imagine, during the 
great debate. One could well argue that this superposition on Dionysius of 
dialectics and natural philosophy privileged the Aristotelians or, on account 

of the conflict between the plurality of divine ideas and the unity of divine 
essence, put Pico uncomfortably close to Averroes”s theories on the “unity 
of intellect”;* however, there is more than enough space here in the 
passage from illumination to perfection to fit in any number of ideas from 
Proclus or Ficino.** We may come to an even fuller appreciation of this 
strategy by considering Conclusiones 2.11.66, in which (despite an unclear 
order) Pico lists the sefirot as he adapted them to the soul: the first is 
associated with unity; the second with intellect; the third with reason. Such 
a representation appears to suggest the following relationships: unity- 
perfection-theology-thrones; intellect-illumination-natural philosophy- 
cherubim; reason-purification-dialectics-seraphim. Clearly, something is 
missing. Even if we were to assign Pico”s fourth sefirah (“superior sensual 
passion”) to the seraphim and move the first sefirah to the level of God, this 
scheme would still be less than convincing.* What he loses in 
inconsistency of rigid epistemological systems, however, he makes up for 
with flexible allegory (“per figuram””). 

Sections 73-82 recall for the reader the multifaceted allegorical figure of 
Jacob's ladder (Gen. 28:11-17), here employed by Pico as a logical 
metaphor for our way to God. The ladder is an image long embraced in the 
readings of Pico's entire audience, from Hebrew midrashim and cabalistic 
treatises on the Tree of Life to Christian mystical texts and Islamic accounts 
of the Night of the Mi'ráj. Access to this path, however, is restricted to 
those who are “pure” and “prepared.” Purification and preparation signify 
respectively the absolute renunciation of earthly desires and the assiduous 
pursuit of intellectual and spiritual readiness for the soul. But how may we 
approach the ladder? The feet of the unenlightened are sullied by base 
sensual desires, and his hands are stained with self-serving destructive 
aggression (8875-77). Once the hands and feet are washed clean by moral 
philosophy, they are transformed from hindrances to advantages.“ The 
potential cleansing or redemption of desire was explained by Pico himself 
in his Commento on the fifth stanza. What is most important to note in this 
imagery is that God has given us the tools to use our innate affective and 
intellectual powers so that we may ascend, rather than descend, the ladder 
that leads up to the supernal essence ($66). This ladder, for someone like 
Pico, who so profoundly appreciates the allegory of hierarchy (and the 

hierarchy of allegory), may be variously interpreted. It might stand for the 
soul's participation in the gradations of creation just as well as for the 
orderly progression of its perfection.*“ Just as in Genesis (28:12-13), and as 
in Dante*s Paradiso (22.61—75) for that matter, the ladder is highly specific 
ad litteram but amply inclusive ad allegoriam. What emerges with the 
greatest clarity in this discussion is the notion that downward movement 
along the ladder?s rungs leads to chaos, and upward movement to unity 
($82). The dismemberment of Osiris suggests the centrifugal powers of 
strife, whereas the Apollonian unifying force would stand for the capacity 
of well-directed love to draw the soul upward toward God. 

Sections 83-97 are dedicated to the preparation of the soul and, once 
perfected, to its union with God. Pico's references to the inherently 
troublesome nature of lived existence (8887-89) are thematically very 
appropriate to the imagery he has just reproduced from Genesis, including 
the presence of the cherubim, and to the appearance here in the text of Job. 
If Jacob*s ladder is primarily illustrative of the righteous use of the sensual 
appetite (the spectrum that runs from luxuria to caritas), Job*s identification 
of God's heavenly peace surely addresses the proper use of our intellectual 
and active faculties. Empedocles, then, is very well suited to an “exegesis” 
of Job, insofar as the spectrum that complements the one just mentioned 
would run from strife to friendship. “Friendship” in this context should be 
understood both as a form of caritas and as the general force of harmonious 
attraction (much discussed by Empedocles and analyzed by Aristotle [Met. 
985a20-30]), which, in Pico, translates into that energy which encourages 
the soul toward its union with God. The soul, which has a natural faculty 
for friendship (1 Sam. 18:1), is always drawn upward toward the highest 
good, which is in itself tranquil and peaceful. It may profitably be noted at 
this point that, according to the cabalistic interpretation of the cosmogony 
of Genesis, great discord arose between Hesed (Mercy) and Geburah 
(Force) upon the separation of the upper and lower waters, and the conflict 
was quelled by the establishment of the firmament between them (e.g., 
Zohar 1.17a-18a). Moses drew on the story of this conflict to make peace 
between Korah and Aaron when the two came to blows over the latter”s 
monopoly of the Levite priesthood (Num. 16-17). Lasting peace was 
established only after wrath was transformed into love. Essential in this 
process is the notion of Peace, or spiritual tranquillity, whose attainment is 

prerequisite to the defeat of the inner desires and earthly appetites that 
contaminate our soul. This spiritual calm, produced not only through 
dialectics and natural philosophy but especially through the study of 
theology, is the loftiest goal of each individual and should be desired both 
for oneself and for all mankind. This is the Pythagorean “friendship” that 
characterizes the beginning and the end, the return of the soul from its 
mortal exile.”% Once the soul is purified and prepared, Pico explains, it will 
ascend to the heavens and, like a bride, be wedded to God. The sensuality 
of 8893-97 obviously derives in great measure from the Song of Songs, 
which was highly influential both to the Christian mystical tradition and to 
cabalistic interpretation. Pico unites the sponsa Christi of the former with 
the Shekhinah of the latter to form an image easily recognizable by those 
familiar with either motif. Ultimately, the successful bride-soul releases its 
grip on mortality and consigns itself to wondrous death: “Let us also, 
therefore, choose this kind of death, as also the Apostle says, that “we may 
die to sin, but live to God”” (Origen 1982, 172-73, Eleventh Homily on 
Genesis, quoting Rom. 6:10).?! 

In 8898-102, Pico extends the metaphorical image of the soul's path of 
enlightenment to the biblical descriptions of the tabernacle that Moses had 
built in the wilderness as a place of worship for the Israelites (Exod. 26:27, 
35-38). Like the ladder, the tabernacle is another of the most enduring 
symbols of the contemplative”s path to enlightenment; it had been used for 
centuries to illustrate the progress of the soul and/or the mind toward its 
ultimate goal.?? Richard of St. Victor devoted an immense amount of 
energy to the application of this analogy in his De arca mystica, and by the 
time we reach Bonaventure, the imagery seems to be quite taken for granted 
(Itinerarium mentis in Deum 3.1 and 5.1). The Zohar speaks of an upper 
and a lower Tabernacle (cf. 2.130a, 2.159a, 234b, 239b-240a, 3.114b), 
associating the former with the Tabernacle of Metatron, which symbolizes 
the Shekhinah, and the latter with the hidden Tabernacle of Binah. In almost 
every instance of the tabernacle allegory, access to the structure?s inner 
areas is restricted to varying degrees — as in the Bible — depending on one's 
level of holiness. Likewise, the soul is granted proximity to God in 
accordance with its level of purity and perfection. In Pico*s scheme, those 
who have not begun this process must remain outside the tabernacle; partial 

access is granted to those who have embraced only dialectics and moral 
philosophy; the final vision of the Godhead is obtained at the centre of the 
tabernacle by those who, beyond dialectics and moral philosophy, have 
dedicated themselves to theology as well. The most important aspect of this 
segment is Pico's allegorical division of the place of worship into three 
stages, each corresponding to a level of personal perfection. This is an 
interesting twist to the physical hierarchy of holy places that is presented in 
the Bible and to the Pseudo-Dionysian path to enlightenment on which Pico 
built so much in the preceding paragraphs. Particularly useful to a full 
understanding of $898-102 is an often overlooked passage in Maimonides” 
Guide of the Perplexed (3.51), which offers so many close parallelisms to 
Pico*s allegory of the tabernacle that one is tempted to call it a source. In 
Maimonides (1995), the prince and his castle are representative of God and 
the tabernacle: 

Those who are outside the city are all those human beings who possess 
no religious belief whatsoever, be it of a speculative or of a traditional 
nature. [...] These are like the animals devoid of reason. [...] Those 
who are in the city but turn their backs to the prince*s palace are men 
of thought and speculation who have arrived at false opinions, be this 
due to some major error that crept into their reasoning or to their 
acceptance of erroneous ideas of others. [...] Those who are making 
for the palace and aim at entering it, but have never seen the palace 
yet, are the great mass of those who obey the Law, or in other words 
the “men without learning who occupy themselves with religious 
duties.” Those who have arrived at the palace and are walking round it 
are those possessed of religious learning, who accept the right opinions 
as traditional beliefs and study the detailed ordinances of the works 
demanded in the service of God, but have never made an attempt to 
speculate on the principles of their faith or inquired in any way into the 
justification of any item of faith. "Those who have embarked on 
speculation concerning the principles of religion have entered the 
forecourts. [...] Those, finally, who have succeeded in obtaining 
demonstrative proof of everything that can be demonstratively proved, 
and have reached certainty with regard to all those metaphysical 
matters on which certainty can be reached, and have almost reached 

certainty wherever no more than this was possible, those, I say, have 
penetrated to the presence of the prince in the inner parts of the palace. 

Maimonides concludes the metaphor notably, like Pico, by distilling these 
various levels of initiation into three. The first corresponds to Pico's 
description of dialectics ($99): “As long as you are occupied with the 
mathematical sciences and the technique of logic, you belong to those who 
walk around the palace in search of the gate” (Maimonides 1995, 186). The 
second corresponds to Picos description of those who, employing 
dialectics, put themselves at the service of philosophy (8100): “As soon as 
you learn the natural sciences you enter the palace and pass through its 
forecourts” (Maimonides 1995, 186). The third corresponds to the 
theological contemplation of the divine (8101): “When you complete your 
study of the natural sciences and get a grasp of metaphysics, you enter unto 
the prince into the inner courtyard (Ezek. 44:21, 27) and have achieved to 
be in the same house as he” (Maimonides 1995, 186). Though 
Maimonides” extended allegory deals superficially with the Prince and His 
palace, his own reference to the tabernacle in Ezekiel draws a perfect 
correspondence with those instructions of Moses mentioned in the Oration. 
In Pico, the outermost area of the Temple is that of the unclean or the 
common people, and the Levites are responsible for the sanctuary (see 
Num. 1:47-53, 3:5-10, 18:1—7; Ezek. 44:15-17, etc.). At the centremost 
area of the Temple, that part administered by the descendants of Aaron, is 
located the “velum” (“without any veil of a likeness coming in between,” 
8101), behind which one finds himself in God's direct presence. In the first 
proem to the Heptaplus, Pico explains that Moses was entirely illuminated 
by the Divine Light but revealed to men the truths according to their ability 
to comprehend them (cf. Ps. 118:11; 1 Cor. 5:11), an idea that is certainly 
present in these paragraphs, too. Similarly, in the Heptaplus?s second 
proem, Pico expounds on the figure of Moses's tabernacle as a tripartite 
configuration of the world structured according to levels of attainable 
comprehension: the highest level (or innermost area) is that which 
theologians call “angelic” and philosophers call “intelligible”; the middle 
level is the celestial world; and the lower is the sublunary world that we 
inhabit. The outermost area described in 899 corresponds to the “lower 
waters” of creation or the “sublunary world.” In 8100, Pico refers to the 
zone of the firmament where the seven planets are situated. Known as the 

“celestial world,” or AIMWN (hashamayim) in Hebrew, it corresponds to 
that region above the inhabited world and below the supercelestial. The 
Holy of Holies of 8101 is comparable to the supernal world inhabited by 
God and the three highest orders of angels. These three worlds are 
symbolized by Moses's instructions regarding the construction of the 
tabernacle. Pico insists on this series of similes, as he himself tells us, 
because through them man is able to recognize his path to a union with 
God. It was with the sight of the Spirit (i.e., through intellectual or intuitive 
cognition combined with theological enlightenment) that Moses and Paul 
saw God without any veil of a likeness coming in between them.”* This is 
the same task that awaits anyone who wishes to scale the ladder, prepare a 
dwelling-place in his soul for God, become one with the Mind above all 
minds, draw together Osiris”s limbs, die in the bliss of the plenitude of life, 
or be received within the Prince”s palace. 

88103-41 (Saverio Marchignoli) 

The first, very elegant part of Pico's Oration — that dedicated to the 
assertion of the dignity of man and the praise of philosophy — ends with the 
present sections, in which the author systematically extends his inquiry to 
nonbiblical sources (“not only the Mosaic and Christian mysteries...,” 
8103). His aim here is to provide evidence supporting the universal 
recognition of the tripartite philosophy that he would like to discuss in front 
of the “Fathers” in Rome (the very term tripartita philosophia appears 
precisely in this section, 8115). Such evidence is supplied by the 
interpretation of the language of the mysteries in which the texts of the 
“theology of the ancients” (priscorum theologia) were supposed to have 
been preserved. Pico starts with a rather general nod to the Greek 
(Eleusinian) mysteries, in which he again refers to the Pseudo-Dionysian 
model of the three stages of spiritual progression: purification (moral 
philosophy and dialectics), illumination (natural philosophy), and perfection 
(theology, which culminates in the mystical vision called epopteia). Then, 
in $8109-13, he adapts Plato's doctrine of the four divine pavíca (maníai) 
“frenzies” (or divini furores, following the terminology in Ficino's 1457 
letter to his long-time friend Pellegrino Agli) to his tripartita philosophia. 
Poetic madness is linked to moral philosophy and dialectics, mystical 

madness to natural philosophy, and the last two madnesses — the prophetic 
and the erotic — to theology. This passage is particularly elaborate and 
refined, for it reflects a major concern in Picos thought: Pico was not only 
working on the Commento sopra una canzona de amore but also planning 
to develop it into a commentary on Platos Symposium. The same 
interpretational process is then applied to the three Delphic precepts, 
“Nothing too much,” “Know thyself,” and “You are,” which are easily 
reconnected to these three stages of the spiritual life. In 88120-23, Pico 
points to the Pythagorean “symbols” as further evidence for his tripartita 
philosophia, which in 88130-35 is recognized in the writings of the 
“Chaldeans” as well. Finally, after a meaningful allusion to Abraham 
(originating from the land of the Chaldeans) in 88140-41, Pico uses the 
names of the most eminent archangels of traditional angelology in order to 
expound his tripartite scheme still further. With the mention of Raphael 
(“God heals”), Gabriel (“God is strong”), and Michael (“Who is like 
God?”), Pico rejoins the biblical tradition, thus circularly closing the 
section. 

Paul O. Kristeller once wrote that “in studying the sources of Pico's 
thought, we are not merely pursuing a task that is potentially interesting for 
an understanding of his work, but are actually following up one of the basic 
notions of Picos own philosophy” (Kristeller 1965, 41). Such an 
affirmation would prompt us to seek, whenever possible, all of Pico*s 
sources, a task that proves particularly difficult for the Oration and the 
Conclusiones, replete as they are with references to unusual or even 
unknown works and authors.”” Such an endeavour, while always intriguing, 
is particularly tempting in the enigmatic allusions of these sections in 
particular. On account of the abovementioned risks of pursuing such a 
strategy, however, we have here limited ourselves to tracing the actual 
sources underlying the complex texture of Pico?s work, thus distinguishing 
them from other possible, but more remote, sources. For instance, the 
distant source of 88109-13 is obviously Platos (1990) Phaedrus 265b, 
“And we made four divisions of the divine madness, ascribing them to four 
gods, saying that prophecy was inspired by Apollo, the mystic madness by 
Dionysus, the poetic by the Muses, and the madness of love [...] by 
Aphrodite and Eros,” and Pico certainly knew Ficino's Latin translation of 
the passage. But the order in which Pico lists the four furores in the Oration 

suggests even more convincingly that his actual direct source in this case 
was not this passage in Plato but Ficino*s interpretation of it in the final 
pages of his Commentarium in Convivium Platonis. While some sources 
may have been recognized here for the first time (such as the quotation of 
Paul's Letter to the Hebrews in 8112 or the reference to the letter De divino 
furore in 8113), the chief crux of these sections is still to be found in the 
references to the “writings of the Chaldeans” (8130). Unfortunately, the 
nature of Picos “Chaldean” sources still remains unclear. A closer 
examination of the Greek “Chaldean Oracles” (including Psellus?s exegesis) 
may be helpful in explaining some of these intricacies, but we would likely 
still be left without a real solution to the problem itself. 

As for the Latin text, it must be emphasized that, as opposed to other 
editions, the lacunae corresponding to the “Chaldean” names of the rivers 
of Paradise (8134) have not been provided by Bausi. The Hebrew names 
that appear in most sixteenth-century editions, and that pass thence into 
modern editions, are in fact taken from Gen. 2:11-15, but such conjectural 
shortcuts are incompatible with the translations in Picos possession. This 
omission of names ultimately appears fully justified, especially in the light 
of the only extant (partial) manuscript of the Oration, in which we find a 
possible trace of the “Chaldean writings” with which Pico was familiar. 
Finally, it must be noted that some of the variae lectiones preserved in this 
manuscript and accepted in Bausi's text are quite remarkable: among these, 
the reader should take note of the phrase sacratissimum deorum cultum 
(“most holy worship of the gods”) of 8135, which replaces the usual 
sacratissimum Dei cultum (“most holy worship of God”). The nature of 
Picos hermeneutic attitude toward nonbiblical sources is a major, 
controversial topic. It would seem from this and other similar details that a 
profound change in Pico's attitude took place after the failure of the 
projected disputation in Rome and his subsequent condemnation in 1487. 
Indeed, a more apologetic Christian pattern, with regard to both pagan and 
Hebrew sources, prevailed during Picos last years in Florence under 
Savonarola's influence (1491-94). 

But what can be said about Pico”s attitude in 1486, the year in which the 
Conclusiones, the Oration, and the Commento were composed? Here we 

witness a full-scale use of Neoplatonic symbolic patterns within the 
framework represented by the prisca theologia and the continuous 
intermingling of biblical and nonbiblical sources. Pico seems to be so 
deeply absorbed in his “project of concord” that he is capable of speaking 
many different “languages” simultaneously (Pier Cesare Bori has rightly 
emphasized Picos “bilingualism”). Such a linguistic fusion assumes the 
existence of a “mysteric” level at which the secret meaning of all 
theological texts simply awaits the interpreter”s illuminating exegesis. In 
this sense, Pico (as well as Ficino, though in a somewhat different fashion) 
goes a step further in the process of transforming the “ritual mysteries” into 
“literary mysteries,” which some scholars (e.g., Festugiére, Wind) have 
brilliantly identified as a deeply significant characteristic of the Neoplatonic 
movement. The presupposition of a “mysteric” level common to biblical 
and nonbiblical texts ended up being a sanctification of the latter, thus 
inaugurating a hermeneutic attitude that would develop in its own way, 
independently from the late positions of the Florentine Platonists and 
despite the severe judgments of the subsequent generation (including Pico*s 
own nephew, Gianfrancesco). 

88142—70 (Giorgio Melloni, Michael Papio, and Massimo Riva) 

In these sections, Pico strongly defends his vocation for philosophical 
studies, the dignity implicit in pursuing the love of wisdom (philo-sophia), 
and the right to engage in public debate in order to defend his own opinions. 
He does so following and copiously quoting illustrious examples from 
classical (Greek and Roman) antiquity. This praise of philosophy can 
perhaps be considered the leitmotif of the entire Oration. 

According to Bori (2000, 30-31), the original nucleus of these sections 
can be found in the second half of the manuscript P (Palatino 885), 8825— 
31, in which Pico stresses two essential points: that a thorough knowledge 
of sources is necessary to the apprentice philosopher and that disputation is 
beneficial even when one's argument is defeated. Again according to Bori's 
general hypothesis on the composition of the Oration, the defence of 
philosophy and the contemplative life contained in these sections was added 
later. Datable to mid-October of 1486 (when Pico took refuge in the castle 

of Fratta after the Margherita episode), it closely follows the letter to 
Andreas Corneus, also written during the same period (along with the 
Commentary on a Love Song by Girolamo Benivieni). As Bori notes, this 
entire group of sections reflects Pico's anxiety over the upcoming public 
debate on his nine hundred theses, an anxiety intensified by Corneus”s 
reproach that Pico has unduly abandoned the active life (an accusation to 
which Pico replies in his letter). Later on, some themes expressed in these 
sections will be repeated and expanded in Picos Apologia (published in 
Naples in 1487 after the failure of the Roman disputation), in which Pico 
defends himself from the accusations of heterodoxy levelled at him by the 
pope”s theologians. The relevant sections of the Apologia (A), as well as 
those of the manuscript (P), are extensively quoted in the footnotes in order 
to allow a close comparison among the various drafts. 

Pico begins this group of sections by providing several arguments in his 
own defence, focusing on the duty he felt to engage in the study of 
philosophy, including the study of those heterogeneous sources of ancient 
wisdom discussed in the preceding passage (Chaldean Oracles and 
cabalistic doctrines). The models he follows here are classical — Cicero, in 
particular (On Moral Ends, De Oratore, and De Republica primarily, but 
also the Tusculan Disputations, in which we find the etymological 
definition of philosophy as disinterested love of wisdom, on which Pico 
insists). The reference to Cicero”s definition (“wisdom is the knowledge of 
things divine and human, together with an understanding of each thing's 
cause” — Augustine provides another similar source) is consistent with the 
inspiration for the whole Oration. Here again, Pico outlines the ascending 
path to truth, the three (or, according to Bausi, four) stages through which 
the journey toward wisdom must pass: from the knowledge of earthly 
phenomena to that of celestial and divine manifestations, up to the supreme 
cause, or principle of the universe. This confirms Picos fundamental 
position in the Oration vis-a-vis theology, that philosophy is not absorbed 
by theology: “Pico extols the dignity of the contemplative-philosophical 
stage within a plurality of diverse and parallel spiritual itineraries” (Bori 
2000, 63).>* 

Yet the practice of philosophy is now disparaged, Pico laments, and even 
this sublime knowledge is degraded, measured only against the material 
profit it can produce for its practitioners. The pursuit of wisdom is 
nowadays reduced to a career, a business similar to that of merchants, and 
therefore supposedly inappropriate for a nobleman like him. The rhetorical 
pitch of the Oration here reaches a climax. The simile used, without 
euphemism, is prostitution. Pallas Athena (the personification of 
philosophy, and for Pico, in particular, a symbol of the universal intellect) is 
forced to parade naked, “like a prostitute who accepts a pittance for her 
deflowered virginity” (8155). The source of this image is most likely 
Petrarch (RVF 7.10-11), while Petrarch's Invectiva Contra Medicum, full of 
piercing expressions against the pseudophilosophers of his time, is also a 
text Pico may have had in mind. With the aim of restoring his own image as 
that of a disinterested searcher for truth, consumed by a compelling desire 
to pursue wisdom at all costs, Pico goes so far as to renounce (in part) his 
patrimonial rights and states that he has given himself over entirely to the 
contemplative life, thus fully embracing the Aristotelian thesis of its 
superiority over the active life (Nicomachean Ethics 10.7). We can hear in 
his words the echo of a Petrarchan-Augustinian leitmotif (De vita solitaria) 
— for that matter, the opposition between the active and contemplative life 
gives rise to lively debates in other key humanistic texts of the 
Quattrocento, such as, for example, Landino*s Disputations at Camaldoli.?” 
Yet this opposition, which is also the counterposition between the civic and 
mercantile culture of the Florentine commune, on the one hand, and the 
rising aristocratic courtly culture, epitomized by the Medicean circle, on the 
other, is not absolute in the fifteenth century. Thus, Bori detects a Socratic 
theme in Picos apology (namely, a reference to Platos Apology of 
Socrates) and evokes the figure of the Platonic Socrates in order to 
exemplify how Picos own vocation for philosophical studies and his 
readiness to publicly debate his ideas are “not without a civic relevance” 
(Bori 2000, 77). 

Next, Pico moves on to sing the praises of disputations, a formal practice 
common in scholastic circles and universities. Yet, one is uncertain whether 
to consider Pico”s plan to discuss his ideas about universal peace “before a 
vast assembly of learned men and in the presence of the apostolic senate” as 

the last in a long line of ecumenical councils of Church Fathers (those Pico 
addresses, in the Oration, as “most reverend”) or the very first international 
conference of scientists. Later, in the Apologia, written, as we know, after 
the debate was called off, Pico redefines his intended audience, speaking of 
a “secret meeting among a few learned men” (cf. Farmer 1998, 9). Here, in 
this portion of the Oration, Pico defends himself against the accusation of 
presumptuousness, of daring, at only twenty-four years of age, “to propose 
a discussion on the sublime mysteries of Christian theology, the most 
profound questions of philosophy and unexplored fields of knowledge” 
($164). One cannot entirely blame his critics for harbouring such thoughts. 
Again, however, it is in the name of philosophy that Pico defends himself, 
arguing in favour of the practice of disputation, in which the “eminent 
doctors” of the Church “have engaged quite often (and not without high 
honour and praise)” and in which “also [...] Plato, Aristotle and all the most 
revered philosophers of every age” have engaged. Finally, he calls on Plato 
in order to remind the reader that jealousy must be “excluded from the 
divine chorus” (Phaedrus 247a). In short, disputation “sharpens the 
intellect,” argues Pico, quoting Talmudic sources in support of this central 
point. It is worth noting that the tradition of public disputations focused 
mainly on debates between Christian theologians and Jewish Rabbis, yet 
another instance in which Pico aims to show how all major philosophical 
and theological traditions converge in the search for the truth, at least in 
method, if not in substance. 

Interestingly enough, and almost in contradiction with himself (with both 
his fundamental message of universal peace and his later criticism of 
astrology), Pico even includes an astrological reference in his argument 
extolling the need for philosophical debates, as though to suggest, 
indirectly, that his own destiny as a philosopher, as well as his idea of a 
public disputation, was written in the stars: in the horoscope of 
philosophers, in the threefold conjunctions of Mars and Mercury, inasmuch 
as Mars symbolically represents the need for “conflict” (i.e., disputation as 
a gymnasium of the mind). 

Finally, Pico recuses himself rhetorically from defending his right to 
engage in such a battle at such a young and (according to his critics) 

immature age. However, he then quotes biblical (Old Testament) sources in 
defence of youth and bellicosely claims for himself not the title of scholar 
but that of a “soldier” (of truth, one could add), albeit an admittedly “weak” 
one. Indeed, he points out that even those who are defeated will benefit 
from debating since “there is profit in defeat.” This is a statement that, 
harkening back to classical antiquity, may well apply not only to theological 
disputes but also to such modern contraptions as democracy and 
experimental science (Karl Popper docet). If the goal is our search for truth, 
then the real enemies of truth, however we choose to define it, are those 
who refuse to put their own ideas and beliefs to the test of dialogue and 
debate; in other words, those who do not submit to human reason. Such 
faith in reason is based in turn on the conviction that our intellectual 
pursuits, beyond our religious and philosophical convictions, are all rooted 
in the one universal intellect that governs all things. 

88171-233 (Dino Buzzetti) 

This group of sections begins with the last argument of Pico's self- 
vindication in the face of the criticisms raised against the proposal of a 
public disputation of his nine hundred theses. In his opinion, there is no 
cogent reason to argue against the high number of his theses or against his 
young age, for, on the contrary, in both cases his attempt would be 
praiseworthy even in the case of defeat. Far from being needless and 
audacious, his endeavour is timely and appropriate: a close examination of 
all positions and a suitable comparison of all philosophical doctrines and 
schools are absolutely vital to genuine philosophical inquiry. Accordingly, 
Pico carries on with a detailed enumeration of the several authors whose 
theses he lists in the first half of his nine hundred Conclusiones, where he 
represents the doctrines shared by different schools and cultural traditions. 
He follows the same order of the theses in mentioning first the Latins, or the 
Western medieval philosophers who wrote their works in Latin, followed by 
the Arabs and the Greeks. Conforming to a classical rhetorical model, Pico 
associates with each name in his survey a particular quality that vividly 
portrays the author?s work. In Picos mind, the merits of the comparison of 
different schools and opinions deserve to be vigorously emphasized. The 
truth can shine through only in the discussion of diverse positions because 

the wisdom of the latest thinkers is deeply rooted in the traditions of their 
predecessors, the Arabs and the Greeks, and because the Greeks themselves 
inherited the wisdom of the barbarians. Hence, no one can be content with 
just one opinion or refrain from appealing to other sources. Pico has 
extended his examination to the testimonies of the prisca theologia, the 
ancient theology of the Hermetic, Pythagorean, and Chaldean traditions, but 
comprehensive as such an approach may be, no scrutiny of the many 
different doctrines can substitute for a more direct and personal inquiry, 
such as the one Pico presents in the second part of his nine hundred theses. 
He proceeds therefore to describe concisely the conclusions drawn 
according to his own opinion and ascribes to his own merits a 
demonstration of the agreement between Plato and Aristotle, which many 
others had merely taken for granted. Pico also insists on an attempt to show 
the agreement among some conclusions by Scotus and Aquinas, and 
likewise the harmony among certain contentions of Averroes and Avicenna. 
The other major ability he claims for himself is that of deriving any 
conclusion whatsoever on natural and metaphysical matters from 
completely different principles than are commonly taught in schools of his 
time. His is, furthermore, a new philosophy that deserves to be judged for 
its own worth rather than by his young age. 

At this point in the Oration, Pico feels obliged to account for the 
inclusion of the somewhat remarkable areas of inquiry that he has included 
in his collected theses. Each of them requires a rather detailed explanation. 
He deals in the first place with the art of numbers, which, he contends, 
offers a novel method by which to prove philosophical truths, and mentions 
the ancient theologians and all the philosophers, from Pythagoras onward, 
who were conversant with it. He insists in particular on Plato, without 
failing, however, to refer to Aristotle and the Arabs as well. The last part of 
the present section is devoted to an illustration of magic, which Pico 
presents as the highest and most perfect form of wisdom and natural 
philosophy. In this lengthy exposition, he sharply distinguishes between two 
forms of magic, one that scarcely deserves attention and another, nobler 
one, which has been identified since the most ancient times with the 
knowledge of things divine. The first was disregarded by wise men and 
condemned by religion and civil laws, whereas the second was sought after 
by philosophers and cultivated by the forerunners of the Pythagorean and 

Zoroastrian traditions. The latter was praised by Plato, the Arabs, and the 
Schoolmen, but it is to Plotinus in particular that Pico refers in his 
explanation of how this noble form of magic can lead to the profoundest 
knowledge of the inner workings of the powers of nature. The kind of 
comprehensive and concise summary of the content of his nine hundred 
theses that Pico provides here involves a very large number of references to 
philosophical sources and doctrines. 

The chief purpose of the notes for this group of sections was that of 
documenting their import and provenance. Where the reference is not literal 
but conjectural, it is accompanied by the indication of the commentators 
who have suggested it. The notes often contain quotations from the textual 
sources in order to help the reader to understand their use in Pico*s hands as 
well as his intended interpretation. The other notes supplied are mainly 
historical. The amount of information provided is inversely proportionate to 
the renown of the persons and subjects there described. Particular attention 
has been paid to lesser-known historical characters and unusual terms; in 
those cases, some care has been taken in gathering information otherwise 
scattered and dispersed in different or not easily available sources. Pico*s 
direct references are selective and deliberate, and full acquaintance with 
them helps in the clarification of his intentions. The text of the present 
portion of the Oration may be profitably compared both with an earlier 
draft, preserved in the manuscript of Florence?s Biblioteca Nazionale and 
known as Palatino 885 (fols. 143-153), and with Pico*s Apologia, a self- 
defence written after the prohibition of the public discussion of his nine 
hundred theses and the formal condemnation of some specific points 
contained therein. A synopsis of the divergent passages of the Oration and 
the Palatino manuscript was first published by Pier Cesare Bori and Saverio 
Marchignoli," and a complete collation is comprised in the appendix to 
Francesco Bausi's 2003 edition, where a list of the additions to the portion 
of the text included in the Apologia is also to be found.?? The most 
significant variants of the earlier draft are reported here in the notes. 
References to the corresponding sections of the Conclusiones are also 
included. 

In his praise of philosophy, Pico has shown that its ultimate goal is the 
attainment of peace, the friendship of all souls in their spiritual unity with 
God's one mind (894). By showing that philosophical practice and 
meditation consist in one's preparation for the plenitude of life that holy 
peace alone can bestow on us (897), Pico has justified his intention to 
devote himself entirely to the exercise of philosophy (8142). In this part of 
the text, his main concern becomes that of describing his quest for 
philosophical truth and defending his method of inquiry alongside the paths 
to philosophical wisdom that he has envisaged in opposition to the severe 
and unfair criticisms levelled against his endeavour. Picos methodology 
refuses any indiscriminate allegiance to authority and admits only 
independent inquiry; he explicitly identifies his conscience as the sole judge 
of his opinions (8150). Determined as he is not to put his trust in the 
opinions of others, he boldly declares his intention to become acquainted 
with all doctrines and all schools ($180). He argues that a thorough 
examination of all philosophical positions is required not only to avoid error 
and unwarrantable contentions but also to discover that part of the truth 
which is to be found in any given philosophical doctrine or tradition 
($8184-85). Consequently, the comparison of different positions (8192) 
appears to be the only criterion that can ensure independent thinking and 
promote genuine research. 

Pico sees philosophical practice as a matter of personal commitment and 
concern (8142). He is convinced that it is only through philosophy and 
contemplation that man can ascend to a state of passionate ardour and 
spiritual union with the all-embracing Divine Mind, and afterward be 
prepared to descend again in order to strive, with full awareness, toward 
peace and friendship in the earthly world (866). He is therefore unable to 
renounce direct personal inquiry and necessarily must find his own way to 
the truth, by himself and within himself (8197). Picos confidence in his 
own direct quest for truth both leads him to claim that the solution to any 
philosophical question whatsoever can be established by means of his new 
inventive principles and allows him to aver the introduction of an altogether 
“new philosophy” (88206—7). On the grounds of his new principles, Pico 
feels entitled to declare that he has not only suggested, as many others had 
done, but even proved the compatibility of Plato and Aristotle (8200). 

Indeed, beyond Aristotle and Plato, he similarly affirms agreement between 
Scotus and Aquinas and between Averroes and Avicenna (8205). Pico 
devotes a special group of his nine hundred Conclusiones to the 
concordance between philosophical positions commonly held to be 
divergent and dissonant. Clearly, concord is one of Picos major concerns. 
In maintaining the harmony between Plato and Aristotle, he finds himself 
very much in accordance with the ancient Neoplatonic tradition. Plotinus 
had openly said that his teachings were “no novelties” and only amounted 
to the interpretation and explanation of earlier doctrines (Enneads 5.1.8) 
“that ranged themselves most closely to the school of Pythagoras” (5.1.9). 
And Pico himself quite consistently takes a similar hermeneutical stance. 
He traces to different sources his notion of the Protean nature of man 
(8818-23, 33) and his explanation of the three stages of the mystical 
progression (870): Mosaic and Christian Scriptures (842); the doctrines of 
the cabalists and the Arabs (8139); Zoroastrian (8135), Chaldaean (843), 
and Hermetic (833) theology; Pythagorean doctrines (834); and Greek 
mysteries (8104). All traditions rooted in ancient theology (prisca 
theologia: 8199) and wisdom (prisca sapientia: 8259) converge in 
conveying the same hidden doctrines (secreta philosophia: 8263). As in the 
ancient Neoplatonic tradition, the exercise of philosophy then comes to 
reside in the hermeneutical practice of unveiling and exposing the covert 
meaning of earlier writings. The more Pico sees his task as challenging and 
new, the less he finds possible support in the works of any other interpreters 
or expounders. From this point of view, the ancient method of 
philosophizing through numbers can also be presented as new (8208). But 
the art of counting that he espouses in his Conclusiones is not to be 
confused with the arithmetic of the merchants (8212); it consists, on the 
contrary, in the divine arithmetic that Pythagoras introduced and shaped on 
the model of the Orphic theology (8260). And the same can be said of 
magic, which is to be seen as that science of things divine that Plato 
ascribes to Zoroaster (8223) and that Pythagoras, and all who travelled afar 
to learn it, held to be the most important form of arcane wisdom (8221). 
This higher and holier form of philosophy can lead us from the 
contemplation of the wonders and the most secret things of nature to 
religion and to the worship of God (8232), but we must guard against 
mistaking it for that execrable and most deceitful of arts that makes man a 
slave to wicked powers (8227) and has been condemned by religion and 

civil laws alike (8218). Picos task of interpreting the ancient wisdom and 
all the sapiential knowledge that flowed from it (88133-34) can thus be 
seen in its own right as a new form of philosophizing. The novelty of his 
attempt to expose hidden content and to rationalize the occult doctrines 
handed down in the ancient teachings can thus be easily reconciled with his 
effort to demonstrate the profound concord and agreement of all theological 
and philosophical traditions that originated from them. 

88234-68 (Massimo Riva) 

In this final segment of the Oration, Pico explains his position toward 
Judaism, or, as he put it, “the ancient mysteries of the Hebrews.” In short, 
he claims to find in the Jewish tradition the confirmation of Catholic faith, 
as well as the very weapons with which to confute the “calumnies of the 
Jews” (8234). These pages must be read in close connection with the 
section of the Conclusiones that contains Picos own “cabalistic theses,” as 
well as with relevant passages from the Heptaplus, Pico”s commentary on 
Genesis, written a couple of years later (1489). Yet Pico”s assimilation and 
treatment of the Jewish tradition (which gained him the reputation of 
“Christian cabalist”) are still under scrutiny and assessment by scholars, 
who have formulated various hypotheses about the actual sources that he 
may have used and the roles played by such figures as Flavius Mithridates 
and Yohanan Alemanno in his reading and interpretation of cabalistic texts. 

The first and most important source mentioned here is actually a 
conflation of Esdras, Hilary, and Origen. For Pico, Esdras is a composite 
figure uniting the Jewish leader of the canonical Book of Ezra with the 
visionary from the apocryphal Greek Books of Esdras. The latter, which 
record the revelation received by Esdras, were conserved in the Western 
tradition and circulated both independently and within the compilation of 
the Latin Vulgate (by 1560, 2 Esdras is relegated to an appendix to the New 
Testament). Pico drew primarily from 2 Esdras, which was familiar to the 
Church Fathers he mentions; hence, it is likely that he formed his ideas 
more from reading this text than from any original Jewish sources. In this 
composite work, he finds the narrative account of how a secret explanation 
of the Law was given to Moses on Mount Sinai, along with the five books 

of the Pentateuch (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and 
Deuteronomy); the letter of the Law contained in those books will be 
divulged to the people, while its explanation will remain the secret 
prerogative of a few God-fearing men (the cohanim, direct descendants of 
Aaron the high priest, brother of Moses) in a lineage beginning with Jesu 
Nave (Joshua, son of Nun), the first leader of the Jewish people after 
Moses, according to various biblical narratives.*% Again, we are faced with 
a subtle ambivalence in Pico*s argumentative strategy: on the one hand, he 
seems to embrace the esoteric nature of ancient traditions, including the 
Cabala; on the other, he wants to explain what its mysteries actually mean 
or at least how they should be interpreted. This ambivalence is further 
complicated by the difficult relation between (pagan) philosophical and 
(Judeo-Christian) theological exegesis in his thought. If philosophy helps 
clarify theological mysteries, the confirmation of theological (Christian) 
truths remains the ultimate goal of philosophical explanations. Indeed, 
Pico”s treatment of the Jewish tradition, in this final portion of the Oration, 
deals directly with the distinction between esotericism and exotericism in 
the transmission (tradition) of all (theological) truths. This is at the core of 
his exegetic method and governs also what Bori has called Picos 
bilingualism: his ability to articulate, in the most original parts of the 
Oration, a universalistic point of view, speaking in a dual language, at once 
theological and philosophical, capable of extending the (range of) truth and 
recognizing different paths to wisdom while following the path of his own 
Christian faith. This attitude, according to Bori, would also provide a 
solution to the ambivalence of esotericism and exotericism mentioned 
earlier: because Pico”s intensive universalism (neither monistic nor a simple 
variety of syncretism) does not make philosophy ancillary to theology 
neither does it subordinate theology to philosophy.** Pico*s universalism, 
however, remains fundamentally elitist (albeit retrospectively so). Indeed, is 
not the phrase “to make public to the populace the most secret mysteries 
and the profoundest arcana of divinity” (8237) the same as “to give holy 
things to the dogs and cast pearls before swine” (Matt. 7:6)? The implicit 
answer to this rhetorical question is yes, of course — at least until the time 
comes when bigotry and an acritical, dogmatic adherence to the Law can be 
superseded by a superior understanding of, and implicit dialogue among, 
different traditions (that is, different ways of articulating and interpreting 

the true Law). That time has now apparently come, with Pico and his nine 
hundred theses. 

Pico's attitude toward the Cabala, then, sums up his attitude toward 
prisca theologia as a whole. Putting the Cabala on the level of pagan 
(Pythagorean and Platonic) philosophy? he actually treats pagan 
philosophy (including natural philosophy and magic, discussed in the group 
of sections immediately preceding this one) as a repository of “hidden 
wisdom” to be explained in light of Christian dogmas. Yet there is both a 
contemplative and a practical value in the Cabala; as stated in the 
Conclusiones, it “puts into practice all of formal metaphysics and lower 
theology.”%* Like HPythagorean and Platonic doctrines, the Cabala 
contributes to that spiritual transformation that allows man to ascend to the 
level of angels and beyond. According to Pico, contemplation of the True 
Torah transforms man into a more godlike creature like Adam (818), 
transformed into the cosmic Adam Kadmon, or like Enoch (835), who is 
both human and angelic in nature. Paul is the logical choice for a cabalistic 
model for Christians since Pauline experiences concord perfectly with the 
two key components of the initiation described in the Oration: conversion 
and revelation. At the moment of conversion, Paul accepted the new Law 
over the old Torah; therefore, for Pico, the revelation given to him must be a 
new Cabala and Paul the new Moses. The divine commandment that is at 
the origin of esotericism applies to all forms of wisdom and is a common 
trait of the various paths leading to it. In other words, there is a “cabalistic” 
trait in all traditions, including the Egyptian (the distinction between 
demotic writing or the common sort and the sacred writing or hieroglyphs 
known only to priests and scribes) and the Greek (Pythagoras, Plato, and 
Aristotle all to some extent wrote in enigmas or transmitted a more secret 
knowledge to their followers). The same can be said of the “forgotten words 
of Jesus,” the oral wisdom entrusted to his disciples and hence left 
unwritten.** 

We are here taken back to the notion of a direct revelation of the divine 
truth, sine interprete, a mystical union with the Godhead, which is also the 
goal of the spiritual itinerary, the last stage of the inner transformation 
outlined in the Oration. This is a paradoxical notion if ever there was one, 

inasmuch as those who receive this revelation often become its interpreters, 
or the intermediaries for those who are (and, as we have seen, should be) 
excluded from it. Pico himself implicitly assumes this interpretive role in 
the Conclusiones. This is the difference between “epopteia” and 
“reception,” which lies at the root of all traditions, a difference that cannot 
be reduced simply to the opposition between orality and literacy but is 
instead based on two communicative and cognitive systems: “from mind to 
mind” or “through the intercession of the word” (8244). Yet Pico*s focus on 
the Cabala (in Reuchlin's definition, “receiving what is heard”**) as a sort 
of genealogical model for the “reception” and transmission of the highest 
form of knowledge in general bears witness to the intense exchange 
between Jewish and humanistic circles in the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, an exchange that has increasingly attracted the attention and 
scrutiny of scholars in recent years.*% This is highly significant, as even 
Ficino and other thinkers who were interested in the Jewish tradition never 
clearly distinguished Cabala from other mystical approaches. This was in 
part because they lacked the linguistic and theological background acquired 
by Pico through his studies with Jewish scholars such as Yohanan 
Alemanno, Elia del Medigo, and Flavius Mithridates. By working directly 
with Jewish thinkers, Pico not only acquired these requisite skills but was 
also directly introduced to a tradition that was still relatively new within 
Judaism since Cabala appeared around the twelfth century and became 
widespread among Jews only in the fourteenth (thus, we can actually speak 
of a development parallel to, and probably intertwined with, the rise of 
humanism, all within the same historical framework).*? 

As to the actual extent of Picos knowledge of the Cabala, the jury is still 
out; again, the prophet Ezra is quoted in these pages as the master source of 
Pico?s account and treatment of the Cabala's origins, against the backdrop 
of the reconstruction of the temple in Jerusalem and the reestablishment of 
the Law following the Babylonian exile. Ezra, according to the narrative in 
the biblical canonical writings, was scribe and leader of the Jewish 
congregation in Babylon. He was accorded permission to return to 
Jerusalem with a second group of exiles. In Jerusalem, Ezra organized the 
community of the Jews according to traditional Jewish Law, written down 
in the five Books of Moses (1 Ezra 7); upon his return to Jerusalem, he also 

received from the archangel Uriel the vision that is transcribed into the 
seventy books (as many as the members of the Synedrion) that (according 
to Pico) contain “the science of the Cabala,” to be handed down in its three 
fundamental components: “the ineffable theology of the supersubstantial 
deity”; “the exact metaphysics of the intelligible and angelic forms”; and 
“the most steadfast philosophy of natural things” (8250).%% Notwithstanding 
the fact that he was then only twenty-six (and that, as he himself notes, 
“these books are held in such religious awe by the Jews of today that no one 
under the age of forty is permitted to approach them,” 8252), Pico aimed to 
acquire as many as possible, translating and studying them with the help of, 
among others, Flavius Mithridates (the convert Jew Guglielmo Raimondo 
de Moncada, who was Picos teacher of Hebrew, Aramaic, and Arabic in 
1486 and had been appointed teacher of Oriental languages at the “Studium 
Urbis” in Rome in 1482). 

Whether we may speak of an actual “conversion” of Pico to the Cabala or 
simply of an apologetic attempt to “convert” the Cabala into an anti-Jewish 
tool of conversion” is still open to conjecture. Perhaps (at least as far as the 
Oration and the Conclusiones are concerned) one does not entirely exclude 
the other. There is no doubt, however, that Pico is a Christian when he 
writes the Oration and when he defends himself, in the Apologia, forcefully 
declaring: “I am not a magician, I am not a Jew, I am not an Ishmaelite, 1 
am not a heretic, but 1 worship Jesus and carry Jesus? cross on my body” 
(preface 14). Pico sees in the cabalistic books — and God is his witness (vidi 
in illis, testis est Deus) — not the secrets of the Mosaic religion but the 
universal truths of Christian dogmas; he also reads in them “what we read 
daily in Paul, Dionysius, Jerome and Augustine.””% In the light of his 
personal “epiphany,” Pico claims that the teachings of the Cabala confirm 
Christian doctrines and dogmas and are to be considered as part of the 
Christian tradition as a whole. In his cabalistic Conclusiones, he therefore 
acts as an interpreter, the translator of a personal, philosophical, and 
theological vision. As the (natural) science of astrology teaches us how to 
read in the book of God (nature) — he writes — thus the Cabala teaches us 
how to read in the book of the Law (Conclusiones 2.11.72; Farmer 1998, 
552). The same argument (a mixture of esotericism and exotericism) used 
for the Cabala is also valid for the Chaldean and Orphic mysteries, handed 

down through the fragmentary teachings of Zoroaster and Pythagoras's 
mathematical doctrines (with the substantial difference that in Pico?s day 
there was no significant number of followers of Orpheus or Pythagoras to 
be converted to the universal truth of Christianity). Nevertheless, as Bori 
suggestively observes, it is sometimes tempting, while reading Pico, 
actually to believe in the survival or rebirth of mysteries like those 
transmitted in the pagan initiation rites. Understanding the esoteric 
language of initiation and spiritual transformation implies interpreting and 
translating its content, its truth, disguised under the veil of poetic enigmas, 
into the language of Christian theology. Pico*s is a highly synthetic — yet 
generously inclusive — philosophical reconciliation of the multiple ways in 
which universal (Christian) truth may be articulated. As young Pico himself 
provocatively declares in the final lines of the Oration, his principal task 
was to “[free] from the tangle of riddles and the obscurity of fables the 
meaning of this secret philosophy” (8263). 

This is the hermeneutic strategy that lies at the core of Picos “new 
philosophy”: only through the correct (or at least doggedly coherent) 
interpretation of any given text — or doctrine — may its disguised truths be 
revealed. In this way, it is perhaps more accurate to say that Pico has 
developed an entire system of exegetic thought rather than “merely” a new 
philosophy. Yet this characteristic alone is not enough to explain the full 
import of Picos many contributions. How many philosophers and 
theologians before (and after) him spent sleepless nights examining the 
texts of their predecessors through a lens that was, or genuinely seemed to 
them, to be wholly original? This is the age-old task of all commentators, 
one that Plotinus addresses in his Enneads (7.1): 

When, perhaps, we make the effort to clarify our ideas and close into 
the heart of the matter we are at once unsettled: our doubts throw us 
back upon ancient explanations; we choose among the various 
theories, or among the various interpretations of some one theory, and 
so we come to rest, satisfied, if only we can counter a question with an 
approved answer, and glad to be absolved from further enquiry. Now, 
we must believe that some of the venerable philosophers of old 
discovered the truth; but it is important to examine which of them 

really hit the mark and by what guiding principle we can ourselves 
attain to certitude. 

What sets Pico apart from others, what at last makes his Oration so 
significant, is not simply his heartfelt desire to attain a comforting measure 
of “certitude”; rather, it is his equally ardent willingness (indeed, necessity) 
to put his theories to the test. Success is gauged not in rest but in action. 
However, this ambition, if we may use such a term, derives as much from 
his own slakeless thirst to make a contribution of his own as it does from a 
sense of responsibility toward his fellow man. In the first proem to the 
Heptaplus, Pico explains that he had assumed the role of exegete so that “I 
too might pluck for myself a few ears to place as first fruits upon the altars 
of the church, that I might not be shut off from the privileges of the temple 
like a false Israelite or one of the uninitiate.” The spirited acquisition of 
knowledge is itself a part of man's path to perfection. For this reason, we 
ought to see Picos submission of his theses to public debate both as an 
opportunity to test their validity and as an altruistic invitation to assist, 
albeit indirectly, in the self-enlightenment of all those in his learned 
audience. 

1 There have been several attempts at identifying this unknown person. In 
any Case, that the “manifesto of Renaissance Humanism” may begin with a 
coded reference to an Arabic “prophet” (as in the Palatino manuscript) who 
is actually a converted friar (or a converted Jew) remains a fascinating 
conjecture. 

2 Asclepius 6. See also Augustine, De civitate Dei 10.12; Ficino, Theologia 
Platonica 14.3. 

3 Convivio 4.19.7. 

4 Cf. Bori, “Tre giardini” (1996b, 551-64); Bori (2000, 36ff.). 

5 Besides Hermetic texts (e.g., Asclepius 8-9), this motif is present also in 
Lactantius (De ira dei 14.1) as well as Manetti (De dignitate 3). Cf. Bausi 
(Pico 2003, 7). 

6 Gentile (1991, 66). 

7 It is precisely for this reason, we might add, that Pico (with an eye 
toward Seneca's forty-first letter, to Lucilius) develops and integrates 
Seneca's idea of wisdom into the Oration. The concept of reason as a 
means of dominating oneself, and the whole cosmos, is expressed in 
Senecan terms, although the second sentence suggests, again, an upward 
dynamism that does not belong to Stoic usage. 

8 See Marcel (1958, 664ff.). On Ficino?s concept of human dignity, see 
Vasoli (1999, 74-89). 

9 To reinforce this “contamination” of a Platonic and biblical archetype in 
the Oration, we may remember that Origen, in a work translated into Latin 
in 1481 by Cristoforo Persona (Contra Celsum), had already recognized in 
the Platonic myth of the Symposium a reflection of the Creation story told in 
Genesis (with Póros identified with Adam and Penía with the serpent). For 
Pico's attitude toward Origen, see Conclusiones 1.29.29 (Farmer 1998, 
434-35). See also Wind (1983, 44): “Although [Pico*”s] doctrine is not 
identical with Origen's in any detail, they have in common the assumption 
that man's place in the universe is not fixed, that he is able to move freely, 
up and down, between the angelic and the animal spheres, belonging to 
both and bound to neither.” See also Wind (1965, 197ff.). 

10 In this passage, Ficino comments on Symposium 203. 

11 Pico (1942, 501). Picos thesis 2.5.21 (Farmer 1998, 444-45) also 
speaks of the hortus Jovis (“the garden of Jove [Zeus])”). 

12 See 830. 

13 The following sentence by Pico”s friend and patron Lorenzo de” Medici 
(from the Commentary on His Own Sonnets, also written in the 1480s and 
possibly a model for Pico?s own Commentary on a Love Song by Girolamo 
Benivieni) seems to echo the dynamic meaning of “happiness,” based on a 
long classical tradition, from Plato to Boethius, on whose celebration this 
section of the Oration opens: “All men are born with a natural appetite for 
happiness, and all human actions are directed toward it as their true goal” 
(Pico 1992, 605, translation mine). For the anthropological tradition, see 
Buck (1997, 1:6ff.). 

14 The copious references to Patristic sources, underscored by the majority 
of commentators, should not overshadow the real emphasis of the Oration. 
When they speak of animal metamorphoses, for example, the Church 
Fathers and monastic authors (perhaps with the exception of such mystic 
authors as St. Bernard) generally speak in the negative, emphasizing the 
nature of the Fall and portraying a true (allegorical and theological) 
“menagerie” of human degradation into a variety of animals, according to 
various sins. Many (e.g., St. Thomas Aquinas) add as a corollary the 
demonic corruption of the imaginative and rational faculties of man. Pico 
instead is focused on extolling the transcendent possibilities of chameleon- 
like human nature and imagination. 

15 Cf. Copenhaver (2002a, 59): “[A Jt the peak of a climb that starts with 
free choice and rises through terrestrial, celestial and supercelestial natures, 
Adam's last movement is withdrawal into himself, and his final goal is 
mystical extinction in the godhead.” 

16 Among the Church Fathers, Origen and Jerome spoke of the “threefold” 
sense of Scripture, but the third of Origen's senses, the spiritual, was split 
into two, the allegorical and the anagogical, and so the “fourfold” sense 
became established. The mnemonic distich “Litera, gesta docet; quid 
credas, allegoria; moralis, quid agas; quo tendas anagogia” (“The letter 
teaches events, allegory what you should believe, morality teaches what 
you should do, anagogy what mark you should be aiming for”) is most 
often cited from the Glossa ordinaria (De Lubac 1998, 1:1). An alternative 
version is: “Litera, scripta docet; quod credas, allegoria; quod speres, 

anagoge; quid agas, tropologia.” On Origen, see De Lubac (1998, 1:142-59, 
161-84 and passim). 

17 Pico (1971, 1:178). Compare Antonino Raspanti's introduction to Picos 
Expositiones in Psalmos (in Pico 1997, 18-21) and Wirszubski (1989, 262— 
63) on the sources of “the Hebrew terms of the fourfold interpretation of the 
Scripture which Pico uses in his Apology.” See also Campanini (2005, 432— 
44). 

18 Cf. Farmer (1998, 345); Copenhaver (2002a). Cf. also Conclusions on 
the Ways of Interpreting Orpheus? Hymns According to Magic 15 (Farmer 
1998, 510). 

19 Sonetti (1994, 33, 61): “di caligine opaca dianci pieno” (“full of 
impenetrable darkness”) (16.4) and “di caligine operto e ?l vivo raggio,” 
which could be translated as “the vivid ray piercing [through] darkness” 
(30.6). Interestingly, caligine (“darkness”) is a hapax in Dante (Purg. 
11.30). 

20 Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics 1.1100b5ff. (Aristotle 2002, 106): “For 
clearly if we were to track a person”s fortunes, we shall find ourselves often 
Calling the same person happy and then miserable, thus revealing the happy 
man as a kind of chameleon and infirmly based” (emphasis added). Bausi 
correctly points out that the Aristotelian meaning of the term comes back, in 
a different context, in Picos (2003, 14) confutations of astrology in 
Disputationes adversos astrologiam (6.2). One could perhaps recognize 
here a nod to the great Renaissance theme and iconography of Fortune as 
chance, opportunity, occasio temporis, to be seized by the forelock. 
Copenhaver (2002a, 60) points instead to the negative, naturalistic, and 
“magic” background of the image. 

21 Asclepius 5-6. Cf. Hermes Trismegistus (1992, 69). 

22 Farmer (1998, 514): “Frustra adit naturam et Protheum, qui Pana non 
attraxerit.” 

23 Wind (1968, 196). 

24 Copenhaver stresses the (Christian) cabalistic leitmotif of the Oration 
over other themes: “Human mutability, according to Pico, is a marvel, but is 
also unreliable. [...] Man finds his dignity by emulating the angels” 
(Copenhaver 2002a, 60). 

25 Wind (1968, 218). According to Wind, we are not far here from 
Nicholas of Cusa's docta ignorantia (“learned ignorance”). De Lubac and 
(after him) Bausi also recall a passage of Cusa's On Conjectures (De 
conjecturis), in which the main theme of this section of the Oration, man's 
potential transformation into a human God or a God humanized (humanus 
Deus atque Deus humanatus), is also clearly expressed (De Lubac 1974, 
200-1). 

26 See Bausi (Pico 2003, 25). 
27 See Idel (2005). 

28 For an interpretation of the role of Metatron in Pico's angelology, see 
Copenhaver (2002a, 78ff.). 

29 Ernst Cassirer (1942, 138) put Pico?s doctrine of God, man, and the 
world under the category of “symbolic thought.” Bori (2000, 86) agrees. 

30 Cf. Copenhaver (2002a, 81): “[W]ritten in Latin, expressed in recondite 
allusions to classical and biblical texts, and dependent on sources even 
more arcane, the Oration could be read as the antithesis of what Descartes 
wanted philosophy to become: divorced from history and philology and 
obligated to clarity as an ideal.” 

31 Cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses 15.165—72: “All things are changing; nothing 
dies. The spirit wanders, comes now here, now there, and occupies 
whatever frame it pleases. From beasts it passes into human bodies, and 

from our bodies into beasts, but never perishes. And, as the pliant wax is 
stamped with new designs, does not remain as it was before nor keep the 
same form long, but is still the selfsame wax, so do 1 teach that the soul is 
ever the same, though it passes into ever-changing bodies” (Ovid, 1946). 

32 In another section of the text (837), we read in the Palatino manuscript: 
“[I]t is not the circular body that makes the demon [the “heavens” in the 
princeps] but straightforward reason.” 

33 Augustine, On Genesis against the Manichees 2.23: “Hence, we read, 
and we hear, and we should believe, that the fullness of knowledge and the 
flaming sword [of the cherubim] guard the tree of life. No one can come to 
the tree of life except by these two ways, that is, by the endurance of 
troubles and the fullness of knowledge [...], that is, by charity” (Augustine 
of Hippo 1990). The endurance of troubles, we may assume, is addressed in 
8892-93 of the Oration. See also Farmer (1998, 41). 

34 Philo, Life of Moses 2.97. See Augustine's sermon on Psalms 17 
(especially v. 10) and 98, Jerome's De interpretatione nominum 
hebraicorum s.v., Peter Lombard's commentary on Psalm 98, and Rabanus 
Maurus, De universo 5.3. 

35 Cf. Augustine's sermon on Psalm 79: “The cherub is the seat of God's 
glory and is interpreted as the fullness of knowledge. There God sits in the 
fullness of knowledge. Though we understand that the cherubim are the 
exalted powers and virtues of the heavens, you will nevertheless be a 
cherub if you so desire. If the cherub is the seat of knowledge, listen to what 
the Scripture says: “the soul of the just man is the seat of knowledge” 
(Wisdom 7). How, you say, will 1 become the seat of knowledge? Who will 
make it so? You yourself have the means to make it so: “the fullness of law 
is love”” (Rom. 13:10) (Augustine of Hippo 1888). 

36 Cf. Pico”s first exposition on Psalm 17:12 (Pico 1997, 149) and the 
“solitary darkness of the Father” in 830. 

37 In the Old Testament (Jer. 10:2), the upper waters are compared to the 
Jews (Hep. 7.2), whereas the lower waters come to represent the gentiles 
(Hep. 7.2) and more generally the earthly world from which Christians are 
freed, as if from a yoke (Hep. 7.3). Furthermore, Pico attributes to Moses 
the notion that the firmament (i.e., the sphere of the fixed stars) was placed 
by God between the two waters (Hep. 2.3). 

38 See also Ps. 28:3. 
39 Cf. John 4:13-15. 

40 The inherent link between love (charity) and law, while not immediately 
apparent, becomes clear in Augustine?s sermon on Psalm 98, in which he 
equates knowledge with the knowledge of God's law (“the duties of 
action,” 869). Thus, Augustine”s appeal to the reader to embody the fullness 
of knowledge is, not unlike what Pico presents here, an exhortation to 
aspire to the heights of theology. 

41 See Conclusiones 2.5.14 and 2.11.10; Wirszubski (1989, 198-200); 
Farmer (1998, 441, 524-25). This same concept is found in Maimonides” 
Guide of the Perplexed 3.ex. 

42 The most significant illustration of the motif is to be found in Richard 
of St. Victor”s treatise De arca mystica, in which the complex elaboration of 
the contemplative process culminates within the tabernacle in the figures of 
the cherubim (see 4.5 and passim). See 8232 of the Oration, which seems to 
echo Richard's main idea. 

43 See the first proem to the Heptaplus. 

44 It is worth noting that Pico”s library contained a copy of what appears to 
be Berengar of Poitiers's defence of Abelard (Kibre 1936, 149, no. 207). 

45 See Conclusiones 7.2-4. This is but a single example among many of 
the fact that Pico was pursuing, with well-intentioned yet perhaps naive 
optimism, certain fundamental notions with perilous disregard for what one 
may nowadays see as their “cultural baggage.” Another analogous example 
is to be found in the case of Abelard, who unhesitatingly explained that the 
Platonic anima mundi (“world soul”) was tantamount to the Holy Spirit 
(e.g., Theologia Christiana 1.5, PL 178.1144a-46d). 

46 For example, Theologia Platonica 1.5.14, 13.2.10, and 14.2.8-10, 
among many other possibilities. 

47 See Farmer (1998, 81-82, 549). 

48 Augustine, for instance, had explained in his sermon on Psalm 98 that 
once the believer has gratefully accepted God's illuminating grace, his feet 
become nimble like the hooves of a stag and his hands take on the strength 
of a bow (Ps. 17:34-35, 37). The stag's hooves, then, come to represent the 
believer”s agile zeal, and his strong hands suggest his steadfastness in doing 
good works. See Augustine”s sermon on Ps. 9:15-16. Note, however, that 
the foot can also be a positive symbol: love directed to the proper ends (see 
Peter Lombard's commentary on the same verses in Ps. 9 and Sent. 2.38; 
Bernard of Clairvaux's sermon 13 on the Psalms). 

49 E.g., Conclusiones 2.8.1. 
50 Pertinent to this discussion is Di Napoli (1965, 410-16). 

51 Daniélou has traced out the tradition of angels serving as the soul- 
bride?s helpers (Daniélou 1976, 83-94); cf. Augustine's De doctrina 
christiana 1.37. 

52 Cf. Philo”s Life of Moses 2.66-140; Clement of Alexandria's Stromateis 
5.6; Bede's De tabernaculo. 

53 Each of these translations comes from Rabin's edition (Maimonides 
1995). 

54 See also Pico?'s Commento 2.9. 

55 The richest and most reliable annotation for the Oration is presently that 
of Francesco Bausi (Pico 2003). 

56 Bausi strongly disagrees with this point of view, stressing how Pico*s 
“opening to all philosophical-theological schools and religious traditions 
does not deny (and in fact preventively implies) that only one, the Christian, 
is the repository of a full and unique truth, communicated to man through 
Revelation” (Pico 2003, 26). 

57 Cf. Vickers, Rombach, and Enenkel. 
58 Cf. Bori (2000, 154-58). 
59 Cf. Bausi (Pico 2003, 141-56). 

60 It is not coincidental that (as Pico elaborates in his cabalistic 
Conclusions) Joshua Nave, the first in this lineage, has the same name as 
the Savior (Yehoshua's root = salvation), who, according to his followers, 
will fulfil the prophecy of the Old Testament. 

61 Bori (2000, 90-94). Farmer (1998, 89-96, passim) adopts the category 
of syncretism, and Grafton (1997, 97) speaks instead of “a model of eclectic 
philosophy that would inspire imitation for centuries to come.” An 
interpretation different from that of Bori is provided also by Bausi (Pico 
2003, xlvii ff.), who stresses the fundamental continuity between Pico'”s 
Oration and his later writings, in particular the Heptaplus, part of a 
projected monumental tract Against the Enemies of the Church (Adversus 
hostes ecclesiae), of which only one part was drafted, the Disputations 
against Divinatory Astrology. In the proem to the third exposition of the 

Heptaplus, Pico adopts an argument first put forth by Augustine in De 
doctrina Christiana (2.40), according to which Christians are the legitimate 
proprietors of those truths that pagan philosophers, in particular the 
Platonists, illegitimately claimed to possess. 

62 Copenhaver (2002a, 75). 

63 Copenhaver (2002a, 76). Pointing out that Pico sees in the Cabala both 
a theosophy (contemplative) and a theurgy (operative — a major influence on 
Pico?s Cabala was the thirteenth-century mystic Abraham Abulafia, whose 
Cabala “was aggressively theurgic”), Copenhaver sees the possibility “that 
Pico meant to bring both the Sefirot (a theology expressed in names and 
hence lower than the “ineffable” theology) and the Merkabah (forms, 
angels, intelligences, what Maimonides called “metaphysics”) into his 
practical Cabala.” See also Wirszubski (1989, 137ff.). 

64 Pesce (2004, introduction). 

65 Cf. Pico's Commento (in the commentary to the final stanza), in which 
the Cabala is defined as “reception” precisely because it is transmitted not 
in writing but by word of mouth. 

66 See, for example, Garin (1996). 

67 Pico underlines how recently translations of Jewish cabalistic works 
into Latin had appeared, beginning with the humanists (88251-53). 
Interestingly enough, the first printed editions of cabalistic works in Latin 
were not translations of Jewish works but Christian writings on the Cabala, 
such as Reuchlin's De arte cabalistica and De verbo mirifico. 

68 See Copenhaver (2002a, 75ff.) for a recent attempt at situating these 
words within the cabalist tradition probably known to Pico, from 
Maimonides to Abulafia. 

69 Cf. Bausi (Pico 2003, 131n257). In addition to the episode of Dactylus 
Hebreus, recounted by Pico himself, we discover in a letter of Lorenzo de” 
Medici to Giovanni Lanfredini (11 August 1488) that Pico had converted 
(using “his own arms”) a young and learned Jew whom he had employed to 
translate some of his Hebrew books. 

70 Cf. Bori (2000, 61): “It is evident that both points of view coexist in 
Pico: on the one hand, the persistence of the language of mysteries [...]; on 
the other, Augustine and traditional biblical devotion.” Indeed, Beroaldo 
Called Pico “the Other Apuleius,” referring to Apuleius as a follower of the 
sacred mysteries (Bausi 1996, 169). 

Part Il Text 

¡ATIN TEXT 

1. Legi, patres colendissimi, in Arabum monumentis, interrogatum 
Abdalam Sarracenum quid in hac quasi mundana scena admirandum 
maxime spectaretur, nihil spectari homine admirabilius respondisse. 

2. Cui sententiae illud Mercurii adstipulatur: “Magnum, o Asclepi, 
miraculum est homo.” 

TRANSLATION 

1. Most esteemed fathers,* 1 have read in the ancient texts of the Arabians? 
that when Abdallah the Saracen? was questioned as to what on this world's 
stage, so to speak, seemed to him most worthy of wonder, he replied that 
there is nothing to be seen more wonderful than man.?* 

2. This opinion is seconded by Mercury*s saying: “A great miracle, 
Asclepius, is man.”? 

3. Horum dictorum rationem cogitanti mihi non satis illa faciebant, quae 
multa de humanae naturae praestantia afferuntur a multis: esse hominem 
creaturarum internuntium, superis familiarem, regem inferiorum; sensuum 
perspicacia, rationis indagine, intelligentiae lumine naturae interpretem; 
stabilis evi et fluxi temporis interstitium, et (quod Persae dicunt) mundi 
copulam, immo hymeneunm, ab angelis, teste Davide, paulo deminutum. 

4. Magna haec quidem, sed non principalia, idest quae summae 
admirationis privilegium sibi iure vendicent. 

5. Cur enim non ipsos angelos et beatissimos caeli choros magis 
admiremur? 

3. Still, when 1 considered the reasons behind these maxims,? I was 
unsatisfied by the arguments put forward by many men to explain the 
excellence of human nature:” that man is the intermediary between 
creatures, a companion of the higher beings, a king of the things beneath 
him; that, by the acuity of his senses, by the discernment of his reason and 
by the light of his intelligence he was the interpreter of nature;? that man is 
the midpoint between fixed eternity and fleeting time, the bond (as the 
Persians say”) or rather the wedding-song of the world,*% and only slightly 
inferior, as David affirms,!! to the angels. 

4, These reasons are indeed great, but they are nonetheless not the 
principal ones. That is, they are not the main grounds on which man may 
rightfully claim for himself the privilege of the highest admiration. 

5. Indeed, why then would we not find the angels themselves and the 
blessed choirs of heaven even more admirable? 

6. Tandem intellexisse mihi sum visus cur felicissimum proindeque 
dignum omni admiratione animal sit homo, et quae sit demum illa conditio 
quam in universi serie sortitus sit, non brutis modo, sed astris, sed 
ultramundanis mentibus invidiosam. 

7. Res supra fidem et mira! 

8. Quidni? Nam et propterea magnum miraculum et admirandum 
profecto animal iure homo et dicitur et existimatur. 

9. Sed quae nam ea sit audite, patres, et benignis auribus pro vestra 
humanitate hanc mihi operam condonate. 

10. lam summus Pater architectus Deus hanc quam videmus mundanam 
domum, divinitatis templum augustissimum, archanae legibus sapientiae 
fabrefecerat. 

11. Supercelestem regionem mentibus decorarat; ethereos globos 
aeternis animis vegetarat; excrementarias ac faeculentas has inferioris 
mundi partes omnigena animalium turba complerat. 

12. Sed, opere consumato, desiderabat artifex esse aliquem qui tanti 
operis rationem perpenderet, pulchritudinem amaret, magnitudinem 
admiraretur. 

13. Idcirco iam rebus omnibus (ut Moses Timeusque testantur) absolutis, 
de producendo homine postremo cogitavit. 

6. At length, it seemed to me that I had come to understand why man is 
the most fortunate of beings and therefore worthy of all admiration, and 
what finally is the condition that befell him in the universal order, a 
condition to be envied not only by beasts but even by the stars and the 
intelligences dwelling beyond this world.*? 

7. A thing surpassing belief, and wondrous too! 

8. And why not? Since, for this very reason, man is rightly called, and 
thought to be, a great miracle and a being worthy of all admiration. 

9. But hear, fathers, exactly what this condition is and, while you listen 
benevolently, kindly indulge me in my endeavour. 

10. In accordance with the laws of His mysterious wisdom, God the 
supreme Father and Architect had already fashioned this worldly home we 
behold, this most sacred temple of His divinity. 

11. He had already adorned the supercelestial region with intelligences, 
enlivened the heavenly globes with eternal souls, and filled the excremental 
and filthy parts of the lower world with a multitude of forms of animal life. 

12. But when the work was finished, the Craftsman'* still longed for 
there to be someone to ponder the meaning of such a magnificent 
achievement, to love its beauty and to marvel at its vastness.!* 

13. So, when everything was done (as Moses and Timaeus testify), He 
finally thought to bring forth man.!” 

14. Verum nec erat in archetipis unde novam sobolem effingeret, nec in 
thesauris quod novo filio hereditarium largiretur, nec in subsellis totius 
orbis ubi universi contemplator iste sederet. 

15. lam plena omnia; omnia summis, mediis infimisque ordinibus 
fuerant distributa. 

16. Sed non erat paternae potestatis in extrema faetura quasi effetam 
defecisse; non erat Sapientiae consilii inopia in re necessaria fluctuasse; non 
erat benefici Amoris ut qui in aliis esset divinam liberalitatem laudaturus, in 
se illam damnare cogeretur. 

17. Statuit tandem optimus opifex ut cui dari nihil proprium poterat, ei 
commune esset quicquid privatum singulis fuerat. 

14. But there was nothing among His archetypes from which He could 
mould a new progeny, nor was there anything in his storehouses that He 
might bestow upon His new son as an inheritance, nor was there among the 
seats of the world any place for this contemplator of the universe. 

15. Every place was by then filled; all things had already been assigned 
to the highest, the middle, and the lowest orders. 

16. But it was not in the nature of the Father's power to fail, as if 
exhausted, in His final creation. It was not in the nature of His wisdom to 
hesitate, as if at a loss, when faced with a necessary task. Nor was it in the 
nature of His beneficent love to have one who would praise divine 
generosity in all other things be forced to find it blameworthy in regard to 
himself. 

17. At length, the Master Creator decreed that the creature to whom He 
had been unable to give anything wholly his own should share in common 

whatever belonged to every other being.** 

18. Igitur hominem accepit, indiscretae opus imaginis, atque in mundi 
positum meditullio sic est alloquutus: “Nec certam sedem, nec propriam 
faciem, nec munus ullum peculiare tibi dedimus, o Adam, ut quam sedem, 
quam faciem, quae munera tute Ooptaveris, ea pro voto, pro tua sententia, 
habeas et possideas. 

19. Definita caeteris natura intra praescriptas a nobis leges cohercetur. 

20. Tu, nullis angustiis cohercitus, pro tuo arbitrio, in cuius manu te 
posui, tibi illam prefinies. 

21. Medium te mundi posui, ut circumspiceres inde comodius quicquid 
est in mundo. 

22. Nec te celestem neque terrenum, neque mortalem neque immortalem 
fecimus, ut, tui ipsius quasi arbitrarius honorariusque plastes et fictor, in 
quam malueris tute formam effingas. 

23. Poteris in inferiora, quae sunt bruta, degenerare; poteris in superiora, 
quae sunt divina, ex tui animi sententia regenerari.” 

18. He therefore took man, this creature of indeterminate image,” set 
him in the middle of the world,'? and said to him: “We have given you, 
Adam, no fixed seat or form of your own, no talent peculiar to you alone. 
This we have done so that whatever seat, whatever form, whatever talent 
you may judge desirable, these same may you have and possess according 
to your desire and judgment. 

19. Once defined, the nature of all other beings is constrained within the 
laws We have prescribed for them. 

20. But you, constrained by no limits, may determine your nature for 
yourself, according to your own free will, in whose hands We have placed 
you. 

21. We have set you at the centre of the world so that from there you 
may more easily gaze upon whatever it contains. 

22. We have made you neither of heaven nor of earth, neither mortal nor 
immortal,'? so that you may, as the free and extraordinary”% shaper of 
yourself, fashion yourself in whatever form you prefer. 

23. It will be in your power to degenerate into the lower forms of life, 
which are brutish. Alternatively, you shall have the power, in accordance 
with the judgment of your soul, to be reborn into the higher orders, those 
that are divine.” 

24. O summam Dei patris liberalitatem, summam et admirandam 
hominis foelicitatem, cui datum id habere quod optat, id esse quod velit! 

25. Bruta, simul atque nascuntur, id secum afferunt (ut ait Lucilius) e 
bulga matris quod possessura sunt. 

26. Supremi spiritus aut ab initio aut paulo mox id fuerunt, quod sunt 
futuri in perpetuas aeternitates. 

24. O supreme liberality?! of God the Father, and supreme and 

wonderful happiness”? of man who is permitted to obtain what he desires 
and to be what he wills! 

25. As soon as they are born, brutes bring with them from their mother”s 
womb,?? as Lucilius says, all that they are going to possess. 

26. The Intelligences have been, either from the beginning or soon 
thereafter,?* what they are perpetually going to be throughout eternity. 

27. Nascenti homini omnifaria semina et omnigenae vitae germina 
indidit Pater. 

28. Quae quisque excoluerit, illa adolescent, et fructus suos ferent in illo. 

29. Si vegetalia, planta fiet; si sensualia, obrutescet; si rationalia, 
caeleste evadet animal; si intellectualia, angelus erit et Dei filius. 

30. Et si, nulla creaturarum sorte contentus, in unitatis centrum suae se 
receperit, unus cum Deo spiritus factus, in solitaria Patris caligine, qui est 
super omnia constitutus omnibus antestabit. 

27. The Father infused in man, at his birth, every sort of seed and all 
sprouts of every kind of life.?? 

28. These seeds will grow and bear fruit in each man who sows them. 

29. If he cultivates his vegetative seeds, he will become a plant. If he 
cultivates his sensitive seeds, he will become a brute animal. If he cultivates 

his rational seeds, he will become a heavenly being. If he cultivates his 
intellectual seeds, he will be an angel and a son of God.?* 

30. And if he — being dissatisfied with the lot assigned to any other 
creature — gathers himself into the centre of his own unity, thus becoming a 

single spirit with God in the solitary darkness?” of the Father, he, who had 
been placed above all things, will become superior to all things. 

31. Quis hunc nostrum chamaeleonta non admiretur? 
32. Aut omnino quis aliud quicquam admiretur magis? 
31. Who will not wonder at this chameleon of ours?”* 
32. Or rather, who will admire any other being more? 

33. Quem non immerito Asclepius Atheniensis, versipellis huius et se 
ipsam transformantis naturae argumento, per Protheum in mysteriis 
significari dixit. 

34. Hinc illae apud Hebreos et Pythagoricos methamorphoses celebratae. 

33. Not without reason, Asclepius the Athenian?? said that man was 
represented in the secret rites by Proteus because of his changing and 
metamorphous nature.?% 

34. Hence the metamorphoses renowned among the Jews?! and the 
Pythagoreans.”? 

35. Nam et Hebreorum theologia secretior nunc Enoch sanctum in 
angelum divinitatis, quem vocant INUDUONA, nunc in alia alios numina 

reformant; et Pythagorici scelestos homines et in bruta deformant et, si 
Empedocli creditur, etiam in plantas. 

35. Indeed, even the most secret Hebrew theology at one time transforms 
holy Enoch into an angel of divinity,% whom they call [INVUN] 
Metatron,* and at other times it reshapes other men into other spirits. 
According to Pythagoreans, wicked men are deformed into brutes and, if 
Empedocles is to be believed, into plants as well.** 

36. Quos imitatus Maumeth illud frequens habebat in ore, qui a divina 
lege recesserit brutum evadere. 

37. Et merito quidem: neque enim plantam cortex, sed stupida et nihil 
sentiens natura; neque iumenta corium, sed bruta anima et sensualis; nec 
caelum orbiculatum corpus, sed recta ratio; nec sequestratio corporis, sed 
spiritalis intelligentia angelum facit. 

38. Si quem enim videris deditum ventri, humi serpentem hominem, 
frutex est, non homo, quem vides; si quem in phantasiae quasi Calipsus 
vanis praestigiis cecutientem et, subscalpenti delinitum illecebra, sensibus 
mancipatum, brutum est, non homo, quem vides. 

36. Imitating them, Mohammed frequently remarked that he who strays 
from divine law becomes a brute.* 

37. And, indeed, rightly so. It is not in fact the bark that makes the plant, 
but dull and insentient nature; not the hide that makes a beast of burden, but 
a brutish and sensuous soul; not the circular body that makes the heavens, 
but straightforward reason; not the separation from the body that makes an 
angel, but its spiritual intelligence.”” 

38. If you see someone who is a slave to his belly, crawling along the 
ground,** it is not a man you see, but a plant; if you see someone who is 
enslaved by his own senses, blinded by the empty hallucinations brought on 

by fantasy (as if by Calypso herself*%) and entranced by their bedevilling 
spells, it is a brute animal you see, not a man. 

39. Si recta philosophum ratione omnia discernentem, hunc venereris; 
caeleste est animal, non terrenum. 

40. Si purum contemplatorem corporis nescium, in penetralia mentis 
relegatum, hic non terrenum, non caeleste animal: hic augustius est numen, 
humana carne circumvestitum. 

41. Ecquis hominem non admiretur? 

42. Qui non immerito in sacris Litteris Mosaycis et Christianis nunc 
“omnis carnis,” nunc “omnis creaturae” appellatione designatur, quando se 
ipsum ipse in omnis carnis faciem, in omnis creaturae ingenium effingit, 
fabricat et transformat. 

43. Idcirco scribit Evantes Persa, ubi Chaldaicam theologiam enarrat, 
non esse homini suam ullam et nativam imaginem, extrarias multas et 
adventitias. 

44. Hinc illud Chaldeorum [23 3 NAM N9INNI TTA IN YN YAON 1 

na YWI11] idest “homo variae ac multiformis et desultoriae naturae 
animal.” 

39. If you see a philosopher discerning things with right reason, worship 
him, for he is not an earthly creature, but divine. 

40. If you see a pure contemplator, oblivious to his body and absorbed in 
the recesses of his mind, this is neither an earthly nor a heavenly creature: 
this is a still more eminent spirit, clothed in human flesh. 

41. Who, then, will not admire man? 

42. Not undeservedly, in Mosaic and Christian Scripture he is sometimes 
Called “all flesh” and sometimes “every creature,” insofar as he fashions, 
shapes, and transforms his own appearance into that of all flesh,*!* his own 
Character into that of every creature. 

43. Accordingly, Evanthes the Persian, writing on Chaldean theology, 
says man possesses no innate image, but many that are extrinsic and 
acquired. 

44. Hence that saying of the Chaldeans [33 3 914 N9%NNI TTA IN 
YN YA10N IN Y WIN1];% that is, “Man is by nature diverse, multiform 
and inconstant.”44 

45. Sed quorsum haec? 

46. Ut intelligamus (postquam hac nati sumus conditione, ut id simus 
quod esse volumus) curare hoc potissimum debere nos, ut illud quidem in 
nos non dicatur, cum in honore essemus non cognovisse similes factos 
brutis et iumentis insipientibus, sed illud potius Asaph prophetae: “Dii estis 
et filii Excelsi omnes”; ne, abutentes indulgentissima Patris liberalitate, 
quam dedit ille liberam optionem e salutari noxiam faciamus nobis. 

47. Invadat animum sacra quaedam et lunonia ambitio, ut mediocribus 
non contenti anhelemus ad summa, adque illa (quando possumus, si 
volumus) conseqguenda totis viribus enitamur. 

48. Dedignemur terrestria, caelestia contemnamus, et, quicquid mundi 
est denique posthabentes, ultramundanam curiam eminentissimae divinitati 
proximam advolemus. 

49. Ibi, ut sacra tradunt mysteria, Seraphin, Cherubin et Throni primas 
possident; horum nos, iam cedere nescii et secundarum impatientes, et 
dignitatem et gloriam emulemur. 

45. Yet, why go on about this? 

46. So that we may understand that we (having been born into this 
condition; that is, born with the possibility to become what we wish to be) 
must take the greatest care, lest people say of us that we, although held in 
high esteem, did not realize that we had turned ourselves into brutes and 
mindless beasts of burden. Let us instead recall the saying of Asaph the 
prophet: “You are all gods and sons of the most high.”“ Thus may we 
avoid abusing the most indulgent liberality of the Father by transforming 
the free choice He bestowed upon us from something beneficial to 
something harmful. 

47. Let our souls be pervaded by a certain holy and Junonian ambition so 
that we, not satisfied with what is mediocre, may aspire to what is loftiest, 
and may apply ourselves with all our strength in that pursuit, for we shall 
succeed if we are so minded. 

48. Let us spurn the terrestrial, disdain the celestial;* disregarding all 
that is of this world, let us fly off to the otherworldly court that is near to the 
most eminent Divinity.*” 

49. There, according to the sacred mysteries, seraphim, cherubim, and 
thrones occupy the first places;* let us emulate their dignity*? and glory, 
unwilling as we are to yield to them and unable to endure second place. 

50. Erimus illis, cum voluerimus, nihilo inferiores. 
51. Sed qua ratione, aut quid tandem agentes? 
52. Videamus quid illi agant, quam vivant vitam. 

53. Eam si et nos vixerimus (possumus enim), illorum sortem iam 
equaverimus. 

54. Ardet Saraph charitatis igne; fulget Cherub intelligentiae splendore; 
stat Thronus iudicii firmitate. 

55. Igitur si actuosae addicti vitae inferiorum curam recto examine 
susceperimus, Thronorum stata soliditate firmabimur. 

56. Si ab actionibus feriati in opificio opificem, in opifice opificium 
meditantes, in contemplandi ocio negociabimur, luce Cherubica undique 
corruscabimus. 

57. Si charitate ipsum opificem solum ardebimus, illius igne, qui edax 
est, in Saraphicam effigiem repente flammabimur. 

58. Super Throno, idest iusto iudice, sedet Deus iudex seculorum. 
50. If so we wish, we will not be inferior to them at all. 

51. But in what way, or by doing what? 

52. Let us consider what they do, what life they lead. 

53. If we too live that life (and indeed we can), we will be equal to their 
lot. 

54. The seraph burns with the fire of love; the cherub shines with the 
splendour of intelligence; the throne stands in the steadfastness of 
judgment. 

55. Therefore, if we, being dedicated to an active life, undertake the care 
of inferior things with proper consideration of their worth, we will be 
strengthened by the steadfast solidity of the thrones.”% 

56. If we, being unburdened by actions, meditate on the Creator in His 
creation and on creation in the Creator, we shall be engaged in the 
tranquillity of contemplation; we shall shine on all sides with cherubic 
light?! 

57. If we burn for the Creator alone, with charity, with its all-consuming 
fire, we shall burst into flame in the likeness of the seraphim.?? 

58. Upon the throne, that is, upon the just judge, sits God, the Judge of 
all time. 

59. Super Cherub, idest contemplatore, volat atque eum quasi incubando 
fovet. 

60. Spiritus enim Domini fertur super aquas, has — inquam — quae super 
caelos sunt, quae apud lob Dominum laudant antelucanis hymnis. 

61. Qui Saraph, idest amator est, in Deo est, et Deus in eo, immo et Deus 
et ipse unum sunt. 

62. Magna Thronorum potestas, quam iudicando, summa Saraphinorum 
sublimitas, quam amando assequimur. 

63. Sed quo nam pacto vel ¡udicare quisquam vel amare potest 
incognita? 

64, Amavit Moses Deum quem vidit, et administravit iudex in populo 
quae vidit prius contemplator in monte. 

59. Over the cherub, that is, over the contemplator, He flies”? and, as if 
brooding over him,”* imbues him with warmth. 

60. Indeed, the Spirit of the Lord is carried over the waters, the waters 
that, I say, are above the Heavens and that praise God in the pre-dawn 
hymns in the book of Job.?? 

61. He who is a seraph, that is, a lover, is in God and God is in him; 
indeed, he and God are one.” 

62. Great is the power of the thrones that we may reach by judging; 
supreme is the height of the seraphim that we may reach by loving. 

63. And yet in what manner can anyone either judge or love things 
unknown?>” 

64. Moses loved the Lord Whom he saw. As a judge, Moses 
administered to the people the things that he earlier saw on the mountain as 
a contemplator.?* 

65. Ergo medius Cherub sua luce et Saraphico igni nos praeparat, et ad 
Thronorum iudicium pariter illuminat. 

66. Hic est nodus primarum mentium, ordo Palladicus philosophiae 
contemplativae preses; hic nobis et emulandus primo et ambiendus, atque 
adeo comprehendendus est, unde et ad amoris rapiamur fastigia, et ad 
munera actionum bene instructi paratique descendamus. 

67. At vero operae precium, si ad exemplar vitae Cherubicae vita nostra 
formanda est, quae illa et qualis sit, quae actiones, quae illorum opera, prae 
oculis et in numerato habere. 

68. Quod cum nobis per nos, qui caro sumus et quae humi sunt sapimus, 
consequi non liceat, adeamus antiguos patres, qui de his rebus utpote sibi 
domesticis et cognatis locuplectissimam nobis et certam fidem facere 
possunt. 

69. Consulamus Paulum apostolum, vas electionis, quid ipse, cum ad 
tertium sublimatus est caelum, agentes Cherubinorum exercitus viderit. 

70. Respondebit utique, Dyonisio interprete, purgari illos, tum 
illuminari, postremo perfici. 

65. Hence, the cherub, located in the middle position, uses his light both 
to prepare us for the seraphic fire and likewise to illuminate for us the 
judgment of the thrones.?? 

66. The cherub is the bond of the Prime Minds, the order of Pallas, the 
overseer of contemplative philosophy.* First we must emulate him, thirst 
after him and to the same degree understand him in order that we may be 
raised from him to the heights of love and descend from him, well taught 
and prepared, to the duties of the active life. 

67. And yet, if our life is to be modelled on the example of the cherub's, 
it is worth our while to have before our eyes an idea of what life they lead 
and what it is like,?! what their duties are and what they do. 

68. Inasmuch as we, who are flesh and have the smell of earthly things,*? 
are not permitted to follow their model of our own accord, let us consult the 
ancient Fathers, for they, to whom these things were common and well 
known, can provide us with certain and abundant evidence of their nature. 

69. Let us inquire of the apostle Paul, the chosen vessel,**? regarding the 

activities of the cherubic hosts whom he saw when raised up to the third 
heaven. 

70. He will certainly answer, according to the interpretation of 
Dionysius, that they are cleansed, then illuminated, and afterward are 
perfected.** 

71. Ergo et nos, Cherubicam in terris vitam emulantes, per moralem 
scientiam affectuum impetus cohercentes, per dialecticam rationis 
Caliginem discutientes, quasi ignorantiae et vitiorum eluentes sordes 
animam purgemus, ne aut affectus temere debacchentur, aut ratio imprudens 
quandoque deliret. 

72. Tum bene compositam ac expiatam animam naturalis philosophiae 
lumine perfundamus, ut postremo divinarum rerum eam cognitione 
perficiamus. 

73. Et ne nobis nostri sufficiant, consulamus lacob patriarcham, cuius 
imago in sede gloriae sculpta corruscat. 

74. Admonebit nos pater sapientissimus in inferno dormiens, mundo in 
superno vigilans; sed admonebit per figuram (ita eis omnia contingebant) 
esse scalas ab imo solo ad caeli summa protensas, multorum graduum serie 
distinctas, fastigio Dominum insidere, contemplatores angelos per eas 
vicibus alternantes ascendere et descendere. 

71. So too, emulating the cherubic life on Earth, curbing the drive of the 
emotions through moral science, dispersing the darkness of reason through 
dialectics (as if washing away the squalor of ignorance and vice), may we 
purge our souls, lest our emotions run amok or our reason imprudently run 
off course at any time.*” 

72. Then may we imbue our purified and well-prepared soul with the 
light of natural philosophy so that afterward we may perfect it with the 
knowledge of things divine.*? 

73. And lest we be satisfied by those of our own, let us also consult 
Jacob the patriarch, whose image shines, chiselled in the dwelling place of 
glory.*” 

74. The most wise father, asleep in the lower world and awake in the 
higher, will illuminate us. But he will teach us through a figure (in this 
way all things were known to them) that there is a ladder that stretches from 
the lowest earth to the highest Heavens and that is marked by a series of 
many rungs. God is at its height, and the contemplative angels move up and 
down it in turns. 

75. Quod si hoc idem nobis angelicam affectantibus vitam factitandum 
est, queso, quis Domini scalas vel sordidato pede, vel male mundis manibus 
attinget? 

76. Impuro, ut habent mysteria, purum attingere nephas. 
77. Sed qui hi pedes? Quae manus? 

78. Profecto pes animae illa est portio despicatissima, qua ipsa materiae 
tanquam terrae solo innititur: altrix — inqguam — potestas et cibaria, fomes 
libidinis et voluptariae mollitudinis magistra. 

79. Manus animae cur irascentiam non dixerimus, quae appetentiae 
propugnatrix pro ea decertat, et sub pulvere ac sole predatrix rapit quae illa 
sub umbra dormitans helluetur? 

75. Yet, if we are to carry out these things in our efforts to imitate the 
angelic life, who, I ask, will dare to touch the Ladder of God, either with 
unclean feet or with unwashed hands? 

76. Itis unlawful, as the mysteries have it, to touch the clean with the 
unclean.7% 

77. But what feet are these? What hands? 

78. To be sure, the foot of the soul is that part which is most despicable, 
that which leans upon matter as if on earthly soil; it is the faculty, I say, that 
feeds and nourishes; it is, 1 say, the kindling wood of lust and the teacher of 
sensual weakness. ?* 

79. And why not call the hands of the soul its irascible part, that which 
fights on behalf of Desire, ”? battles for it, and like a plunderer takes away in 
broad daylight and the public arena”? the things that Desire, resting in the 
shade, then devours??* 

80. Has manus, hos pedes, idest totam sensualem partem in qua sedet 
corporis illecebra quae animam obtorto (ut aiunt) detinet collo, ne a scalis 
tamquam prophani pollutique reiciamur, morali philosophia quasi vivo 
flumine abluamus. 

81. At nec satis hoc erit, si per lacob scalam discursantibus angelis 
comites esse volumus, nisi et a gradu in gradum rite promoveri, et a 
scalarum tramite deorbitare nusquam, et reciprocos obire excursus bene apti 
prius instructique fuerimus. 

80. These hands, these feet, are the entire sensual part of the body in 
which resides the attraction that drags the soul back, as they say, obtorto 
collo.7? Let us wash them in moral philosophy as in a flowing river lest we 
be held back from the ladder as wicked and unclean.”* 

81. And yet not even this will be enough if we wish to be companions of 
the angels who hasten up and down Jacob*s ladder unless we are first well 
prepared and instructed to be promoted from step to step, to wheel away 
nowhere from the course of the ladder, and to face their movements to and 
fro. 

82. Quod cum per artem sermocinalem sive rationariam erimus 
consequuti, iam Cherubico spiritu animati, per scalarum idest naturae 
gradus philosophantes, a centro ad centrum omnia pervadentes, nunc unum 

quasi Osyrim in multitudinem vi Titanica discerpentes descendemus, nunc 
multitudinem quasi Osyridis membra in unum vi Phebea colligentes 
ascendemus, donec, in sinu Patris — qui super scalas est — tandem 
quiescentes, theologica foelicitate consumabimur. 

83. Percontemur et iustum lob, qui foedus iniit cum Deo vitae prius 
quam ipse ederetur in vitam, quid summus Deus in decem illis centenis 
millibus qui assistunt ei potissimum desideret: pacem utigue respondebit, 
iuxta id quod apud eum legitur: “Qui facit pacem in excelsis.” 

84. Et quoniam supremi ordinis monita medius ordo inferioribus 
interpretatur, interpretetur nobis lob theologi verba Empedocles 
philosophus. 

85. Hic duplicem naturam in nostris animis sitam, quarum altera sursum 
tollimur ad celestia, altera deorsum trudimur ad inferna, per litem et 
amicitiam, sive bellum et pacem, ut sua testantur carmina, nobis significat. 

82. Once we, inspired by the cherubic spirit, have reached this point 
through the art of speaking or of reasoning — that is, philosophizing 
according to the grades of Nature, penetrating the whole from the centre to 
the centre?” — then shall we descend, dashing the one into many with 
Titanic force like Osiris, and ascend, drawing together with Phoebean might 
the many into one, like Osiris's limbs,7 until at last, resting in the bosom of 
the Father Who is at the top of the ladder, we shall be made perfect in 
theological bliss.?? 

83. And let us inquire of just Job, who entered into a living pact with the 
God of life before he was brought into being,% as to what God the Highest 
desires among those tens of hundreds of thousands who are there present 
before Him.*! He will certainly answer “Peace,” in accordance with what is 
written in the book of Job: “He who makes peace in the heavens.”*? 

84. And since the middle order interprets the precepts of the supreme 
order for the lower ones,93 let now Empedocles the philosopher interpret for 
us the words of Job the theologian. 

85. Empedocles, as his songs attest, presents to us through the symbols 
of strife and friendship, or of war and peace, the dual nature that is set in 
our souls: one of them lifts us upwards to the heavens and the other drags us 
down into the depths.** 

86. In quibus se lite et discordia actum, furenti similem, profugum a diis 
in altum iactari conqueritur. 

87. Multiplex profecto, patres, in nobis discordia; gravia et intestina 
domi habemus, et plus quam civilia bella. 

88. Quae si noluerimus, si illam affectaverimus pacem quae in sublime 
ita nos tollat ut inter excelsos Domini statuamur, sola in nobis compescet 
prorsus et sedabit philosophia. 

89. Moralis primum, si noster homo ab hostibus indutias tantum 
quesierit, multiplicis bruti effrenes excursiones et leonis iurgia, iras 
animosque contundet; tum si rectius consulentes nobis perpetuae pacis 
securitatem desideraverimus, aderit illa et vota nostra liberaliter implebit, 
quippe quae cesa utraque bestia, quasi icta porca, inviolabile inter carnem et 
spiritum foedus sanctissimae pacis sanciet. 

90. Sedabit dialectica rationis turbas, inter orationum pugnantias et 
syllogismorum captiones anxie tumultuantis. 

91. Sedabit naturalis philosophia opinionis lites et dissidia, quae 
inguietam hinc inde animam vexant, distrahunt et lacerant. 

86. In these songs, he deplores being tossed upon the seas, driven by 
conflict and discord like a madman and banished from the gods.?> 

87. Manifold indeed, O fathers, is the discord in us; we have grave 
internal, more than civil, wars in our home.?* 

88. They are such that, if we desire them not, if we yearn after that peace 
which will lift us up and set us among God's most exalted ones, only 
philosophy will be able to still the troubles within us and bring us calm. 

89. If our man?” would just seek a truce from his enemies, moral 

philosophy will beat down the unbridled stampede of the manifold beast 
and the aggression, ire, and arrogance of the lion.** Then, if we yearn right- 
mindedly for the safety of perpetual peace for ourselves, it will come and 
liberally satisfy our desires; indeed, both beasts having been sacrificed like 
a stuck sow, it will ratify an everlasting pact of the most holy peace between 
the flesh and the spirit.99 

90. Dialectics will calm the tumults of reason agitated and tossed about 
between the contradictions of speech and the captiousness of syllogisms. 

91. Natural philosophy will allay the differences of opinion and 
disagreements that vex, perplex, and afflict our restless soul from all sides. 

92. Sed ita sedabit, ut meminisse nos iubeat esse naturam, iuxta 
Heraclitum, ex bello genitam, ob id ab Homero “contentionem” vocitatam; 
idcirco in ea veram quietem et solidam pacem se nobis prestare non posse, 
esse hoc dominae suae, idest sanctissimae theologiae, munus et privilegium. 

93. Ad illam ipsa et viam monstrabit et comes ducet, quae procul nos 
videns properantes “Venite,” inclamabit, “ad me qui laboratis, venite et ego 
reficiam vos, venite ad me et dabo vobis pacem quam mundus et natura 
vobis dare non possunt.” 

94. Tam blande vocati, tam benigniter invitati, alatis pedibus, quasi 
terrestres Mercurii, in beatissimae amplexus matris evolantes, Optata pace 
perfruemur: pace sanctissima, individua copula, unianimi amicitia, qua 
omnes animi in una mente, quae est super omnem mentem, non concordent 
adeo, sed ineffabili quodammodo unum penitus evadant. 

92. But it will bring harmony in such a way as to remind us that nature is 
the offspring of war, as Heraclitus said, and is therefore called “strife” by 
Homer. Thus, it is said that in philosophy true rest and stable peace cannot 
reveal themselves to us alone, that this is the duty and privilege of its 
mistress; that is, of the most holy Theology.?* 

93. She will show us the way to this peace and like a companion will 
lead us. Seeing us hurrying along from afar, she will call out, “Come to me, 
you who exert yourselves in vain; come and 1 will restore you; come to me 
and I will give you that peace which the world and nature cannot give to 
you. 

94. So gently called, so kindly invited, we will then fly away into the 
embrace of the most blessed Mother like terrestrial Mercuries with winged 
feet” and will rejoice in the longed-for peace.”* This is that most holy 
peace, the indissoluble bond, the harmonious friendship in which all souls, 
in one mind (a mind that is above all minds) are not only in agreement but, 
indeed, in a certain ineffable way, inwardly become one. 

95. Haec est illa amicitia quam totius philosophiae finem esse 
Pythagorici dicunt; haec illa pax quam facit Deus in excelsis suis, quam 
angeli in terram descendentes annuntiarunt hominibus bonae voluntatis, ut 
per eam ipsi homines ascendentes in caelum angeli fierent. 

96. Hanc pacem amicis, hanc nostro optemus seculo, optemus unicuique 
domui quam ingredimur, optemus animae nostrae, ut per eam ipsa Dei 
domus fiat; ut, postquam per moralem et dialecticam suas sordes excusserit, 
multiplici philosophia quasi aulico apparatu se exornarit, portarum fastigia 

theologicis sertis coronarit, descendat Rex gloriae et cum Patre veniens 
mansionem faciat apud eam. 

95. This is the friendship that the Pythagoreans call the end of all 
philosophy,* that peace which God makes in His heavens, which the angels 
who came down to earth announced to men of good will so that these men 
would, ascending to heaven, be transformed by it into angels.” 

96. Let us desire this peace for our friends, for our times; let us desire it 
for whatever home we enter. Let us desire it for our soul so that in her”? 
may be made a house of the Lord, so that, after casting off her impurities 
through moral philosophy and dialectics, our soul may adorn herself with 
multifaceted philosophy, as if with royal magnificence, and so that she may 
crown the heights of her doors with the garlands of theology. And let us 
desire this peace for our soul so that the King of Glory!% may descend at 
last, together with the Father, to make a home in her.!%! 

97. Quo tanto hospite si se dignam praestiterit (qua est illius immensa 
clementia) deaurato vestitu quasi toga nuptiali, multiplici scientiarum 
circumdata varietate, speciosum hospitem, non ut hospitem iam, sed ut 
sponsum excipiet, a quo ne unguam dissolvatur dissolvi cupiet a populo 
suo, et domum patris sui, immo se ipsam oblita, in se ipsa cupiet mori ut 
vivat in sponso, in cuius conspectu preciosa profecto mors sanctorum eius: 
mors — inquam -— illa, si dici mors debet plenitudo vitae, cuius meditationem 
esse studium philosophiae dixerunt sapientes. 

97. Tf our soul shows herself to be worthy of such a Guest — for His 
Clemency is immense!%” — she (clad in gold, as in a wedding toga, and 
surrounded by a diverse variety of sciences!%%) will receive her handsome 
Guest not merely as a Guest but as a Bridegroom.*% So as not to be 
separated from Him, she will wish to be separated from her people. Having 
forgotten her own father?s home — indeed, having forgotten herself — she 
will wish to die in herself so that she may live in her Spouse, in Whose 
sight the death of His saints is truly precious.'% This is the death, 1 say (if 

one must call that plenitude of life death), whose contemplation is, 
according to the sages, the study of philosophy.*% 

98. Citemus et Mosen ipsum, a sacrosanctae et ineffabilis intelligentiae 
fontana plenitudine, unde angeli suo nectare inebriantur, paulo deminutum. 

99. Audiemus venerandum iudicem nobis in deserta huius corporis 
solitudine habitantibus leges sic edicentem: “Qui polluti adhuc morali 
indigent, cum plebe habitent extra tabernaculum sub divo, quasi Thessali 
sacerdotes interim se expiantes. 

98. Let us take as an example Moses, who is himself but a bit inferior to 
the fountain-like fullness of sacrosanct and ineffable intelligence whose 
nectar inebriates the angels.*% 

99. We will hear the venerable Judge thus declare His laws to us who 
live in the empty solitude of this body:*% “Let those who are unclean and 
as yet in need of moral philosophy dwell with the masses outside the 
tabernacle in the open air while they purify themselves like the priests of 
Thessaly.*% 

100. Qui mores iam composuerunt, in sanctuarium recepti, nondum 
quidem sacra attractent, sed prius dialetico famulatu, seduli levitae 
philosophiae, sacris ministrent. 

101. Tum ad ea et ipsi admissi, nunc superioris Dei regiae multicolorem, 
idest sydereum aulicum ornatum, nunc caeleste candelabrum septem 
luminibus distinctum, nunc pellicea elementa in philosophiae sacerdotio 
contemplentur, ut postremo, per theologicae sublimitatis merita in templi 
adyta recepti, nullo ¡i¡imaginis intercedente velo divinitatis gloria 
perfruantur.” 

102. Haec nobis profecto Moses et imperat et imperando admonet, 
excitat, inhortatur, ut per philosophiam ad futuram caelestem gloriam, dum 

possumus, iter paremus nobis. 

100. Let those who have already put their behaviour in order and have 
been received into the sanctuary not yet lay hands upon the sacred things, 
but first, in the service of dialectics, let them serve the holy things of 
philosophy like diligent Levites. 

101. Once they are allowed access to the holy things in the priesthood of 
philosophy, let them contemplate the multicoloured aspect of the higher 
kingdom of God; that is, the divine, princely decoration, as well as the 
celestial candelabra adorned with seven lights.*!% Let them behold the skins 
so that they, permitted at last into the recesses of the temple!!! through the 
merits of theological sublimity, may rejoice in the glory of the Divinity 
without any veil of a likeness coming in between.”!!? 

102. These things Moses truly commands of us and in commanding 
instructs, incites, and encourages so that through philosophy we may 
prepare for ourselves, while we are able, the path to the future celestial 
glory. 13 

103. Verum enimvero, nec Mosayca tantum aut Christiana mysteria, sed 
priscorum quoque theologia harum, de quibus disputaturus accessi, 
liberalium artium et emolumenta nobis et dignitatem ostendit. 

104. Quid enim aliud sibi volunt in Graecorum archanis observati 
initiatorum gradus, quibus primo, hercle, per illas quas diximus quasi 
februales artes, moralem et dialecticam, purificatis, contingebat 
mysteriorum susceptio? 

105. Quae quid aliud esse potest quam secretioris per philosophiam 
naturae interpretatio? 

103. In fact, however, not only the Mosaic and Christian mysteries!** but 
also the theology of the ancients!!” shows us the dignity and value of the 

liberal arts, which I came to discuss. 

104. For at what else, by Hercules!!!* was the observance of the 
different degrees of initiation in Greek mysteries aimed? Only after having 
been purified through moral philosophy and dialectics,*!” those arts that we 
might call expiatory, could the initiates gain entrance to the mysteries.!!8 

105. And what else can such an initiation possibly signify if not an 
understanding, achieved through philosophy, of nature?s most mysterious 
things? 

106. Tum demum ita dispositis illa adveniebat gnornteía, idest rerum 
divinarum per theologiae lumen inspectio. 

107. Quis talibus sacris initiari non appetat? 

108. Quis, humana omnia posthabens, fortunae contemnens bona, 
corporis negligens, deorum conviva adhuc degens in terris fieri non cupiat, 
et aeternitatis nectare madidus mortale animal immortalitatis munere 
donari? 

109. Quis non Socraticis illis furoribus, a Platone in Phaedro decantatis, 
sic afflari non velit ut alarum pedumque remigio hinc, idest ex mundo, qui 
est positus in maligno, propere aufugiens, ad caelestem Hierusalem 
concitatissimo cursu feratur? 

110. Agamur, patres, agamur Socraticis furoribus, qui extra mentem ita 
nos ponant, ut mentem nostram et nos ponant in Deo! 

106. Only then did that érorrreía,*!* the intimate vision of divine things 
by the light of theology, come to those who were so disposed. 

107. Who would not yearn to be initiated into such sacred rites? 

108. Who, leaving behind all human concerns, scorning the goods of 
fortune and pleasures of the body, would not wish to become a guest at the 
table of the gods while still alive on earth*?% and, inebriated by the nectar of 
eternity, to receive, though still a mortal creature, the gift of immortality?!?! 

109. Who would not wish to be so inspired by those Socratic frenzies, 
which Plato celebrates in the Phaedrus,!?? that he is whisked away to the 
heavenly Jerusalem, soaring from here — that is, from this world set on 
evil!23 — with oarlike strokes of wings and feet?1?* 

110. Let us be led away, fathers, let us be led away by the Socratic 

frenzies that will so lift us beyond our minds!?” as to put our mind and 
ourselves in God! 

111. Agemur ab illis utique, si quid est in nobis ipsi prius egerimus; nam 
si et per moralem affectuum vires ita per debitas competentias ad modulos 
fuerint intentae, ut immota invicem consonent concinentia, et per 
dialecticam ratio ad numerum se progrediendo moverit, Musarum perciti 
furore celestem armoniam intimis auribus combibemus. 

112. Tum Musarum dux Bacchus, in suis mysteriis (idest visibilibus 
naturae signis) invisibilia Dei philosophantibus nobis ostendens, inebriabit 
nos ab ubertate domus Dei, in qua tota si uti Moses erimus fideles, accedens 
sacratissima theologia duplici furore nos animabit. 

111. They will surely lead us away — but only once we ourselves have 
taken control of what is ours. If, through moral philosophy, the forces of our 
passions have been guided correctly toward their proper ends (in such a 
way that they produce together a lasting harmony!*?*) and if, through 
dialectics, our reason has moved along at the proper pace, only then, stirred 
by the frenzy of the Muses,!?” shall we drink in that heavenly harmony with 
our inmost hearing. 

112. Then, through his mysteries!*”* (that is, through the visible signs of 
nature), Bacchus, the leader of the Muses,*?* will show the invisible things 
of God!” to those of us who pursue philosophy and will make us drunk 
with the abundance of God's house;*%! and if we, like Moses, prove faithful 
in all God's house,!*? most sacred Theology shall draw close to us, 
animating us with a twofold frenzy. 

113. Nam in illius eminentissimam sublimati speculam, inde et quae 
sunt, quae erunt quaeque fuerint insectili metientes aevo, et primaevam 
pulchritudinem suspicientes, illorum Phebei vates, huius alati erimus 
amatores, et ineffabili demum charitate quasi aestro perciti, quasi Saraphini 
ardentes extra nos positi, numine pleni, iam non ipsi nos, sed ille erimus 
ipse qui fecit nos. 

114, Sacra Apollinis nomina, si quis eorum significantias et latitantia 
perscrutetur mysteria, satis ostendent esse deum illum non minus 
philosophum quam vatem. 

115. Quod cum Ammonius satis sit exequutus, non est cur ego nunc 
aliter pertractem; sed subeant animum, patres, tria Delphica precepta oppido 
his necessaria, qui non ficti, sed veri Apollinis, qui illuminat omnem 
animam venientem in hunc mundum, sacrosanctum et augustissimum 
templum introgressuri sunt: videbitis nihil aliud illa nos admonere, quam ut 
tripartitam hanc, de qua est presens disputatio, philosophiam totis viribus 
amplectamur. 

113. For, raised to her most eminent heights, and thence comparing to 
indivisible eternity all things that are and shall be and have been, we shall 
be the Phoebean seers of those things;!%% and, admiring that primeval 
beauty, we shall become its winged lovers.'" And at last, roused by 
ineffable love as if by a frenzy, 19 and borne outside ourselves like ardent 
seraphim, filled with the godhead,*** we shall no longer be ourselves, but 
He Himself Who made us.**” 

114, The sacred names of Apollo, if anyone investigates their meanings 
and hidden mysteries, sufficiently show that God is, no less than a seer, a 
philosopher.*98 

115. But since Ammonius!”* has amply examined this matter, there is no 
reason for me to treat it further. Instead, fathers, let us call to mind the three 
Delphic precepts,!*% which are absolutely necessary to those who are to 
enter the most holy and august temple, not of the false but of the true 
Apollo, who illuminates every soul that comes into this world;** you will 
realize that they exhort us to do nothing other than embrace with all our 
strength the tripartite philosophy that we now discuss. 

116. lud enim unótv áyav, idest “nequid nimis,” virtutum omnium 
normam et regulam per mediocratits rationem, de qua moralis agit, recte 
praescribit. 

117. Tum illud yvW0: ozautóv, idest “cognosce te ipsum,” ad totius 
naturae nos cognitionem, cuius et interstitium et quasi cynnus natura est 
hominis, excitat et inhortatur. 

118. Qui enim se cognoscit, in se omnia cognoscit, ut Zoroaster prius, 
deinde Plato in Alcibiade scripserunt. 

119. Postremo, hac cognitione per naturalem philosophiam illuminati, 
iam Deo proximi, el, idest “es” dicentes, theologica salutatione verum 
Apollinem familiariter proindeque foeliciter appellabimus. 

120. Consulamus et Pythagoram sapientissimum, ob id praecipue 
sapientem, quod sapientis se dignum nomine nunquam existimavit. 

121. Praecipiet primo ne super modium sedeamus, idest rationalem 
partem qua anima omnia metitur, iudicat et examinat, ociosa desidia ne 

remittentes amittamus, sed dialectica exercitatione ac regula et dirigamus 
assidue et excitemus. 

122. Tum cavenda in primis duo nobis significabit, ne aut adversus 
solem emingamus, aut inter sacrificandum ungues resecemus. 

116. For the famous maxim unótv úyav (that is, “nothing too much”)!*? 

rightly prescribes as rule and norm for every virtue the criterion of the 
“mean,” of which moral philosophy speaks. 

117. Then the maxim yvW8 ceautóv (that is, “know thyself”)!4 urges 

and exhorts us to the knowledge of all nature, of which the nature of man is 
the intermediary and, so to speak, the mixture.!%* 

118. For he who knows himself in himself knows all things, as was first 
written by Zoroaster and later by Plato in the Alcibiades.*%* 

119. Finally, once natural philosophy has enlightened us with this 
knowledge, we, being very close to God and saying ei (that is, “you 
are”),146 shall address by a theological salutation the true Apollo on 
intimate and likewise blissful terms. 

120. But let us also consult the exceedingly wise Pythagoras,!*” wise 

precisely because he never deemed himself worthy of that name.** 

121. He will first advise us “not to sit on a bushel”*% — that is, not to 

lose that rational faculty through which the soul measures, judges, and 
considers all things — by abandoning it to sloth and inaction; rather, he will 
advise us by the exercise and the rule of dialectics to direct and to stimulate 
that faculty assiduously. 

122. Then he will point out to us two things to be avoided above all: that 
is, making water facing the sun and trimming our nails while offering 

sacrifice. 1 

123. Sed postquam per moralem et superfluentium voluptatum fluxas 
eminxerimus appetentias, et unguium presegmina quasi acutas irae 
prominentias et animorum aculeos resecuerimus, tum demum sacris, idest 
de quibus mentionem fecimus Bacchi mysteriis, interesse, et, cuius pater ac 
dux merito Sol dicitur, nostrae contemplationi vacare incipiamus. 

124. Postremo ut gallum nutriamus nos admonebit, idest ut divinam 
animae nostrae partem divinarum rerum cognitione quasi solido cibo et 
caelesti ambrosia pascamus. 

125. Hic est gallus cuius aspectum leo, idest omnis terrena potestas, 
formidat et reveretur. 

126. Hic ille gallus cui datam esse intelligentiam apud lob legimus. 
127. Hoc gallo canente aberrans homo resipiscit. 

123. But after we have urinated away the dissolute appetites of our 
overflowing pleasures through moral philosophy and pared away, like nail 
clippings, the sharp points of wrath and the spines of animosity,'”* only 
then shall we finally begin to take part in the sacred rites, that is, in the 
abovementioned mysteries of Bacchus, and to dedicate ourselves to that 
contemplation of which the sun is rightly called the father and guide.*?? 

124. Finally Pythagoras will exhort us “to feed the cock”! — that is, to 
nourish the divine part of our soul!”* — with the knowledge of divine things, 
as if with solid food and heavenly ambrosia.*?> 

125. This is the cock whose sight fills the lion — that is, all earthly power 
— with fear and awe.** 

126. This is the cock to whom, as we read in Job, intelligence was 
given.!>? 

127. When this cock crows, the erring man comes to his senses.**% 

128. Hic gallus in matutino crepusculo, matutinis astris Deum 
laudantibus, quotidie commodulatur. 

129. Hunc gallum moriens Socrates, cum divinitatem animi sui divinitati 
maioris mundi copulaturum se speraret, Esculapio, idest animarum medico, 
lam extra omne morbi discrimen positus, debere se dixit. 

130. Recenseamus et Chaldeorum monumenta: videbimus (si illis 
creditur) per easdem artes patere viam mortalibus ad felicitatem. 

128. In the dawn twilight, this cock sings each day with the morning 
stars in praise of God.!"? 

129. This is the cock that the dying Socrates, when — now out of danger 
of all bodily illness — he was hoping to join the divine part of his soul to the 
divinity of the greater world,**% said he owed to Aesculapius; that is, to the 
physician of souls.**! 

130. But let us also review the writings of the Chaldeans,**? and we shall 
see (if they are trustworthy) that it is by these same arts that the road to 
happiness is made accessible to mortals. 

131. Scribunt interpretes Chaldei verbum fuisse Zoroastris alatam esse 
animam, cumque alae exciderent ferri illam praeceps in corpus, tum illis 
subcrescentibus ad superos revolare. 

132. Percunctantibus eum discipulis quo pacto alis bene plumantibus 
volucres animos sortirentur: “Irrigetis — dixit — alas aquis vitae.” 

133. Iterum sciscitantibus unde has aquas peterent, sic per parabolam 
(qui erat hominis mos) illis respondit: “Quatuor amnibus paradisus Dei 
abluitur et irrigatur; indidem vobis salutares aquas hauriatis. 

134. Nomen ei qui ab aquilone [...], quod “rectum” denotat; ei qui ab 
occasu [...], quod “expiationem” significat; ei qui ab ortu [...], quod 
“lumen? sonat; ei qui a meridie [...], quod nos “pietatem” interpretari 
possumus.” 

131. The Chaldean interpreters write that it was a saying of Zoroaster”s 
that the soul is winged and, when its wings fall off, it plummets into the 
body;**% but once the wings have regrown, it flies back to heaven.*** 

132. When his disciples asked him how they too might obtain souls with 
well-plumed wings and the ability to fly, he replied: “Soak them well in the 
waters of life.” 

133. And when they asked him where they might look for such waters, 
he answered them with a parable (as was his custom): “God's paradise is 
irrigated and cleansed by four rivers.*% From these you may draw the 
waters that will save you. 

134. The name of the river that flows from the north is [...], which 
means the right; that which flows from the west is named [...], which 
means expiation; that which comes from the east is named [...], that is, 
light; while that from the south is [...], which may be translated as 
piety.”198 

135. Advertite animum et diligenter considerate, patres, quid haec sibi 
velint Zoroastris dogmata: profecto nihil aliud nisi ut morali scientia, quasi 

undis Hibericis, oculorum sordes expiemus; dialectica, quasi boreali 
amussi, illorum aciem lineemus ad rectum; tum in naturali contemplatione 
debile adhuc veritatis lumen, quasi nascentis solis incunabula, pati 
assuescamus, ut tandem per theologicam pietatem et sacratissimum deorum 
cultum, quasi caelestes aquilae, meridiantis solis fulgidissimum iubar 
fortiter perferamus. 

136. Hae illae forsan et a Davide decantatae primum, et ab Augustino 
explicatae latius, matutinae, meridianae et vespertinae cognitiones. 

137. Haec est illa lux meridialis quae Saraphinos ad lineam inflammat et 
Cherubinos pariter illuminat. 

138. Haec illa regio quam versus semper antiquus pater Abraam 
proficiscebatur. 

135. Now consider carefully and with your full attention, fathers, what 
these doctrines of Zoroaster represent. They surely mean nothing other than 
to induce us to wash away with moral philosophy, as in the Iberian waves, 
the filth from our eyes, and to straighten our gaze by dialectics, as if by the 
northern line.**” Then we should accustom our eyes, in the contemplation 
of nature, to endure the still feeble light of truth, like the first rays of the 
rising sun, so that through theological piety and the most holy worship of 
the gods, we finally become able to endure, like heavenly eagles, the 
dazzling splendour of the midday sun.**8 

136. These are, perhaps, those celebrated morning, midday, and evening 
thoughts first sung by David and then given a wider explanation by 
Augustine.**9 

137. This is the noonday light that squarely enflames the seraphim and 
equally illuminates the cherubim. 

138. This is the region toward which our ancient father Abraham was 
ever advancing.*”0 

139. Hic ille locus ubi immundis spiritibus locum non esse et 
Cabalistarum et Maurorum dogmata tradiderunt. 

140. Et si secretiorum aliquid mysteriorum fas est vel sub enigmate in 
publicum proferre, postquam et repens e caelo casus nostri hominis caput 
vertigine damnavit et — iuxta Hieremiam — ingressa per fenestras mors ¡ecur 
pectusque male affecit, Raphaelem coelestem medicum advocemus, qui nos 
morali et dialectica uti pharmacis salutaribus liberet. 

141. Tum ad valetudinem bonam restitutos iam Dei robur Gabriel 
inhabitabit, qui nos per naturae ducens miracula, ubique Dei virtutem 
potestatemque indicans, tandem sacerdoti summo Michaeli nos tradet, qui 
sub stipendiis philosophiae emeritos theologiae sacerdotio quasi corona 
preciosi lapidis insignet. 

139. This is the place where, according to the doctrines of the cabalists 
and the Mooss, there is no place for unclean spirits.*”* 

140. And, if it may be permitted, even in the form of a riddle, to bring 
anything at all of the most hidden mysteries into the open!”? (inasmuch as 
the sudden fall from heaven has condemned the head of our man!”* to 
dizziness and, according to Jeremiah, death has come in through the 
windows to smite our livers and breasts!”*), let us call upon Raphael,*”? the 
heavenly physician, to set us free with moral philosophy and dialectics, as if 
with healing drugs. 

141. Then, once we have been restored to health, Gabriel, the strength of 
God,'”? will abide in us and, leading us through the marvels of nature and 
showing us everywhere the merit and the power of God, he will finally 
deliver us to Michael the high priest, who will in turn bestow upon us, who 

will have completed our service to philosophy, the insignia of theological 
priesthood,!”” as if a crown of precious stones.!”* 

142. Haec sunt, patres colendissimi, quae me ad philosophiae studium 
non animarunt modo, sed compulerunt. 

143. Quae dicturus certe non eram, nisi his responderem qui 
philosophiae studium in principibus praesertim viris, aut his omnino qui 
mediocri fortuna vivunt, damnare solent. 

144. Est enim iam hoc totum philosophari (quae est nostrae etatis 
infoelicitas!) in contemptum potius et contumeliam, quam in honorem et 
gloriam. 

142. These are the reasons, most reverend fathers, that have not only 
encouraged me but even thrust upon me the duty of studying philosophy. 

143. And I would certainly not elaborate on them if I were not 
compelled to respond to those who are accustomed to condemning the study 
of philosophy, especially in men of high rank or, even more generally, in 
those of a middling fortune.*”? 

144, For philosophizing as a whole (and this is the misfortune of our 
age!) is now derided and disparaged, instead of being honoured and 
glorified.*90 

145. Ita invasit fere omnium mentes exitialis haec et monstrosa 
persuasio, aut nihil aut paucis philosophandum: quasi rerum causas, naturae 
vias, universi rationem, Dei consilia, caelorum terraeque mysteria pre 
oculis, pre manibus exploratissima habere nihil sit prorsus, nisi vel gratiam 
inde aucupari aliguam, vel lucrum sibi quis comparare possit. 

145. Thus, nearly everyone?s mind has been invaded by the ruinous and 
monstrous conviction that either no one or only a very few may study 

philosophy,**! as if having before our eyes and at our fingertips the causes 

of things, the ways of nature, the logic of the universe, the divine plan, and 
the mysteries of Heaven and Earth!9? were of no value whatsoever unless 
accompanied by the possibility of garnering some favour or making a 
profit. 

146. Quin eo deventum est ut iam (proh dolor!) non existimentur 
sapientes nisi qui mercennarium faciunt studium sapientiae, ut sit videre 
pudicam Palladem, deorum munere inter homines diversantem, eiici, 
explodi, exsibilari, non habere qui amet, qui faveat, nisi ipsa, quasi prostans 
et praefloratae virginitatis accepta mercedula, male paratum aes in amatoris 
arculam referat. 

147. Quae omnia ego non sine summo dolore et indignatione in huius 
temporis non principes, sed philosophos dico, qui ideo non esse 
philosophandum et credunt et praedicant, quod philosophis nulla merces, 
nulla sint praemia constituta; quasi non ostendant ipsi, hoc uno nomine, se 
non esse philosophos, quod cum tota eorum vita sit vel in questu, vel in 
ambitione posita, ipsam per se veritatis cognitionem non amplectuntur. 

146. Indeed, it has now reached the point (what sorrow!) that only those 
who reduce the study of wisdom!*%* to a business!9* are considered wise. It 
is like seeing chaste Pallas,*9* who dwells among men out of the generosity 
of the gods, rejected, hooted off and hissed at, with no one to love or protect 
her, lest she, like a prostitute who accepts a pittance for her deflowered 
virginity, deposit the ill-earned profit into her lover?s money chest. +98 

147. And I say all these things (not without the deepest grief and 
indignation) not against the lords of our times but against the philosophers 
who believe and openly declare that no one should pursue philosophy if 
only because there is no market for philosophers, no remuneration given to 
them, as if they did not reveal in this very word!*” that they are not true 
philosophers. Hence, insofar as their whole life has been dedicated to 
moneymaking and ambition, they are incapable of embracing the 
knowledge of truth for its own sake. 

148. Dabo hoc mihi, et me ipsum hac ex parte laudare nihil erubescam, 
me nunquam alia de causa philosophatum nisi ut philosopharer, nec ex 
studiis meis, ex meis lucubrationibus mercedem ullam aut fructum vel 
sperasse alium vel quesiisse, quam animi cultum et a me semper plurimum 
desideratae veritatis cognitionem. 

149. Cuius ita cupidus semper et amantissimus fui ut, relicta omni 
privatarum et publicarum rerum cura, contemplandi ocio totum me 
tradiderim, a quo nullae invidorum obtrectationes, nulla hostium sapientiae 
maledicta vel potuerunt ante hac, vel in posterum me deterrere poterunt. 

150. Docuit me ipsa philosophia a propria potius conscientia quam ab 
externis pendere iuditiis, cogitareque semper non tam ne male audiam, 
quam ne quid male vel dicam ipse vel agam. 

151. Equidem non eram nescius, patres colendissimi, futuram hanc 
ipsam meam disputationem quam vobis omnibus, qui bonis artibus favetis 
et augustissima vestra praesentia illam honestare voluistis, gratam atque 
i¡ocundam, tam multis aliis gravem atque molestam; et scio non deesse qui 
inceptum meum et damnarint ante hac, et in praesentia multis nominibus 
damnent. 

148. This much shall I grant myself (and I shall not blush a bit for self- 
praise in this regard): that 1 have never pursued philosophy for any other 
reason than for the sake of being a philosopher, nor have 1 ever hoped for or 
sought from my studies, from my queries, any reward or fruit beyond the 
nourishment of my mind and the knowledge of the truth, something I have 
always very greatly desired. 

149. And I have always been so avid for it and so enamoured of it that, 
setting aside all private and public concerns,*9 T devoted my whole self to 
the leisure of contemplation,*9*% from which no calumny of the envious, no 
slander of the enemies of wisdom, has thus far managed to distract me, nor 
will it in the future. 

150. Philosophy herself has taught me to rely upon my own conscience 
rather than upon the opinions of others, and always to be careful, not so 
much that people do not speak badly of me as, rather, that I not say or do 
anything that is in itself bad.!% 

151. In fact, most reverend fathers, 1 was not unaware that this proposed 
debate of mine would be just as welcome and enjoyable to all of you who 
promote the good arts and have honoured this discussion with your most 
august presence as, on the contrary, it would be bothersome and unpleasant 
to many others. 1 furthermore realize both that there has been no lack of 
men who criticized my undertaking from the outset and that they still 
continue to do so for a variety of reasons. 

152. Ita consueverunt non pauciores, ne dicam plures, habere 
oblatratores quae bene sancteque aguntur ad virtutem, quam quae inique et 
perperam ad vitium. 

153. Sunt autem qui totum hoc disputandi genus et hanc de litteris 
publice disceptandi institutionem non approbent, ad pompam potius ingenii 
et doctrinae ostentationem quam ad comparandam eruditionem esse illam 
asseverantes. 

154. Sunt qui hoc quidem exercitationis genus non improbent, sed in me 
nullo modo probent, quod ego hac aetate, quartum scilicet et vigesimum 
modo natus annum, de sublimibus Christianae theologiae mysteriis, de 
altissimis philosophiae locis, de incognitis disciplinis, in celebratissima 
urbe, in amplissimo doctissimorum hominum consessu, in apostolico senatu 
disputationem proponere sim ausus. 

155. Alii, hoc mihi dantes, quod disputem, id dare nolunt, quod de 
nongentis disputem questionibus, tam superfluo et ambitiose quam supra 
vires id factum calumniantes. 

156. Horum ego obiectamentis et manus illico dedissem, si ita quam 
profiteor philosophia me edocuisset, et nunc, illa ita me docente, non 
responderem, si rixandi ijurgandique proposito constitutam hanc inter nos 
disceptationem crederem. 

157. Quare obtrectandi omne lacessendique propositum, et quem scribit 
Plato a divino semper abesse choro, a nostris quoque mentibus facessat 
livor, et an disputandum a me, an de tot etiam quaestionibus, amice 
incognoscamus. 

152. In truth, endeavours directed sincerely and righteously toward the 
attainment of virtue have always faced no fewer (indeed, often more) 
hecklers!9! than those directed sinfully and wrongly toward vice. 

153. There are, admittedly, some who frown upon both this style of 
debate and the very institution of publicly disputing matters of learning. 
They claim that such discussions are better suited to the flaunting of wit and 
the display of erudition than to the acquisition of knowledge. 

154. There are also others who, though not critical of this kind of 
exercise in itself, entirely disapprove of it in me who, born just twenty-four 
years ago, have at my age dared to propose a discussion on the sublime 
mysteries of Christian theology, on the most profound questions of 
philosophy, and on unexplored fields of knowledge, all in such a famous 
city, before a vast assembly of learned men and in the presence of the 
apostolic senate. 

155. Still others, although they allow me the right to debate, do not wish 
to grant me the permission to dispute nine hundred theses, for they 
wrongfully consider the task and my desire to participate in it to be as 
superfluous and presumptuous as it is beyond the reach of my intellect. 

156. I would have readily given in to their objections had I been so 
taught by the philosophy that I profess; nor would 1 now attempt to respond 

to them, even with the guidance of philosophy, if I believed that this debate 
among us had been opened with the purpose of fighting and quarrelling. 

157. Therefore, let us rid from our minds any intention to disparage and 
disquiet, as well as the ill will that Plato assures us is absent from the divine 
chorus.!%? Let us instead amiably consider both whether 1 am to begin this 
discussion and whether 1 should entertain so large a number of theses.!% 

158. Primum quidem ad eos, qui hunc publice disputandi morem 
calumniantur, multa non sum dicturus, quando haec culpa, si culpa censetur, 
non solum vobis omnibus, doctores excellentissimi, qui sepius hoc munere 
non sine summa et laude et gloria functi estis, sed Platoni, sed Aristoteli, 
sed probatissimis omnium etatum philosophis mecum est communis. 

159. Quibus erat certissimum nihil ad consequendam quam querebant 
veritatis cognitionem sibi esse potius, quam ut essent in disputandi 
exercitatione frequentissimi. 

160. Sicut enim per gymnasticam corporis vires firmiores fiunt, ita dubio 
procul in hac quasi litteraria palestra animi vires et fortiores longe et 
vegetiores evadunt. 

161. Nec crediderim ego aut poetas aliud per decantata Palladis arma, 
aut Hebreos, cum 7112, idest “ferrum,” DIMINNY, idest “sapientum,” 
symbolum esse dicunt, significasse nobis, quam honestissima hoc genus 
certamina adipiscendae sapientiae Oppido quam necessaria. 

158. First, with regard to those who maliciously criticize this use of 
public disputation, I shall say very little, since this blunder, if we must call 
it so, has been committed on numerous occasions not only by me and by all 
of you, most eminent doctors, who have engaged quite often in it (and not 
without high honour and praise), but also by Plato, Aristotle, and all the 
most revered philosophers of every age.!”* 

159. These men were certain that, in order to achieve the knowledge for 
which they searched, nothing was more beneficial than wholehearted 
engagement in the practice of debate. 

160. In fact, just as the body? muscles become robust through 
gymnastics, undoubtedly so too, in this literary gymnasium of sorts,*% do 
the forces of the mind become far firmer and more vigorous. 

161. Nor would 1 believe that the poets, in their singing of the arms of 
Pallas, and the Hebrews in saying that 7112 [barzel], “iron,”*% is the 
symbol DININMWY [shel-ha-hhakhamim], “of wise men,” can mean 
nothing other than that this honourable pursuit of public debate is absolutely 
essential to the attainment of wisdom. 

162. Quo forte fit ut et Caldei, in eius genesi qui philosophus sit futurus, 
illud desiderent, ut Mars Mercurium triquetro aspectu conspiciat, quasi si 
hos congressus, haec bella substuleris, somniculosa et dormitans futura sit 
omnis philosophia. 

163. At vero cum his qui me huic provinciae imparem dicunt, difficilior 
est mihi ratio defensionis: nam si parem me dixero, forsitan immodesti et de 
se nimia sentientis, si imparem fatebor, temerarii et inconsulti notam videor 
subiturus. 

164. Videte quas incidi angustias, quo loco sim constitutus, dum non 
possum sine culpa de me promittere quod non possum mox sine culpa non 
praestare. 

165. Forte et illud lob afferre possem, spiritum esse in omnibus, et cum 
Timotheo audire: “Nemo contemnat adolescentiam tuam.” 

162. Perhaps this is why the Chaldeans hope to see in the horoscope of 
one who is to become a philosopher!”” that Mars faces Mercury from three 

separate angles;!% it is almost as if all philosophy would become sluggish 

and drowsy were it not for the existence of these conflicts and debates. 

163. It is more difficult for me, though, to defend myself against those 
who pronounce me unequal to this undertaking. If I in fact declare myself 
equal to it, it seems I shall be accused of immodesty and of having an 
excessively high opinion of myself. If, instead, I admit that 1 am unequal to 
it, I shall be charged with recklessness and imprudence. 

164. See what difficulties 1 face,19% what task awaits me, since 1 cannot 
blamelessly promise about myself something 1 must then fulfil without 
blame. 

165. I can refer, perhaps, to Job's famous saying% that the spirit exists 

in all men, and find comfort in what Timothy was told: “Let no man despise 
thy young age.”?%! 

166. Sed ex mea verius hoc conscientia dixero, nihil esse in nobis 
magnum vel singulare; studiosum me forte et cupidum bonarum artium non 
inficiatus, docti tamen nomen mihi nec sumo nec arrogo. 

167. Quare et quod tam grande humeris onus imposuerim, non fuit 
propterea quod mihi conscius nostrae infirmitatis non essem, sed quod 
sciebam hoc genus pugnis, idest litterariis, esse peculiare quod in eis lucrum 
est vinci. 

168. Quo fit ut imbecillissimus quisque non detrectare modo, sed 
appetere ultro eas jure possit et debeat, quandoquidem qui succumbit 
beneficium a victore accipit, non iniuriam, quippe qui per eum et 
locupletior domum, idest doctior, et ad futuras pugnas redit instructior. 

169. Hac spe animatus, ego infirmus miles cum fortissimis omnium 
strenuissimisque tam gravem pugnam decernere nihil sum veritus. 

170. Quod tamen temere sit factum nec ne, rectius utique de eventu 
pugnae quam de nostra aetate potest quis iudicare. 

171. Restat ut tertio loco his respondeam, qui numerosa propositarum 
rerum multitudine offenduntur, quasi hoc eorum humeris sederet onus, et 
non potius hic mihi soli quantuscumque est labor esset exanclandus. 

166. To speak, though, from my own conscience, 1 could say with all 
sincerity that there is nothing great or singular about me. While I strongly 
uphold my own eager commitment to the good arts,*%? 1 do not assume or 
expect the title of scholar.?% 

167. Thus, though 1 have taken a great burden upon my shoulders,?% it 
was most certainly not because I am unaware of my weaknesses; rather, 1 
recognize that in this particular kind of clash — that is, one of a literary 

nature — there is profit in defeat. 

168. Consequently, those who are weakest?% should, rather than 
disparaging such contests, have the right, indeed the obligation, voluntarily 
to seek them out. He who has been defeated receives not an injury from the 
winner but an advantage, for, thanks to him, he returns home richer; that is, 
wiser and better equipped for future contests. 

169. Though I am but a weak soldier, 1 am nonetheless enlivened by this 
hope, and I have no fear of combat in so difficult a battle against the 
strongest and most vigorous adversaries.?% 

170. Whether or not this initiative was reckless will be best decided not 
from my age but from the final outcome of the battle. 

171. It remains in the third place?” for me to respond to those who take 
offence at the very large number of my propositions, as if this burden lay on 

their shoulders and it were not instead up to me alone to support its weight, 
no matter how great. 

172. Indecens profecto hoc et morosum nimis, velle alienae industriae 
modum ponere, et — ut inquit Cicero — in ea re quae eo melior quo maior, 
mediocritatem desiderare. 

173. Omnino tam grandibus ausis erat necesse me vel succumbere vel 
satisfacere: si satisfacerem, non video cur quod in decem praestare 
questionibus est laudabile, in nongentis etiam praestitisse culpabile 
existimetur. 

174. Si succumberem, habebunt ipsi, si me oderunt, unde accusarent, si 
amant, unde excusent: quoniam in re tam gravi, tam magna, tenui ingenio 
exiguaque doctrina adolescentem hominem defecisse, venia potius dignum 
erit quam accusatione. 

175. Quin et iuxta poetam: “... si deficiant vires, audacia certe laus erit: 
in magnis et voluisse sat est.” 

176. Quod si nostra aetate multi, Gorgiam Leontinum imitati, non modo 
de nongentis sed de omnibus etiam omnium artium questionibus soliti sunt, 
non sine laude, proponere disputationem, cur mihi non liceat, vel sine culpa, 
de multis quidem, sed tamen certis et determinatis disputare? 

172. To be sure, it is unseemly and exceedingly patronizing to wish to 
set limits to another?s efforts and, as Cicero says, to desire moderation in a 
matter where the greater is the better.?9% 

173. In undertaking so great a venture, it was inevitable that 1 either fail 
or succeed. If I should succeed, I do not see why what is praiseworthy to do 
for ten theses should be considered blameworthy to do for nine hundred. 

174, If I should fail, they will have grounds for accusing me if they hate 
me — and for excusing me if they love me. Indeed, a young man who has 
failed through lack of intelligence or want of learning in so serious and 
great an undertaking will certainly be more worthy of forgiveness than of 
blame. 

175. Indeed, according to the poet: “If strength fails, audacity will surely 
be praised; and in great endeavours, it is enough to have willed.”2% 

176. Andif many in our age, imitating Gorgias of Leontini,?!% have been 
accustomed, not without praise, to propose a disputation not merely on nine 
hundred questions but on all questions related to all arts,?** why should 1 
not be allowed to engage without blame in debate on questions that, though 
indeed numerous, are at least precise and determined? 

177. “At superfluum — inquiunt — hoc, et ambitiosum.” 

178. Ego vero non superfluo modo, sed necessario factum hoc a me 
contendo; quod et si ipsi meam philosophandi rationem considerarent, inviti 
etiam fateantur plane necesse est. 

179. Qui enim se cuipiam ex philosophorum familiis addixerunt, 
Thomae videlicet aut Scoto (qui nunc plurimum in manibus) faventes, 
possunt illi quidem vel in paucarum questionum discussione suae doctrinae 
periculum facere. 

180. At ego ita me institui, ut, in nullius verba ¡uratus, me per omnes 
philosophiae magistros funderem, omnes scedas excuterem, omnes familias 
agnoscerem. 

177. But they say this is needless and audacious. 

178. Yet I contend that I did this not needlessly but out of necessity, and 
if they should consider my philosophical method, they must admit, albeit 
reluctantly, that it is clearly necessary. 

179. This is because those who have devoted themselves to any one of 
the schools of philosophy, siding for instance with Thomas”!? or with 
Scotus,?1 who are now most in fashion, can surely put their doctrines to the 
test in the discussion of but a few questions. 

180. As for myself, however, 1 have resolved — in order not to swear by 
the words of another?!*-— to pore over all masters of philosophy, to examine 
every page, and to become acquainted with all schools.?*? 

181. Quare, cum mihi de illis omnibus esset dicendum, ne, si privati 
dogmatis defensor reliqua posthabuissem, illi viderer obstrictus, non 
potuerunt, etiam si pauca de singulis proponerentur, non esse plurima quae 
simul de omnibus afferebantur. 

182. Nec id in me quisquam damnet, quod me quocumque ferat 
tempestas, deferar hospes. 

183. Fuit enim cum ab antiquis omnibus hoc observatum, ut, omne 
scriptorum genus evolventes, nullas quas possent commentationes illectas 
preterirent, tum maxime ab Aristotele, qui eam ob causam Gávayvootíc, 
idest “lector,” a Platone nuncupabatur. 

184, Et profecto angustae est mentis intra unam se Porticum aut 
Achademiam continuisse; nec potest ex omnibus sibi recte propriam 
selegisse, qui omnes prius familiaritates non agnoverit. 

185. Adde quod in una quaque familia est aliquid insigne, quod non sit ei 
commune cum caeteris. 

181. Therefore, since 1 was to speak about all of these doctrines (lest 1 
seem committed to advocating one in particular as a result of having 
neglected the others), it was impossible for there not to be very many 
questions concerning all of them together, even if only a few questions were 
proposed in regard to each.?** 

182. Nor should anyone condemn me on this account, for “wherever the 
tempest carries me, there 1 am brought as a guest.”?!” 

183. For it was a rule observed by all the ancients in studying every kind 
of writer never to pass over any commentaries they were able to read, and 
this is especially true for Aristotle, who for this reason was called by Plato 
ávayvootnc; that is, “the reader.”?18 

184. And confining oneself within a single Porch?*? or Academy?%% 

certainly does show narrowness of mind. Nor can anyone rightly choose his 
own doctrine from them all unless he has first made himself familiar with 
each of them.??! 

185. In addition, there is in each school something distinctive that is not 
shared in common with any other. 

186. Atque ut a nostris, ad quos postremo philosophia pervenit, nunc 
exordiar, est in loanne Scoto vegetum quiddam atque discussum, in Thoma 
solidum et equabile, in Egidio tersum et exactum, in Francisco acre et 
acutum, in Alberto priscum, amplum et grande, in Henrico (ut mihi visum 
est) semper sublime et venerandum. 

186. And now, to begin with our own,??? to whom philosophy came last, 
we find in John [Duns] Scotus??%% something lively and meticulous, in 
Thomas [Aquinas]??* a balanced solidity, in Giles [of Rome]?? a neat 
precision, in Francis [of Meyronnes]?% a penetrating acuteness, in Albert 

[the Great]??” an ancient and grand breadth, in Henry [of Ghent],?% as it 
has seemed to me, a constant and venerable solemnity.??? 

187. Est apud Arabes in Averroe firmum et inconcusum, in Avempace, 
in Alpharabio grave et meditatum, in Avicenna divinum atque Platonicum. 

188. Est apud Graecos in universum quidem nitida, in primis et casta 
philosophia; apud Simplicium locuplex et copiosa, apud Themistium 
elegans et compendiaria, apud Alexandrum constans et docta, apud 
Theophrastum graviter elaborata, apud Ammonium enodis et gratiosa. 

187. Among the Arabs,*%% we find in Averroes?%! an unshaken firmness, 

in Avempace,?% as in Al-Farabi,?P% a thoughtful seriousness, in 
Avicenna?”* a divine Platonic sublimity. 

188. Among the Greeks,?% philosophy is certainly limpid in general and 
pure in particular; in Simplicius?% it is rich and copious, in Themistius??” 
elegant and compendious, in Alexander [of Aphrodisias]?% learned and 
self-consistent, in Theophrastus??% seriously worked out, in Ammonius?*% 
smooth and agreeable. 

189. Et si ad Platonicos te converteris, ut paucos percenseam, in 
Porphirio rerum copia et multiiuga religione delectaberis, in lamblico 
secretiorem philosophiam et barbarorum mysteria veneraberis; in Plotino 
privum quicquam non est quod admireris, qui se undique prebet 
admirandum, quem de divinis divine, de humanis longe supra hominem 
docta sermonis obliquitate loquentem sudantes Platonici vix intelligunt. 

190. Pretereo magis novitios, Proclum Asiatica fertilitate luxuriantem, et 
qui ab eo fluxerunt, Hermiam, Damascium, Olympiodorum et complures 
alios, in quibus omnibus illud tó Oelov, idest “divinum,” peculiare 
Platonicorum simbolum elucet semper. 

189. And if you turn to the Platonists,?4! to mention but a few, in 
Porphyry?* you will be pleased by the wealth of his topics and the 
complexity of his religion; in lamblichus?% you will be awed by an occult 
philosophy and the mysteries of the barbarians; in Plotinus?*% there is no 
one thing in particular for you to admire, for he offers himself to admiration 
in every part. Even the Platonists themselves struggle to understand his 
wisely allusive discourse when he speaks divinely of things divine and 
when he speaks of human things in a way that far surpasses humanity. 

190. I shall pass over the more recent ones, such as Proclus,?% who 
abounds in Asian fecundity, and those who stem from him, Hermias,?* 
Damascius,? Olympiodorus,*4 and many others, in all of whom there 
always shines forth that tÓ Oeglov — that is, that divine something which is 
the distinctive mark of the Platonists. 

191. Accedit quod, si qua est heresis quae veriora incessat dogmata et 
bonas causas ingenii calumnia ludificetur, ea veritatem firmat, non infirmat, 
et velut motu quassatam flammam excitat, non extinguit. 

192. Hac ego ratione motus, non unius modo (ut quibusdam placebat), 
sed omnigenae doctrinae placita in medium afferre volui, ut hac 
complurium sectarum collatione ac multifariae discussione philosophiae ille 
veritatis fulgor, cuius Plato meminit in epistolis, animis nostris quasi sol 
oriens ex alto clarius illucesceret. 

193. Quid erat si Latinorum tantum, Alberti scilicet, Thomae, Scoti, 
Egidii, Francisci Henricique philosophia, obmissis Graecorum Arabumque 
philosophis, tractabatur, quando omnis sapientia a barbaris ad Graecos, a 
Graecis ad nos manavit? 

194. Ita nostrates semper in philosophandi ratione peregrinis inventis 
stare et aliena excoluisse sibi duxerunt satis. 

191. One should also add that when some school attacks the more 
established truths and derisively slanders valid arguments of reason, it 
strengthens rather than weakens the truth, which — like a flame that is 
stirred by agitation — is thus enkindled rather than extinguished.?*? 

192. Spurred on by this reasoning, I wished to bring to light the opinions 
not only of a single doctrine (as some would have liked) but of every school 
of thought, so that, through the comparison of many schools and the 
discussion of several philosophies, that “effulgence of truth” which Plato 
mentions in his letters might more intensely illuminate our minds, like the 
sun rising from the deep.*% 

193. Inasmuch as all wisdom has flowed from the barbarians to the 
Greeks and from the Greeks to us, what would have been the point of 
dealing only with the philosophy of the Latins — that is, of Albert, Thomas, 
Scotus, Giles, Francis, and Henry — while leaving the Greek and Arab 
philosophers aside???* 

194. Thus, our authors have always seen fit, in matters of philosophy, to 
ground themselves in foreign discoveries and to perfect the doctrines of 
others.?? 

195. Quid erat cum Peripateticis egisse de naturalibus, nisi et 
Platonicorum accersebatur Achademia, quorum doctrina et de divinis 
semper inter omnes philosophias, teste Augustino, habita est sanctissima, et 
a me nunc primum, quod sciam (verbo absit invidia), post multa secula sub 
disputandi examen est in publicum allata? 

196. Quid erat et aliorum quot quot erant tractasse opiniones, si, quasi ad 
sapientum symposium asymboli accedentes, nihil nos quod esset nostrum, 
nostro partum et elaboratum ingenio, afferebamus? 

197. Profecto ingenerosum est (ut ait Seneca) sapere solum ex 
commentario et, quasi maiorum inventa nostrae industriae viam 

praecluserint, quasi in nobis effaeta sit vis naturae, nihil ex se parere quod 
veritatem, si non demonstret, saltem innuat vel de longinquo. 

198. Quod si in agro colonus, in uxore maritus odit sterilitatem, certe 
tanto magis infecundam animam oderit illi complicita et associata divina 
mens, quanto inde nobilior longe proles desideratur. 

195. What point would there have been in dealing with natural things 
alongside the Peripatetics without also invoking the Platonic Academy? 
Their doctrine on divine things, as Augustine shows,?* has always been 
considered the most sacred of all philosophies; this is a doctrine that, as far 
as I know, is now being brought forward by me for the first time after many 
centuries (may my words inspire no envy) to be submitted for public 
debate. 

196. And what would have been the point of dealing with the opinions of 
others, no matter how many there were, if I — like he who comes to the 
banquet of the wise without contributing anything?* — were to bring 
nothing of my own, nothing born of and elaborated with my own mind??? 

197. It is certainly undignified, as Seneca says,” to know only through 
books and, as though the discoveries of our ancestors had barred the way to 
our own industriousness and the power of nature were exhausted in us, to 
bring about from ourselves nothing that, even if it fell short of 
demonstrating the truth, might at least hint at it from afar. 

198. For if a farmer hates sterility in his field and a husband hates it in 
his wife,” the Divine Mind will certainly hate even more the barren soul 
that is joined and associated with It, insofar as it is a far nobler offspring 
that is desired. 

199. Propterea non contentus ego, praeter communes doctrinas, multa de 
Mercurii Trismegisti prisca theologia, multa de Caldeorum, de Pythagorae 
disciplinis, multa de secretioribus Hebreorum addidisse mysteriis, plurima 

quoque per nos inventa et meditata de naturalibus et divinis rebus 
disputanda proposuimus. 

200. Proposuimus primo Platonis Aristotelisque concordiam, a multis 
ante hac creditam, a nemine satis probatam. 

199. Hence, I have not been content simply to add, beside the common 
doctrines, many principles taken from the ancient theology of Hermes 
Trismegistus,? many more drawn from the teachings of the Chaldeans??? 
and Pythagoras,*% and many others deriving from the more secret 
mysteries of the Hebrews,?%! and 1 have also proposed for disputation a 
good many discoveries and reflections of my own,?*? both on things natural 
and divine. 

200. In the first place, I have proposed the concord of Plato and 
Aristotle, believed by many before me but adequately proven by none.?*? 

201. Boetius, apud Latinos id se facturum pollicitus, non invenitur 
fecisse unquam quod semper facere voluit. 

202. Simplicius, apud Graecos idem professus, utinam id tam praestaret 
quam pollicetur! 

203. Scribit et Augustinus in Achademicis non defuisse plures qui 
subtilissimis suis disputationibus idem probare conati sint, Platonis scilicet 
et Aristotelis eandem esse philosophiam. 

204. Ioannes item Grammaticus, cum dicat apud eos tantum dissidere 
Platonem ab Aristotele qui Platonis dicta non intelligunt, probandum tamen 
posteris hoc reliquit. 

205. Addidimus autem et plures locos in quibus Scoti et Thomae, plures 
in quibus Averrois et Avicennae sententias, quae discordes existimantur, 

concordes esse nos asseveramus. 

201. Among the Latins, Boethius promised to do it, but there is no 
evidence that he ever did what he always wished to do.?** 

202. Among the Greeks, Simplicius made the same declaration, and if 
only he had fulfilled his promise!?** 

203. Augustine,** too, writes that there were not a few Academics who 
tried with their most subtle arguments to prove the same thing — namely, 
that the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle were one. 

204. Likewise John [Philoponus] the Grammarian, who,?*” although he 
says that Plato differs from Aristotle only for those who do not understand 
what Plato says,?% nevertheless left it to posterity to prove. 

205. I have also added many theses in which I maintain that several 
statements by Thomas and Scotus that are thought to be discordant are in 
agreement, and many others in which 1 maintain the same about 
statements by Averroes and Avicenna.?7% 

206. Secundo loco quae in philosophia cum Aristotelica tum Platonica 
excogitavimus nos, tum duo et septuaginta nova dogmata physica et 
metaphysica collocavimus, quae si quis teneat, poterit, nisi fallor (quod 
mihi erit mox manifestum), quamcumque de rebus naturalibus divinisque 
propositam questionem longe alia dissolvere ratione quam per eam 
edoceamur quae et legitur in scolis et ab huius evi doctoribus colitur 
philosophiam. 

207. Nec tam admirari quis debet, patres, me in primis annis, in tenera 
etate, per quam vix licuit (ut lactant quidam) aliorum legere 
commentationes, novam afferre velle philosophiam, quam vel laudare illam 
si defenditur, vel damnare si reprobatur; et denique, cum nostra inventa 

haec nostrasque sint litteras iudicaturi, non auctoris annos, sed illorum 
merita potius vel demerita numerare. 

206. In the second place, I have presented not only my discoveries in 
Aristotelian and Platonic philosophy?”* but also seventy-two new theses,?”? 
which I have proposed both in physics and in metaphysics. Whoever grasps 
these theses will be able — if I am not mistaken, as I shall soon see — to 
solve any question put to him regarding things natural and divine by a 
method quite unlike that of the philosophy taught in schools and cultivated 
by the doctors of this age. 

207. Nor should anyone be much amazed, fathers, that in my youth, at a 
tender age at which (as some propose) I should hardly have been allowed to 
read the works of others, 1 wish to introduce a new philosophy;?”* instead, 
let this philosophy be either praised if it is defensible or condemned if it is 
refutable. When my discoveries and my writings are eventually judged, one 
should tally up not the years of their author but rather their merits or 

demerits. 

208. Est autem, et praeter illam, alia quam nos attulimus nova per 
numeros philosophandi institutio, antiqua illa quidem et a priscis theologis, 
a Pythagora presertim, ab Aglaophemo, a Philolao, a Platone prioribusque 
Platonicis observata; sed quae hac tempestate, ut preclara alia, posteriorum 
incuria sic exolevit, ut vix vestigia ipsius ulla reperiantur. 

209. Scribit Plato in Epinomide inter omnes liberales artes et scientias 
contemplatrices praecipuam maximeque divinam esse scientiam numerandi. 

210. Quaerens item cur homo animal sapientissimum, respondet: “Quia 
numerare novit”; cuius sententiae et Aristoteles meminit in Problematis. 

208. There is, moreover, still another method of philosophizing (one that 
is carried out with numbers), which 1 have presented as new but which is in 
fact old, and was observed by the ancient theologians,?”* by Pythagoras in 

particular, by Aglaophamos,?”” Philolaus,?”* and Plato, and by the earlier 
Platonists.?”7 But in our age this doctrine, like other famous ones, has so 
fallen into disuse on account of the carelessness of posterity that hardly any 
traces of it remain. 

209. Plato writes in the Epinomis that, among all liberal arts and 
contemplative sciences, the principal and most divine is the science of 
numbers. 

210. And again, asking why man is the wisest of animals, he answers: 
“Because he knows how to count.”?7* Aristotle also mentions this response 
in his Problems.?”? 

211. Scribit Abumasar verbum fuisse Avenzoar Babilonii eum omnia 
nosse, qui noverat numerare. 

212. Quae vera esse nullo modo possunt, si per numerandi artem eam 
artem intellexerunt cuius nunc mercatores in primis sunt peritissimi; quod et 
Plato testatur, exerta nos admonens voce ne divinam hanc arithmeticam 
mercatoriam esse arithmeticam intelligamus. 

213. Hllam ergo arithmeticam, quae ita extollitur, cum mihi videar post 
multas lucubrationes exploratam habere, huiusce rei periculum facturus, ad 
quatuor et septuaginta questiones, quae inter physicas et divinas principales 
existimantur, responsurum per numeros publice me sum pollicitus. 

211. Abumasar**% writes that it was a saying of Avenzoar of Babylon?*! 
that he who knows how to count knows all things. 

212. None of these things could possibly have been true if they had 
taken the art of numbering to be that same one at which merchants are now 
especially skilful. Plato attests to this as well? when he openly warns us 
not to believe that this divine arithmetic is the mathematics of the 
merchants. 

213. Since it seemed to me, after long nights of study, that I had 
thoroughly examined that arithmetic which is so praised, 1 made up my 
mind to put these matters to the test and promised that 1 would answer in 
public, through the art of numbering, the seventy-four questions?8* that are 
considered most important in matters natural and divine. 

214. Proposuimus et magica theoremata, in quibus duplicem esse 
magiam significavimus, quarum altera demonum tota opere et auctoritate 
constat, res medius fidius execranda et portentosa; altera nihil est aliud, cum 
bene exploratur, quam naturalis philosophiae absoluta consumatio. 

215. Utriusque cum meminerint Greci, illam, magiae nullo modo nomine 
dignantes, yontelav nuncupant; hanc propria peculiarique appellatione paye 
(av, quasi perfectam summamgque sapientiam, vocant. 

216. Idem enim, ut ait Porphyrius, Persarum lingua “magus” sonat quod 
apud nos “divinorum interpres et cultor.” 

217. Magna autem, immo maxima, patres, inter has artes disparilitas et 
dissimilitudo. 

218. Illam non modo Christiana religio, sed omnes leges, omnis bene 
instituta respublica damnat et execratur; hanc omnes sapientes, omnes 
caelestium et divinarum rerum studiosae nationes approbant et 
amplectuntur. 

214. I have also proposed some theses regarding magic??* in which 1 

have shown that there are two forms of magic: one is based entirely on the 
deeds and powers of demons (and is, in truth, an execrable and monstrous 
thing); the other, when keenly examined, is nothing but the absolute 
perfection of natural philosophy. 

215. The Greeks mentioned both of them, but they call the former yontel 
av (dignifying it in no way with the name of magic), whereas they call the 

latter by the proper and exclusive name of puayelav, the perfect and highest 
wisdom, as it were.?9> 

216. As a matter fact, as Porphyry says,“ “magus” in the Persian 

language means the same as “expert and interpreter of divine things” in 
ours. 

217. So, fathers, there is a great or even the greatest difference and 
disparity??” between these two arts. 

218. The former is condemned and abhorred not only by the Christian 
religion but by all laws and every well-ordered state. The latter is approved 
and embraced by all wise men and by all peoples devoted to heavenly and 
divine things. 

219. Illa artium fraudulentissima, haec altior sanctiorque philosophia; 
illa irrita et vana, haec firma, fidelis et solida. 

220. Hlam quisquis coluit semper dissimulavit, quod in auctoris esset 
ignominiam et contumeliam; ex hac summa litterarum claritas gloriaque 
antiquitus et pene semper petita. 

219. The former is the most deceitful of arts; the latter is the highest and 
most holy philosophy. The former is sterile and vain; the latter is sure, 
reliable, and firm.?88 

220. The former has always been concealed by whoever has practiced it 
because it would have brought shame and disrepute to anyone who wrote 
about it, whereas the highest literary renown and glory have since antiquity 
almost always been sought from the latter.?89 

221. Tllius nemo unquam studiosus fuit vir philosophus et cupidus 
discendi bonas artes; ad hanc Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato 

discendam navigavere, hanc predicarunt reversi, et in archanis precipuam 
habuerunt. 

221. No philosopher, nor any man eager to learn the good arts, has ever 
applied himself to the study of the former, but Pythagoras, Empedocles,?%% 
Plato, and Democritus””* crossed the seas to learn the latter, taught it when 
they returned, and considered it chief among the arcane doctrines.??? 

222. Illa, ut nullis rationibus, ita nec certis probatur auctoribus; haec, 
clarissimis quasi parentibus honestata, duos precipue habet auctores: 
Xamolsidem, quem imitatus est Abbaris Hyperboreus, et Zoroastrem, non 
quem forte creditis, sed illum Oromasi filium. 

222. The former is neither based on any principles nor approved by any 
reliable author; the latter, ennobled, as it were, by the most celebrated 
parents, has two authors above all: Zalmolxis,%% who was imitated by 
Abaris the Hyperborean,?% and Zoroaster,?%” not the one of whom perhaps 
you are thinking?” but the son of Oromasius.?”” 

223. Utriusque magia quid sit Platonem si percontemur, respondebit in 
Alcibiade Zoroastris magiam non esse aliud quam divinorum scientiam, qua 
filios Persarum reges erudiebant, ut ad exemplar mundanae reipublicae 
suam ipsi regere rempublicam edocerentur; respondebit in Carmide magiam 
Xamolsidis esse animi medicinam, per quam scilicet animo temperantia, ut 
per illam corpori sanitas comparatur. 

223. If we ask Plato what the magic of both these men is, he will answer 
in the Alcibiades that the magic of Zoroaster is nothing other than that 
science of divine things in which the kings of the Persians educated their 
sons so that they might learn to rule their state in accordance with the 
example of the order of the universe.?% And in the Charmides??* he will 
answer that the magic of Zamolxis is the medicine of the soul, or that 
medicine by which temperance is obtained for the soul, just as by the other 
medicine health is obtained for the body. 

224. Horum vestigiis postea perstiterunt Carondas, Damigeron, 
Apollonius, Hostanes et Dardanus; perstitit Homerus, quem ut omnes alias 
sapientias, ita hanc quoque sub sui Ulixis erroribus dissimulasse in poetica 
nostra theologia aliquando probabimus; perstiterunt Eudoxus et Hermippus, 
perstiterunt fere omnes qui Pythagorica Platonicaque mysteria sunt 
perscrutati. 

224. Afterward, Charondas,>%% Damigeron,*! Apollonius,%? 
Osthanes,*9% and Dardanus*%% followed in their footsteps. And so did 
Homer, who likewise concealed this wisdom, just as he concealed all the 
others, beneath the wanderings of his Ulysses, as I shall eventually prove in 
my Poetic Theology.*% Eudoxus and Hermippus also followed this path,*%€ 
and so, too, did almost everyone else who has assiduously investigated the 
Pythagorean and Platonic mysteries. 

225. Ex iunioribus autem qui eam olfecerint tres reperio, Alchindum 
Arabem, Rogerium Baconem et Guilielmum Parisiensem. 

226. Meminit et Plotinus, ubi naturae ministrum esse et non artificem 
magum demonstrat: hanc magiam probat asseveratque vir sapientissimus, 
alteram ita abhorrens ut, cum ad malorum demonum sacra vocaretur, rectius 
esse dixerit ad se illos quam se ad illos accedere. 

225. Among the later philosophers, then, I find three who have got a 
whiff of it: the Arabian Al-Kindi,% Roger Bacon, and William of 
Paris.2%? 

226. Plotinus also mentions it,**% where he shows that a magus is the 
minister and not the maker of nature. That most wise man approves and 
justifies this kind of magic, so abhorring the other that, invited to the rites 
of evil demons, he says that it was more fitting for them to come to him 
than for him to go to them. 

227. Et merito quidem: ut enim illa obnoxium mancipatumque improbis 
potestatibus hominem reddit, ita haec illarum principem et dominum. 

228. Illa denique nec artis nec scientiae sibi potest nomen vendicare; 
haec, altissimis plena mysteriis, profundissimam rerum secretissimarum 
contemplationem et demum totius naturae cognitionem complectitur. 

229. Haec, intersparsas Dei beneficio et interseminatas mundo virtutes 
quasi de latebris evocans in lucem, non tam facit miranda, quam facienti 
naturae sedula famulatur. 

227. And rightly so,?!* for just as the former makes man a slave and a 
minion of wicked powers, the latter makes him their lord and master. 

228. The former, in the end, cannot claim for itself the name either of art 
or of science, whereas the latter, full as it is of the loftiest mysteries, 
comprises the deepest contemplation of the most secret things and 
ultimately the knowledge of all nature. 

229. The latter, in calling out, as it were, from their hiding places into the 
light the good powers sown and scattered here and there in the world by 
God's beneficence, does not so much perform miracles as sedulously act as 
the servant of nature, which in turn performs them. 

230. Haec universi consensum, quem significantius Graeci ovurTáBerav 
dicunt, introrsum perscrutatius rimata, et mutuam naturarum cognationem 
habens perspectatam, nativas adhibens unicuique rei et suas illecebras, quae 
magorum (vyyec nominantur, in mundi recessibus, in naturae gremio, in 
promptuariis archanisque Dei latitantia miracula, quasi ipsa sit artifex, 
promit in publicum; et sicut agricola ulmos vitibus, ita magus terram caelo, 
idest inferiora superiorum dotibus virtutibusque maritat. 

230. The latter has quite profoundly probed into that harmony of the 
universe that the Greeks more expressively call ovyriáBerav,*!? and has 

discerned the mutual kinship?!* that natures share. It assigns to each thing 

its innate charms (which are called the Uuyyec*!* of the magicians) and 
brings out into the open, as if it were itself their cause, the miracles lying 
hidden in the recesses of the world, in the womb of nature, in the 
mysterious storerooms of God. Just as the farmer marries elm to vine,?1? so 
does the magus marry earth to heaven — that is, the lower things to the 
endowments and powers of the higher.?** 

231. Quo fit ut quam illa prodigiosa et noxia, tam haec divina et salutaris 
appareat: ob hoc praecipue, quod illa hominem, Dei hostibus mancipans, 
avocat a Deo, haec in eam operum Dei admirationem excitat, quam 
propensa charitas, fides ac spes, certissime consequuntur. 

232. Neque enim ad religionem, ad Dei cultum quicquam promovet 
magis quam assidua contemplatio mirabilium Dei, quae ut per hanc de qua 
agimus naturalem magiam bene exploraverimus, in opificis cultum 
amoremque ardentius animati, illud canere compellemur: “Pleni sunt caeli, 
plena est omnis terra maiestate gloriae tuae.” 

233. Et haec satis de magia, de qua haec diximus, quod scio esse plures 
qui, sicut canes ignotos semper adlatrant, ita et ipsi saepe damnant 
oderuntque quae non intelligunt. 

234. Venio nunc ad ea quae, ex antiquis Hebreorum mysteriis eruta, ad 
sacrosanctam et catholicam fidem confirmandam attuli; quae ne forte ab 
his, quibus sunt ignota, commentitiae nugae aut fabulae circumlatorum 
existimentur, volo intelligant omnes quae et qualia sint, unde petita, quibus 
et quam claris auctoribus confirmata, et quam reposita, quam divina, quam 
nostris hominibis ad propugnandam religionem contra Hebreorum 
importunas calumnias sint necessaria. 

231. Hence, the latter is consequently revealed to be just as divine and 
salutary as the former is monstrous and harmful. It is precisely on this 
account that the former, in subjecting man to the enemies of God, drives 
him away from God, whereas the latter stimulates him to admire God's 

works, which is the state of mind that most surely gives rise to well- 
disposed faith, hope, and charity. 

232. For nothing better induces us to religion and to the worship of God 
than the assiduous contemplation of His wonders. Once we have aptly 
examined them by means of this natural magic 1 am discussing, we shall be 
all the more ardently aroused to the worship and love of their Creator, and 
shall be forced to sing: “The heavens are full, all the earth is full with the 
majesty of Thy glory.”?!” 

233. But this is enough on magic, regarding which I have said this much 
because I know that there are many who, just as dogs always bark at 
strangers, likewise often hate and condemn what they do not understand. 

234. I come now to those things that 1 deduced from the ancient 
mysteries of the Hebrews and that Í cite as confirmation of the sacrosanct 
and Catholic faith. So that these things not be considered, by those who are 
ignorant of such matters, imaginary trifles or the fables of storytellers,?** 1 
wish to explain to all men what they are and what they are like; where they 
come from; by whom and by how many enlightened authors they are 
confirmed; and how enigmatic, how divine, how necessary they are to those 
of our own faith for the safeguard of our religion against the importunate 
calumnies of the Jews.?!” 

235. Scribunt non modo celebres Hebreorum doctores, sed ex nostris 
quoque Hesdras, Hilarius et Origenes, Mosen non legem modo, quam 
quinque exaratam libris posteris reliquit, sed secretiorem quoque et veram 
legis enarrationem in monte divinitus accepisse; preceptum autem ei a Deo 
ut legem quidem populo publicaret, legis interpretationem nec traderet 
litteris, nec invulgaret, sed ipse lesu Nave tantum, tum ille aliis deinceps 
succedentibus sacerdotum primoribus, magna silentii religione revelaret. 

235. Not only the celebrated Hebrew doctors but also some among our 
own,*22 such as Esdras,*2!* Hilary,*2? and Origen,?2 write that Moses 
received from God on the mount not only the five books of the Law*”* that 

he bequeathed to posterity but also a true and more secret exposition of the 
Law.?2” God commanded him to proclaim the Law to the people but never 
to put the interpretation of the Law into writing, nor divulge it, but to 
communicate it only to Jesu Nave,?2 who would in turn reveal it, under a 
solemn vow of secrecy, to his successors among the high priests.??” 

236. Satis erat per simplicem historiam nunc Dei potentiam, nunc in 
improbos iram, in bonos clementiam, in omnes ¡ustitiam agnoscere, et per 
divina salutariaque precepta ad bene beateque vivendum et cultum verae 
religionis institui. 

237. At mysteria secretiora et sub cortice legis rudique verborum 
pretextu latitantia, altissimae divinitatis archana, plebi palam facere, quid 
erat aliud quam dare sanctum canibus et inter porcos spargere margaritas? 

236. The simple story was sufficient to recognize now God's power, now 
His wrath against the wicked, His mercy toward the good, or His justice 
before all. Divine and salutary precepts were sufficient to learn about the 
goodly and blessed life, the worship of true religion.*?2? 

237. But to make public to the populace the most secret mysteries and 
the profoundest arcana of divinity concealed beneath the bark*%% of the Law 
and the rough vestiture of language,?%! what else could this have been but to 
give holy things to the dogs and to cast pearls before swine??? 

238. Ergo haec clam vulgo habere, perfectis communicanda (inter quos 
tantum sapientiam loqui se ait Paulus), non humani consilii, sed divini 
precepti fuit; quem morem antiqui philosophi sanctissime observarunt. 

239. Pythagoras nihil scripsit nisi paucula quaedam, quae Damae filiae 
moriens commendavit. 

240. Egyptiorum templis insculptae Sphinges hoc admonebant, ut 
mystica dogmata per enigmatum nodos a prophana multitudine inviolata 

custodirentur. 

238. Therefore, the custom of keeping from the masses these things that 
were to be conveyed only to the perfect*%% (among whom only Paul*** 
declared that he wished to speak of wisdom) derived not from human 
counsel but from divine commandment**” and was a practice that the 
ancient philosophers solemnly observed. 

239. Pythagoras wrote nothing but a few insignificant things that he 
entrusted to his daughter Dama*”* on his deathbed. 

240. The Sphinxes carved”"" on the temples of the Egyptians 
admonished them that the mystical doctrines should be kept inviolate from 
the profane multitude by the knots of enigmas.*%* 

241. Plato, Dionysio quaedam de supremis scribens substantiis, “per 
enigmata — inquit — dicendum est, ne si epistola forte ad aliorum pervenerit 
manus, quae tibi scribimus ab aliis intelligantur.” 

242. Aristoteles libros Metaphysicae, in quibus agit de divinis, editos 
esse et non editos dicebat. 

243. Quid plura? lesum Christum vitae magistrum asserit Origenes 
multa revelasse discipulis, quae illi, ne vulgo fierent comunia, scribere 
noluerunt. 

244. Quod maxime confirmat Dionysius Areopagita, quí secretiora 
mysteria a nostrae religionis auctoribus £xk vo0c eic voUv, $14 égov AÓyov, 
idest ex animo in animum, sine litteris, medio intercedente verbo ait fuisse 
transfusa. 

241. Plato, writing certain things to Dionysius**” regarding the supreme 
substances, explained: “It is necessary to write in enigmas, for should this 

letter perchance fall into the hands of others, they would then be unable to 
understand what I have written to you.” 

242. Aristotle used to say that the books of the Metaphysics, in which he 
deals with divine things, were published and unpublished.*40 

243. What else? According to Origen, Jesus Christ, the Teacher of 
Life,*4! revealed many things to His disciples, which they refused to write 
down so that these things would not be communicated to the common 
people. 

244. This is conclusively confirmed by Dionysius the Areopagite,>*? 

according to whom the secret mysteries were transmitted to the founders of 
our religion, “Éx vo0c eic voDv, 814 Léoov Aóyov”94 — that is, from mind to 
mind — without writing, through the intercession of the word.*4* 

245. Hoc eodem penitus modo cum ex Dei praecepto vera illa legis 
interpretatio Moisi deitus tradita revelaretur, dicta est Cabala, quod idem est 
apud Hebreos quod apud nos “receptio”; ob id scilicet, quod illam 
doctrinam non per litterarum monumenta, sed ordinariis revelationum 
successionibus alter ab altero quasi hereditario iure reciperet. 

246. Verum postquam Hebrei, a Babilonica captivitate restituti per 
Cyrum et sub Zorobabel instaurato templo, ad reparandam legem animum 
appulerunt, Esdras, tunc ecclesiae praefectus, post emendatum Moseos 
librum, cum plane cognoscerent per exilia, cedes, fugas, captivitatem gentis 
Israeliticae institutum a maioribus morem tradendae per manus doctrinae 
servari non posse, futurumque ut sibi divinitus indulta celestis doctrinae 
archana perirent, quorum commentariis non intercedentibus durare diu 
memoria non poterat, constituit ut, convocatis qui tunc supererant 
sapientibus, afferret unusquisque in medium quae de mysteriis legis 
memoriter tenebat, adhibitisque notariis in septuaginta volumina (tot enim 
fere in sinedrio sapientes) redigerentur. 

245. Once the Laws genuine interpretation, which God conveyed to 
Moses, had been revealed in this same private way, it was called 
“Cabala,”*% which means to the Hebrews what “reception”** means to us 
(doubtlessly because this doctrine was received not through written 
documents but through orderly successions of revelations from one man to 
another, almost by hereditary right). 

246. However, after Cyrus”“” restored the Hebrews from the Babylonian 
Exile, and once the Temple had been rebuilt under the rule of 
Zerubbabel,*4 the Hebrews turned their minds toward the reestablishment 
of the Law. Esdras?*% (who was then the leader of the people), having 
amended the books of Moses, clearly realized that — following the exiles, 
the massacres, the flights and captivity of the people of Israel — the custom 
instituted by their ancestors for handing down the doctrines could no longer 
be preserved and that the mysteries of this divinely conveyed celestial 
doctrine would fade into oblivion in the absence of written documents since 
they could no longer endure in memory alone. Thus, he decided that those 
sages who were still alive should be convened,** that each of them should 
share with the others whatever he could recall of the mysteries of the Law, 
and that scribes be employed to record it all in seventy volumes*”? (roughly 
the same as the number of sages in the Sanhedrin).9*? 

247. Qua de re ne mihi soli credatis, patres, audite Esdram ipsum sic 
loquentem: “Exactis quadraginta diebus loquutus est Altissimus dicens: 
“Priora quae scripsisti in palam pone, legant digni et indigni, novissimos 
autem septuaginta libros conservabis ut tradas eos sapientibus de populo 
tuo; in his enim est vena intellectus et sapientiae fons et scientiae flumen.” 

248. Atque ita feci.” 
249. Haec Esdras ad verbum. 

250. Hi sunt libri scientiae Cabalae; in his libris merito Esdras venam 
intellectus, idest ineffabilem de supersubstantiali deitate theologiam, 

sapientiae fontem, idest de intelligibilibus angelicisque formis exactam 
metaphysicam, et scientiae flumen, idest de rebus naturalibus firmissimam 
philosophiam esse clara in primis voce pronuntiavit. 

251. Hi libri Sixtus quartus Pontifex Maximus, qui hunc sub quo 
vivimus foeliciter Innocentium VIII proxime antecessit, maxima cura 
studioque curavit ut in publicam fidei nostrae utilitatem Latinis litteris 
mandarentur; iamque cum ille decessit, tres ex illis pervenerant ad Latinos. 

247. So that you need not believe only me, fathers, hear what Esdras 
himself says: “At the end of forty days, the Most High spoke, saying, “That 
which you first wrote, set forth clearly so that the worthy and unworthy 
alike may read it, but keep to yourself the most recent seventy books so that 
you may hand them over to the wisest among your people. In them are the 
vein of intellect, and the fountain of wisdom, and the river of science.” 

248. And l did so.”?>* 
249. These are the words of Esdras to the letter. 

250. These are the books of the science of the Cabala.*"” These tomes, as 
Esdras””* rightly proclaimed, clearly and from the outset, contain a vein of 
understanding — in other words, the ineffable theology of the 
supersubstantial deity — a font of wisdom that is the exact metaphysics of 
the intelligible and angelic forms, and the river of science that is the most 
steadfast philosophy of natural things.*>” 

251. Pope Sixtus IV?%% — who immediately preceded Innocent VII1,*9 
under whom we live in happiness — arranged, with the utmost care and 

concern, for these books to be translated**% into Latin for the common good 
of those of our faith.?%! At the time of his death, three of them were already 
available in Latin.**? 

252. Hi libri apud Hebreos hac tempestate tanta religione coluntur, ut 
neminem liceat nisi annos quadraginta natum illos attingere. 

253. Hos ego libros non mediocri impensa mihi cum comparassem, 
summa diligentia indefessis laboribus cum perlegissem, vidi in illis (testis 
est Deus) religionem non tam Mosaycam, quam Christianam. 

254, Ibi Trinitatis mysterium, ibi Verbi incarnatio, ibi Messiae divinitas; 
ibi de peccato originali, de illius per Christum expiatione, de caelesti 
Hyerusalem, de casu demonum, de ordinibus angelorum, de purgatoriis, de 
inferorum paenis eadem legi quae apud Paulum et Dionysium, apud 
Hieronymum et Augustinum quotidie legimus. 

252. These books are held in such religious awe by the Jews of today 
that no one under the age of forty is permitted to approach them.**? 

253. 1 purchased these books at no little cost to myself,*4 and when 1 
perused them with the greatest diligence and unstinting labour, 1 saw in 
them (as God is my witness) not so much the Mosaic as the Christian 
religion.?*> 

254. Here is the mystery of the Trinity, here the Incarnation**” of the 
Word, here the divinity of the Messiah;*% here of original sin, of its 
expiation through Christ,?7% of the heavenly Jerusalem,?”* of the fall of the 
demons, of the hierarchy of the angels, of Purgatory, of the punishments in 
Hell.?7? 1 saw the same things that we read every day in Paul, Dionysius, 
Jerome,?”* and Augustine.””* 

255. In his vero quae spectant ad philosophiam, Pythagoram prorsus 
audias et Platonem, quorum decreta ita sunt fidei Christianae affinia, ut 
Augustinus noster immensas Deo gratias agat quod ad eius manus 
pervenerint libri Platonicorum. 

256. In plenum nulla est ferme de re nobis cum Hebreis controversia de 
qua ex libris Cabalistarum ita redargui convincique non possint, ut ne 
angulus quidem reliquus sit in quem se condant. 

257. Cuius rei testem gravissimum habeo Antonium Cronicum, virum 
eruditissimum, qui suis auribus, cum apud eum essem in convivio, audivit 
Dactylum Hebreum peritum huius scientiae in Christianorum prorsus de 
Trinitate sententiam pedibus manibusque descendere. 

258. Sed ut ad meae redeam disputationis capita percensenda, attulimus 
et nostram de interpretandis Orphei Zoroastrisque carminibus sententiam. 

259. Orpheus apud Graecos ferme integer; Zoroaster apud eos mancus, 
apud Caldeos absolutior legitur: ambo priscae sapientiae crediti patres et 
auctores. 

260. Nam, ut taceam de Zoroastre, cuius frequens apud Platonicos non 
sine summa semper veneratione est mentio, scribit lamblicus Calcideus 
habuisse Pythagoram Orphycam theologiam tamquam exemplar ad quam 
ipse suam fingeret formaretque philosophiam. 

255. As for those matters pertaining to philosophy, it truly seems you are 
hearing Pythagoras or Plato, whose conclusions bear such affinity to the 
Christian faith that our own Augustine pronounced immense gratitude to 
God that the Platonic books made their way into his hands.?”? 

256. On the whole, there is no point of controversy between us and the 
Jews on which the latter could not be refuted and convinced by means of 
the cabalistic books, so that no corner will remain in which they may take 
refuge.?7* 

257. On this matter, 1 have a most trustworthy witness in the most 
erudite Antonius Chronicus,?7” who, at a banquet at his house at which 1 

was present, heard with his own ears Dactylus the Jew himself,?78 an expert 
in this science, wholeheartedly acknowledge the Christian tenet of the 
Trinity. 

258. But to return to reviewing the theses of my disputation, I have also 
presented my own interpretation of the songs of Orpheus and Zoroaster.?”? 

259. Orpheus is extant among the Greeks in an almost complete text; 
Zoroaster is lacunose among the Greeks but among the Chaldeans is read in 
a more complete text. Both are credited with being the fathers and authors 
of ancient wisdom.*% 

261. Quin idcirco tantum dicta Pythagorae sacra nuncupari dicunt, quod 
ab Orphei fluxerint institutis; inde secreta de numeris doctrina et quicquid 
magnum sublimeque habuit Graeca philosophia ut a primo fonte manavit. 

262. Sed (qui erat veterum mos theologorum) ita Orpheus suorum 
dogmatum mysteria fabularum intexit involucris et poetico velamento 
dissimulavit, ut si quis legat illius hymnos, nihil subesse credat praeter 
fabellas nugasque meracissimas. 

263. Quod volui dixisse ut cognoscatur quis mihi labor, quae fuerit 
difficultas ex affectatis enigmatum syrpis, ex fabularum latebris latitantes 
eruere secretae philosophiae sensus, nulla praesertim in re tam gravi, tam 
abscondita inexplorataque adiuto aliorum interpretum opera et diligentia. 

264. Et tamen oblatrarunt canes mei minutula quaedam et levia ad 
numeri ostentationem me accumulasse: quasi non omnes quae ambiguae 
maxime controversaeque sunt quaestiones, in quibus principales 
digladiantur achademiae, quasi non multa attulerim his ipsis, qui et mea 
carpunt et se credunt philosophorum principes, et incognita prorsus et 
intentata. 

265. Quin ego tantum absum ab ea culpa, ut curaverim in quam 
paucissima potui capita cogere disputationem; quam si (ut consueverunt 
alii) partiri ipse in sua membra et lancinare voluissem, in innumerum 
profecto numerum excrevisset. 

260. Indeed, to say nothing of Zoroaster, who is often mentioned by the 
Platonists and always with the utmost veneration, lamblichus of Chalcis 
writes that Pythagoras regarded Orphic theology as the model on which he 
fashioned and formed his own philosophy.*** 

261. As a matter of fact, it is said for this reason alone that the 
Pythagorean maxims are thought to be sacred, for they derive from the 
Orphic teachings; from this first source flowed forth the secret doctrine of 
numbers? and everything that is great and sublime in Greek 
philosophy.*** 

262. However, Orpheus (as was the practice among the ancient 
theologians) so well concealed the mysteries of his dogmas under the 
coverings of fables and hid them under the veil of poetry that, if one were to 
read his hymns, one would believe there is nothing more behind them than 
the most commonplace tales and trifles. 

263. I wished to say this so as to make known what trouble and what 
difficulties 1 faced in freeing from the tangle of riddles and the obscurity of 
fables the meaning of this secret philosophy,?%* especially since 1 could not 
rely on assistance in a matter so important, so hidden and unexplored, from 
the work or diligence of any other interpreters. 

264. Nevertheless, the dogs have barked**%” that 1 have ostentatiously 
accumulated a large number of minutia and trivialities, as if all of them 
were not the most ambiguous and controversial questions over which the 
principal academies are now in pitched battle; as if 1 myself had not studied 
many arguments that are wholly unknown to, and untried by, the very ones 

who carp at me and who believe themselves to be the noblest of 
philosophers. 

265. Indeed, I am so far removed from this fault that 1 took care to limit 
the disputation to as few theses as 1 could. Had I wished (as is customary 
among others) to dismember the disputation and chop it into pieces, the 
theses would have grown to a countless number. 

266. Et, ut taceam de caeteris, quis est qui nesciat unum dogma ex 
nongentis, quod scilicet de concilianda est Platonis Aristotelisque 
philosophia, potuisse me citra omnem affectatae numerositatis suspitionem 
in sexcenta, ne dicam plura, capita deduxisse, locos scilicet omnes in quibus 
dissidere alii, convenire ego illos existimo, particulatim enumerantem? 

267. Sed certe (dicam enim, quamquam neque modeste neque ex ingenio 
meo; dicam tamen, quia dicere me invidi cogunt, cogunt obtrectatores) 
volui hoc meo congressu fidem facere non tam quod multa scirem, quam 
quod scirem quae multi nesciunt. 

268. Quod ut vobis re ipsa, patres colendissimi, iam palam fiat, ut 
desiderium vestrum, doctores excellentissimi, quos paratos accinctosque 
expectare pugnam non sine magna voluptate conspicio, mea longius oratio 
non remoretur, quod foelix faustumque sit, quasi citante classico iam 
conseramus manus. 

266. And, to say nothing of all of the others, who does not know that 1 
could have subdivided a single thesis of the nine hundred (the one, for 
example, on the reconciliation of the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle) 
into, say, six hundred or more without arousing the suspicion of padding the 
numbers by enumerating in detail all the points on which others think they 
disagree and l believe they agree? 

267. There can be no doubt — this 1 shall declare, although it is neither 
modest nor in keeping with my character; this I shall nonetheless declare 
since those who envy and speak ill of me compel me to do so — that I have 

resolved through this congress of mine to demonstrate not so much that 1 
know many things as that 1 know things that many do not know.*8* 

268. So that this may become clear to you by the facts, most reverend 
fathers, and so that my oration no longer postpone the object of your desire, 
most excellent doctors (whom not without great delight 1 see ready and, 
girded up, spoiling for a fight), let us take up ours arms, as if to the sound of 
the battle trumpet, and may the outcome be fruitful and favourable. 

1 Pico prepared this oration for a future debate in Rome, at which he 
believed his nine hundred theses would be discussed. He speaks of this 
congress as a senate or a council (see 8154); cf. Pico*s Epistle to Lorenzo 
(Bausi 1996, 115). 

2 Pico was studying Arabic under the guidance of Flavius Mithridates. See 
his letter to Corneus (Pico 1971, Opera omnia 1:376-—79). Cf. Pico”s Epistle 
to Ficino from Fratta and his Epistle to Corneus of 15 October 1486. 

3 Various hypotheses have been formulated about the identity of this 
Abdallah: Tognon (Pico 1987, 62) and Cicognani (Pico 1941, 97) identify 
him with “Abd-Alláh ibn al-Mugaffa*, an Arabic writer of the eighth 
century and a translator of Persian works into Arabic; Bausi (Pico 2003, 2) 
identifies him with *Abd-Allah ibn Salam, a Jew of Medina who converted 
to Islam two years before the death of Mohammed (630) after recognizing 
the identity of the Koran and the Torah. According to tradition, he 
collaborated in the writing of the Koran and was one of the four Jews who 
interrogated Mohammed himself on one hundred theological questions 
(Doctrina Machumeti); cf. Bibliander (1543) and Nicholas of Cusa (1971, 
718, 733). Piemontese (2012) identifies him as *Abd-Alláh b. al Tamir, 
head of the Christian community of Nagran (Yemen) and famous in 
medieval Islamic literature because of his martyrdom in 523 AD. 

4 Nihil ... respondisse: P has here some presumably Arabic letters, written 
in an inexpert hand, that may be deciphered as the sequence ”-l-r-*-j-w-?-l, 

perhaps naively intended to spell al-rajul. There then comes a blank space 
followed by idest hominem respondisse. See fig. 1. 

5 “A great miracle...”; see Hermes Trismegistus, Asclepius 6.1-2 (Corpus 
Hermeticum, Hermes Trismegistus 1960, 2:301-—2). The Hermetic writings 
are attributed to the Egyptian God Thot, Hermes Trismegistos in Greek, the 
inventor of writing, who was made to correspond to the Latin Mercury. 
Written in Greek and Latin, they are dated between the first and the third 
centuries AD and were highly valued during the period of humanism and the 
Renaissance, thanks to Marsilio Ficino's translation of the most important 
among them, the Poimandres. Among these works, one also finds the 
Asclepius (Fr. Asclepius, Lat. Aesculapius, god of medicine and prophecy). 
Cf. Heptaplus 5.6; Ficino, Theologia Platonica 14. 

6 Cf. Cicero, De Oratore 1.1 (Bausi 1996, 115). 

7 Pico is here referring to the rich literature on the dignity of man (e.g., 
Bartolomeo Fazio or Giannozzo Manetti, for whom ancient Christian 
authors were essential); see Garin (1938) and De Lubac (1974). Pico 
accepts the idea of man as a microcosmos, gathering within himself all the 
elements, mediator and interpreter of the universe (see 8817 and 27, 
Heptaplus 5.7, Picatrix 3.5.1). This is also the central thesis of Marsilio 
Ficino”s Platonic Theology, in which the soul is placed between matter and 
angelic intelligences (see Kristeller 1988, 118-23), but Pico believes that 
man's calling consists not in the static enjoyment of this central position but 
rather in the dynamism by which the human being is called to transcend the 
world of images and finally to become one with the Absolute, which is 
beyond representation. 

8 Note the sequence sense, reason, intellect; these elements will reappear 
in the three-stage ascension according to the model of the angelic orders: 
thrones, cherubim, seraphim. The same sequence is in 8829ff. (and again in 
8837-40), where man is meant to transcend even the angelic orders and to 
become one with God. 

9 “Persians.” Pico is possibly thinking of a “Chaldaic” source. The 
Chaldean Oracles (a mystic writing probably of the second century and 
very important to Proclus) had been attributed to Zoroaster by Gemistus 
Plethon, Ficino's source. See 8259 and Conclusiones 2.8 (Farmer 1998, 
486-93). We do not know, however, exactly which Chaldean texts Pico is 
referring to. See 8129; Persae: magi P. 

10 Ficino, Theologia Platonica 10 and also his Epistle to Bracciolini 
(Ficino 1576, 1:657); cf. Chaldean Oracles, frag. 6 (De Places 1971, 68). 

11 See Ps. 8:47: “quoniam videbo caelos tuos; opera digitorum tuorum 
lunam et stellas quae tu fundasti / quid est homo quod memor es ejus aut 
filius hominis quoniam visitas eum / minuisti eum paulo minus ab angelis 
gloria et honore coronasti eum / et constituisti eum super opera manuum 
tuarum” (“For I will behold thy heavens, the works of thy fingers: the moon 
and the stars which thou hast founded. / What is man that thou art mindful 
of him? Or the son of man that thou visitest him? / Thou hast made him a 
little less than the angels, thou hast crowned him with glory and honour: / 
And hast set him over the works of thy hands”). 

12 Note the order angels, stars, lower creatures, repeated in reverse order 
in 811. 

13 “Craftsman” translates artifex, a term echoed both in architectus (810) 
and opifex (856). 

14 Note the threefold structure (to ponder, to love, to wonder), repeated in 
814 (archetypes, treasure-houses, seats), 815 (higher, middle, lower orders), 
816 (power, wisdom, love, with a reference to the Trinity), and once more 
in $18 (seat, form, talents). Bausi believes that this rhetorical device derives 
from the original redaction of the Oration, which takes three “anaphoric 
series” as its point of departure (Bausi 1996, 115). 

15 This account of Creation depends on both biblical and Platonic sources 
(Bori 1996b and Bori 2000, 35ff.). (a) Biblical is the sequence of creative 

acts that places Adam at the centre of a Creation already concluded, even if 
the way the generative processes take place is different from that of Genesis 
1. Here, Creation occurs in a movement downward from on high: the area 
above the heavens, the animated heavenly bodies, the animals on the earth 
and man, with a sort of ontological degradation. (b) The idea of God 
speaking to His new creature is biblical, but the words spoken are quite 
different: instead of prohibiting accession to the tree of knowledge, there is 
the invitation to direct desire, knowledge, and one's whole being toward the 
highest possible aim. Man is taught this and not the prohibition. (c) While 
the image”s theme is biblical, Picos man has not been created in the image 
of God but is opus indiscretae imaginis (“a creation of an indeterminate 
image”). (d) The idea of sovereignty over things, which in Genesis 2 is 
expressed together with the faculty of naming, is also biblical. As for the 
Platonic source, attention must be drawn to Timaeus 41b (man is created as 
the last of beings, as a mixture of mortality and immortality), Protagoras 
321c-d (the myth of the creation of Epimetheus, created in a state of 
imperfection and need), and especially the Symposium (interpreted by 
Ficino in his De Amore, as well as by Pico himself in his Commento, both 
of 1486). According to the well-known myth, Eros was conceived in the 
garden of Zeus by Poros (resource) and Penia (poverty) on the day 
Aphrodite was born. Eros gets his imperfect nature from this intermediate 
position between ignorance and knowledge, and is always seeking the latter 
(Symp. 203d-204c). Both in the Oration and in the Symposium (a) we find 
the praise of someone — Eros and the human creature, respectively — not for 
his innate dignity, based only on stereotypes and clichés, but for his 
potential capacity to reach the highest of ends; (b) we find someone who is 
in an intermediate condition, neither mortal nor immortal, neither of the 
earth nor of the heavens (Symp. 203€); (c) we find someone placed in the 
midst (medium, metaxú in the Symposium), capable of reaching, through the 
love of knowledge, the supreme reality (Symp. 202d); and (d) we find the 
priority of love, of desire, of the will as the final essence of the human 
being, while his intellectual nature is not at odds with but within his 
spiritual development and is supported by the dynamics of desire (and there 
is again here a parallel between the ascent described at the end of Diotima's 
intervention and the exit from the cave described in Republic 7). 

16 Pico*s conception of microcosmos is active: the presence in man of the 
principles of every being allows him to ascend, so to speak, through all 
beings. 

17 The term “indeterminate” translates the Latin indiscretus, which is 
influenced by the Greek 4SiÓxprioc (“undecided”). Genesis 1:26 seems to 
be contradicted here insofar as man has no image; however, the human 
being has no image precisely because he or she is called to become God, 
Who is beyond all representation. See 830, “caligo Patris.” 

18 Human centrality (see also 821) is statically affirmed, but in relation to 
the dynamics of freedom. 

19 This comes from the Symposium; see 813. Cf. Ps. 8:6. 

20 God is the “ordinary” creator. Honorariusque om. P. Arbitrarius: cf. 
Martianus Capella 1.68. Man is “honorarius,” while God is “ordinarius” 
(Bausi 1996, 119); Plotinus, Enneads 1.6, 9, 13 (Pico 2003, 11). 

21 liberality: Pico, the scion of an aristocratic family, goes beyond the 
earthly meaning of “liberality,” one of the Aristotelian virtues discussed in 
Nicomachean Ethics 4.1, and celebrated in the Tenth Day of Boccaccio*s 
Decameron, as a sort of aristocratic sublimation of the utilitarian, 
mercantile logic that pervades fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Florentine 
civic culture. Cf. Cicero*s (2005b) De officiis 1.20: “beneficientia, quam 
eandem vel benignitatem vel liberalitatem appellari licet” (“charity, which 
may also be called kindness or generosity”). Cf. also Pico (1998, De ente et 
uno 8): “in veritate venerari artificis sapientiam, in bonitate redamare 
amantis liberalitatem” (“in truth, we can venerate the wisdom of the artisan; 
in goodness, we can love in return the liberality of the lover”). 

22 happiness: Here, too, Pico goes beyond the Aristotelian-Scholastic roots 
of this term (see Dante, Conv. 4.17.8: “felicitade e operazione secondo 
virtude in vita perfetta” — “happiness is activity according to virtue in 
perfect life”), embracing a more dynamic, spiritual meaning in Platonic or 

Neoplatonic terms. In book 4 of his De dignitate et eccellentia hominis 
(following Lactantius; see Garin 1972, 23ff.), Giannozzo Manetti (1396— 
1459) had already questioned the opinions of those, whether ancients or 
moderns, pagans or Christians, who emphasize the misery of human life. 
Manetti considers happiness to be the result of a “virtuous life” — that is, a 
Christian life (“...all those who accurately observe heavenly 
commandments will without doubt be destined to be fortunate from birth, 
and always happy and blessed forever,” quoted by Garin 1952b, 485, my 
translation), emphasizing the importance of “active” versus 
“contemplative” life (vita activa vs. vita contemplativa). Pico, perhaps 
influenced by Marsilio Ficino, seems to find a new connection between the 
active and the contemplative aspects — knowledge as an active force — for 
which it may not be out of place to recall here also Virgil, Georgics 2.490: 
“Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causam.” (“Happy is he who could 
know the cause of things”). See also Heptaplus 7 (Pico 1942, 324-26), in 
which Pico makes a distinction between a “natural” and a “supernatural” 
happiness, the latter achievable only “per gratiam,” through divine grace 
(see also Pico 2003, introduction, 20, and n17). Cf. Pico, Expositiones in 
Psalmos 17 (Pico 1997, 154): “Hoc autem principium est universae 
humanae foelicitatis: ut rectae sint cogitationes nostrae et Dei spiritu 
agamur” (“This, however, is the source of all human happiness: that our 
thoughts be righteous and that we be moved by the Spirit of God”). 

23 bulga, a Latin term of Celtic origin, translated as “womb” by analogy 
(from Lucilius 1904-5, Satyres 1:26, 623; 2:230-31). 

24 That is, after Lucifer”s fall. 

25 In the second proem of Pico's Heptaplus (a commentary on Genesis), 
we read: “It is a common expression in the Schools to say that man is a 
microcosm, whose body is a mixture of elements, including the heavenly 
spirit, the vegetative soul, the senses of brutes, reason, the angelic mind and 
the image of God” (Pico 1942, 193, my translation). Cf. Augustine, De 
civitate Dei 7.30 and 12.24. 

26 In his commentary, Bausi (Pico 2003, 12-13, n29) traces this crucial 
passage to lamblichus, Protrepticus 5, a collection of philosophical readings 
compiled in the third and fourth centuries (for an English translation, see 
lamblichus 1988). Cf. Asclepius 1.5-6a (in Hermes Trismegistus 1924-36, 
1:294-96). Garin suggests looking to medieval sources as well, such as 
John of Salisbury (Policraticus 8.12 [PL 199.756b]) and Alan of Lille. In 
the latter's De Planctu Naturae (prose 3), “the possibility for man to 
degenerate into a brute and regenerate himself in God are expressed in 
terms very similar to those used by Pico” (Garin 1972, 37); cf. Ps. 48:21. 
Tognon suggests a precise reference for this entire section of the Oratio: 
John Scotus Eriugena*s De divisione naturae (3.37, PL 122.732b— and 4.5, 
PL 122.754a—b). According to De Lubac, the Oration simply repeats the 
same idea that was expressed many times before in Patristic literature (De 
Lubac 1974, 198-99). Cf. Ficino, Theologia Platonica 14.3: “It [the soul] 
lives the life of a plant insofar as it indulges the body by fattening it up; the 
life of the beast insofar as it flatters the senses; the life of a man insofar as it 
calls upon reason to handle human affairs; the life of the heroes insofar as it 
investigates things in nature; the life of the demons insofar as it 
contemplates mathematics; the life of the angels insofar as it inquires into 
the mysteries divine; and the life of God insofar as it does all things for 
God's sake. Every man's soul in a way makes trial of all these in itself, 
although different souls do so in different ways, and thus humankind strives 
to become all things, since as a genus it lives the lives of all. Mercurius 
Trismegistus was struck with wonder by this and declared, “Man is a great 
miracle, an animal meet to be worshipped and adored”” (Allen trans. in 
Ficino 2001-6, 4:240-43). 

27 Among several plausible sources for this passage, both Bori (2000, 43) 
and Bausi (Pico 2003, 13) suggest Gregory of Nyssa (1978, Life of Moses 
2.162—65), where we read: “When therefore Moses grew in knowledge, he 
declared that he had seen God in darkness, that is, that he had then come to 
know that what is divine is beyond all knowledge and contemplation.” Cf. 
Exod. 19:9: “The Lord said to him: Lo, now will I come to thee in the 
darkness of a cloud”; Exod. 20:21: “And the people stood afar off. But 
Moses went to the dark cloud wherein God was”; 2 Chron. 6:1: “Then 
Solomon said: The Lord promised that he would dwell in a cloud.” See also 
Deut. 4:11: “And you came to the foot of the mount, which burned even 

unto heaven: and there was darkness, and a cloud and obscurity in it.” Bori 
(2000, 42) quotes a passage from Pico's De ente et uno (Pico 1942, 414) in 
which we find an articulate definition of the paradoxical (mystical) nature 
of our “knowledge” of the divine, according to which “there is no darkness, 
no light, no error, no truth, and about the divine it is not possible [to make] 
either a positive or a negative statement.” Cf. Conclusiones 1.26.5 (Farmer 
1998, 338-39); Conclusiones 2.10.15 (Farmer 1998, 510-11); Statius, 
Thebaid 3.498; Kaldaica Skolia, frag. 18; Proclus, On Cratylus 57.25; Ps. 
17:12: “et posuit tenebras latibulum suum in circuitu eius tabernaculum eius 
tenebrosa aqua in nubibus aeris” (“And he made darkness his covert, his 
pavilion round about him: dark waters in the clouds of the air”). See, too, 
De ente et uno (Pico 1942, 412-15) and Bausi (1996, 120-21). Cf. Ficino, 
In Dionysium Areopagitam (Ficino 1962, 2:1014) and 813, Asclepius 1.6a, 
26-28 (in Hermes Trismegistus 1924-36, 1:294-96), and P, 117ff. (Pico 
2003, 150-51). 

28 According to Garin (followed by Pico 2003, 14n31), the most important 
reference for Pico*s use of this word is Ficino?s mention of that passage of 
Priscian's commentary on Theophrastus where the adjectives 
chameleontean and Protean are attributed to human imagination 
(“Imagination is both [a] Proteus and chameleon”). See Ficino (1962, 
2:1825) and Garin (1985, 351). Copenhaver suggests that behind Pico*s use 
of the term there may also be a (negative) reference to magical tradition 
after Pliny the Elder”s Natural History (8.51), a text that Cosimo de” Medici 
had Cristoforo Landino translate into Florentine: “According to ancient 
sources that Pico knew, it [the chameleon] looks and behaves like a lizard, 
combining features of a fish, pig, viper, tortoise, and crocodile into a 
horrific appearance that masks its harmlessness. Is man such a monstrosity, 
assembled from parts of other creatures?” [...] With one exception, Pico*s 
other examples of mutability in this section of the Oration are as negative 
and ambiguous as the chameleon — transmigration of criminal souls into 
animals or plants and the shapeshifting of Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea 
who fights the noble Menelaus in the Odyssey. The only clearly positive 
transformation is angelic” (Copenhaver 2002a, 60). See also Aristotle”s 
Nicomachean Ethics 1100b, 5-9, on human happiness, and Ficino's 
translation and gloss on Priscian's comments on Theophrastus's De 
Phantasia et Intellectu (Ficino 1962, Opera omnia 2:1824-25). 

29 Bausi (Pico 2003, 14n33) says that the identity of the Asclepius to 
whom Pico refers here is unknown. The adjective Athenian could make us 
think of Asklepios (Lat. Aesculapius), the legendary Greek physician, son of 
Apollo and Coronis and god of healing (also related to the Egyptian god 
Imothep). His first teacher was the wise centaur Chiron (on the cult of 
Asklepios in ancient Greece, see Aleshire 1991). However, contextual 
evidence makes it more plausible that Pico here refers again to that 
composite collection of texts known as the Corpus Hermeticum (already 
quoted in the opening paragraph of the Oration), which Marsilio Ficino 
started to translate from Greek into Latin in 1463; namely, to the so-called 
Latin Asclepius (Ficino's edition of the Asclepius was printed in 1469). 
Pico*s text clearly echoes the Hermetic Asclepius (the interlocutor and 
disciple of Hermes Trismegistus, also understood to be a descendant of the 
great Asklepios, just as Hermes is a grandson of the great Egyptian god 
Toth). 

30 For the mythological Proteus, see Homer, Odyssey 4.383-570, and 
Virgil, Georgics 4.387-527. However, the most immediate reference is to 
the Orphic Hymns quoted in Ficino*s Theologia Platonica 11.3: “Theologia 
Orphica Protheum appellat essentiam tertiam, animarum rationalium 
sedem” (“Orphic Theology calls Proteus the third essence, and the seat of 
the rational soul”). (See Pico 2003, 14n33: the human soul can be compared 
to a Proteus because it contains the essence of all things.) De Lubac 
dedicates two chapters of his book on Pico (De Lubac 1974, pt. 2, 
“Metamorphosis”) to Proteus in the works of the Church Fathers and in 
medieval culture. 

31 The specific reference seems to be to the “Hebrew Cabalist Wisemen 
Whose Memory Should Always be Honoured,” to whom forty-seven 
cabalistic Conclusiones are dedicated. See Farmer (1998, 344-45 and notes) 
for a discussion of Pico*s cabalistic sources, all drawn from late medieval 
texts, and more specifically, according to Wirszubski (1989), from Flavius 
Mithridates? Latin translation of Menahem Recanati's Commentary on the 
Pentateuch (a thesis criticized by Farmer). At the Vatican Library, there are 
four codices (Vaticani Hebraici 189-91 and Chigi A VI 190) that contain 
Mithridates? translations with glosses by Pico. On the issue of Pico's 

relationship to Jewish culture, in addition to Wirszubski, see the important 
contributions of Paolo Edoardo Fornaciari (1988, 107-20), Fabrizio Lelli 
(1994, 193-223 and 1997, 1:303-25), and Giuliano Tamani (1997, 2:491— 
530). See also Copenhaver (2002a, 78ff.). 

32 Cabalistic and Pythagorean doctrines and calculations are a significant 
component of Pico?s Conclusiones (according both to the opinions of others 
and to his own). For references to the mathematics of Pythagoras, namely, 
the Quaternarius, see in particular 1.25.1-14. According to Farmer, Pico 
draws his references to Pythagorean doctrines from late Greek sources, 
primarily Proclus's Theologia Platonica (Farmer 1998, 334). In short, a 
numerical (and mystical) ratio underlies the metamorphic nature of the 
cosmos. On Pythagoras and Florentine culture of the fifteenth century, and 
Pico”s contemporary Giovanni Nesi (1456-1506), in particular, possibly the 
transcriber of the only extant manuscript of the Oration, P, see Celenza 
(2001). Cf. Conclusiones 2.10.28 (Farmer 1998, 514). 

33 Both Garin and Tognon refer to the Ethiopic Book of Enoch 40.8 (first 
or second century; see Knibb 1978). Tertullian considered it part of the 
Holy Scriptures. There are at least three references for the Book of Enoch: 
the Ethiopic Book of Enoch, also known as 1 Enoch; the Slavonic Book of 
Enoch, also known as 2 Enoch; and the so-called Third Book of Enoch. 
Rather than referring to a single text, Pico more likely elaborates on a 
complex, and apocryphal, textual tradition. His reference could include the 
so-called Third Book of Enoch, presumably compiled in Babylon around 
the sixth century. This late apocalyptic text, which circulated also in 
medieval manuscripts, harkens back to the mysticism of the Merkabah 
(Scholem 1941, 66ff.). In the Jewish tradition, many legends accrete around 
the figure of Enoch (son of Jared, father of Methuselah, the seventh in 
Adamitic genealogy in the line of Seth). See Gen. 5:24: “And he walked 
with God, and was seen no more: because God took him,” and also the 
apocryphal Sir. 50:14: “No one like Enoch has been created on earth, for he 
was taken up from the earth.” Transfigured, he was taken to heaven without 
abandoning the human form. In the Jewish tradition, Enoch is also 
represented as the inventor of letters, arithmetic, and geometry, and is called 
“the first author.” 

34 The princeps edition has a blank space where the Hebrew word should 
be. Both Basel editions (1557 and 1572) have Mal*akh ha-Sekinach, 
Hebrew retroversion of the Latin angelum divinitatis. Following Wirszubski 
(1989, 232), Bausi (Pico 2003, 171—72) restores in his edition the characters 
found in the earlier version of the Oration (possibly one of two drafts Pico 
prepared in fall 1486 while in Umbria before moving to Rome) in the 
manuscript Palatino 885 of the National Library in Florence, reading them 
as Metatron (see fig. 2). A reference to Metatron can be found in Pico?s 
Commento sopra una canzona (written in the same period as the Oration 
and the Conclusiones, 1486) almost in the exact terms of the Oration, as a 
synonym of transfiguration: “This is what the statement of the Cabalist wise 
men must mean, when they say that Enoch was transformed into Metatron, 
angel of divinity, or, in general, that any other man is transformed into an 
angel” (Pico 1984, 147; see also Pico 1942, 554). On the interpretation of 
the Enoch-Metatron transfiguration, see also Conclusiones 1.19.2 
(according to Themistius) and 2.11.10 (cabalistic conclusions confirming 
the Christian religion). It is generally held that there are three possible 
etymological interpretations of the word Metatron: in addition to the Greek 
“Methathronius,” meaning he who is next to the throne of God, one derived 
from matara (“keeper of the watch”), and one derived from metator 
(“guide”). See Scholem (1941, 66-69, and 1971-72, 1443-46). As Scholem 
writes, “two different traditions have been combined in the figure of 
Metatron. One relates to the heavenly angel who was created with the 
creation of the world, or even before, and makes him responsible for 
performing the most exalted tasks in the heavenly kingdom [derived from 
the angel Yaol, a sort of lesser YHWAH]. [...] A different tradition associates 
Metatron with Enoch [...] he who ascended to heaven and was changed 
from a human being into an angel — in addition he also became the great 
scribe who recorded men's deeds.” Interestingly enough, the fact that this 
second tradition associating Metatron with Enoch is “absent from the 
Talmud or the most important Midrashim, is evidently connected with the 
reluctance of the Talmudists to regard Enoch in a favourable light” 
(Scholem, 1971-72, 1444-45). It is perhaps not surprising that the 
identification occupies a prominent place in Pico?s Christian Cabala. Cf. 
Gen. 5:21-24; Enoch 12:1-4; 3 Enoch 3:1, 16:5. 

35 “I was born a male and female child, a plant, a bird and a dumb fish of 
the sea...” (Empedocles of Akragas, frag. 117 [Diels]; see Fitt 1962, 65— 
66). Cf. Pico, Heptaplus 4.5 (1942, 280-81): “Hence that Chaldean saying: 
“the beasts of the earth live in you”; and we learn from Plato, in the 
Republic, that we have inside us diverse species of animals; thus it is not 
difficult to believe (if one understands it well) the paradox of the 
Pythagoreans, that wicked men transform themselves into beasts.” See also 
Pico*s Conclusiones 2.3.71, where Empedocles” doctrine is connected to the 
sefirot (“By strife and friendship in the soul Empedocles means nothing but 
the leading upwards and leading downwards in it, which I believe is 
proportional in the science of the sefirot to eternity and adornment,” trans. 
Farmer 1998, 421) and to Zoroaster and his Chaldean commentators (“In 
the same place, by the roots of the earth they can only mean the vegetative 
life, which conforms to the «words of Empedocles, who posits 
transanimation even into plants,” 2.8.4, trans. Farmer 1998, 489). 

36 See Sura 2:65: “And certainly you have known those among you who 
exceeded the limits of the Sabbath, so We said to them: Be (as) apes, 
despised and hated.” See also Sura 5:60, 7:166. We know that Pico, who 
was studying Hebrew and Arabic with the help of Flavius Mithridates, 
borrowed a Latin translation of the Koran from Marsilio Ficino (Pico 2003, 
17n36). 

37 According to Bausi (Pico 2003, 17n37), this passage shows that Pico 
does not adhere to the doctrine of metempsychosis (or transmigration of the 
soul) and agrees with Ficino (Theol. Pl. 17.4) on a moral and allegorical 
interpretation of the transformations of which Empedocles and other ancient 
authors speak. 

38 The Latin text (humi serpentem hominem) plays on a popular 
etymology for human, derived from humus (man shaped out of earth), 
already used by G. Manetti in his own De dignitate. There are many 
medieval sources for this passage; see Isidore of Seville?s Etymologies 
11.1.4 and Picos own commentary on Genesis (Pico, 1942, 270, my 
translation): “Because he was made of earth, as Moses writes, he was called 
man.” 

39 Homer, Odyssey 1.55-57 (Homer 1990, 5). It was widely taken that 
Ulysses is the allegory of the “good (moral) man” and that Calypso, the 
enchantress, binds him with false imaginations. 

40 For this paragraph, possible sources are Seneca, Epistles 41.4-5, and 
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics 7.1 (1145a), echoed by Dante?s Convivio 
3.7.6. 

41 See, for example, Gen. 6:12 (“God had seen that the earth was 
corrupted, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth”); Num. 27:16; 
Deut. 5:26; Luke 3:6; John 3:6 and 17:2; 1 Cor. 15:39; 1 Peter 24. 

42 Itis difficult to know which “Persian” source Pico has in mind. 

43 The Hebrew characters here derive from Wirszubski's transliteration of 
the phrase in the Palatino manuscript, which is reproduced in fig. 3. (See 
Mithridates 1963, 38, and Wirszubski 1989, 241.) Pico claims he possessed 
the Chaldean Oracles (i.e., books containing the oracles of “Ezre, 
Zoroastris and the Melchiar of the Magi”) in a letter to Ficino (fall 1486, 
Ficino 1937, 2:272—73). According to Farmer (1998, 486-87), this became 
the source of a conviction among Renaissance editors of the Oracles — such 
as, for example, Francesco Patrizi — that Pico indeed possessed the original, 
integral texts from which the extant and incomplete Greek collections made 
by Psellus (eleventh century) and Pletho (fifteenth century) were drawn 
(fragments from Plotinus, Proclus, and others). Ficino himself had 
translated and provided commentary on Pletho*s collection. There is no 
trace of it (attributed to Chaldean sources) in the Conclusiones. According 
to Bausi (Pico 2003, 172-—73), who follows both Wirszubski and 
Marchignoli (in Bori 2000, 98, 106), the rather uncertain quotation is in a 
composite language, a mixture of Aramaic and Hebrew, written in an 
Ethiopic script, that Pico*”s “consultant,” Flavius Mithridates, presented to 
his patron as Chaldean. See 88130-35. The Heinrich Petri editions present 
not these words but a Latin paraphrase translated back into Hebrew (see 
Pico 2003, 172). 

44 Bausi (Pico 2003, 20n44) notes how the Latin word here translated as 
“inconstant” (desultorius) is used by Varro and Apuleius in reference to 
riders (desultores) who jumped like acrobats from one horse to another. 
More interestingly perhaps (also according to Bausi), Poliziano uses the 
same adjective for Venus (desultoria Venus) in Nutricia 106—7, speaking of 
the “free love” of primitive men before the institution of marriage. 

45 The reference is to Ps. 81:6—7: “I have said: You are gods and all of you 
the sons of the most High. / But you like men shall die: and shall fall like 
one of the princes.” These are words spoken by God to the angels, 
condemned for their sins. Pico applies them to men in order to incite them 
to ascend from their intermediate (and shapeless) station toward a higher, 
angelic form, the theme of the next section of the Oration. Cf. Copenhaver 
(2002a, 61). 

46 Wallis, Miller, and Carmichael mistakenly translate “caelestia 
contemnamus” as “let us struggle toward the heavenly.” 1 prefer to be 
consistent with the letter of the text, sticking to the classical meaning of the 
verb contemnare (used by Cicero and others) and translating caelestia as 
“celestial” rather than “heavenly.” Pico's reference might be to the 
astronomical-astrological knowledge of the heavens. In any case, it is 
consistent with what he writes in 840, where he suggests a higher stage of 
contemplation beyond the earthly and the celestial (see also my reference to 
the rubbed out word “demon” in the introduction). 

47 This image is developed further in 894 and 8132. 
48 On angelic hierarchies, see the commentary to the next section. 

49 This is the first time the word “dignity” appears in the text of the 
Oration. It also appears written in the margins of the Bolognese 
incunabulum of 1496 (visible online on the site of the Pico Project) and will 
migrate later into the title (see Michael Papio*s introduction to this volume). 
In addition to Garin (1938, 102-46), Bori (2000, 41) lists a number of 
canonical and extracanonical sources most likely known to Pico, including 

a text by Pope Leo the Great, that have become part of the Christmas 
service: “Agnosce, o christiane, dignitatem tuam ...” (Acknowledge, o 
Christian, your dignity; and espousing divine nature, do not regress to the 
old filth, with a degenerate conversation”). See also Buck (1997, 1:5). The 
dignity and nature of man is the eighth point in Pico's twelve Spiritualis 
pugnae arma (“Arms of the spiritual struggle”), included in his Twelve 
Rules for the Spiritual Struggle. Cf. Manetti's De dignitate et excellentia 
hominis (1532, fol. 163): “...quod neque angelis neque ulli aliae creaturae, 
nisi homini dumtaxat, ad admirabilem quandam humanae naturae 
dignitatem et ad incredibilem quoque eius ipsius excellentiam, datum, 
concessum et attributum esse novimus” (“...we acknowledge what neither 
pertains to the angel nor to any other creature, if not to man, and it is given, 
allowed and attributed to the admirable dignity of human nature and his 
own incredible excellence”). 

50 Gf. Picos first exposition on Ps. 17:12 (Raspanti in Pico 1997, 149). 

51 As in Calcidius's commentary on Platos Timaeus, opifex (from 
S$npuioupyóc; e.g., Tim. 28c) may be taken as God or the Creator. Opificium, 
then, comes to mean “creation” or “world.” See Picos Heptaplus (e.g., 
1.1.3, 1.5.2, and 6.proem). 

52 In accordance with the scheme set out by Pseudo-Dionysius (see 870 of 
the Oration) and confirmed by St. Thomas (Summa Theologiae 1.108, art. 
6) and St. Gregory (In evang. Il hom. 34), Pico represents here the three 
divisions of the highest order of angels: the seraphim, the cherubim, and the 
thrones. The fact that Pico specifically calls the cherubim contemplators 
does not, of course, mean that the seraphim and thrones are not. Man's task 
is the emulation of the highest angels, and dialectics is the necessary 
intermediate stage in this mystic process (Bori 1996b, 557). See 
Conclusiones 1.6.7, 1.28.2. It has been suggested (Farmer 1998, 346-51) 
that Pico consciously overlaid the cabalistic sefirot on the celestial 
hierarchy elucidated by Pseudo-Dionysius. In this arrangement, as it applies 
here, each of these three types of angels is associated with a specific 
sefirah: the seraphim with Hesed (love); the thrones with Din (fjudgment); 

the cherubim with Binah (intelligence). See Pseudo-Dionysius, Celestial 
Hierarchy 205b-209a. 

53 Yahweh flies through the Heavens mounted on a cherub (2 Sam. 22:11; 
Ps. 17:11). 

54 This unusual phrase, in which God “broods,” is glossed by Pico himself 
in Heptaplus 2.2: “Above this [i.e., the crystalline heaven of the upper 
waters] was borne or, as Hebrew wisdom has it and as Ephraim the Syrian 
translates it, “brooded,” the Spirit of the Lord; that is, the closely adhering 
spiritual Olympus, the seat of the Spirits of the Lord, warmed it with its 
warmth-giving light” (Pico 1998). See also Heptaplus 1.2 and Pico's 
Commento 1.10. Interestingly, the gloss of St. Ephrem in question (Com. on 
Genesis 1.7) explicitly states that it was a normal wind and not the Spirit of 
the Lord (Hebrew MIA, ruah) that hovered or brooded above the waters 
(Kronholm 1978, 43-44). Jerome registers the Hebrew term mentioned 
there as NDNMN, which he transcribes as merefeth (Liber Hebraicarum 
quaestionum in Genesim PL 23.937c). Some manuscripts, however, have 
the apparently more accurate merahefeth or merahaefeth. For the 
implications of this line of interpretation, see Hayward's commentary on 
Jerome*s Hebrew Questions on Genesis (in Jerome 1995, 103-5) (see also 2 
Sam. 22:11; Pss. 18:11, 104:3; Hos. 4:19; Augustine, Confessions 13.9, De 
Genesi ad litteram 1.18; Abelard, Sic et non 23; Basil, Homilia II in 
Hexaéron). Later in the Heptaplus (6.2 and 6.5), Pico returns to this same 
image, citing James 1:17. See also: Pss. 17:11, 23:2; Gen. 1:2; Jer. 4:23. 

55 As Bausi rightly notes, most commentators direct the reader to Job 38:7, 
but a more likely source is actually Ps. 148:4. Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.24, 
2.11.67; Farmer (1998, 549 and passim). On early-morning prayer, see 
Conclusiones 1.28.37. 

56 Gf. 1 Cor. 12:8-14; Augustine, De trinitate 9.3. 

57 On loving the unknown, see Augustine, De trinitate 10.1.3, and 
Rabanus Maurus's Commentary on Matthew 4.13.5. Cf. John 10:30, 17:11, 

21-22; Deut. 29:29; Farmer (1998, 226, 252). 

58 Exod. 24:15-18. After his ascent to the mountain to make atonement for 
his people*s sins (Exod. 32:30ff.), Moses returned to his people in the Sinai 
Wilderness and revealed to them what he had learned in direct communion 
with God: the Law tablets (Exod. 34:1-4), the granting of Israel's covenant 
(Exod. 34:10ff.), the establishment of the Feast of the Unleavened Bread 
(Exod. 34:18), the revelation of the Sabbath (Exod. 35:1ff.), and the 
organization of the tabernacle (Exod. 35-38). For Moses as a contemplator, 
see Philo, Life of Moses 2.68-69, and Pseudo-Dionysius, Mystical Theology 
1001a. 

59 These three classes of angels are known as the “first hierarchy,” as they 
are closest to God. The necessity of the middle level in joining the upper 
and the lower is addressed in the Heptaplus (6.7) in imagery consonant with 
that employed here. Cf. Picos Exposition (230-38) on Psalm 50 (in Pico 
1997, 246) and the Heptaplus*s second proem. 

60 Cf. Macrobius, On the Dream of Scipio 1.6.11, and Picos Heptaplus 
6.6. The “Prime Minds” are the angels; the “Order of Pallas” is a phrase 
referring to the cherubim, insofar as they preside over the contemplators 
(Pico 2003, 26-27). 

61 Bausi (1996, 126) maintains that the language here is drawn directly 
from Ermolao Barbaro (1943, 1:15), but see also Quintilian's Institutiones 
6.3.111 and Seneca's Controversiae 2.13. 

62 Rom. 8:5; Phil. 3:19; Col. 3:2. Cf. Heptaplus (proem to 7): “si nixum 
propria fortitudine nihil supra se ipsum potest assurgere (alioquin se ipso 
esset validius), utique nihil nitens per se ipsum ad felicitatem maius aliquid 
vel perfectius sua natura assequi poterit” (“since nothing can rise above 
itself by relying on its own strength [otherwise it would be stronger than 
itself], so nothing relying on itself can attain a felicity any greater or more 
perfect than its own nature” (Pico 1998). 

63 Acts 9:15. See also Commento 2.9; Panofsky (1962, 140-41). 

64 Celestial Hierarchy 165b—c, 205c-209d. This Dionysius was, of course, 
thought to be the homonymous follower of Paul of Acts 17:34. See also 
Heptaplus 3.3 and Pseudo-Dionysius's Divine Names 821b-d. The mystic 
three-stage path, or triplex via, was often articulated as purgatio- 
¡illuminatio-unitio (or perfectio). 

65 Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 537a—c. 

66 Augustine, among several others, regularly defines the cherub as 
plenitudo scientiae (“the fullness of knowledge”). See, for example, his 
sermon on Psalm 97, in which he makes a connection between the fullness 
of knowledge, love, and God's throne. Pico may have also been thinking of 
Richard of St. Victor?s De arca mystica: “Certe cherubin plenitudo scientiae 
dicitur, et sub talis vocabuli praesagio magnum quiddam secretioris 
scientiae proponere, vel polliceri videtur” (“Certainly the word “cherub” 
means “fullness of knowledge,” and under the indication of this word it 
seems that a kind of great thing of hidden knowledge is being proposed and 
promised,” Zinn, trans., in Richard of St. Victor 1979, 259). See also 
Gregory, Moralia in Job 17.27 (PL 76.29a); Isidore of Seville, Mysticorum 
expositiones sacramentorum, “On Genesis” 5.13-14 and “On Exodus” 46.1 
(PL 83.222c and 311b-c). Pico's use of the phrase in the Oration 
additionally evokes Jerome”s famous notion of scientia secretorum, which 
seems particularly appropriate to his discussion of the mysteries (see 8104). 

67 Richard of St. Victor's De duodecim patriarchis is based on the notion 
that Jacob was the father of twelve sons: the successive stages of the 
contemplator?s quest for mystical enlightenment. The recurring topos of 
Jacob's image engraved in the throne of God comes from the Aggadic 
tradition. See Wolfson 1995, 1-62. Jacob, like Moses, was considered a 
prototype of effective enlightenment. “Those of our own” refers to the 
scholars of the Latin tradition (see $186). 

68 Jacob saw God here on Earth only during a dream (Gen. 28:11—17); in 
Heaven, however, the vision of God is attainable in a waking state. Cf. 
Heptaplus 3.4, Commento (notes to fourth stanza), and St. Hilary's 
Tractatus super psalmos (PL 9.657b). This paradox of Jacobs heightened 
powers of perception during “sleep” was used by Richard of St. Victor as a 
model of ascetic contemplation, of the time when the body seems to sleep 
but the mind is acutely aware (De exterminatione 3.16). 

69 Genesis 28:12-13; Commento (notes to sixth stanza); Philo, De somniis 
1.2ff.; lamblichus, Protrepticus 1 (41.11-24 in lamblichus 1989). 
Interestingly, Picos depiction of the relatively harmonious comings and 
goings of the angels on the ladder is a rather joyous contradiction of the 
typical iconography of the ladder to God. See Katzenellenbogen (1964, 22— 
26). 

70 See Plato, Phaedo 67b (Pico 2003, 31). See also Num. 4:15: “[...] non 
tangant vasa sanctuarii ne moriantur...” (“and they shall not touch the 
vessels of the sanctuary, lest they die”); 2 Kings 6:6—7: “extendit manum 
Oza ad arcam Dei et tenuit eam quoniam calcitrabant boves iratusque est 
indignatione Dominus contra Ozam et percussit eum super temeritate qui 
mortuus est tibi juxta arcam Dei” (“Oza put forth his hand to the ark of 
God, and took hold of it: because the oxen kicked and made it lean aside. 
And the indignation of the Lord was enkindled against Oza, and he struck 
him for his rashness: and he died there before the ark of God”). 

71 The conception here of aspects of the soul as a hindrance to the 
attainment of spiritual and philosophical purity (8878-80) owes much to 
Plato's Phaedo (64c-67b), in which mastery of physical appetite is the 
cornerstone of moral rectitude. 

72 Cf. Ps. 17:25. Cf. Arnobius Afer, Disputationum adversus gentes libri 
VII 2.9; Rabanus Maurus, Commentaria in libros H paralipomenon 2.28. 
See also Bausi (1996, 127). 

73 The phrase sub pulvere (“within the dust”) often means “furtively” (e.g., 
Gregory, Mor. 32.10) but here conveys precisely the opposite meaning: “in 
the public arena” or “publicly.” See, for example, Cicero, De legibus 3.6.14. 

74 Job 40:16; Isidore, Sententiarum libri tres 2.39, “De fornicatione” (PL 
83.641a). Cf. Pico (1998, De ente et uno 10): “Unitatis pacem turbat 
ambitio et sibi haerentem animum extra se rapit et in diversa quasi lacerum 
trahit atque discerpit” (“Ambition disturbs the peace of unity and wrenches 
the soul that clings to it out of itself, and drags and tears the soul in pieces 
as if wounded”). 

75 “By the neck.” Despite some commentators” ingenious source hunting, 
this was not a particularly uncommon expression. See, however, Garin's 
edition of the Oration, in which he observes that this particular usage here 
may echo Asclepius (Pico 1942), an opinion adopted by Copenhaver 
(2002a, 67-68) and Hermes Trismegistus (1992, 74). 

76 Psalm 23:34: “quis ascendet in montem Domini et quis stabit in loco 
sancto eius [?] innocens manibus et mundo corde qui non exaltavit frustra 
animam suam” (“Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord: or who 
shall stand in his holy place? The innocent in hands, and clean of heart, who 
hath not taken his soul in vain”). Cf. Aeneas to Anchises (Virgil 1986, Aen. 
2.717ff.): “Tu, genitor, cape sacra manu patriosque Penatis; / me, bello e 
tanto digressum et caede recenti, / attrectare nefas, donec me flumine vivo / 
abluero” (“Father, do thou take in thy hand the sacred things and our 
country?s household gods; for me, fresh from such a conflict and recent 
carnage, it were sin to handle them, until 1 have washed me in a running 
stream.” 

77 This could be a reference to the metaphor of eternal happiness as 
circular movement. See Heptaplus (proem to 7): “Circular motion, through 
which a body is carried around to the point from which it started, is the 
most express image of the true felicity, through which a creature returns to 
the beginning from which it proceeded” (Pico 1998). This passage may be 
inspired principally by al-Batalyawsi. See Idel (2005, Ascensions 183-87). 

78 A probable source for these similes is Plutarch's On Isis and Osiris 18. 
After Osiris dies, Typhon (who is identified as being akin to the Titans in 49 
and whom Pico identifies with Satan in Conclusiones 2.10.13) comes upon 
his corpse and cuts it into pieces. Isis afterward collects almost all of the 
body parts and, with the help of her son Horus (first identified with Apollo 
in Herodotus 2.144), conquers Typhon. As a result of this conflict, Osiris 
comes to be regarded as the god of the dead but also of renewed life 
through Horus (who is, like Apollo, associated with the sun). See also 
Pico's Commento 2.8. 

79 “Io be made perfect” is a phrase that refers to “perfection” in its 
mystical sense. See 870 and note 64. 

80 It actually was not Job but Jeremiah who entered into a pact with God 
before his birth (see Jer. 1:5). See also, however, Job 31:18. 

81 Daniel 7:10. 

82 Job 25:2; Dan. 7:10; Gen. 1:2; Heptaplus 3.6. Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.24 
(Farmer 1998, 355) and Mithridates (2005, 151). 

83 Pseudo-Dionysius, Celestial Hierarchy 209a—b. Cf. Conclusiones 2.5.3. 

84 Empedocles, frag. 17 (Diels and Kranz 1951-52). This is a reference to 
the “Cosmic Cycle” of Empedocles, according to which two fundamental 
cosmic forces are locked in an eternal struggle. Love (wa) strives to 
attract and combine, while Strife (velkoc) seeks to repel and separate. Cf. 
Aristotle, Met. 985a20-30; Plutarch, On Isis and Osirus 48. By comparing 
Conclusiones 2.3.71 and 2.11.66, we see that the former is akin to the 
seventh sefirah and the latter to the eighth (i.e., what moves toward superior 
things and what toward inferior). See Farmer (1998, 421, 549). 

85 Empedocles, frag. 115, 13-14 (Diels and Kranz 1951-52). Cf. 
Conclusiones 2.3.71. 

86 Cf. Lucan, Pharsalia 1.1 (Cassirer, Kristeller, and Randall in Pico 1948, 
231). Plusquam civilia bella (“more than civil wars”) are those waged not 
only among citizens but even members of a single family. See Isidore of 
Seville (Etym. 18.1) and Rabanus Maurus (De universo 20.1). Cf. 
Augustine, De doctrina christiana 4.139. 

87 The phrase “our man” in 2 Cor. 4:16 is explained as the “exterior self” 
(Pico 2003, 38). Bonaventure (1882-1902, 2:587) glosses the expression as 
the body, as opposed to the “interior self,” which is the “rational spirit” or 
mind. 

88 Pico elaborates on the metaphor of man's interior “manifold beast” in 
Heptaplus 4.5—7, citing Plato”s statements in the Republic (588c-92b) that 
our secret desires can be compared to various beasts that dwell within us. 
Cf. Eusebius, Praeparatio evangelica 12.46. Bori explains that there is an 
allusion here to the labours of Hercules (Bori 2000, 77) and that the phrase 
“manifold beast” refers to the hydra (sensuality) and the “lion” refers to the 
Nemean lion (wrath). Cf. Bausi (Pico 2003, 39). 

89 To understand this simile of the “icta porca” (stuck sow), we must look 
to Virgil, who, in the eighth book of the Aeneid, recounts the peace made 
between Romulus and Tatius over the sacrificed sow (Aen. 8.639-41). This 
passage is incorporated by Pico in Christian terms and brought in here as 
the symbol of a ratified peace. See also the last verse of Pico's Carmen 
latinum 7. 

90 Contentio (“strife”) is perhaps the Latin translation of veixoc but could 
refer just as well to Homer”s use of ép1c, related to Eris, the goddess of 
discord. The comparison between Heraclitus and Homer is found in 
Aristotle (Eudem. Eth. 1235a25), Plutarch (De Iside et Osiride 48), and 
others. See Heraclitus, frags. 10, 53 (in which the etymon is ródepoc [Pico 
2003, 40)]), and 80 (Diels and Kranz 1951-52); Homer, Iliad 18.107. Cf. 
Commento 2.8 and the first Epistle to Gianfrancesco. 

91 Cf. Philo, On the Cherubim 37. 

92 Matthew 11:28; John 14:27; Jer. 6:16. 

93 In other words, we who are of this world will fly into the embrace of 
Theology. See Conclusiones 2.5.9. Cf. De ente et uno 10; Ps. 54:7; 
Commento (notes to stanza I). See also 8109. Although Pico casts the 
beatissima mater (“most blessed Mother”) specifically as Theology, his 
phrase is constructed in such a way as to bring to mind also the Virgin and 
the Dove of Song of Songs 6:8 as well as the female personification of 
knowledge or philosophy at large (cf. Boethius, Consolation of Philosophy 
4. prose 1, metre 1). This feminine personification likewise suggests 
Shekhinah or the Matronita. A relationship between the medieval Marian 
tradition and the Shekhinah of the Zohar is proposed by Green (94-97). 

94 This phrase echoes quite closely the important proem of the Heptaplus”s 
(Pico 1998) third book, in which we read: “volabo insuper caelestem 
regionem, ubi vera est quies, vera pax, vera tranquillitas, pax utique quam 
hic visibilis et corporeus dare non potest” (“I shall fly above the heavenly 
region to that of true repose, peace, and tranquility, especially that peace 
which this visible and corporeal world cannot give”). 

95 On the unity of the intellect, see Farmer (1998, 112-14). See also 
Conclusiones 1.7.3, 1.20.7, 2.4.24-25; Farmer (1998, 107-8). It should be 
noted that the yearning for peace is, in effect, also the desire for truth (cf. 
Mithridates 2005, 158), for without peace there is no union (whether unitio 
or henosis), and without truth there is no understanding of the Godhead (or 
the One). For Pico, these are all logical points of ontological — and 
philosophical — convergence. See De ente et uno 10 (Pico 1998): “Pat[er 
...] ipsa unitas, ipsa veritas, ipsa bonitas est. [...] Evolemus ad Patrem ubi 
pax unifica, ubi lux verissima, voluptas optima” (“The Father [...] is unity 
itself, truth itself, goodness itself. [...] Let us fly to the Father where there is 
unifying peace, truest light, best pleasure”). 

96 See lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica 33.229-33. See also Pico's Epist. 
20.5. 

97 Cf. Luke 2:13-14 and Heptaplus 7.4. 

98 Cf. Matt. 10:12-13: “Intrantes autem in domum salutate eam et 
siquidem fuerit domus digna veniat pax vestra super eam” (“And when you 
come into the house, salute it, saying: Peace be to this house”); Luke 10:5— 
6; John 14:23. 

99 As will soon become apparent, the feminine pronouns in this section 
and the next refer to the soul, anima, which is a feminine noun in Latin. 

100 Psalm 23:10. Cf. Conclusiones 1.6.3. 

101 See Macarius*s first homily (3-4), in which he explains the allegories 
of Ezekiel's vision, comprehensible only if one takes it anagogically to 
represent the advent of Christ (the hand that appears beneath the cherub*s 
wings), Who oversees the perfection of the human soul and its preparation 
to become God's throne. For Proclus”s tripartite path to theology as an 
analogue to Pseudo-Dionysius*s triple way, see Bori (2000, 51ff.). Despite 
man's apparent ability to raise himself up, the self-preparatory elements of 
the soul's attainment of union with God should not be seen as existing 
outside the need for God's grace (see Dulles 1941, 121-25). Cf. John 14:23; 
Ps. 23:78. 

102 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.3; Prov. 20:28. 

103 Psalm 44:10-11: “Adstetit regina a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato 
circumdata varietate / audi filia et vide et inclina aurem tuam et obliviscere 
populum tuum et domum patris tui” (“The queen stood on thy right hand, in 
gilded clothing; surrounded with variety. / Hearken, O daughter, and see, 
and incline thy ear: and forget thy people and thy father's house”). 
According to the most common interpretations of these verses, the bride 
here represents the emergence of a single church from a “variety” of 
languages and customs (cf. Jerome Ep. 65.14-15 [PL 22.633]; Augustine, 
Enarrationes in psalmos 44.24-25 [PL 36.510]). Pico recasts the image as 

the illumination of the single soul through a variety of “sciences,” or 
schools of thought. 

104 Cf. Isa. 49:18, 61:10; Jer. 2:32; John 3:29; Rev. 19:7-8, 21:2. This 
eroticization of the union between the soul and God clearly owes much in 
tone to the Song of Songs. Cf. also Hos. 2:19—20. This union is of a very 
personal nature inasmuch as this intimate “marriage” represents the 
contemplative?s ultimate goal. See Rabanus Maurus, Commentary on 
Ezekiel 15.40; Ps. 44:11-12; Isa. 49:18; Gen. 24:7. The allegorical allusions 
belong both to the cabalistic tradition of hieros gamos (e.g., Shekhinah's 
coupling with Binah) and to the Christian mystical vision of the soul's 
union with the Godhead (e.g., Bernard of Clairvaux's Sermones in 
Epiphania 2.2-3 [PL 183.158-59]). See also Richard of St. Victor's De 
arca mystica 3.13-16. 

105 Cf. Conclusiones 1.17.3-5; Ps. 115:15. 

106 That “plenitude of life” known as death is explained more clearly by 
Pico in De ente et uno 5. Citing Paul (1 Cor. 15:31; Rom. 7:24) and Seneca 
(Ep. 102 and 120), Pico casts our worldly life as death itself inasmuch as it 
is simply the soul's temporary vivification of the body, not a state of 
existence that is characteristic of the essence of the soul. The soul's “life” is 
being and, given that the study of philosophy is also the contemplation of 
being, can in this way be seen to exemplify the object of the philosopher”s 
endeavour. Cf. the last sentence of De ente et uno and Phaedo 82b-84b. In 
the Commento (notes to stanza 4), Pico explains that the cabalists believed 
many patriarchs had died as a result of intellectual rapture, represented 
allegorically in the kiss. Having been so completely uplifted, they were able 
to abandon their bodies (Conclusiones 2.8.7, 2.11.13). See also Macrobius, 
In somnium Scipionis 1.12.17; Rom. 14:7-8; Col. 2:11-13; Plato, Phaedo 
60d ff. (Pico 1987, 20), 8la (Cassirer, Kristeller, and Randall in Pico 1948, 
232): 

107 See Origen's first homily on Genesis: “Therefore, by participation in 
that celestial water which is said to be above the heavens, each of the 
faithful becomes heavenly, that is, when he applies his mind to lofty and 

exalted things, thinking nothing about the earth but totally about heavenly 
things” (Origen 1982, 50). This notion is not far from those expressed in 
8855-56 and indeed corresponds to Pico?s explanation of the “deathless 
fountain” in the Commento (notes to stanza 4). Cf. Conclusiones 2.9.6. The 
image of heavenly nectar in this context goes back to Plato*s discussion of 
the angelic charioteer who, after guiding the soul to heaven, refreshes his 
horses with ambrosia and nectar (Phaedrus 243e-257a). Cf. Macrobius, In 
somnium Scipionis 1.12.11. Nectar, according to Proclus, corresponds to the 
Infinite (cf. Conclusiones 1.24.54; Farmer 1998, 333). Ficino was 
especially intrigued by this mythical “hymn,” of which he wrote several 
times and which indeed occupies nearly all of his commentary on the 
Phaedrus. In a letter sent to Giovanni Cavalcanti (known as the De raptu 
Pauli ad tertium coelum [Ficino 1576, 1:697ff.]), Ficino uses Plato”s 
Ccharioteer as a stylistic model for Paul's vision of heaven (cf. 2 Cor. 12:2-4 
and 870). The motif is revisited, complete with mention of the divine foods, 
in two other works: in De voluptate, Ficino explains that ambrosia 
represents contemplation and nectar the joy of being near to God; in De 
amore (7.14), ambrosia and nectar are symbolic of the wondrous vision of 
heaven. These two interpretations come together in his commentary on the 
Philebus (chap. 34) and in the Theologia Platonica (18.8). These various 
ideas on the meaning of heavenly nectar appear frequently in many of 
Ficino”s letters. See Allen (1981, 220 and passim). Pico probably begins 
with this Platonic notion of the presence of nectar in heaven but then, 
relying on Plotinus”s interpretation (Enneads 3.5.9) of a passage in Plato”s 
Symposium (203b—c), adds the reference to intoxication, an allusion in the 
case of Plotinus to the way in which knowledge is passed down from higher 
to lower levels. See also Picos Commento (2.14a, notes to stanza 3 and 
notes to stanza 4, in which he refers to Maimonides” Guide for the 
Perplexed 2.12) and Conclusiones 2.10.24, 2.11.17; cf. 8108. For the 
cherub as the supercelestial charioteer who guides the soul in an orderly 
fashion away from discord, see Philo, On the Cherubim 23-24. 

108 “Solitude of the body” is a phrase that was sometimes associated with 
Job 39:6 (Gregory, Moralia in Job 30.16). See also Gerhoh of 
Reichersberg's Commentaria vetustissima et profundissima super Canticum 
Canticorum 3.3 (PL 195.1129c-d). 

109 Cf. Exod. 19:22-23; Lev. 16:23-24. The allegory of the tabernacle as 
an end is traditional. See Gregory of Nyssa's Life of Moses 177-—78. Though 
hardly as enthusiastic about pagan philosophers, Richard of St. Victor (both 
in his De arca mystica and the Nonnullae allegoriae tabernaculi foederis) 
likewise glosses the various grades of access to the tabernacle as linear 
phases of epistemological progress that culminate in the grace of 
understanding through the contemplation of divine invisibilia. For the 
purification of the priests, see Philo's Life of Moses 2.74 and 138ff.; 
Clement of Alexandria's Stromateis 5.6; Jerome's Commentary on Ezekiel, 
chap. 3; and Pico”s first exposition on Ps. 17:12 (Pico 1997, 149). Thessaly, 
long considered a hotbed of magicians, fits in nicely with the concept of the 
intelligent but misguided soul. 

110 The menorah appears also in the eighth tale of Flavius Mithridates” 
translation, made for Pico, of The Great Parchment. lts modern editor, 
Giulio Busi, explains: “In various passages, [the author] expresses the 
theoretical principle of the correspondence between a particular sefirah and 
the whole. He says for instance that “the holy Temple below is arranged 
according to the region of the holy temple above,” thus signifying that 
malkut (the lower Sanctuary) reproduces the structure of the whole 
emanation (the upper Sanctuary). Such a perfect mirroring is however 
possible only when the priest takes his dirty “clothes [...] away [and ...] 
puts clean linen over his head.? That is when the evil forces are driven away 
and yesod (the holy priest) is connected purely with malkut. Such a mystical 
purity makes it possible to ascend through meditation to the outermost 
source of light” (Mithridates 2004, 38). 

111 Cf. Rabanus Maurus's Commentary on Ezekiel 42.17; Bausi (1996, 
37). 

112 The meaning of 8898-102 relies upon several Old Testament passages 
related to temples and the duties of priests. Most scholars attribute the 
wondrous images of 8101 to the descriptions of the Ark of the Covenant 
(Exod. 25-26). See also Exod. 27:21; Lev. 4:6, 24:3; Heptaplus (second 
proem); and Conclusiones 1.2.22. 'To be sure, the phrase pellicea elementa 
(“skin coverings”) is difficult to understand if not in reference to the furs 

placed over the ark*s exterior (cf. Exod. 26:7, 14, 36:19, and 39:33; see Pico 
1948, 233). The skins could be Christological symbols and/or representative 
of the Fall and Redemption; cf. Conclusiones 2.8.8-9 and Farmer (1998, 
48990). Similarly, the seven-part candelabra could well be inspired by the 
septem lucernas (“seven lights”) of Exod. 25:37-39 and the multicoloured 
decorations of the supercelestial world by the various blues, scarlets, 
purples, and golds of the tabernacle?s curtains (Exod. 26:1-—6). 

113 Such a forthright assertion recalls Eriugena's famous phrase “Nemo 
intrat in caelum nisi per philosophiam” (“No one enters heaven except 
through philosophy,” in Eriugena 1939, 64). 

114 Pico was not the only one to use the term “mystery” as applied to 
Moses's teachings. Cf., for example, Ficino's In Phaedrum (Ficino 1576, 
1363): “Tum vero interea mirabile nota mysterium mosayco mysterio 
simile” (“Meanwhile, take note of this marvelous mystery, which resembles 
the Mosaic mystery,” trans. Allen 1981, 74-75). For an antecedent, see 
Philo, On the Cherubim 48-49. See also Eriugena, Periphyseon 2.22 (PL 
122.564a—b). 

115 On the theology of the ancients, or prisca theologia (a notion that was 
taken from Gemistus Pletho), see Ficino's Argumentum set before his 
translation of the Pimander (Ficino 1576, 1836): “There is, therefore, a 
theology of the ancients (prisca theologia) [...] which has its origins in 
Mercury and culminates in the divine Plato.” For an alternative thread, 
which begins with Zoroaster, see Theologia Platonica 17.1 (Ficino 1576, 
386). For the different genealogies, see Walker (1956). For a general 
overview, see Walker (1972); see also M. J. B. Allen, “Golden Wits, 
Zoroaster and the Revival of Platon” in Allen (1998). Pico's trust in the 
prisca theologia will turn into disillusionment and then finally disappear in 
his Disputationes; see Valcke (1989, 192), cited in Bausi (1996, 110n19). 

116 The exclamation “by Hercules!” (akin to “by Jove!”) was not 
uncommon, but see Bausi (Pico 2003, 167-68) for its appearance in 
Gianfrancesco”s editorial work. 

117 On dialectics seen as an expiatory art, see Plato, Sophist 230c-d. 

118 Ancient mystery cults (e.g., the Eleusinian) often required novices to 
progress through a series of stages before beholding in person the contents 
of the sacred kiotn and attaining epopteia (see 88104 and 106). The 
creation of an analogy between the path of philosophy and that of the 
mysteries — the first steps of which consist in purification and initiation — is 
typical of Neoplatonism but is already present in Plato's Phaedo 69b-d: *... 
but truth is in fact a purification from all these things, and self-restraint and 
justice and courage and wisdom itself are a kind of purification. And 1 
fancy that these men who established the mysteries were not unenlightened, 
but in reality had a hidden meaning when they said long ago that whoever 
goes uninitiated and unsanctified to the other world will lie in the mire, but 
he who arrives there initiated and purified will dwell with the gods. For as 
they say in the mysteries, “the thyrsus-bearers are many, but the mystics are 
few”; and these mystics are, 1 believe, those who have been true 
philosophers” (Plato 1990). A.-J. Festugiere has suggested that the mysteres 
cultuels have been replaced through the mysteres littéraires (cf. Diés 1927). 
Regarding the issue of the “language of mysteries” in a Platonic context, 
refer to Wind's introduction (Wind 1968). 

119 Cf. Plato, Symposium 210a; Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 77 (382d). 
120 See Plato, Phaedo 69c. 

121 See Plato, Phaedrus 247e, in Ficino”s translation: “Cum autem 
redierit, auriga ad praesepe sistens equos obicit illis ambrosiam, et post 
ipsam nectar potandum” (“On his arrival, the charioteer stops the horses at 
the stable and offers them ambrosia and nectar also to drink,” Allen trans. in 
Allen 1981, 220). See also 898. 

122 Platos most significant passage may be found in Phaedrus 265b: 
“And we made four divisions of the divine madness, ascribing them to four 
gods, saying that prophecy was inspired by Apollo, the mystic madness by 
Dionysos, the poetic by the Muses, and the madness of love [...] by 

Aphrodite and Eros” (Plato 1990). This passage is amply treated by Ficino 
in the final pages of his Commentarium in Convivium Platonis, whence 
Pico draws the order of the four madnesses, or furores, described later. On 
the divinus furor, see also Ficino”s letter to Pellegrino Agli (Gentile 1990; 
Ficino 1576, 613ff.). The translation of the Greek manía into the Latin furor 
appears in Cicero, De divinatione 1.80: “Negat enim sine furore Democritus 
quemquam poetam magnum esse posse, quod idem dicit Plato. Quem, si 
placet, appellet furorem, dum modo is furor ita laudetur ut in Phaedro 
Platonis laudatus est” (“Democritus says that no one can be a great poet 
without being in a state of frenzy, and Plato says the same thing. Let Plato 
Call it “frenzy” if he will, provided he praises it as it was praised in his 
Phaedrus,” Falconer trans. in Cicero 1959). See Plato, Phaedrus 244a. 

123 John 5:19: “Scimus quoniam ex Deo sumus: et mundus totus in 
maligno positus est” (“We know that we are of God, and the whole world is 
seated in wickedness”). 

124 See Virgil, Aen. 6.19. See Marsilio Ficino, Commentarium in 
Convivium Platonis 7.14: “Alas animo tribuit, per quas in sublime feratur” 
(“[Plato] attributes wings to the soul, by which it may be borne to the 
sublime,” Jayne trans. in Ficino 1944). See also 8848 and 94. 

125 Marsilio Ficino, Theologia Platonica 1.6: “Aliud tamen mens erit, 
aliud veritas. Quod sic aperit Zoroaster: MúávBave TO vontÓv, énel ÉZw vóov 
úrrápyel, id est: “Scito intellegibile ipsum esse extra mentem”” (“Yet mind 
and truth will still be different things. Zoroaster unfolded it like this: “Be 
aware that the intelligible lies outside the mind,”” Allen, trans. in Allen 
1981). See Chaldean Oracles 1.10 (Des Places 1971, 66). 

126 Marsilio Ficino, Commentarium in Convivium Platonis 7.14: “Primus 
itaque furor inconcinna et dissonantia temperat” (“So the first kind of 
madness tempers dissonant and unharmonious parts,” Jayne trans. in Ficino 
1944). 

127 Marsilio Ficino, Commentarium in Convivium Platonis 7.14: “Primus 
quidem poeticus furor, alter mysterialis, tertius vaticinium, amatorius 
affectus est quartus. Est autem poesis a Musis, mysterium a Dionysio, 
vaticinium ab Apolline, amor a Venere” (“The first is the poetic madness, 
the second is that of the mysteries, the third is that of prophecy, and the 
fourth is that of love. Moreover, the poetry is from the Muses, the mystery 
from Dionysus, the prophecy from Apollo, and the love from Venus,” Jayne 
trans. in Ficino 1944). Ficino, while paraphrasing Plato?s Phaedrus, gives 
the four furores a different order, which is followed by Pico. See Plato, 
Phaedrus 265b. 

128 Second furor, the furor mysterialis. See note 127. 

129 On the relation between Dionysus and Apollo (to whom the 
appellation Musagetes normally refers), see Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 
389b-c. 

130 Romans 1:20: “Invisibilia enim ipsius, a creatura mundi, per ea quae 
facta sunt, intellecta, conspiciuntur” (“For the invisible things of him, from 
the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things 
that are made”). See Ficino, De divino furore, a letter to Pellegrino Agli (in 
Ficino 1576, 613): “Itaque Paulus ac Dionysius, Christianorum 
theologorum sapientissimi, invisibilia Dei, asserunt, per ea quae facta sunt 
queque hic cernuntur intelligi” (“Paul and Dionysius, the wisest of the 
Christian theologians, affirm that the invisible things of God are understood 
from what has been made and is to be seen here,” trans. in Ficino 1975— 
2003, 1:43-44). 

131 Psalm 35:9: “Inebriabuntur ab ubertate domus tuae” (“They shall be 
inebriated with the plenty of thy house”). 

132 Hebrews 3:5: “Et Moses quidem fidelis erat in tota domo eius 
tamquam famulus” (“And Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a 
servant”). Additionally, Heb. 3:2: “Qui fidelis est ei qui fecit illum sicut et 
Moses in omni domo illius” (“Who is faithful to him that made him, as was 

also Moses in all his house”), which is a quotation of Num. 12:7: “At non 
talis servus meus Moses, qui in omni domo mea fidelissimus est” (“But it is 
not so with my servant Moses who is most faithful in all my house”). 

133 Cf. Homer, Iliad 1.70, cited in Plutarch's On the E at Delphi 3876b. 
This is the third furor, the vaticinium (see note 127). 

134 The fourth furor, the amatorius affectus (“loving emotion”) (see note 
127). 

135 The original term, aestrus or oestrus, derives from the Greek olotpoc 
(lit. “gadfly”), which was often used metaphorically, as in Sophocles and 
Euripides, to refer to any stimulus that drives one mad. See Pico”s letter to 
Benivieni of 12 November 1486 (in Dorez 1895, 358). See also Bausi (Pico 
2003, 54). 

136 On the ardent seraphim, cf. 8854 and 57. See, again, Ficino's De 
divino furore (in Ficino 1576, 613): “in hac autem ipsa alarum 
recuperatione abstrahi a corpore illarum vi animum Deoque plenum ad 
Superos trahi ac vehementer anniti” (“On recovery of these wings, the soul 
is separated from the body by their power. Filled with God, it strives with 
all its might to reach the heavens and thither it is drawn,” Allen trans. in 
Allen 1981). 

137 Galatians 2:20: “Vivo autem iam non ego, vivit vero in me Christus” 
(“And I live, now not I; but Christ liveth in me”). 

138 Cf. Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 385b. 

139 This philosopher, who was Plutarch's teacher, belonged to the Platonic 
Academy; he is one of the main characters of Plutarch's On the E at Delphi. 
See Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 385b-c. 

140 The whole passage is clearly dependent on Plutarch's On the E at 
Delphi, where the three Delphic maxims are commented on. 

141 John 1:9: “Erat lux vera, quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem 
in hunc mundum” (“That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man 
that cometh into this world”). 

142 Cf. Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 385d. 
143 Cf. Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 385d and passim. 

144 Cf. Nonius Marcellus (1903, 1:62, 83); Cicero, Orator 21. See also 
Bausi (Pico 2003, 56-57). 

145 Plato, Alcibiades 1 (131a-33c). 
146 Cf. Plutarch, On the E at Delphi 392a and passim. 

147 On the reception of Pythagoras during the Renaissance, see Casini 
(1998). 

148 Cf. lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica 8.44. 

149 Cf. lamblichus, Protrepticus 21 (lamblichus 1967, 107, 116-17; 
lamblichus 1989, 134, 142-43); Porphyry, Vita Pythagorae 42; Ficino, 
Symbola Pythagorae philosophi; Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola 
Pythagorae (in Ficino 1937, 2:102). 

150 Cf. lamblichus, Protrepticus 21 (lamblichus 1967, 107-8, 115, 121-— 
22; lamblichus 1989, 134, 141, 147); Ficino, Symbola Pythagorae 
philosophi (in Ficino 1576, 1979); Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola 
Pythagorae (in Ficino 1937, 2:102-3). Cf. also Diogenes Laertius 7.34-35; 
Hesiod, Opera et dies 727, 742-43; Pliny, Natural History 28.69. 

151 Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola Pythagorae (in Ficino 1937, 
2:100): “Mingere est purgari, incidere ungues etiam est amovere a te 
superba et vilia” (“To urinate is to purge oneself, to cut the nails is to 
distance oneself from prideful and vile things”). See Celenza (1999, 694— 
95). 

152 Cf. Plato, Republic 508b—c. 

153 Cf. lamblichus, Protrepticus 21; Ficino, Symbola Pythagorae 
philosophi; Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola Pythagorae (in Ficimo 
1937, 2:101). See Celenza (1999, 695-97). 

154 Cf. Plato, Alcibiades 1 (1330). 

155 “Solid food” in this context recalls Paul's admonition not to take 
spiritual food that is too strong before one is ready. See Heb. 5:12-14: 
“Etenim cum deberetis magistri esse propter tempus rursum indigetis ut vos 
doceamini quae sint elementa exordii sermonum Dei et facti estis quibus 
lacte opus sit non solido cibo. Omnis enim qui lactis est particeps expers est 
sermonis justitiae parvulus enim est; perfectorum autem est solidus cibus 
eorum qui pro consuetudine exercitatos habent sensus ad discretionem boni 
ac mali” (“For whereas for the time you ought to be masters, you have need 
to be taught again what are the first elements of the words of God: and you 
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat [solido cibo)l. 
For every one that is a partaker of milk, is unskillful in the word of justice: 
for he is a little child. But strong meat [solidus cibus] is for the perfect; for 
them who by custom have their senses exercised to the discerning of good 
and evil”). Regarding ambrosia, see notes 107 and 121. 

156 Cf. Prov. 30:30-31: “Leo, fortissimus bestiarum, ad nullius pavebit 
occorsum; gallus succinctus lumbos, et aries; nec est rex, qui resistat ei” 
(“A lion, the strongest of beasts, who hath no fear of anything he meeteth: 
A cock girded about the loins: and a ram: and a king, whom none can 
resist”). See, moreover, Ficino, De vita coelitus comparanda 3.14 (in Ficino 
1576, 550). 

157 Job 38:36; cf. Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola Pythagorae (in 
Ficino 1937, 2:102). 

158 Cf. Ficino, Commentariolus in symbola Pythagorae (in Ficino 1937, 
2:102). See Matt. 26:74—75: “Et continuo gallus cantavit. Et recordatus est 
Petrus verbi lesu, quod dixerat: prius quam gallus cantet, ter me negabis” 
(“And immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus 
which he had said: Before the cock crows, thou wilt deny me thrice””). 

159 Cf. Job 38:7: “Cum me laudarent simul astra matutina [...]” (“When 
the morning stars praised me together [...]”). 

160 The greater world (maior mundus) is the Neoplatonic Macrocosmos or 
Megacosmos. 

161 Plato, Phaedo 118a. Since those who recovered from illness often 
sacrificed a cock to Aesculapius as recognition for their cure, these famous 
last words of Socrates were commonly taken to mean that he viewed death 
as the ultimate remedy for the vicissitudes of this life. 

162 Unfortunately, the nature of Pico*s sources is not clear. Some texts had 
been brought to his attention by Flavius Mithridates (see Pico”s letter to 
Ficino written in autumn 1486, in Supplementum Ficinianum, 272-—73: 
“Chaldaici hi libri sunt, si libri sunt et non thesauri: In primis Ezre, 
Zoroastris et Melchiar Magorum oracula, in quibus et illa quoque, que apud 
Graecos mendosa et mutila circumferuntur, leguntur integra et absoluta. 
Tum est in illa Chaldeorum sapientum brevis quidem et salebrosa, sed plena 
misteriis interpretatio. Est itidem et libellus de dogmatis Chaldaice 
theologie cum Persarum, Grecorum et Chaldeorum in illa divina et 
locupletissima enarratione” (“These are the Chaldean books, if they are to 
be considered books and not treasures: first the oracles of the Mages, Ezra, 
Zoroaster, and Melcher, in which one can read in its absolute integrity what 
has been transmitted only in fragments and full of mistakes among the 
Greeks. In those books is contained the somewhat condensed and hard to 
decipher, yet comprehensive, interpretation of the mysteries of the Chaldean 

wise men. One equally finds in them also a small book about the dogmas of 
the Chaldean theology, with a divine and most authoritative explanation of 
the Persians”, the Greeks”, and the Chaldeans””). Pico certainly had some 
texts or fragments written in a language that Wirszubski, on the basis of the 
extant fragments preserved in the Palatino manuscript (for example, the 
names of the paradisiacal rivers listed in 8134), considered to be a mixture 
of Aramaic, Syrian, and Hebrew, written in Ethiopic characters. These 
“texts,” however, might obviously have been fabricated, perhaps by Flavius 
Mithridates himself (Farmer 1998, 13, 486-87). Pico considered them, as in 
the preceding quotation, as being genuine versions (perhaps the originals) 
of the Chaldean Oracles; according to him they were better and richer than 
the compilation of scattered Greek fragments that circulated under that title 
(on the fortune of the Greek Chaldean Oracles during the Renaissance, see 
Dannenfeldt 1957). Gemistus Pletho might have been the first to believe 
that the Chaldean Oracles embodied sentences by Zoroaster (see also 
Masai 1956, 136ff.; Bidez and Cumont 1938; Duchesne-Guillemin 1958, 
4). He was followed by Ficino in the Theologia Platonica (see Gentile 
1990). See also Bausi (Pico 2003, 173—75). 

163 See Psellus, Summaria et brevis dogmatum Chaldaicorum expositio 
(PG 122.1152d). 

164 See note 127. 
165 PG 122.1129a. 

166 The names of the rivers are not available in the editio princeps, and the 
lacunae are normally filled in later editions with the Hebrew names of the 
paradisiacal rivers (Gen. 2:10-14). In the Palatino manuscript, Wirszubski 
(Wirszubski 1989, 242, and in Mithridates 1963, 38ff.) was able to read the 
four names as written in Ethiopic letters, but in a language that can be 
interpreted as a mixture of Aramaic, Syriac, and Hebrew, as follows: 1. q-s- 
t = “truth” (in Syriac); 2. k-?-r-n = “expiation” (in Hebrew); 3. n-h-r = 
“light” (in Aramaic); 4. r-h-m-n-t = “piety” (in Hebrew). See fig. 4. 

167 The phrase “northern line” translates boreali amussi. Amussis was a 
term variously used to signify an instrument employed to ascertain the 
degree to which a flat surface was level or precise. Pico may intend here 
nothing more esoteric than the plane one establishes while aligning one's 
sight through the eyepieces of an astrolabe (or by levelling a quadrant, 
nocturnal, or other navigational device) pointed toward Polaris (the North 
Star). Hence, we could assume here an image, albeit a rather complicated 
one, that approximates the modern expression “moral compass.” The 
reference to Iberian waves could be, as Bausi conjectures, to Seneca (Pico 
2003, 64). See also the notion of “median line” in Idel (2005, Ascensions 
167-81). 

168 The North, therefore, would represent dialectics; the East, natural 
philosophy; the South, theology; and the West, moral philosophy. 

169 Psalm 54:18: “Vespere, et mane, et meridie, narrabo, et annuntiabo” 
(“Evening and morning, and at noon I will speak and declare”). Augustine, 
De genesi ad litteram 4.30.47: “[...] ubi semper est dies in contemplatione 
incommutabilis veritatis, semper vespera in cognitione in seipsa creaturae, 
semper mane etiam ex hac cognitione in laude Creatoris” (“when it is 
always day in the immutable contemplation of truth, it is always evening in 
man's awareness of himself and morning always arises from that awareness 
in praise of the Creator”). See also Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos 
54.18: “Evangeliza tu, noli tacere quod accepisti, vespere, de praeteritis; 
mane, de futuris; meridie, de sempiternis” (“Do thou proclaim glad tidings, 
keep not secret that which thou hast received, “in evening? of things gone 
by, “in morning? of things to be, “at noon” of things ever to be,” Augustine 
of Hippo, 1888). Morning, then, comes to be associated with natural 
philosophy, evening with moral philosophy, and noon with theology. This 
pattern, with the exception of dialectics, is compatible with the allegory of 
the cardinal directions listed in note 168. 

170 Cf. Gen. 12:1-13:3, 13:14-15; Conclusiones 1.28.14. 

171 The “Moors” are, more accurately, the Arabs. See Conclusiones 
1.21.3. This could be a reference to the ideas that informed Conclusiones 

1.28.21 inasmuch as midday, like the South, belongs to theology. 

172 On the prohibition against disclosing the contents of the mysteries, 
see, for one example among many, Plotinus, Enneads 6.9.11: “This is the 
intention of the command given in the mysteries here below not to disclose 
to the uninitiated” (Plotinus 1966-88). 

173 For the phrase “our man,” see note 87. 

174 Jeremiah 9:21: “Quia ascendit mors per fenestras nostras, ingressa est 
domos nostras” (“For death is come up through our windows, it is entered 
into our houses”). Bausi reminds us that the windows of our souls are our 
senses, through which we are susceptible to temptation. He likewise notes 
that Plato associated our liver and breast with concupiscence and wrath, 
respectively (Pico 2003, 67). 

175 For a possible source of this angelological conclusion, see Gregory the 
Great, XL Homiliarum in Evangelia libri duo 34.9 (PL 76.1251a): “Raphael 
vero dicitur medicina Dei” (“In truth, Raphael is called the medicine of 
God”). Cf. Tob. 3:25: “Et missus est angelus Domini, ut curaret eos ambos, 
quorum uno tempore sunt orationes in conspectu Domini recitatae” (“And 
the holy angel of the Lord, Raphael was sent to heal them both, whose 
prayers at one time were rehearsed in the sight of the Lord”). On the names 
of the angels as connected to the doctrine of the sefirot (a connection which 
might be alluded to through the words “the most hidden mysteries”), see 
Yates (1979). For Raphael as healer, see, for example, Tob. 3.25-26 and 
11.8ff. 

176 Cf. Gregory the Great, XL Homiliarum in Evangelia libri duo 34.9 (PL 
76.1251a): “Gabriel autem, fortitudo Dei” (“And Gabriel is the strength of 
God”). 

177 Cf. Gregory the Great, XL Homiliarum in Evangelia libri duo 34.9 (PL 
76.1251a): “Michael namque, qui ut Deus” (“And Michael, who is like 
God”). 

178 Psalm 20:4: “Posuisti in capite eius coronam de lapide pretioso” 
(“thou hast set on his head a crown of precious stones”). 

179 For an example of an analogous use of the term fortune, see Pico, 
Epistle 36 (to Andrea Corneus), 15 October 1486 (Pico 1971, Opera omnia 
1:376—79), to which this whole section of the Oration is very similar (Bori 
2000, 73-77): “Everyone must act this way, especially those whom fortune 
has treated so benevolently that they can live not merely splendidly and 
comfortably, but also magnificently. Great fortunes raise one up to the skies 
and therefore induce ostentation but, like an indomitable, bucking steed, 
they often behave badly and torment, rather than transport, him who rides 
upon them” (Pico 1971, 1:377). 

180 As Bausi (Pico 2003, 68) notes, this whole passage recalls the opening 
paragraph of Cicero's De finibus bonorum and malorum (On Moral Ends), 
where we find a similar defence of philosophical studies: “In this work I am 
putting into Latin themes which philosophers of the highest talent and most 
refined learning have dealt with in Greek, and 1 am well aware, Brutus, that 
this will incur criticism of various kinds. Some people, by no means 
uneducated, altogether disapprove of philosophizing. Others do not criticize 
it so long as it is done in an easygoing manner, but consider that one should 
not devote so much of one”s enthusiasm and attention to it” (Cicero 2001b). 

181 See again Pico*s letter to Andrea Corneus: “Men's minds have been 
invaded by the ruinous and monstrous conviction that noblemen ought to 
refrain from philosophical studies or, at most, that they should taste them 
only with the edge of their lips in order to show off their intelligence, rather 
than putting them into practice, in peace, so as to better themselves. They 
consider Neoptolemus” saying as a decree: no one, or just a very few, 
should engage in philosophy” (Pico 1971, 1:377). The Neoptolemus 
referred to here is the protagonist of a lost tragedy by Ennius quoted by, 
among others, Cicero (De Republica 1.18.30): “He much preferred Ennius” 
Neoptolemus, who said that “he wanted to be a philosopher but only a little; 
it didn't please him totally”” (Cicero 1999b). See also De Oratore 2.37.156: 
“I have determined to philosophize, as Neoptolemus says in Ennius, “In a 
few things, for 1 don't want to do so in all ways”” (Cicero 1979-82); Aulus 

Gellius (1984, Attic Nights 5.15.9): “I agreed with Ennius? Neoptolemus, 
who rightly says: “Philosophizing there must be, but by the few; / Since for 
all men it's not to be desired.”” 

182 Here Pico outlines again a comprehensive plan for philosophical study 
in three stages, ascending from the investigation of earthly phenomena and 
natural philosophy (“the causes of things, the ways of nature”) to celestial 
phenomena (“the logic of the universe”) and theological mysteries (the 
plans of God, the mysteries of Heaven and Earth). The passage is 
reminiscent of Cicero, Tusculan Disputations (4.57): “[W]lisdom is the 
knowledge of things divine and human, together with an understanding of 
each thing's cause” (Cicero 2002). 

183 “The study of wisdom” is an etymological reflection of the Greek 
puwocogía (“philosophy”). Cf. Augustine, Against the Academicians 3.9.20: 
“Listen, my friend, philosophy is not called wisdom itself but the zeal for 
wisdom” (Augustine of Hippo 1995); Augustine, Epistles 3.149.2: “[...] 
and what is philosophy in Latin, if not the study of wisdom?” Cf. also 
Cicero, Tusculan Disputations 1.1: “The theoretical study of all the skills 
which have to do with the right way of living is to be identified with the 
pursuit of wisdom, that is, philosophy. So 1 decided that 1 should expound 
this in Latin” (Cicero 1985). 

184 See again Pico's letter to Andrea Corneus: “Would it therefore be 
ignoble or wholly improper for a nobleman gratuitously to pursue wisdom? 
Who could hear or tolerate such a thing without irritation? No one who has 
practiced philosophy in such a way as to be able or unable to do so has ever 
truly been a philosopher. Such a man has engaged in commerce, not 
philosophy” (Pico 1971, 1:377). As Bausi (Pico 2003, 70) notes, this 
passage also echoes Convivio 1.9.3-5, where Dante, however, speaks 
against perverting the pursuit of “letters” in general (not philosophy, in 
particular) into practical and monetary advantage. Such a scornful attitude 
toward the pursuit of knowledge is one of the main themes of the early 
humanists (cf., e.g., Petrarch's Invective contra medicum and Boccaccio*s 
Genealogiae deorum gentilium 14). 

185 See 8161 and 8865-66, where “the order of Pallas” is described as that 
of cherubic contemplation that brings to fruition the link between love (the 
seraphim) and justice or law (the thrones): throughout the Oration and 
Conclusiones, as the personification of Wisdom or Philosophy, Pallas 
signifies the intellectual nature which leads to wisdom (in Conclusiones 
2.5.14 and 2.11.10, the Orphean Pallas is associated with the cabalists” 
Metatron). 

186 Cf. Plato, Republic 495c. For the image of chaste Philosophy as 
neglected, scorned, and reduced to prostitution, one may also recall these 
famous verses from Petrarch (1976, RVF 7.10-11): “Povera e nuda vai, 
Philosophia, / dice la turba al vil guadagno intesa” (““Philosophy, you go 
poor and naked!” / says the mob, bent on low gain”). 

187 That is, “remuneration.” 

188 This may be a reference to the fact that in 1483 Pico renounced the 
administration of his patrimony, securing for himself only one-third of its 
revenues (Pico 2003, 72). According to Gianfrancesco, he renounced all 
earthly possessions three years before his death (in 1496). 

189 See again the epistle to Andrea Corneus, in which Pico speaks about 
the opposition between active and contemplative life: “But you might say: I 
want you to embrace Martha [the active life], but without abandoning Mary 
[the contemplative life]. 1 do not reject this opinion; in truth, 1 neither 
condemn nor impugn anyone who holds it. But maintaining that it is not a 
mistake to pass from a contemplative to a public life is very different from 
considering one's refusal to do so to be an act of slothfulness or, indeed, 
even a sin or a crime” (Pico 1971, 1:377). As to whether the active life is 
more excellent than the contemplative, see Thomas Aquinas, Summa 
Theologiae 2.2.182.1 (which follows Aristotle?s Ethics 10.7.8). This 
question was vigorously debated in humanist circles: see Cristoforo 
Landino (1424-1504), Disputationes Camaldulenses 1. See also Philippus 
de Harveng, Commentaria in cantica canticorum 3.7 and 3.11. 

190 Bori (2000, 76) notes that this passage echoes Platos Apology of 
Socrates 28a-34d, where we read: “I greet you, Athenians, with affection, 
but I shall obey the god rather than you, and so long as I am alive and 
capable I will not stop doing philosophy...” (Plato 1997). 

191 Literally “barking opponents.” The Latin term oblatrator is found in 
Sidonius, Epist. 1.3.2 and 4.22.6 (Bausi 1996, 136), and in the feminine 
form in Plautus?s Miles gloriosus 3.1.87. See 8264 and Jerome, Epist. 
135.15. 

192 Cf. Plato, Phaedrus 247a: “First in the heavens travels Zeus [...] after 
him there follows an army of gods and divinities, ordered in eleven 
companies [...] and after them follows anyone who wishes and is able to do 
so, for jealousy is excluded from the divine chorus” (Plato 2005). 

193 It is difficult to ascertain who exactly has taken these differently 
nuanced positions toward the idea of a public discussion of Pico*s nine 
hundred theses. Bori (2000, 75) conjectures that this whole segment, from 
where the text departs from the extant manuscript P in the second line of 
8143 (“And I would certainly not elaborate on them ...”) to 8150, was 
added to the text of the Oration by inserting parts of the letter to Corneus, 
written in mid-October 1486. Bausi (1996, 111-12), however, conjectures 
that Picos defence of philosophy was part of his answer to the five 
objections that were addressed to him after the publication of the nine 
hundred theses. On the history of the text in its present edition, including a 
synopsis of the manuscript P, the editio princeps, and Pico's Apologia, 
published in Naples in 1487, see Massimo Riva's preface and Pier Cesare 
Bori's and Michael Papio”s introductions to this volume. 

194 Bausi (Pico 2003, 76) observes that this whole passage echoes Angelo 
Poliziano?'s commentary on Statius?'s Silvae, where Poliziano quotes 
Aristotle (Problemata 916b.19), saying that “even the most contentious 
argument greatly sharpens the intellect” (“Contentiosa enim illa disputatio, 
ut Aristoteles scribit, magnopere ingenium exacuit”). Cf. Poliziano (1978, 
92). 

195 Cf. Sidonius, Epist. 1.6, 2.9. 

196 The term barzel (“iron”) occurs seventy-six times in the Old Testament 
and appears for the first time in Gen. 4:22. All of the occurrences refer, 
either literally or metaphorically, to the significance of iron. The 
metaphorical aspect that interests us here is one that alludes to the ideas of 
physical force, harshness, difficulty, and resistance. Grinding iron against 
iron symbolizes the way in which a sage tempers the presence of another 
person's spirit in such a way that, as a result, the latter?s ability to react will 
become razor sharp. See, for example, Prov. 27:17: “Iron sharpens itself 
with iron and man sharpens the intelligence of his companion,” and also 
Cicognani*s note (in my translation): “In the Talmud the wise are likened to 
iron, which is ground and sharpened by beating one piece against the other. 
See the Babylonian Talmud, discussed in the book of Ta*anith, p. 7a. “Rab 
Hammah observes: what is the significance of the text of Prov. 27:17: iron 
and iron together? As it occurs among instruments of iron, where one 
sharpens the other, so it is also the case among two wise men who sharpen 
themselves one against the other” (in Pico 1943, 119). Cf. Bausi (Pico 2003, 
172). 

197 What is here translated as “horoscope” is literally genesi (“the moment 
of birth”). 

198 Literally, “they desire [...] that Mars face Mercury directly from a 
horizontal trine.” “Triquetrus aspectus (the 120% angle formed by the 
position of the two planets in question) is [...] a technical astrological term: 
cf. Pliny the Elder, Natural History 2.77” (Bausi 1996, 132). It signifies a 
most propitious conjunction. See also Carena (in Pico 1994, 75): 
“Triquetrus, said of a celestial body at a distance of one third of the zodiac 
from another body or, rather, that forms with that body one side of an 
equilateral triangle in the zodiac.” See also Cicognani's note in his edition 
(in Pico 1943, 119): “The astrological viewpoint spoken of here is called 
“triangular aspect,? which means that the two lines of sight construct a 1209 
angle, one of the most favourable aspects; and the would-be philosopher 
will have to the highest degree the conjunction of hermetic intelligence 
(Mercury) and pugnacious prowess (Mars).” See also Pico, Disputationes 

adversus astrologiam divinatricem 66.14.16 and 10.9 (with the 
corresponding annotations by E. Garin in Pico 1946-52); Pliny the 
Younger, Natural History 2.59, 2.77, 2.80; Lucretius, De rerum natura 
1.717, 4.653; Julius Caesar, Bellum Gallicum 5.13.1. 

199 Bausi (1996, 140) notes the transitive use of incidere with the simple 
accusative, found in poetry (see Lucretius, De rerum natura 4.568), in post- 
classical Latin (Solinus, Tacitus, and especially Apuleius) and in the 
Christian authors. See Ermolao Barbaro, Temistius fol. 113v. 

200 Cf. Job 32:8: “But, as I see, there is a spirit in men, and the inspiration 
of the Almighty giveth understanding.” 

201 Cf. 1 Tim. 4:12: “Let no man despise thy youth: but be thou an 
example of the faithful in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in 
chastity.” 

202 Gf. 8151. The term “good arts” is found in Ovid (1988, Tristia 3.7.32): 
“So put aside the causes of sloth, accomplished girl, return to [noble arts] 
and thy sacred offerings” (Wheeler trans., with modifications). See also 
Augustine, In Psalmum IX Enarratio (PL 36.127). 

203 For the allusion to Pythagoras (who chose for himself the term 
“philosopher,” or “lover of wisdom,” rather than that of “wise man”), see 
8120 and notes. 

204 Cf. Horace, Ars Poetica 38-40: “Pick a subject, writers, equal to your 
strength and take some time to consider what your shoulders should refuse 
and what they can bear” (Horace 1995b). 

205 For the term imbecillissimus, see Cornelius Celsus 2.18; Seneca, De 
beneficiis 4.18. Pico uses the term in his letter to Corneus and numerous 
times elsewhere in his works. 

206 Cf. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita 28.14.12 and 33.5. 

207 Picos self-justification continues, in parallel with the text of the 
Apologia, until 8266. 

208 Cicero, On Moral Ends (De finibus bonorum et malorum) 1.2: “The 
second class of critics, who, however much they approve of philosophy, 
nevertheless would rather have it less eagerly prosecuted, are asking for a 
restraint that is not easy to practise. The study is one that when once taken 
up admits of no restriction or control. In fact, the attitude of the former 
class, who attempt to dissuade us from philosophy altogether, seems almost 
less unreasonable than that of those who would set limits to what is 
essentially unlimited, and expect us to stop half-way in a study that 
increases in value the further it proceeds” (Cicero 1999a). Bausi adds a 
further reference to 1.3 (Pico 2003, 80-81n172). Carena adds a reference to 
the catalogue of the books possessed by Pico (Kibre 1936, no. 1217). 
According to Reich and Buck, who follow Reich's apparatus to the letter, 
“no exactly corresponding passage” can be found. Reich adds a reference to 
Cicero, Philippicae 8.3.10 (Wuilleumier 99), “What do we promise our 
armies? Far better and greater rewards” (Cicero 1986), and Cato maior 
(Carena in Pico 1994, 17, but the quotation is imprecise: see Cicero, Cato 
maior de senectute 6.17: “non facit ea [senectus] quae ¡uvenes; at vero 
multo maiora et meliora facit” [“Granted that an old man does not do what 
young men do: still, the things he does are vastly more significant and more 
worthwhile,” Copley trans. in Cicero 1967]). 

209 Propertius, Elegiae 2.10.5-6. See Kibre (1936, nos. 236, 324, 795). 
Compare the closing paragraph of the Heptaplus?s second proem. 

210 Gorgias of Leontini (c. 485—c. 380 BC) was a major representative of 
early Sophistry. See Diels and Kranz (1951-52, 82A.1a, from Philostratus, 
Vitae sophistarum 1.9.11ff.). 

211 Cf. 8158. For the reference to Gorgias, prince of dispute, see Cicero, 
De Oratore 3.32.129: “And Gorgias was actually the very first to dare, in 

large gatherings, to call on people to tell him what subject each of them 
wanted to hear about” (Cicero 2001a). See also Cicero, Brutus 12.46-47; 
Cicero, On Moral Ends 2.1. See Kibre (1936, nos. 55, 507, 331). Regarding 
Aristotle, see the Texvv ouvayoyh (Technón sunagógé: “collection of 
systems”), “which, to integrate his Rhetoric, contained a history of 
eloquence in the presentation of the single systems (téxvoa)” (Cicero 1962, 
28n). See also Sophistici elenchi 34.183b36-184a1: “For the training given 
by the paid teachers of contentious argument resembled the system of 
Gorgias. For some of them gave their pupils to learn by heart speeches 
which were either rhetorical or consisted of questions and answers, in 
which both sides thought that the rival arguments were for the most part 
included” (Aristotle 1955). 

212 Cf. 8186. 
213 Cf. 8186. 

214 Horace, Epistles 1.1.14: “nullius addictus iurare in verba magistri” (“1 
am not bound over to swear as any master dictates,” Horace 2005). Cf. 
Kibre (1936, nos. 37, 109, 357, 414, 718); Quintilian, Institutio oratoria 
1.8.19. 

215 The correspondence with the text of manuscript Palatino 885, 
interrupted at 8169, is resumed here and continues to 8190. A significant 
omission, with respect to the text of the Palatino, is to be noted. The text of 
the Palatino manuscript reads: “My first aim was not to swear by anyone 
else”s words but to pore over all masters of philosophy, to examine all 
books, and to become acquainted with all schools. [...] I discovered that in 
order to do so it was necessary to know not only the Greek and Latin 
languages, but also the Hebrew and Chaldean languages, and the Arabic 
language as well, with which I have just begun to labour under the guidance 
of William Mithridates, an expert on all these languages.” The William 
Mithridates mentioned here by Pico is the Jewish Orientalist, his 
collaborator and teacher, better known as Flavius Mithridates: “a much 
sought-after translator, he had to flee from Rome in 1483 after a mysterious 
crime. [...] Willelmus Ramundus Mithridates, professor of arts and sacred 

theology, member of the curia and translator from the Hebrew, Arabic, 
Chaldean, Greek and Latin languages.” This was the title he gave himself in 
the edition of the Dicta septem sapientium dated 24 March 1485 in Cologne 
(Secret 1965, 170). According to Farmer (1998, 167), this “passage praising 
Flavius Mithridates” and similar ones are “suspiciously left out of the 
Oration as Gian Francesco printed it,” a circumstance that may be an 
indication (Farmer 1998, 171n108) of the shrewd “editorial sieve” applied 
by Gianfrancesco to the text of the 1496 Bolognese edition (Farmer 1998, 
169). On the Chaldean language, see 8199. 

216 The proposition is omitted in the Palatino manuscript. Olivier 
Boulnois comments: “Pico does not reject the Medieval principle of 
dispute; on the contrary, he extends it to everything that may be thought” 
(in Pico 1993, 328) because “if the Discourse has mans dignity as its 
object, its aim is to permit the integration of all things within the peace of 
the absolute. [...] Hence, the aim pursued is not that of constituting an 
inventory, but that of restoring a theological and philosophical peace, the 
foundation of all the other, moral and political, forms of peace” (Pico 1993, 
326-27). 

217 Horace, Epistles 1.1.15: “quo me cumque rapit tempestas, deferor 
hospes” (“wherever the storm drives me, I turn in for comfort,” Horace 
2005). See Kibre (1936, nos. 37, 109, 357, 414, 718). This, too, is omitted 
in the Palatino manuscript. 

218 See De vita Aristotelis 1-3 (Aristotle 1967, 428) and 14-15 (Aristotle 
1967, 443). 

219 The “Stoa,” that is, the portico (or “porch” as here) in Athens, where 
in about 300 Bc the Stoic School had its original seat. 

220 Plato*s school, the Academy, is thus called because it had its seat near 
the gardens dedicated to the legendary hero Academos. 

221 The Palatino manuscript adds: “In the past there has never been, nor 
will there ever be after us, anyone whose task is to understand the whole 
truth. Its vastness goes beyond the human capacity to be equal to it.” 

222 From this point on, the text begins to follow the order of the exposition 
of the nine hundred theses, which can be divided into two major and 
numerous minor sections. The first main section can be defined as “quasi- 
historical” and is subdivided into several minor sections that present in 
reverse chronological order the “opinions of the pagans and their 
heresiarchs.” Thus, “the Latin scholastics (8186) are followed by the Arabs 
($187), the Arabs by the Greeks (8$8188-90), the Greeks by the Chaldeans 
($199), the Chaldeans by the Egyptians ($199), and the Egyptians by the 
Hebrew cabalist wise men (8199). The second main section contains, in 
turn, theses “presented according to Picos own opinion (secundum 
opinionem propriam)” 8195, 8199, and following sections (Farmer 1998, 
8). As Pignagnoli notes, “by “our own,” Pico means the Scholastics” (in 
Pico 1969, 119n); cf. Conclusiones 1.1.1-6.11 (Farmer 1998, 212-49). The 
“Latin” authors quoted by Pico “are all to be found in abundance in his 
library” (Carena in Pico 1994, 76n). 

223 Cf. Conclusiones 1.4.1-22 (Farmer 1998, 236-41). John Duns Scotus 
(ca. 1266-1308) is considered one of the most important thinkers of the 
entire scholastic period, surnamed Doctor subtilis (“the subtle Doctor”) for 
his highly technical and meticulous reasoning. 

224 Cf. Conclusiones 1.2.1-45 (Farmer 1998, 218-31). 
225 Cf. Conclusiones 1.6.1-11 (Farmer 1998, 246-49). 
226 Cf. Conclusiones 1.3.1-8 (Farmer 1998, 232-35). 

227 Cf. Conclusiones 1.1.1-16 (Farmer 1998, 212-17). Albertus Magnus 
(ca. 1200-1280), also known as Saint Albert the Great, was a Dominican 
theologian and philosopher. 

228 Cf. Conclusiones 1.5.1-13 (Farmer 1998, 242-45). Henry of Ghent 
(ca. 1217-1293) was a philosopher and theologian at the University of 
Paris. 

229 Pico*s style of enumeration is modelled on a passage in Cicero's De 
Oratore (3.7.28). 

230 Cf. Conclusiones 1.7.1-1.14.2 (Farmer 1998, 250-81). The Arab 
authors cited are also “all in Pico”s library” (Carena in Pico 1994, 76n). 

231 Cf. Conclusiones 1.7.1-41 (Farmer 1998, 50-63). Ibn Rushd (1126— 
1198), the “commentator of Aristotle,” was famous in the Latin world under 
the name of Averroes. He was a scholar well grounded in Muslim religious 
studies and in the positive sciences (physics, medicine and biology, 
astronomy), as well as being a theologian and philosopher. 

232 Cf. Conclusiones 1.14.1-2 (Farmer 1998, 280-81). Ibn Baájja (late 
1000s-1139), known as Avempace in the medieval West, was a famous 
philosopher and wazir of Spain in the twelfth century. Together with 
Averroes in the Islamic West and Avicenna in the East, he was one of the 
greatest of all Islamic philosophers. There is no doubt, moreover, that the 
philosophical mysticism of Ibn Bajja's work The Regime of the Solitary 
Man had a great influence on Ibn Tufayl's philosophical novel Risalat Hayy 
ibn Yagzan (“The Story of Hayyi ibn Yagzan”), which was of great 
importance to Pico. The Hebrew version of this novel was “translated into 
Latin by Pico himself for his own personal use, under the influence of 
Johanan Alemanno” (Cassuto 1918, 322; Cicognani in Pico 1941, 114n). 
According to Wirszubski, “the person who next to Flavius Mithridates 
matters most for the study of Pico's encounter with the Kabbala is Johanan 
Alemanmno” (Wirszubski 1989, 256). 

233 Cf. Conclusiones 1.9.1-11 (Farmer 1998, 268—71). Al-Farabi (870— 
950), known to the Middle Ages as Alfarabius or Avennasar, was one of the 
most prominent Muslim philosophers. 

234 Cf. Conclusiones 1.8.1-12 (Farmer 1998, 264-67). Ibn-Sina (980— 
1037), known in the West as Avicenna, had a comprehensive philosophical 
system that was much indebted to Aristotle and, to a certain extent, to 
Neoplatonic doctrines, but featured substantial original thought. 

235 Cf. Conclusiones 1.15.1-1.19.5 (Farmer 1998, 282-95). 

236 Simplicius (ca. 490-560), a Neoplatonist philosopher, was one of the 
chief commentators of Aristotle. In Picos library could be found 
Avicenna's commentaries to Aristotle's Categories (Kibre 1936, nos. 439, 
452, 1616), De anima (Kibre 1936, no. 447), De caelo (Kibre 1936, nos. 
455, 463, 715, 1020, 1595), and Physics (Kibre 1936, nos. 439, 446, 455, 
457, 464, 499, 514, 745). The catalogue contains two copies of an alleged 
commentary by Simplicius, In secundum et tertium ethicorum (Kibre 1936, 
nos. 446, 451), but as far as we know he wrote only one commentary on 
ethical matters, namely, a commentary on the Manual of Epictetus (see 
Hadot 1987, 39). 

237 Themistius (ca. 317-388), a Peripatetic, politician, and commentator 
on Aristotle, was also to be found in Pico”s library (Kibre 1936, no. 575). 

238 Alexander of Aphrodisias was a master of Aristotelian philosophy in 
Athens between 198 and 211 and is known as the greatest commentator on 
Aristotle in ancient times. There are numerous works by Alexander among 
Pico*s books (Kibre 1936, nos. 29, 510, 511, 617, 730, 1588, 1592, 1597). 

239 Theophrastus (ca. 372—ca. 287 BC) was a philosopher and scientist, 
becoming Aristotle?s successor in directing the Peripatetic school from 322 
BC on. His works were found in Pico”s library (Kibre 1936, nos. 450, 631, 
1557). 

240 Picos stylistic considerations prevent his identification with 
Ammonius Saccas (175-252), an Alexandrian Neoplatonist who was the 
teacher of Origen and Plotinus. It is certain that “it was not Ammonius 
Saccas, or Ammonius, Plato?s master, but Ammonius, the son of Hermias, a 

scholar of Proclus” (Pignagnoli in Pico 1969, 121n117). Ammonius 
Hermiae (ca. 440-after 517) was head of the Neoplatonic School in 
Alexandria, commentator on Aristotle, and teacher of Asclepius, 
Damascius, Philoponus, and Simplicius. 

241 Cf. Conclusiones 1.20.1-1.24.55 (Farmer 1998, 296-333). Together 
with the other Neoplatonic authors Plotinus, Porphyry, and lamblichus, 
“there were numerous works by Proclus in Pico”s library” (Carena in Pico 
1994, 77190). 

242 Porphyry (234—ca. 305) was a Neoplatonic philosopher who sought to 
bring even greater precision to Plotinus. 

243 lamblichus (ca. 242-327) was a Neoplatonic philosopher who was a 
disciple of Porphyry and launched the Neoplatonic School in Syria: “His 
writings had a great influence on the Athenian School which arose during 
the following century under Plutarch [of Athens)” (Morrow in Proclus 
1970, 19n). His thinking was essential to later Neoplatonic metaphysics. 

244 Plotimus (205-270) is unanimously considered the chief representative 
of Neoplatonism. He was a pupil of Ammonius Saccas in Alexandria and, 
after the (presumed) death of his teacher, he settled in Rome, where he 
taught Porphyry. 

245 Proclus (412-485), a Neoplatonic philosopher, joined the Neoplatonic 
School at Athens around 430 or 431 and studied under Plutarch of Athens 
and Syrianus, whom he succeeded as head of the school (ca. 437). In 
Proclus, there is a Neoplatonic synthesis of Aristotelian and Stoic elements. 

246 Hermias (fifth century), a Neoplatonic philosopher, was a fellow 
disciple of Proclus in Athens at the school of Syrian the Great, but lived and 
taught in Alexandria. 

247 Damascius (ca. 462—after 538), a Neoplatonic philosopher, sought to 
reinvigorate the Neoplatonists” reputation after the death of Proclus in 485. 

He faced a sharp increase in Christianity, against which he hoped to apply 
philosophic reasoning. 

248 Olympiodorus (before 510—after 565), a Neoplatonic philosopher and 
disciple of Ammonius in Alexandria, attained the chair of philosophy in 
about 541. Though many of his students were Christians, he never 
converted. Olympiodorus can be found in Pico*s library (Kibre 1936, no. 
1130). 

249 Here the Palatino manuscript contains an addition, which Garin 
transcribes as “Sunt haec veritatis privilegia, ut vinci nesciat et coniecta 
contra spicula in auctores redeant” (Garin 1961, 239-40): “These are the 
privileges of truth: it cannot be conquered and the weapons used against it 
rebound against their authors.” See also Boulnois and Tognon (in Pico 
1993, 49n). Yet, for a slightly different lectio, see Marchignoli (in Bori 
2000, 136, 157): “Sane hoc veritatis privilegio [it is truly by this privilege 
of truth], ut vinci nesciat et contorta in eam spicula in auctores redeant.” At 
this point, the correspondence with the text of manuscript P is interrupted, 
to return in 8193 and 8268. 

250 Cf. Plato, Epistula 7.341c-d. 

251 The text of manuscript P reads: “In fact it is certain that all knowledge 
was passed down from the barbarians to the Greeks and from the Greeks to 
us”; see Marchignoli (in Bori 2000, 154). See also Diogenes Laertius, Vitae 
philosophorum 1.Proem.1. On Eudoxus and Hermippus, see 8224. The 
origin of the doctrines of knowledge among the barbarians is also recalled 
by Eusebius's Praeparatio evangelica 9.10.1—7 and 14.10.4-5. 

252 The text of manuscript P adds: “It is undoubtedly necessary to obtain 
the sacred knowledge and most secret mysteries in the first place from the 
Hebrews and the Chaldeans and then from the Greeks. The Arabians share 
with the Greeks all the other arts and the most diverse forms of 
philosophical knowledge. How could anyone who does not approach them 
be able to progress in this knowledge? However, since many of their books, 

including the most valuable ones, have come down to us lacking any 
translation, and of those that have reached us the translators have distorted 
more things than they have rendered useful, obviously then a foggy 
obscurity has spread over everything so that what for the native readers was 
simple, clear and useful has become for us full of difficulties and 
contortions, hence evasive, immediately thwarting any attempt on the part 
of the scholars to understand it.” See Marchignoli (in Bori 2000, 155). 

253 The commentators refer readers to De vera religione 3.3, but, as Reich 
notes, “an exact reference has not been documented” (in Pico 1968, 64n66). 
Reich refers readers rather to De civitate Dei [City of God] 8.11. See also 
De civitate Dei 9.1. The De civitate Dei was to be found among Pico's 
books (Kibre 1936, no. 194) together with a commentary by Thomas 
Anglicus (Kibre 1936, no. 539), presumably Thomas Waleys O.P. (fl. 1314— 
1350). The work by Thomas Waleys, and its continuation by his Dominican 
confrere Nicholas Trevet, is one of the few, or perhaps the only, extended 
commentaries on Augustine”s City of God written in the Middle Ages. 

254 Cf. Gellius 7.13.1-2; see Kibre (1936, no. 420). 

255 Cf. Conclusiones 2.1.1-2.11.72 (Farmer 1998, 364-553) and 8199. In 
fact, there are only 498 theses in the final edition of this second main 
section of the work, while there were originally 500. To compensate for this 
lack, however, there are 402 theses in the final draft of the first main 
section, while there were originally 400 (see Farmer 1998, 8). 

256 Seneca, Epistles 33.7. See Kibre (1936, no. 995). 

257 Cf. Corpus Hermeticum 2.17: “Prudent people therefore regard the 
making of children as a duty in life to be taken most seriously and greatly 
revered, and should any human being pass away childless, they see it as the 
worst misfortune and irreverence” (Hermes Trismegistus 1992). 

258 Cf. Conclusiones 1.27.1-10 (Farmer 1998, 340-43). “Ancient 
theology” here translates the rather wider ranging Latin expression prisca 

theologia. “Under the name of the (Egyptian god) Hermes Trismegistus 
numerous texts circulated, the contents of which were partly astrological 
and partly Platonist-Neopythagorean, presented as translations of ancient 
Egyptian texts. A corpus of 18 texts, which were probably collected in late 
antiquity in Neoplatonic circles, has been handed down. The Corpus 
Hermeticum was translated in 1471 by Ficino, who was strongly influenced 
by the mystic wisdom of these texts” (Reich in Pico 1968, 64n66). 

259 Cf. Conclusiones 1.26.1-6 (Farmer 1998, 338-39). The name 
“Chaldea,” originally applied to the southernmost area of Mesopotamia, 
was later used to designate the entire Babylonian territory. The Chaldeans 
probably came from Arabia, and with the decline of Assyrian power a 
dynasty of Chaldean origin assumed power in Babylon (626 BC), holding it 
until the Persian invasion (529 BC). Farmer notes rightly that the 
“Chaldean” taught to Pico by Flavius Mithridates was in actual fact 
“Aramaic” (Farmer 1998, 3). The “Chaldean” texts Pico stated he had in a 
letter to Ficino in 1486 are quite probably the work, according to Farmer, of 
Mithridates” forgery (Farmer 1998, 13, 486-87, and note). 

260 Cf. Conclusiones 1.25.1-14 (Farmer 1998, 334-37); Pythagoras (sixth 
century BC) was a mysterious figure in Greek intellectual history. Religious 
reformer, mathematician, and inspired thaumaturge, he has been compared 
to Oriental shamans. On shamanic influences, see 8193 and 8222. 

261 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.1-47 (Farmer 1998, 344-63). Here Pico is 
referring to the doctrines of the Cabala. 

262 Cf. again Conclusiones 2.1.1-2.11.72 (Farmer 1998, 364-553); in 
actual fact only 498 (see 8196 and note 255). 

263 Cf. Conclusiones 2.1.1-17 (Farmer 1998, 364—73). Unlike the authors 
cited, Pico expressly strove to demonstrate agreement between Plato and 
Aristotle. “The scholar from Mirandola claims to be the first to propose the 
concordia between the two greatest Greek philosophers “after many 
centuries” [see 8195],” Pignagnoli writes, and “the claim [...] is true in the 

sense that no one until then had dedicated any profound studies to the 
matter” (in Pico 1969, 123n123). This work, perhaps left unfinished, has 
not come down to us. However, Pico speaks explicitly of it in the De ente et 
uno, which according to Boulnois and Tognon “is undoubtedly a fragment 
of it” (in Pico 1993, 109n50). Like the De ente et uno, the Concordia was 
also ordered into ten parts to suggest “the importance of this Pythagorean 
numerus numerorum” (“number of numbers”) (Farmer 1998, 30); cf. 
Conclusiones 2.9.23 (Farmer 1998, 502-3). Pico probably composed the De 
ente et uno “in 1491 as a preliminary sketch for the Concord” (Farmer 
1998, 25). 

264 Boethius, Commentaries on Aristotles De interpretatione 2.3 
(Boethius 1987, 2:80). See Kibre (1936, no. 119). 

265 See Simplicius's proem to In Aristotelis Categorias commentarium 
and Kalbfleisch (in Simplicius 1907, 29-32). It is not present, however, in 
In Aristotelis Physicorum libros commentaria 8.5 (Arist. 258b4 [Diels and 
Kranz 1951-52, 2:1249, 12-13]) or In Aristotelis De caelo commentaria 3.7 
(Arist. 306a1). For the presence of Simplicius among Pico's books, see 
8188 and note 236. A very similar judgment is directly expressed by Pico in 
a letter to Ermolao Barbaro of 6 December 1484 (Pico 1971, Opera omnia 
1:368-69). See also Cicero, Academica 1.4.17-18. 

266 Cf. Contra Academicos 3.19.42, in which Augustine refers to Cicero*s 
Academica 1.17-18: “Non defuerunt acutissimi et sollertissimi viri qui 
docerent disputationibus suis Aristotelem ac Platonem ita sibi concinere, ut 
imperitis minusque attentis dissentire videantur” (“There have been acute 
and clever men who taught in their disputations that Aristotle and Plato in 
such wise agree with one another that those who are unskilled or examine 
the matter cursorily think that they disagree,” Augustine of Hippo 1950). 

267 John Philoponus (ca. 490-570) was “a Christian philosopher and 
theologian, disciple of Ammonius Hermiae in Alexandria”; philoponos, or 
“lover of work,” “is the name given to the members of certain ascetic 
associations” (Faggin 1957, 2:758). Reich's supposition that the reference 
should have been to “John Garland, who lived from about 1190 to 1260/70, 

a grammarian, lexicographer, musicologist and pedagogue” (in Pico 1968, 
66n72) is highly unlikely. Some of Philoponus?s works can be found in 
Pico”s library (Kibre 1936, nos. 449, 1131). 

268 Cf. De vita Aristotelis 23-25 (Aristotle 1967, 438). 

269 Cf., in particular, Conclusiones 1.2-9, 14, and 17 (Farmer 1998, 366— 
71). 

270 Cf., in particular, Conclusiones 1.15-16 (Farmer 1998, 370—71). 

271 Cf. Conclusiones 2.2.1-80: “Eighty philosophical conclusions 
according to my own opinion, which while dissenting from the common 
philosophy, do not depart radically from the common method of 
philosophizing” (Farmer 1998, 372-97). In these theses, too, according to 
Farmer, Pico “resolves numerous standard scholastic conflicts” (Farmer 
1998, 206). 

272 They are the “Conclusiones paradoxae secundum opinionem propria 
nova in philosophia dogmata inducentes” (“Paradoxical conclusions 
according to his own opinion, leading to new philosophical dogmas”): 
Conclusiones 2.3.1—71. In the editio princeps, however, they are indicated 
as 71 (numero Íxxi); see Farmer (1998, 398-421). This discrepancy in 
numbering can be explained by the changes Pico carried out “shortly 
before, and apparently while, the work was in press” (Farmer 1998, 183). A 
“faulty cross-referencing” shows also that “one from his “paradoxical 
conclusions introducing new doctrines into philosophy” [was] excluded” in 
the final draft (Farmer 1998, 461). The fourth of the “Conclusiones magicae 
[...] secundum opinionem propriam” (“Magical conclusions according to 
my own opinion [9.4]”) in fact reads: ex ista conclusione et conclusione 
paradoxa dogmatizante .xlvii. sequitur ... (“from that conclusion and the 
forty-seventh paradoxical conclusion, it follows ...”) (Farmer 1998, 495), 
but the reference in 9.4 is actually to the forty-sixth “paradoxical 
dogmatizing conclusion” (Farmer 1998, 495, note). According to Farmer, 
the thesis was deleted “almost surely for theological reasons” (Farmer 1998, 

18n49). These “seventy-two” theses, or the remaining seventy-one, make 
up the philosophia nova (“new philosophy”) that Pico intended to 
introduce. 

273 Farmer points out that “historians have routinely bypassed this 
passage,” in which Pico expressly states that he wishes to introduce a new 
philosophy (novam afferre velle philosophiam), whereas it should be 
obvious, in his opinion, that in this “key” passage Pico “underscored the 
importance” of the very part of the nine hundred theses in which his 
intention directly took shape (Farmer 1998, 18). 

274 “Marsilius Ficinus cites in the Platonica theologia a certain number of 
“ancient theologians”” (Boulnois and Tognon in Pico 1993, 55n21); cf. 
Marsilio Ficino, Theologia Platonica de immortalitate animorum 6.1 
(Marcel in Ficino 1964—70, 1:224). Pignagnoli (in Pico 1969, 127n130) 
observes that “for prisca theologia (or theologia priscorum), Ficino meant 
thoughts about the “divine” contained in the Corpus Hermeticum [see 8199 
and note 258] and, prior to this, the wisdom of Zoroaster contained in the 
Chaldean Oracles.” See 8137, 8230 and note 314. 

275 E. Wellmann describes Aglaophamos as “the presumed Orphic master 
of Pythagoras, from whom he is thought to have received his initiation in 
Thrace.” See lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica 146; Kibre (1936, no. 844). 
See also Aristotle, Metaphysica 1.5 (985b23-986a3). 

276 Philolaus (ca. 470-385 BC), “a contemporary of Socrates and 
Democritus,” member of the Pythagorean school and “the first to make his 
doctrine known by means of an ample exposition of it [in his Mepi púoewc 
(“On Nature”)], of which numerous fragments remain” (Pozzo 1957, 
2:390). 

277 Cf. Proclus, In primum Euclidis Elementorum libri commentarii, 
Prologue 1; Theologia Platonica 1.5; lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica 146 
(lamblichus 1975, 60, 1-9). It is not present in Aristotle's Metaphysica 1.5 
(985b23-986a3). 

278 Cf. Plato, Epinomis 976c—e. The Epinomis belongs to a set of works 
that were ascribed to Plato in antiquity; however, their authenticity has 
come into doubt in the modern period. Alcibiades I and II also belong to 
this set of works (see 835). “The Epinomis is thought by some scholars to 
be the work of Philip of Opus; but, if it is Plato”s, it certainly belongs to his 
late period” (Kraut 1997, 389). According to Cicognani, however, the 
dialogue “already attributed by many, following Diogenes Laertius (3.37), 
to Philip of Opus, a direct follower of Plato, is nowadays held to be 
authentic by the most authoritative critics” (in Pico 1941, 118n65). 

279 Aristotle, Problemata 30.6 (956a11-13). 

280 Abu Mashar (787-886), a Persian astronomer and astrologer “known 
mainly in western Europe as Albumazar, who studied in Baghdad and was a 
contemporary of the famous philosopher Al-Kindi (first half of ninth 
century); after having studied Islamic traditions, he mainly dedicated 
himself to the study of astronomy and astrology, and it is to the latter 
discipline that he owes his renown” (Millas 1954—, 143). Abu Mashar “is 
one of the most famous medieval astrologers, above all thanks to the great 
influence he had in the West,” where he became “the principal author on 
whose works astrology was studied” (Kunitzsch 1977-98). 

281 “Who this Babylonian Avenzoar may be,” writes Cicognani, “I have 
no means of knowing.” Thus, in his opinion, Pico must have considered this 
Avenzoar “Babylonian” “to distinguish him from Avenzoar of Seville, a 
famous physician, the first of the Arabs to allow tracheotomy” (in Pico 
1941, 119n67). The latter, also called by the Latins Abumaron or 
Abhomaron, was considered by Averroes, “his friend and adviser,” the 
“greatest doctor since the time of Galen.” Abumaron, or more precisely 
Abu Marwan ibn Zuhr (ca. 1094-1162), was the “most important 
representative of a family of doctors, who for six generations practised this 
profession in the Arabian-Hispanic world” (Lauer 1977-98). Pico considers 
his opinions in the nine hundred theses (see Conclusiones secundum 
Abumaron Babylonium numero .iiii. [“Four conclusions according to 
Abumaron the Babylonian”] 1.11.1-4; Farmer 1998, 274-75) and “is 
probably drawing here from Averroes” discussions of Ibn Zuhr, although he 

could also be approached through a Latin translation of his Taysir, his most 
famous medical work.” In fact, “the first printed edition of that text, which 
appeared in 1490/91, found its way into Pico*s library” (Farmer 1998, 274, 
note). See Kibre (1936, 103-4). In the Conclusiones, Pico for some reason 
calls Abumaron “Babylonian,” but the incongruence of his words reported 
by Abumasar, who was a contemporary of Al-Kindi and lived far earlier, 
remains. Cicognani, however, finds it “fruitless to examine the Latin 
versions of Abumasar?s work” and states that “perhaps Avenzoar, in Pico”s 
text, is a mistake” (in Pico 1941, 119). 

282 Plato, Republic 525b—c. 

283 Pico here alludes to the Questiones ad quas pollicetur se per numeros 
responsurum (“Questions to which he promises to respond through 
numbers”) 2.7a.1-74 (Farmer 1998, 470-85), seventy-four in number, 
which are included among the Conclusiones de mathematicis secundum 
opinionem propriam numero .lxxxv. (“Eighty-five conclusions on 
mathematics according to my own opinion”) 2.7.1-11, 2.7a.1-74 (Farmer 
1998, 466-85). 

284 Cf. Conclusiones 2.9.1-26 (Farmer 1998, 494-503) and 2.10.1-31 
(Farmer 1998, 504-15). 

285 For the distinction between yonteía (goéteia) and payeía (mageia), see 
the Suda: “Magic [payela] is the invocation of beneficent spirits for the 
production of something good; like the oracles of Apollonius of Tyana. 
Sorcery [yonteía] is the invocation of maleficent spirits which takes place 
around the graves” (Roth 2002). From here until 8231, Pico refers to yontel 
a (goéteia) and payeía (mageia) as the “former” and the “latter,” 
respectively. 

286 Porphyry, De abstinentia 4.16.1. See also Apuleius, Apologia 25.9; 
Kibre (1936, no. 656). 

287 As Bausi points out, the term disparilitas, used here by Pico in the 
expression disparilitas et dissimilitudo (“difference and disparity”), “was to 
be found already in the letter to Barbaro” (Bausi 1996, 124). The terms 
dissimilitudo, diversitas (“difference, diversity”) are found in Gellius, 
Macrobius, Apuleius, Calcidius, and the Christian authors, but also in 
Barbarus, Temistio, fol. 114r. Besides occurring in the Oration, it returns “in 
the Heptaplus, p. 190 Garin (disparilitas conditionis); and it moreover 
recurs in the preface to the first Miscellanea by Angelo Poliziano. [...] 
Synonymic diphthology with dissimilitudo is found also in Aug. Epist. 
120.12” (Bausi 1996, 38). 

288 Gf. Pliny, Natural History 30.1: “eo ipso quod fraudolentissima artium 
plurimum in toto terrarum orbe plurimisque saeculis valuit” (“were it only 
because the most fraudulent of arts has held complete sway throughout the 
world for many ages,” Jones trans.); 30.2: “natam primum e medicina nemo 
dubitabit ac specie salutari inrepsisse velut altiorem sanctioremque 
medicinam” (“Nobody will doubt that it first arose from medicine, and that 
professing to promote health it insidiously advanced under the disguise of a 
higher and holier system,” Pliny the Elder 1967—70, Jones trans.); see Kibre 
(1936, no. 913). As Boulnois and Tognon point out, “these are the theses 
extensively developed by Pico in his Disputationes adversus astrologiam 
divinatricem, which clearly distinguish for the first time mathematical 
astronomy from divining astrology” (Pico 1993, 57n22). Compare the 
proem of the Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem: “And when 
I say astrology, 1 do not mean that which measures the size and motion of 
the stars with a mathematical method, a certain and noble art, full of dignity 
for its merits, widely supported by the authority of highly learned men, but 
that which foresees the future from the course of the stars, a deceitful 
speculation, forbidden by religious and civil laws, maintained by the 
curiosity of men, derided by philosophers, supported by charlatans, suspect 
to all good people and to all wise men” (Pico 1971, 1:412; Pico 1946-52, 
1:1-9, 40). 

289 Cf. Pliny?s Natural History 30.8: “quamquam animadverto summam 
litterarum claritatem gloriamque ex ea scientia antiquitus et paene semper 
petitam” (“and yet 1 notice that of old, in fact almost always, the highest 

literary distinction and renown have been sought from that science,” Pliny 
the Elder 1967—70, Jones trans.). 

290 Empedocles (492-432 Bc), “the last of the great naturalist 
philosophers of the 5th Century,” “led a life of wandering; if the diverse 
aspects of his life are described as “orator — physician — priest — magician”, 
this is precisely what is meant: that he tried to heal, order and conciliate” 
(Dórrie 1964—75b, “Empedocles”). 

291 Democritus (ca. 460—ca. 370 BC) “was one of the main representatives 
of ancient atomism, which he had learnt from Leucippus” (Bodnár 1996-, 
“Democritus”). “According to one of his own accounts, kept for us by 
Clement of Alexandria (Str. 1.69), he made very long journeys, as no other 
of his time: he thus had the occasion to know the Babylonians and the 
Egyptians” (Doórrie 1964-75a, “Democritus”). However, according to 
Bodnár (1996—, 3:455), “the great travels attributed to Democritus allude to 
nothing but the encyclopaedic vastness of his work” (cf. Diels and Kranz 
1951-52, 68B64 and B65). 

292 Gf. Pliny, Natural History 30.2: “Certe Pythagoras, Empedocles, 
Democritus, Plato ad hanc discendam navigavere exiliis verius quam 
peregrinationibus susceptis, hanc reversi praedicavere, hanc in arcanis 
habuere” (“Certainly Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus and Plato went 
overseas to leam it, going into exile rather than on a journey, taught it 
openly on their return, and considered it one of their most treasured 
secrets,” Pliny the Elder 1967—70, Jones trans.). On the travels to the East 
attributed to the Greek sages, see further lamblichus, De mysteriis 1.1: “For 
it would not be becoming that Pythagoras, Plato, Demokritos, Eudoxos, and 
many others of the Old Greeks, should have obtained competent instruction 
from the temple-scribes of their own time, but that thou [Porphyry] who art 
contemporary with us, and having the same disposition as they, should be 
turned away by those now living and recognized as public teachers” 
(lamblichus 1911). 

293 As for Zalmoxis, Griffiths writes: “According to Herodotus (4.94-6), a 
God of the Getae in Thrace (“also called Gebeleizis”) who promised 

immortality to his devotees [...]. Also offered is an alternative, euphemistic 
version, in which Zalmoxis was a charlatan who imported ideas picked up 
from Pythagoras, whose slave he had been” (Griffiths 2003b, “Zalmoxis,” 
1633). More extensively, Dodds observes: “We know at any rate that 
Pythagoras founded a kind of religious order, a community of men and 
women whose rule of life was determined by the expectation of lives to 
come. Possibly there were precedents of a sort even for that: we may 
remember the Thracian Zalmoxis in Herodotus, who assembled “the best of 
the citizens? and announced to them, not that the human soul is immortal, 
but that they and their descendants were going to live forever — they were 
apparently chosen persons, a sort of spiritual élite. That there was some 
analogy between Zalmoxis and Pythagoras must have struck the Greek 
settlers in Thrace, from whom Herodotus heard the story, for they made 
Zalmoxis into Pythagoras” slave. That was absurd, as Herodotus saw: the 
real Zalmoxis was a daemon, possibly a heroised shaman of the distant past. 
But the analogy was not so absurd: did not Pythagoras promise his 
followers that they should live again, and become at least daemons or even 
gods?” (Dodds 1951, 144). 

294 Abaris is known for being “the priest of Apollo the Hyperborean and a 
shaman like Aristeas of Proconnesus” (Des Places in Porphyre 1982, 49, 
153). In the Charmides, Plato associates him with Zalmoxis (Plato, 
Charmides 158b). In his commentary on the passage in Plato, Alfred 
Croiset refers readers to the information Herodotus gives of him: “Abaris is 
a semi-legendary figure, a sort of thaumaturge, to whom was attributed, 
among his other works, a poem about Apollo among the Hyperboreans. 
According to Herodotus (4.36), he was a priest of Apollo. It was narrated 
that he had travelled around the Earth without eating, carrying with him the 
whole time an arrow that Apollo had given him as a sign of his devotion” 
(Plato 1921, 58-59n3); cf. Herodotus, Historiae 4.36.1. 

295 Gf. Pliny, Natural History 30.3. Zoroaster, who was “the creator of the 
highly influential theological and moral system which was TIranian 
dualism,” remains, however, for us “a hazy figure in an imprecise past 
time” (Bidez and Cumont 1938, 1:v). “The most ancient information that 
has been passed down to us about Zoroaster came from the early Greek 

historians of Asia Minor, the main one of whom was Xanthos the Lydian, 
who wrote in the 5th century, before Herodotus” (Bidez and Cumont 1938, 
5). Diodorus Siculus (Bibliotheca historica 1.94.2) records that 
“Zathraustes” received the laws of the “Benign Spirit.” “It is now admitted 
that this prophet lived at the beginning of the sixth century BC. He was an 
Iranian from the northeast, and the cradle of his preaching was “the Arian 
region” during the reign of King Vishtaspa (Hystapes for the Greeks), north 
of Sogdiana (see Varenne 1966). The term Arianois is, therefore, quite 
correct as this region had not yet been conquered by Cyrus and was neither 
Median nor Persian. The “Benign Spirit? is Ahoura Mazda, god of light, 
who abducted Zarathustra in ecstasy in order to dictate his laws to him” 
(Diodorus Siculus 1993, 173n1). On Ahoura-Mazda, see also p. 235 n. 297. 

296 Cf. Pliny, Natural History 30.8: “diligentiores paulo ante hunc 
[Osthanen] ponunt Zoroastrem alium Proconnensium” (“A little before 
Osthanes, the more careful inquirers place another Zoroaster, a native of 
Procomnesus,” Jones trans. in Pliny 1967-70). This should be Aristeas of 
Procomnesus according to Diels and Kranz (1951-52, 217, 68 [55] B 300, 
13), yet cf. Pliny, Natural History 30.3: “Sine dubio illic orta in Perside a 
Zoroastre, ut inter auctores convenit. Sed unus hic fuerit an postea et alius, 
non satis constat” (“Without doubt magic arose in Persia with Zoroaster. On 
this our authorities are agreed, but whether he was the only one of that 
name, or whether there was also another afterwards, is not clear,” Jones 
trans. in Pliny 1967—70). (See Bidez and Cumont 1938, 2:13n18.) Aristeas 
is, “like Abaris and Zalmoxis, a legendary wisdom-figure associated with 
the cult of Apollo, reflecting early Greek contacts with Scythian culture” 
(Griffiths 2003a, “Aristeas,” 159). On the legend of Aristeas, whose 
“Capacity to disappear and reappear, and whose presence at the same time in 
different places, made him similar [...] to other 'magicians”” (Aldo 
Corcella in Herodotus 1991—, 4:240), see Herodotus, Historiae 4.13-15. 

297 Cf. Apuleius, Apologia 26.1-2. In Zoroastrianism, Oromazes, or 
“Ahoura-Mazda,” is the god of Good, “the supreme, omniscient, 
omnipresent god, standing well above other divine mights; he is, as an 
inscription in Persepolis says, “the creator of this earth, the creator of 

heaven, the creator of man”” (Bidez and Cumont 1938, 1:v). See Diogenes 
Laertius, Vitae philosophorum 1.Proem.8. 

298 Plato, Alcibiades 1 121e-122a. The passage from Plato is quoted by 
Apuleius in a place quite probably known to Pico; see 8216 (and note 286) 
and Apologia 25.10-11. 

299 Plato, Charmides 156c-157a. 

300 Cf. Apuleius, Apologia 90.6. According to Reich, the Charondas cited 
by Pico is nothing but the Carmendas from Apuleius”s text, which at this 
point, moreover, turns out to be highly corrupt. He observes that “both the 
mss. in the Biblioteca Laurenziana report the abbreviation carm das, which 
explains Pico*s “erroneous” form.” In Reich's opinion, therefore, “Carondas 
means, as is found in Apuleius” testimony, the magician Carmendas, whose 
name Pliny (Natural History 30.5) hands down more correctly as 
Tarmoendas”; Pliny “includes him among the magicians quorum nulla 
extant monumenta” (in Pico 1968, 72n83). However, “Tarmoendas is also 
mentioned only once by Pliny” and, according to the interesting conjecture 
by Adam Abt, “because of the way the name is recorded in the codex, it 
signifies that this is the first time it has been seen,” and the name 
Carmendas is “like a rhetorical name: qui carmen dat” (Apuleius 1908, 
319). Also according to Butler and Owen (Apuleius 1914, 162), the name 
Carmendas “would not be an unnatural name for a magician, qui carmen 
dat” and, as Vincent Hunink points out, “in the latter variant, it may well 
have been the surname of any great magician” (Apuleius 1997, 2:223). Cf. 
Pliny, Natural History 30.5. However, lamblichus includes Charondas 
among the first followers of Pythagoras (see 8222). 

301 Damigeron is the presumed author of a work of Greek origin (second 
century AD) on the properties of the stones, whose content is similar to that 
of the pseudo-Zoroaster used by Pliny (Natural History 37.139-85). 

302 Apollonius is the renowned Apollonius of Tyana, of whom the 
Athenian Philostratus wrote a biography dedicated to the Empress Julia 

(before 217, the date of her death). 

303 “Several texts on magic, which recalled Zarathustra [Zoroaster] 
circulated bearing the name of Hostanes, or Osthanes” (Reich in Pico 1968, 
72n83); “the Oktateuchos, a book on magic that was widespread in the first 
centuries of Christianity, was attributed to him.” Osthanes is cited several 
times by Pliny: see Natural History 28.6.69 and 256; 30.8.11 and 14. The 
Suda speaks of a “guild or society” of magicians called Ostanai (Butler and 
Owen in Apuleius 1914, 163). The reference to Zoroaster is taken from 
Diogenes Laertius, to whom the compiler clearly refers; see Diogenes 
Laertius, Vitae philosophorum 1.Proem.2. From this testimony, Osthanes 
can be considered “the most famous” of the magicians who were “heirs to 
the knowledge” of Zoroaster (Bidez and Cumont 1938, 1:vi). Moreover, 
“Democritus was thought when visiting Mendes [a city in the northwestern 
district of the the Nile delta, so called from the name of the major god 
worshipped there] to have been a pupil of Ostanes, a Persian sage, who 
became a legendary figure credited with a corpus of medical and magical 
lore, DK [Diels and Kranz] ii, 210 ff” (Whittaker in Tatian 1982, 35, note 
a). Ostanes also appears in a Gnostic script cited by Hippolytus which 
speaks of certain divine powers and of men endowed with particular 
faculties generated in their image. See Hippolytus, Refutatio omnium 
haeresium 5.14.8. 

304 Dardanus is “the mythical ancestor of the Trojans to whom were 
ascribed the introduction of the Samothracian mysteries and the invention 
of magic. [...] According to Fulgentius he was the author of dimanera. [...] 
Pliny relates that Democritus recovered his writings from his grave. Among 
the Christian authors, Arnobius, Clement of Alexandria and Eusebius 
mention him” (Waszink in Tertullian 1947, 576). See Pliny, Natural History 
30.9; Clemens Alexandrinus, Proptrepticus 2.13.3. 

305 “The Poetic Theology is mentioned in the Commento [sopra una 
canzona de amore] ... and in parallel sections of the Oration and Apology 
(Opera 121, 327; Garin, Scritti vari, 150). Scattered evidence survives that 
would permit a detailed reconstruction of Picos methods in his Poetic 
Theology, which unlike earlier Renaissance works in that genre (like 

Boccaccio's Genealogia deorum) was motivated by highly systematic 
goals” (Farmer 1998, 70n35). These are Pico?s own words: “The sense of 
which, although it may be subtle and lofty, nevertheless conforms to things 
so well that it almost seems a wonder to me that both Marsilius and others, 
captured by the words of Plato, did not understand it; and witness to this is 
my awareness of it the first time 1 ever read the Symposium: no sooner had I 
finished reading his words in this place, than this truth appeared to my 
mind, which in our commentary on the Convivium and in our Poetic 
Theology we shall in fact explain more fully” (Commento, fourth stanza). 

306 Cf. Pliny, Natural History 30.34. As for Aristotle, Gigante points out 
(in Diogenes Laertius 1976, 2:458n26) that “a precise comparison with 
Pliny has been carried out by W. Jaeger”; the latter writes that Aristotle, 
“considering the wisdom of the Egyptians and the Iranian religion, rather 
than being perplexed in the face of their uncertain antiquity, attempted to 
obtain a calculation of the years as precisely as possible” (Jaeger 1923, 
131). Eudoxus (ca. 391-ca. 38 BC) was a “mathematician, astronomer, 
geographer, and philosopher associated with bPlato's Academy and 
subsequently head of his own school in Cnidus.” Diogenes Laertius “tells 
us that he studied geometry with Archytas [VIII. viii. 86] [and] perhaps it is 
for this reason that Diogenes lists him among the Pythagoreans [VITI. viii. 
91]” (Dancy 1997, 236). G. L. Huxley stresses “the importance of his 
doctrine of proportion [and observes that it lay] in its power to embrace 
incommensurable quantities [...], for it amounts to a rigorous definition of 
real number” (Huxley 1970-80, 4:466). Eudoxus carried out long journeys 
in Asia and “spent more than a year in Egypt, some of the time in the 
company of the priests in Helopolis [and he] was said to have composed his 
Oktaeteris, or eight-year calendric cycle, during his sojourn with them” 
(Huxley 1970-80, 4:466). According to Le Bonniec, Hermippus of Smyrna 
(fl. third century BC), a follower of Callimachus who “wrote biographies of 
philosophers, writers and legislators,” was “a compiler belonging to the 
Peripatetic School” (in Arnobius 1982, 353). Hermippus was certainly 
“Called “the Callimachean” or “the Peripatetic” [but] at that time the epithet 
described someone erudite in the field of literature or biography, without 
necessarily implying any connection with the Peripatetic School” 
(Montanari 1996—, 5:439). Hermippus wrote two works, On the Seven 
Sages and On Pythagoras, and “was the author in about the year 200 of a 

book Peri Magón / Ilepit júáyov, which gave Pliny — through Apion — and 
almost at the same time Diogenes Laertius, a series of extracts with 
bibliographical references of capital importance. If Hermippus has 
transmitted to us so many valuable indications about Zoroaster and his 
work, it is with the detachment of a collector of texts who worked separated 
from the clamour and preoccupations of the world, in front of the shelves of 
books in the Museum in Alexandria. As far as Zoroaster is concerned, this 
erudite compiler tries to do nothing but be as exhaustive, precise and 
objective as possible” (Bidez and Cumont 1938, 1:21-22). 

307 Al-Kindi (ca. 800—ca. 873) “was the first outstanding Arabic-writing 
philosopher [and] he appears to have been the first to introduce the late 
Greek syllabus of philosophical learning into the Muslim world. [This 
curriculum] was mainly, though not exclusively, based on the Corpus 
Aristotelicum and its Peripatetic and Neoplatonic commentators. [Al-Kindi] 
had a distinguished position at the Caliph's court in Baghdad [and] for 
about a century he enjoyed a reputation as a great philosopher in the 
Aristotelian-Neoplatonic tradition” (Walzer 1967, 4:340). “One of the items 
for which no title is given in the inventories” of Pico*s library is “possibly 
Alkindi's treatise on Magic Arts” (Kibre 1936, 93; see no. 982 of the 
catalogue). 

308 Interests in operative natural magic were shared also by Roger Bacon 
(1214/20-1292) (Wolter 1967, 1:240-41). “By Roger Bacon, whom Pico 
termed a great patron of astrology [Rogerius Bacon magnus astrologiae 
patronus; see Disputationes in astrologiam in Pico 1971, Opera omnia 
1:419, 490] was the Letter on Secret Works of Art and Nature and on the 
Nullity of Magic” kept in his library (Kibre 1936, 93-94; see no. 422 of the 
catalogue). 

309 The influence of the doctrines of natural magic transmitted by the 
Arabs is seen also in William of Auvergne or of Paris (ca. 1180-1249), 
“French theologian and philosopher [who] taught theology at Paris, and was 
consecrated bishop of the city.” William also belongs to “the first 
generation of Paris masters to make a wide use of Aristotelian, Islamic, and 
Jewish thought”; he may be considered “the first great master of the new 

age [and] the first thinker to use with courage and insight the rediscovered 
riches of Aristotle” (Knowles 1967, 8:302-3). However, “there is moreover 
in his works a dramatically non-Aristotelian notion of experience that 
harked back to Arabic and Hebrew lore on magic and the occult. The real 
“experimenters? were for him natural magicians, whose ability to 
manipulate hidden forces in the natural world held out the promise of 
marvellous accomplishments.” This aspect of William's work also 
constitutes “a theme of major importance for later scholastic thought, 
picked up with fervour by Roger Bacon and many of the so-called 
Perspectivists” (Marrone 1998, 9:726-27). In Pico”s library “there was the 
De universo by William of Auvergne, in which he treated of magic” (Kibre 
1936, 93; see no. 620 of the catalogue). In the Apologia (Pico 1971, 1:169), 
Pico explicitly refers to William's De universo: De hac ut dixi tractat 
Guilielmus Parisiensis in suo de universo corporali et spirituali (Kibre 
1936, 93n42). 

310 Cf. Plotinus, Enneades 4.21.40. “Friendship” (philia / píXMa, or more 
precisely philotés / p1wMÓtmnc) and “discord” (neikos / velkoc) are terms 
introduced by Empedocles (see, e.g., frag. B 17, 16-20 in Diels and Kranz 
1951-52, and 885). For the use of the expression sympatheia, see 8230. 
According to Armstrong, this passage “and the following chapters make 
clear that magic was for Plotimus a manipulation of natural forces, 
attractions and sympathies resulting from the living organic unity of the 
physical universe [and that] his interest in it was philosophical rather than 
practical” (in Plotinus 1966-88, 4:260n1). It is significant to note that the 
Theologia Aristotelis, which follows in this point (6.13) the text by 
Plotinus, expands it, making the distinction Pico insists on explicit: “Now 
the works that arise from sorcery and magic occur in two ways, either by 
sympathy and the concord of similar things, or by opposition and variance 
through the plurality and variance of the faculties. But though they vary 
they complete the one living thing. Often things happen without anybody's 
having performed any trick at all. The artificial magic is falsehood, for it is 
all mistaken and does not hit the mark. The true magic, which is not 
mistaken and does not play false, is the magic of the universe, which is love 
and mastery. The wise magician is the one who assimilates himself to the 
universe and practises its works in accordance with his capability, for he 
makes use of love in one place and makes use of mastery in another place” 

(in Plotinus 1966-88, 4:13-16; the parts in italics are those corresponding 
to the Greek text). 

311 Cf. Porphyry, Vita Plotini 10.33-38; see Kibre (1936, no. 1668). 
312 Cf. Pliny, Natural History 20.1 and 37.59. 

313 The traditional Latin text here reads cognitionem, but Bausi (Pico 
2003, 192) suggests on good grounds the emendation cognationem 
(“affinity or kinship”), which matches the term ovuyyéveiav used by 
Synesius in De insomniis 2.2, the passage upon which Pico most likely 
relied. 

314 Cf. Pape (1914, s.v. itigx): “the wryneck [or wagtail], a small bird, 
which takes its name from its cry (iuzó / iúlo). Tied and made to turn on a 
metal circle, or on a wheel, it was considered by the witches of antiquity an 
effective love philtre (philtron / píltpov), particularly to bring back an 
unfaithful lover.” Thus also Scholia in Theocritum vetera 2.17. It is in its 
metaphorical sense that ¡úigx / Úvy£ is used in fragment 223 of the Chaldean 
Oracles (Des Places 1971, 120), where “the iúigges / Úiyyec play a very 
important role” (Reich in Pico 1968, 74n90). For the Chaldean Oracles, see 
8199 and note 259. In the Chaldean Oracles, therefore, the iynges can be 
conceived of as “noetic powers” (Lewy 1956, 132), which may be 
interpreted at different times as psychic faculties, or divine powers, that 
exercise the “function [...] of a magical mediation between the Supreme 
God and the invoking theurgist” (Lewy 1956, 250). According to Lewy, the 
iynges “are, consequently, the thoughts of the Supreme Being: thinking 
through circular motion” (Lewy 1956, 132) and “besides their theurgical, 
they have also a cosmic function” (Lewy 1956, 135), for they are also 
“astral intelligences” or divinities (Lewy 1956, 137), which “form a triad 
with the connective gods [sunocheis] and the teletarchic gods” (Des Places 
1971, 86, n1 to frag. 76), whose name literally means “lords of initiation” 
(Des Places 1971, 198n1). The procession of the iynges before the Father, 
according to the doctrine of the Chaldean Oracles, is summed up by Psellus 
(Hypotyposis 2-5 in Des Places 1971, 198, 4-19). According to Antelme- 
Édouard Chaignet, “the iúigges of Damascius and of the Chaldeans” must be 

“nothing but systems of abstract ideas” (in Damascius 1964, 2:250 and 
note). Moreover, Lewy observes that “as the world is ruled by noetic 
entities, the ways of communicating with them are also conceived of as 
noetic [and] for this reason, the Chaldeeans regard the science of treating of 
the cognition of the intelligible world as being of basic significance,” so 
“[t]his central theme of Chaldeean theosophy [...] was of particular interest 
to the Neoplatonists” (Lewy 1956, 165). According to Des Places, it may be 
said that “the role of intermediaries, which Plato attributes to the demons, is 
in the Oracles that of the iynges.” According to Bausi, Pico uses the term in 
the sense of magic words, formulas or, more generally, as spells or charms, 
and “in this regard depends on Synesius, De insomniis [2.2)” (Pico 2003, 
114-15). Davide Susanetti, commenting on this passage of Synesius, sums 
it up well: “There are three meanings of ¡tigx: it is the name of a bird, of an 
instrument of erotic magic, and of a witch.” He adds that “in the Chaldean 
system the iynges are not material instruments, but noetic entities [...], 
thought of the paternal intellect [...], magical names, identical to the 
thoughts of the father [...], intermediaries between him and men; words and 
formulae that may not be pronounced and which god himself gave to men 
to permit them to practise sacred rites and theurgical elevation” (in Synesius 
1992, 96-97). 

315 Cf. Horace, Epodes 2.9-10 and Epistles 1.16.3; Vergil, Georgics 1.2 
and Eclogues 2.70; Ovid, Metamorphoses 10.100; Columella, De re rustica 
11.2.79. 

316 Cf. Ficino, Comentarium in Convivium Platonis de amore 6.10, and 
Pico, Conclusiones 2.9.13 (Farmer 1998, 498), and, furthermore, 
Conclusiones 2.9.5 (Farmer 1998, 496) and 2.9.11 (Farmer 1998, 498). 

317 Isaiah 6:3: “plena est omnis terra gloria eius” (“all the earth is full of 
his glory”); cf. Hab. 3:3: “operuit caelos gloria eius, et laudis eius plena est 
terra” (“His glory covered the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise”). 
The phrase “Pleni sunt caeli et terra gloria majestatis tuae” (“The heavens 
and earth are filled with the glory of Thy majesty”) appears as a chorus for 
the mass of the first Sunday during Advent in St. Germain's Hispanic- 
Mozarabic Missal (PL 72.423a). It became a normal part of the Sanctus of 

the mass and was repeated numerous times by St. Gregory, Alcuin, Rabanus 
Maurus, St. Bernard of Clairvaux, and others. 

318 Cf. Heptaplus 7. 

319 The part of the Oration devoted to Jewish tradition corresponds to the 
last section of Pico*s Conclusiones, which contains his cabalistic theses. 

320 For the phrase “our own,” see 8186. 

321 See 8250 and 4 Esd. 14:3-6. The so-called Books of Esdras (in the 
Protestant tradition 1 Esdras and 2 Esdras) are considered apocryphal. 1 
Esdras belongs to the biblical canon of the Catholic Church, Eastern 
Orthodoxy, and Oriental Orthodoxy. It is not included in the Protestant 
Bible and Hebrew Tanakh. 2 Esdras is considered a Jewish apocalypse. It is 
preserved in the biblical canon of the Ethiopian and Russian churches. For 
many Christian groups it belongs to apocryphal literature. The early 
Hebrew and Greek versions are lost, but they circulated in different 
translations. 2 Esdras was published as an appendix in the Latin Vulgate 
edited under Pope Clement VIII. 

322 Hilary, Tractatus in psalmos 2.2 (PL 9.262-63). According to Bausi, 
this sentence is quoted also in the “Apologia, 5, in Commentationes, f. EE 
4.5; Opere complete, 7, 20” (Pico 2003, 118). 

323 Origen, Commentary on John 19.296-97 and PG 14.552-53. Cf. 
“Apologia, V (Commentationes, f. EE iii v — iii r = Opere complete, VII 
18)” (Pico 2003, 124). See also De principiis 2.12; Heptaplus, proem, 12. 

324 The “books of Moses” are the first five books of the Hebrew Bible, so 
Called because their authorship was attributed to Moses. They are called in 
Hebrew “hummach” or “Pentateuch” from the Greek, and comprise 
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. See Conclusiones 
1.28.16 (Farmer 1998, 352-53) and Heptaplus, proem 2.7. 

325 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.33 (Farmer 1998, 358-59) and 2.11.49 (Farmer 
1998, 540-41). This is an allusion to oral tradition and therefore to the 
Cabala as the true revelation received by Moses on the Mount. See 2 
Esdras. In the episode of Zerubbabel, truth is defined as the primary force 
of the universe. See also Sefer ha-Bahir 1.137-8: the “Torah of Truth” 
revealed to Moses. 

326 Jesu Nave is Joshua, son of Nun, who became the leader of Israel after 
the death of Moses, according to the narratives in Num. 27:18 and Deut. 
34:9. Cf. Jos. 1:1; Sir. 46:1 (Pico 2003, 119). Part of the tradition of wisdom 
literature, its principal thesis is that wisdom is identified as the Law, 
revealed only to the God-fearing, who obey the commandments. The name 
Jesus translates the Hebrew name Yehoshua, whose root bears the meaning 
of “salvation.” In the Christian canon (Luke 3:29; Col. 4:11), two other men 
appear with this name, translated as “YHWH is salvation.” Several of 
Pico”s cabalistic conclusions seek to prove this meaning to demonstrate the 
fulfilment of Christian dogma by which Jesus was the Son of God. 

327 These are the kohanim, direct descendants of Aaron the high priest, 
brother of Moses. See also 8141, “sacerdoti summo Michaeli” in reference 
to the archangel, whose name in Hebrew translates as “Who is like God?” 
(Num. 13:13; Dan. 10:13). Pico identifies Michael with the sefirah Keter 
(Crown), which he interprets as the symbol of the priesthood, itself a 
reference to the cabalists, who are thus the spiritual descendants of Jesu 
Nave (Sirach). 

328 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.3. 

329 Cf. Sirach 24. Most of these notions (divine retribution and mercy, the 
mysteries of the universe, etc.) are contained in the work. Later Greek 
versions, as well as the Latin Ecclesiasticus, also mention the origin of sin, 
the afterlife, and other matters related to the Christian dogmas, which Pico 
mentions in $254. See Origen, De principiis 3.14 (Sir. 16:21). See also 
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (Divine Names 597b, 684b—c, where 
reception and transmission of divine commandments are direct knowledge 

of the divine) and Plato, Epist. 8 (1092a), on the lifestyle of priests. At last, 
Pico has enumerated the main themes of Esdras. 

330 “Bark,” as in the outer layer of a tree, translates cortex (“bark,” 
“husk,” or “crust”). The term was used by mythographers and allegorists 
(e.g., Boccaccio's Genealogiae deorum gentilium) as a synonym for the 
rather more common Neoplatonic terms integumentum and involucrum (see 
8262) to refer to the literal meaning that covers or protects the deeper 
meaning of a text. See Conclusiones 2.11.63; Expositiones in psalmos 11.4. 

331 Cf. Heptaplus, proem 8-10. 

332 Matthew 7:6: “Give not that which is holy to dogs; neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and 
turning upon you, they tear you.” The language of election is also to be 
found elsewhere. According to Bausi (Pico 2003, 120), see Epistle to 
Barbaro 853; Apologia V (Commentationes, fol. EE iii r = Opere complete 
7.18); Heptaplus, proem; Commento 3.11. See Pseudo-Dionysius, Celestial 
Hierarchies 145c, on initiation into sacred mysteries. The Latin margaritae 
(“pearls”) is often repeated in other cabalistic works by Christian followers 
of Pico, who specifically use the term “margarite” in translation into Italian. 
See Camillo (1991, 49-50). 

333 The state of perfection is the final stage in the tripartite path to 
mystical enlightenment. See 870 and also Heptaplus 7. 

334 Pico refers here to the esoteric way of transmitting the true religion 
and accepts the idea that religion in its material garb is for the people, 
whereas the truest knowledge of God is meant only for the initiates. Paul 
provides the Christian biblical model of mystical experience with the two 
visionary episodes recorded: his conversion on the road to Damascus (Acts 
9:22, 26; Gal. 1:15-16) and his celestial rapture (2 Cor. 12:1-10). Hence, 
Pico refers to him as one of the elect (“vas electionis,” 869). See Bausi 
(Pico 2003, 120); 1 Cor 2:4—7; Conclusiones 2.11.8 (Farmer 1998, 522-23); 
Heptaplus, proem 10. 

335 1 Corinthians 2:6-7: “Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect: 
yet not the wisdom of this world, neither of the princes of this world that 
come to nought; But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, a wisdom 
which is hidden, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory.” See 
also 1 Cor. 2:13 (“Which things also we speak, not in the learned words of 
human wisdom; but in the doctrine of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things 
with spiritual.”) and Rom. 1:17 (“For the justice of God is revealed therein, 
from faith unto faith, as it is written: The just man liveth by faith.”). See 
Origen's De principiis 3.3. "To communicate the mysteries only to the 
worthy is a recurrent topos from ancient times. 

336 On Pythagoras”s quasi-divine nature, attributing to him miracles that 
recall those attributed to Jesus, see lamblichus, De vita Pythagorica 28.146. 
The reference to Pythagoras as Hyperborean Apollo hints at prophecy, as 
Apollo was associated with oracles. In fact, Pico misquotes lamblichus, 
who actually attributes to Pythagoras the authorship of a single work 
entitled The Sacred Discourse. See Diogenes Laertius 8.42; Pico, 
Heptaplus, proem (Pico 2003, 121). 

337 This passage recalls the image of Jacob and the ladder (8873-74). 
Moses instructs us to prepare for a heavenly vision through the study of 
philosophy (8102). 

338 Since ancient times, it has been widely believed that there were two 
writing systems in Egypt: demotic, or the common sort, and the sacred 
writing, or hieroglyphs, known only to priests and scribes. For ancient 
sources, see Horapollo, Hieroglyphica; Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca 
historica 1.74, 3.4; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 5.4.20. For fifteenth- 
century sources, see the translations by Lorenzo Valla and others of 
Horapollo (reintroduced to Italy in 1419 by Cristoforo Buondelmonti, who 
was certainly the source for Cyriac d'Ancona's famous voyage to Egypt in 
1435). See also Poggio Bracciolini?s edition of Ammianus Marcellinus. 
Others who discuss hieroglyphs are Leon Battista Alberti in De re 
aedificatoria and Francesco Colonna in Hypnerotomachia Poliphili. Cf. 
Picos Heptaplus, proem; Conclusiones 2.11.70f (Farmer 1998, 550-51); 

Commento 3.11. See also Castelli (1979); Camillo (1991, 48); Plutarch, De 
Iside et Osiride 354c (Pico 2003, 121). 

339 Plato, Epist. 2 (312d—e); Pico, Heptaplus, proem (Pico 2003, 121-22). 

340 See Conclusiones 2.11.34 and 63. Bausi notes that this quotation is 
taken from a letter written by Aristotle to Alexander the Great and 
translated into Latin by Gellius (20.5). The topic of the letter is devoted to 
books transmitted through oral wisdom. Pico thought that Aristotle 
transmitted his metaphysical philosophy through oral teaching (Pico 2003, 
122). 

341 See 883 and, on the transmission of Scripture from Moses to Jesus, 
Origen (De principiis 4.1-6; Contra Celsum 6.6; Comm. in Matth. 14.630). 
See also Commento 3.2, a passage that mentions the teachings transmitted 
by Jesus to His disciples through mysteries. Disciples did not write down 
these teachings; rather, they transmitted them orally only to the elect. For a 
recent perspective on this matter, see the introduction in Pesce (2004). 

342 See Conclusiones 2.11.34 and Dionysius”s Celestial Hierarchies 376c. 
Compare Commento 3.11; Heptaplus, proem (Pico 2003, 123). 

343 The Greek text inserted here is the same as has been provided in all 
modern editions of the Oration. Bausi, however, argues quite convincingly 
for the interpolation of a longer quotation from Pseudo-Dionysius, which 
reads: “Ex voOc elc voUv, ÉL Léoou AÓyov, 0Wpatikod pév AvAotépov $e Ó 
oc, ypapñic £ktOc” (“from mind to mind, [...] through the means of verbal 
expression and thus corporeal, but at the same time more immaterial since it 
is free from writing,” Pseudo-Dionysius 1987). Bausi bases this conjecture 
in part on the fact that the phrase sine litteris (“without writing”) seems to 
have been taken from ypapñc éxtOc (“free from writing”), which belongs to 
this lengthier citation (Pico 2003, 165). 

344 See 8101. The link established between the intercession of the veil that 
protects the human mind from the heavenly glories and that of the word 

(“intercedente verbo”) that transmits them in a manner intelligible to the 
intellect illustrates the difference between epopteia and receptio. See 
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies 1.4 (PG 3.367c) and Bausi (Pico 2003, 123). 

345 Most contemporary scholars concur with Reuchlin, who attributed to 
Pico the initial use of this term in a Latin work on the subject (De arte 
cabalistica 1.13p-q). Within erudite Jewish circles, the systematic study of 
the Cabala in a philosophical vein corresponded exactly with the 
development of humanism in Italy. See Garin (1996) and cf. Heptaplus 1, 7; 
Conclusiones 2.11.72 (Farmer 1998, 552-53). 

346 Cf. Reuchlin, De arte cabalistica 2.24d.132: “Kabbalah means “a 
receiving.” More interesting still is the earlier account provided in De arte 
cabalistica 2.6e.61: “Thus, in the ancient writings: “Moshe kibbel'” — 
“Moses heard”, and received the law at Sinai. So Kabbalah gets its name: 
receiving what is heard.” “Moshe qgibbel” is the beginning of Mishna Avot 
1.1 (see Albeck 1988), where it is written that Moshe received the Torah on 
Mount Sinai and that the Torah was then transmitted to other sages in Israel. 
Cf. Commento, incipit to the final stanza. 

347 Cyrus II the Great, founder of the Persian Empire (reigned 559-530 
BC). On the conquest of Babylon in 539 ac, see Isa. 44:28-45:1 and 45:13 
(the latter also for Cyrus as a liberator and messiah). It is Ezra who 
attributes to Cyrus the decree to rebuild the Temple (Ezra 6:3). 

348 This is a reference to the “Babylonian exile” under Nebuchadnezzar 
(reigned 605-562 Bc), who exiled the Jewish leadership from the city in 
597-596 BC and 587-586 BC (1 Ezra 1:1-11). See Soggin et al. (2002, 300— 
31) and Liverani (2003, 203-20). Accounts of the exile are found in several 
biblical texts (2 Kings, 2 Chronicles, Daniel, Jeremiah). The prophet 
Ezekiel lived among the exiles, and it is he who preached to the Jews a 
restoration in the near future. See Heptaplus 7. 

349 Zerubbabel, the grandson of the exiled king of Judah (1 Chron. 3:17— 
19), returned to Jerusalem with the first group of Jews. Upon returning from 

exile, Zerubbabel became governor of the province of Judah under the 
Persian ruler Darius I (522-486 BC). He and the high priest Joshua restored 
the Temple (520-515 BC); however, Zerubbabel is not mentioned in the 
account of the dedication provided in Ezra 6:16-18. Another messianic 
figure (according to Ezra 2:2), Zerubbabel was a descendant of David, thus 
figuring in the genealogies of Jesus in Matthew 1 and Luke 3. 

350 Ezra 1-6 gives the account of the restoration of the Temple, which was 
the centre of Jewish spiritual life until the final destruction of the Second 
Temple in 70 AD. From Ezra 7-10 comes the account of the return of a 
group of Jews to Judah under Artaxerxes (465-424 BC), who had permitted 
Ezra to reestablish the Torah with the help of priests (kohanim) and Levites. 

351 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.45 (Farmer 1998, 362-—63). 

352 2 Esdras; the archangel Uriel appears in a vision to Esdras, who 
transcribes the angelic revelations in seventy books. 2 Esdras, which is a 
Jewish apocalypse, appeared in the Vulgate. It is written that scribes worked 
forty days in order to write down the hidden oral tradition from the seventy 
sages, who correspond to the number of the seventy members of the 
Sanhedrin. 2 Esdras 14:21-24 records that only Esdras's accounts were 
written down; cf. Heptaplus, proem 2. See Bausi (Pico 2003, 125). The 
seventy sages of the Sanhedrin are mentioned in Hilarius, Tractatus in 
psalmos. 

353 In the New Testament, the term often designates the council of priests 
and scribes that opposes Jesus and His followers (Matt. 26:59; Mark 14:55, 
15:1; Luke 22:66; John 11:47; Acts 4:15, 5:21, 6:12, 22:30, 23:1, 24:20). 
Sanhedrin derives from the Greek ouvéSpiov (synedrion), denoting an 
assembly of leaders. In the New Testament, Josephus Flavius, and 
rabbinical literature, various institutions are described with this same name 
in various historical periods. Different theories exist regarding exactly what 
it was and how it functioned. See, for example, Hoenig (1953). 

354 4 Esd. 14:45-48; cf. Heptaplus 1. 

355 Cf. Conclusiones 2.11.1-3 (Farmer 1998, 518-21). 

356 These books are thoroughly messianic; there is even an early 
interpolation at the very beginning of 2 Esdras naming Jesus as the 
Messiah. Furthermore, the seventh and final vision that Esdras has under 
visitation of the angel Uriel explicitly states that Esdras composed seventy 
books of esoteric revelations. It is interesting to note that one of the 
characters in the canonical Book of Ezra is probably the namesake of 
Mithridates. Another possible source for the association of the Cabala to the 
figure of Ezra lies in the works of Abraham ibn Ezra. 

357 The three archangels Pico mentions in 8135 represent dialectics, 
natural philosophy, and theology. It is at this point in the first redaction of 
the oration that Pico underwent what Tognon refers to as an “intellectual 
conversion” (in Pico 1987, 65n16) to the Cabala. Cf. Heptaplus 3 and 5. 

358 Pope Sixtus IV was a renowned bibliophile. A fresco painted by 
Melozzo da Forli (Hospital of Santo Spirito, 1478) depicts the pope 
appointing the humanist Bartolomeo Sacchi (Platina) as Librarian of the 
Vatican. Regarding his complex relationships with Jews and Judaism, one 
must of course remember that it was Sixtus IV who authorized the 
establishment of the Inquisition in Spain in 1478. The initiative's primary 
function was to adjudicate on matters of faith concerning the conversos, or 
converted Jews. 

359 Giambattista Cibó (Innocent VIII, pope 1484-92). It is the same 
Dominican-led tribunal set up by Sixtus IV that will pursue Pico under 
Innocent VIII. See Reuchlin's account of Pico's escape to France and 
pursuit by the Inquisition in De arte cabalistica 1.13q. 

360 It is not certain which books Sixtus IV wanted to be translated into 
Latin. The author of the translations was likely Flavius Mithridates. See 
Bausi (Pico 2003, 126-27) and also Onofri (1986, 69-70); Cicognani's 
commentary to Pico (1941, 124-32); Wirszubski's introduction to Flavius 
Mithridates (1963, 66-69); Piemontese (1996, 261-62). 

361 Cf. Heptaplus 3. 
362 We cannot be sure which books these are. 

363 Pico died in 1494, at only thirty-two years of age. See Pico, Apologia 
V (Commentationes, fol. EE v v = Opere complete, VI 25); Heptaplus 
cabalistica proem. 

364 Reuchlin, De arte, 1.13s=+.91: “Nor can I boast with Mirandola of 
having, like Ezra who once ordered the seventy to write out volumes on the 
secrets of the Kabbalah, spent vast sums collecting books.” Four of these 
books are at the Vatican Library (Vat. Hebr. 189, 190, 191; Vat. Chigi A. 
6.190). See Tamani (1997, 516-18) and Busi's and Campanini's 
introductions to Mithridates (2004) and Mithridates (2005), respectively. 
See also Wirszubski's introduction to Mithridates (1963, 50-63); Lelli 
(1994, 206-10). 

365 Cf. Commento 3.11. Pico writes about his desire to know the cabalistic 
tradition and the need to study Hebrew and Aramaic, without which it is 
impossible to obtain a grasp of the Cabala. See also Pico, Apologia V 
(Commentationes, fol. EE v r = Opere complete, VII 22) (Pico 2003, 128). 
On the Latin translation of these books, see Tamani (1997, 516-18). It is 
likely that the translations made by Flavius Mithridates for Pico are 
different from those made for Sixtus IV (Pico 2003, 129). See Heptaplus, 
proem 2. 

366 The doctrine of the Trinity is not explicitly mentioned in the New 
Testament but was elaborated in later writings. However, certain passages 
provided the material on which it was formulated. See Matt. 28:19: “in the 
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit”; 2 Cor. 13:13: 
“the grace of Jesus, the love of God and the communion of the Holy Spirit.” 
See also Conclusiones 1.28.19 (Farmer 1998, 352-53) as well as 2.11.5—7, 
20, 30, 33-34, and 45; cf. Heptaplus 5-6. 

367 See 1 Cor. 8:6; Phil. 2:6; Col. 1:16, where Paul affirms the existence of 
Christ before Creation. See Conclusiones 2.11.14-16 (Farmer 1998, 526— 
27); cf. Conclusiones 2.11.43 (Farmer 1998, 538-309). 

368 Conclusiones 2.11.32 (Farmer 1998, 532-33), 2.11.38-39 (Farmer 
1998, 536-37), 2.11.46 (Farmer 1998, 538-39), 2.11.51 (Farmer 1998, 540— 
41); Heptaplus 6—7. 

369 Cf. Conclusiones 1.28.4-5 (Farmer 1998, 34647). 

370 Cf. Conclusiones 2.11.19, 21-26, and 40 (Farmer 1998, 528-31, 536— 
37). 

371 Conclusiones 1.28.10 (Farmer 1998, 350-51) and Heptaplus 7. 

372 Purgatory and Hell are not mentioned in the biblical texts but are 
developed in later Christian writings. 

373 Jerome was commissioned by Pope Damasus in 382 to provide a 
faithful Latin translation of the Bible. It took twenty years to complete, 
largely because Jerome took the unprecedented step of translating the Old 
Testament directly from original sources rather than the Greek Septuagint. 
His translation became the accepted text and was thenceforth called the 
versio vulgata or “common translation” (Vulgate). Pico plays on this 
terminology in his distinction between the common understanding of the 
Mosaic texts and the secret cabalistic interpretation known only to the elect. 
See Pico, Conclusiones Cabalisticae 2.11.72. According to Bausi, this idea 
drives all the seventy-two theses on the Cabala. In his Commento (3.2), Pico 
claims that the Cabala is the “greatest source of our Faith.” See Bausi (Pico 
2003, 129). 

374 Cf. Heptaplus, proem 2. 

375 Augustine, Confessiones 7.9.13. 

376 Cf. Heptaplus 7. 

377 Antonio Vinciguerra (1440/46-1502), secretary of the Venetian 
Republic, is listed in the Apologia as a contemporary practitioner of magic 
(Pico 2003, 130). On Antonio Vinciguerra, see Della Torre (1902); Beffa 
(1975); Bacchelli (2001, 64n184). 

378 COn Dactylus, see Widmanstetter (1555, cc. axx2v-3r). See also 
Scholem (1979, 20-22, 40). Dactylus is probably to be identified with the 
Vitalis Dactylomelos who, in January 1500, completed the translation of 
Averroes's Commentary on Aristotle's Physics, contained in the Latin codex 
6507 of the National Library in Paris. See Bacchelli (2001, 65n185). 
Cassuto (1918, 317-19) argues that Dactylus was one of Pico's Hebrew 
teachers. 

379 Conclusiones 2.11.17 (Farmer 1998, 526-27). 
380 “Ancient wisdom” translates prisca sapientia. 

381 See lamblichus, De vita Pytagorica 28.145; Diogenes Laertius 8.1.8; 
Conclusiones 2.11.10 (Farmer 1998, 524-25). See also Reuchlin, De arte 
cabalistica: “His philosophy, however, I have only been able to glean from 
the Hebrew Kabbalah, since it derives in origin from the teachers of 
Kabbalah, and then was lost to our ancestors, disappearing from Southern 
Italy into the Kabbalistic writings.” This would become the widespread 
interpretation throughout the sixteenth century. 

382 Conclusiones 2.11.55 (Farmer 1998, 542-43); cf. Heptaplus, proem. 

383 Reuchlin, De arte cabalistica 147. 'The association between Orpheus 
and Pythagoras is already present in Herodotus 2.81. 

384 Cf. Gellius (1990, Noctes Atticae 12.6.1). 

385 Cf. 8233. 

386 See Reuchlin, De arte cabalistica 3.52f: “[T]he subject is quite 
complicated and not understood by outsiders as yet, and scholars in the 
Latin world in particular know nothing at all about it, except the little work 
published some time ago by Count Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and Paul 
Ricci, and even in the present day that little work is insufficiently 
understood.” He goes on to complain of slanderers (calumniatores), whom 
he compares to Pharisees. 

Part 111 Images 

Figure 1. Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, ms. Palatino 885, f. 
143r. 

LEA! o Sí ella ca 

> (ef; nu! A EIA IM” rá ld 

e [ve Pr DAFP its A su 5 4 

FP en rf ge 
á 

) vA himno rm an 
a 

Ñ , 
Sr 012 H y ab a ria MEN 
de 
” Ep wz 
oPr ce Of * 

) ) 
ad po - hw 1! .P 
A a ) 
de 7 

a pm r EIA 

mir ama Apho re 0 

po? mues. "E 

Figure 2. Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, ms. Palatino 885, f. 
145r. 

edaldo nó rs 

> se Qs, a em: b heomá nani , ¿ 
e alroris DP PE PA basa 3 
mo nr Ga mA ve id fumof: $7 
pop d¿shemms* Ora 

Figure 3. Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, ms. Palatino 885, f. 
1471. 

Figure 4. Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, ms. Palatino 885, f. 
151v. 

Bibliography 

Albeck, Chanoch, ed. 1988. Mishna. Jerusalem: Mossad Bialik. 

Alemanno, Yohanan. 1995. Hay ha-“olamim (L*immortale). Parte 1: la 
Retorica, ed. Fabrizio Lelli. Florence: Olschki. 

Aleshire, S. B. 1991. Asklepios at Athens: Epigraphic and Prosopographic 
Essays on the Athenian Healing Cults. Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben. 

Allen, Michael J. B. 1981. Marsilio Ficino and the Phaedran Charioteer. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Allen, Michael J. B. 1984. The Platonism of Marsilio Ficino: A Study of His 
Phaedrus Commentary, Its Sources and Genesis. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

Allen, Michael J. B. 1989. Icastes: Marsilio Ficino's Interpretation of 
Plato's Sophist: Five Studies and a Critical Edition with Translation. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Allen, Michael J. B. 1998. Synoptic Art: Marsilio Ficino on the History of 
Platonic Interpretation. Florence: Olschki. 

Andreatta, Michela. 2008. “Guglielmo Raimondo Moncada traduttore di 
Lewi ben Gersom: La traduzione latina al Commento al Cantico dei 
cantici eseguita per Pico della Mirandola.” In Guglielmo Raimondo 
Moncada alias Flavio Mitridate: Un ebreo converso siciliano, Atti del 1 
Convegno internazionale, Caltabellotta (Agrigento), 23-24 ottobre 2004, 
ed. Mauro Perani. Palermo: Officina di Studi Medievali. 101-33. 

Apuleius. 1908. Die Apologie des Apuleius von Madaura und die antike 
Zauberei, ed. Adam Abt. Giessen: Tópelmann. 

Apuleius. 1914. Apulei Apologia sive Pro se de magia, ed. Harold 
Edgeworth Butler and Arthur Synge Owen. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Apuleius 1997. Pro se de magia, ed. Vincent Hunink, 2 vols. Amsterdam: 
Gieben. 

Aquilon, Pierre. 1971. “Sur quelques incunables de la Bibliotheque 
Municipale de Bourges.” In L”humanisme francais au début de la 
Renaissance. Paris: Vrin. 102-16. 

Aristotle. 1908-52. The Works of Aristotle Translated into English under the 
Editorship of W. D. Ross. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Aristotle. 1955. On Sophistical Refutations. On Coming-to-Be and Passing- 
Away, trans. D. J. Furley. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Aristotle 1957. Metaphysica, ed. Werner Wilhelm Jaeger. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 

Aristotle 1967. Qui ferebantur librorum fragmenta, ed. Valentin Rose. 
Stuttgart: Teubner. 

Aristotle 1991-94. Problemes [French and Greek], trans. and ed. Pierre 
Louis, 3 vols. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Aristotle 2002. Nicomachean Ethics, ed. Sarah Broadie, trans. Christopher 
Rowe. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Augustine of Hippo. 1888. Expositions on the Book of Psalms, trans. A. 
Cleveland Coxe. New York: Christian Literature Company. 

Augustine of Hippo. 1928. De Civitate Dei, ed. Bernard Dombart and 
Alfons Kalb. Leipzig: Teubner. 

Augustine of Hippo 1950. Against the Academics, trans. John J. O”Meara. 
Westminster, Md.: Newman. 

Augustine of Hippo 1970. Contra Academicos, De beata vita, De ordine, ed. 
William Green and K.-D. Daur. Turnhout: Brepols. 

Augustine of Hippo 1990. On Genesis against the Manichees, trans. Roland 
J. Teske. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University Press. 

Augustine of Hippo 1995. Against the Academicians. The Teacher, ed. and 
trans. Peter King. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Bacchelli, Franco. 2001. Giovanni Pico e Pier Leone da Spoleto. Florence: 
Olschki. 

Barbaro, Ermolao. 1943. Orationes, epistolae et carmina, ed. Vittore 
Branca, 2 vols. Florence: Olschki. 

Bate, Henricus. 1960. Speculum divinorum et quorundam naturalium. 1, ed. 
E. Van de Vyver. Louvain: Publications Universitaires-Béatrice- 
Nauwelaerts. 

Bausi, Francesco. 1996. Nec rhetor neque philosophus: fonti, lingua e stile 
nelle prime opere latine di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1484-87). 
Florence: Olschki. 

Bausi, Francesco ed. 1998a. Ermolao Barbaro and Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola. Filosofia o eloquenza? Naples: Liguori. 

Bausi, Francesco 1998b. “L'epistola di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola a 
Lorenzo de? Medici. Testo, traduzione e commento.” Interpres 17:7-57. 

Beffa, B. 1975. Antonio Vinciguerra Cronico, Segretario della Serenissima e 
letterato. Bern: Herbert Lang. 

Beierwaltes, "Werner. 1985. “Das Seiende Eine. Neuplatonische 
Interpretationen der zweiten Hypothesis des platonischen Parmenides und 
deren Fortbestimmung in der christlichen Theologie und in Hegels 
Logik.” In Werner Beierwaltes, Denken des Einen. Studien zur 
Neuplatonischen Philosophie und ihrer Wirkungsgeschichte. Frankfurt am 
Main: Vittorio Kostermann. 193-225. 

Bernard of Clairvaux. 1976. Five Books on Consideration, trans. John D. 
Anderson and Elizabeth T. Kennan. Kalamazoo, Mich.: Cistercian 
Publications. 

Berti, Domenico. 1859. “Intorno a Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Cenni e 
documenti inediti.” Rivista contemporanea 7:7-56. 

Bibliander, Theodorus. ca. 1543. Machumetis Saracenorum principis 
eiusque successorum vitae ac doctrina ipseque Alcoran. Basilea, ex 
officina loannis Operini. 

Bidez, Joseph and Franz Valery Marie Cumont. 1938. Les mages hellénisés: 
Zoroastre, Ostanes et Hystaspe d*apres la tradition grecque, 2 vols. Paris: 
Les Belles Lettres. 

Bietenholz, Peter. 1959. Der italienische Humanismus und die Blútezeit des 
Buchdrucks in Basel: die Basler Drucke italienischer Autoren von 1530 
bis zum Ende des 16. Jahrhunderts. Basel: Helbing and Lichtenhahn. 

Bietenholz, Peter. 1971. Basle and France in the Sixteenth Century. Geneva: 
Droz. 

Boccaccio, Giovanni. 2009. Giovanni Boccaccio Expositions on Dante's 
Comedy, ed. M. Papio. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 

Bodnár, István. 1996—. “Democritus.” In Der neue Pauly: Enzyklopádie der 
Antike, ed. Hubert Cancik, Helmuth Schneider, and August Friedrich von 
Pauly, 17 vols. Stuttgart: Metzler. 3:455-58. 

Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus. 1987. Anicii Manlii Severini Boetii 
Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Per “Ermhne...aj, 2 vols. Facsimile 
reprint of the first edition (Leipzig: Teubner, 1877-80, ed. Karl Meiser). 
New York: Garland. 

Borghesi, Francesco. 2003. “Pico e la concordia. In margine a un recente 
dibattito.” Schede umanistiche 17, no. 2: 91-107. 

Bori, Pier Cesare. 1996a. In spirito e verita. Letture di Giovanni 4,23-24. 
Bologna: EDB. 

Bori, Pier Cesare. 1996b. “I tre giardini nella scena paradisiaca del De 
hominis dignitate di Pico della Mirandola.” Annali di Storia dell*Esegesi 
13, no. 2: 551-64. 

Bori, Pier Cesare 1998. “Universalismo come pluralitá delle vie.” Filosofia 
politica 12, no. 3: 455-68. 

Bori, Pier Cesare 2000. Pluralita delle vie: Alle origini del Discorso sulla 
dignita umana di Pico della Mirandola. Milan: Feltrinelli. 

Bori, Pier Cesare 2007. “Réforme religieuse, herméneutique des origines et 
rationalité.” In Réformes. Comprendre et comparer les religions, ed. P. C. 
Bori, M. Haddad, and A. Melloni. Berlin: LIT Verlag. 5-13. 

Bori, Pier Cesare 2008. “Lettre sur le monotheismes.” Annali di Storia 
dell*Esegesi 25, no. 1: 9-17. 

Boulnois, Olivier. 1993. “Humanisme et dignité de 1'homme selon Pic de la 
Mirandole.” In Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, CEuvres philosophiques, 
trans. Olivier Boulnois and Giuseppe Tognon. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France. 293-340. 

Buck, August. 1997. “Giovanni Pico della Mirandola e l'antropologia 
dell'umanesimo italiano.” In Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Convegno 
internazionale di studi nel cinquecentesimo anniversario della morte 
(1494-1994), ed. Gian Carlo Garfagnini, 2 vols. Florence: Olschki. 1:1— 
12, 

Burckhardt, Andreas. 1966. Johannes Basilius Herold: Kaiser und Reich im 
protestantischen Schrifttum des Basler Buchdrucks um die Mitte des 16. 
Jahrhunderts. Basel: Helbing and Lichtenhahn. 

Camillo, Giulio. 1991. L*idea del theatro, ed. Lina Bolzoni. Palermo: 
Sellerio. 

Cantimori, Delio. 1939. Eretici italiani del Cinquecento: Ricerche storiche. 
Florence: Sansoni. 

Cantimori, Delio. 1975. “Umanesimo e Riforma.” In Delio Cantimori, 
Umanesimo e religione nel Rinascimento. Turin: Einaudi. 142-57. 

Casini, Paolo. 1998. L*antica sapienza italica: cronistoria di un mito. 
Bologna: Il Mulino. 

Cassirer, Ernst. 1942. “Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: A Study in the 
History of Renaissance Ideas.” Journal of the History of Ideas 3:123-44 
(Part I) and 319-46 (Part ID). 

Cassuto, Umberto. 1918. Gli ebrei a Firenze nell'eta del Rinascimento. 
Florence: Galletti e Cocci. 

Castelli, Patrizia. 1979. I geroglifici e il mito dell*Egitto nel Rinascimento. 
Florence: Edam. 

Celenza, Christopher. 1999. “Pythagoras in the Renaissance: The Case of 
Marsilio Ficino.” Renaissance Quarterly 52: 667-711. 

Celenza, Christopher. 2001. Piety and Pythagoras in Renaissance Florence: 
The Symbolum Nesianum. Leiden: Brill. 

Ceretti, Felice. 1878. “Il conte Antonmaria Pico della Mirandola. Memorie e 
documenti.” Atti e memorie delle Reali Deputazioni di storia patria per le 
province dell*Emilia 3, no. 2: 237-87. 

Cicero. 1959. De senectute, De amicitia and De divinatione, trans. William 
Armistead Falconer. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Cicero. 1962. Brutus, trans. and ed. Otto Jahn and Wilhelm Kroll. Berlin: 
Weidemann. 

Cicero 1967. On Old Age and Friendship, trans. Frank O. Copley. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 

Cicero 1979. De oratore, trans. Augustus S. Wilkins. New York: Arno Press. 

Cicero 1979-82. De Oratore, trans. E. W. Sutton, completed by H. 
Rackham. London: W. Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 

Cicero 1985. Tusculan Disputations 1, ed. and trans. A. E. Douglas. 
Warminster: Aris and Phillips; Chicago: Bolchazy-Carducci. 

Cicero 1986. Philippics, trans. David Roy Shackleton Bailey. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press. 

Cicero 1998. De finibus bonorum et malorum libri quinque, ed. Leighton 
Durham Reynolds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Cicero 1999. De finibus bonorum et malorum, trans. H. Rackham. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Cicero 1999b. On the Commonwealth and On the Laws, ed. James E. G. 
Zetzel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Cicero 2001a. On the Ideal Orator (De Oratore), trans. James M. May and 
Jakob Wisse. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Cicero 2001b. On Moral Ends, ed. Julia Annas, trans. Raphael Woolf. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Cicero 2002. Tusculan Disputations 3 and 4: Cicero on the Emotions, trans. 
Margaret Graver. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Cicero 2005a. De natura deorum. Academica, trans. H. Rackham. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Cicero 2005b. De officiis, trans. Walter Miller. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 

Clausen, Wendell Vernon. 1994. A Commentary on Virgil: Eclogues. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press. 

Copenhaver, Brian. 2002a. “The Secret of Picos Oration: Cabala and 
Renaissance Philosophy.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 26:56-81. 

Copenhaver, Brian. 2002b. “Magic and the Dignity of Man: De-Kanting 
Pico*s Oration.” In The Italian Renaissance in the Twentieth Century. Acts 
of an International Conference, Florence, Villa I Tatti, June 9-11, 1999, 
ed. A. J. Grieco, M. Rocke, and F. Gioffredi Superbi. Florence: Olschki. 
295-320. 

Corazzol, Giacomo. 2012 “Flavio Mitridate e le radici storiche della cabala.” 
In Flavio Mitridate mediatore fra culture nel contesto dell'ebraismo 
siciliano del sec. XV. Atti del Il Convegno internazionale, Caltabellotta, 
Biblioteca Comunale 30 giugno — 1 luglio 2008, ed. Giacomo Corazzol 
and Mauro Perani. Florence: Giuntina. 

Craven, William G. 1981. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Symbol of His 
Age: Modern Interpretations of a Renaissance Philosopher. Geneva: 
Droz. 

Cullman, Karl. 1913. Familiengeschichte der Petri 1391-1913. Nuremberg: 
n.p. 

Damascius. 1964. Problemes et solutions touchant les premiers principes, 
ed. Anthelme-Edouard Chaignet, 3 vols. Brussels: Culture et civilization. 

Dancy, R. M. 1997. “Eudoxus.” In Encyclopedia of Classical Philosophy, 
ed. Donald J. Zeyl, Daniel Devereux, and Phillip Mitsis. Westport, Conmn.: 
Greenwood Press. 236. 

Daniélou, Jean. 1976. The Angels and Their Mission, trans. David Heiman. 
Westminster, Md.: Christian Classics. 

Dannenfeldt, Karl H. 1957. “The Pseudo-Zoroastrian Oracles in the 
Renaissance.” Studies in the Renaissance 4:7-30. 

De Lubac, Henri. 1974. Pic de la Mirandole: Études et discussions. Paris: 
Aubier Montaigne. Italian trans.: 1977. Pico della Mirandola. L*alba 
incompiuta del Rinascimento. Paris: Aubier. 

De Lubac, Henri. 1998—. Medieval Exegesis, 3 vols. Grand Rapids, Mich.: 
Eerdmans. 

De Pace, Anna. 2002. La scepsi, il sapere e l'anima. Dissonanze nella 
cerchia laurenziana. Milan: Edizioni Universitarie di Lettere Economia 
Diritto. 

Del Piazzo, M. 1963. “Nuovi documenti sull*incidente aretino di Pico della 
Mirandola.” Rassegna degli archivi di stato 23:271-—90. 

Della Torre, Arnaldo. 1902. Di Antonio Vinciguerra e delle sue satire. Rocca 
San Casciano: Cappelli. 

Des Places, Édouard. 1971. Oracles chaldaiques, Avec un choix de 
commentaires anciens. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Diels, Hermann and Walther Kranz. 1951-52. Die Fragmente der 
Vorsokratiker, griechisch und deutsch, 3 vols. Berlin: Weidmanmn. 

Dies, Auguste. 1927. Autour de Platon: essais de critique et d”histoire. 
Paris: Gabriel Beauchesne. 

Di Giovanni, Vincenzo. 1894. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella storia 
del rinascimento e della filosofia in Italia. Palermo: Boccone del povero. 

Di Napoli, Giovanni. 1965. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola e la 
problematica dottrinale del suo tempo. Rome: Desclée. 

Diodorus Siculus. 1993. Bibliotheque historique, ed. Pierre Bertrac, trans. 
Yvonne Verniere. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Diogenes Laertius. 1976. Vite dei filosofi, ed. Marcello Gigante, 2 vols. Bari: 
Laterza. 

Dionisotti, Carlo. 1968. Gli umanisti e il volgare tra Quattrocento e 
Cinquecento. Florence: Le Monmnier. 

Dodds, E. R. 1951. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

Dorez, Leon. 1895. “Lettres inédites de Jean Pic de la Mirandole (1482— 
1492).” Giornale storico della letteratura italiana 25:353-59. 

Dórrie, Heinrich. 1964-75a. “Democritus.” In Der Kleine Pauly: Lexikon 
der Antike, ed. Konrat Ziegler and Walther Sontheimer, 5 vols. Stuttgart: 
Druckenmiller. 1:1478. 

Dórrie, Heinrich. 1964—75b. “Empedocles.” In Der Kleine Pauly: Lexikon 
der Antike, ed. Konrat Ziegler and Walther Sontheimer, 5 vols. Stuttgart: 
Druckenmiller. 2:258. 

Dougherty, Michael V. 2008. “Three Precursors to Pico della Mirandola's 
Roman Disputation and the Question of Human Nature in the Oration.” In 
Pico della Mirandola: New Essays, ed. Michael V. Dougherty. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 114-51. 

Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques. 1958. The Western Response to Zoroaster. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Dulles, Avery. 1941. Princeps Concordiae: Pico della Mirandola and the 
Scholastic Tradition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Dupuis, Jacques. 1997. Toward a Christian Theology of Religious Pluralism. 
Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books. 

Dupuis, Jacques. 2001. Il cristianesimo e le religioni: Dallo scontro 
all'incontro. Brescia: Queriniana. 

Enenkel, K. A. E. 1994. “Die humanistische vita activa/vita 
contemplativa/Diskussion: Francesco Petrarcas De vita solitaria.” In 
Proceedings of the Eighth International Congress of Neo-Latin Studies, 
Copenhagen, 12 August-17 August 1991, general editor Rhoda Schnur; 
edited by Ann Moss et al. Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval € Renaissance 
Texts 81 Studies, 249-58. 

Euler, Walter Andreas. 1998. “Pia philosophia” et “docta religio”: 
Theologie und Religion bei Marsilio Ficino und Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola. Munich: Fink. 

Faggin, Giuseppe. 1957. “Filipono.” In Enciclopedia filosofica, 4 vols. 
Venice: Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale. 2:758. 

Farmer, Stephen Alan. 1998. Syncretism in the West: Pico' 900 Theses 
(1486). Tempe, Ariz.: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies. 

Ficino, Marsilio. 1576. Opera. Basilea: Henricpetrina. 

Ficino, Marsilio. 1937. Supplementum Ficinianum, ed. Paul Oskar 
Kristeller, 2 vols. Florence: Olschki. 

Ficino, Marsilio 1944. Marsilio Ficinos Commentary on Plato's 
Symposium, trans. Sears Reynolds Jayne. Columbia: University of 
Missouri Press. 

Ficino, Marsilio 1962. Opera omnia, ed. P. O. Kristeller and M. Sancipriano, 
2 vols. Turin: Bottega d*Erasmo. 

Ficino, Marsilio 1964—70. Théologie platonicienne de l'immortalité des 
ámes, ed. Raymond Marcel, 3 vols. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Ficino, Marsilio 1975-2003. The Letters of Marsilio Ficino, translated from 
the Latin by members of the Language Department of the School of 
Economic Science, London, 7 vols. London: Shepheard-Walwyn. 

Ficino, Marsilio 1990—. Lettere, ed. Sebastiano Gentile. Florence: Olschki. 

Ficino, Marsilio 2001-6. Platonic Theology, English trans. Michael J. B. 
Allen with John Warden; Latin text ed. James Hankins with William 
Bowen, 6 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Fitt, Mary. 1962. Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A Complete 
Translation of the Fragments in Diels Fragmente der Vorspkratiker. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 

Fornaciari, P. F. 1988. “Presenza della Qabbalah nelle Conclusiones 
Nongentae Sive Theses di Giovanni Pico.” In Giovanni e Gianfrancesco 

Pico. L*opera e la fortuna di due studenti ferraresi, ed. Patrizia Castelli. 
Florence: Olschki. 107-20. 

Fukuyama, Francis. 2002. Our Posthuman Future. New York: Farrar, 
Strauss and Giroux. 

Garin, Eugenio. 1937. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Vita e dottrina. 
Florence: Le Monnier. 

Garin, Eugenio. 1938. “La “dignitas hominis” e la letteratura patristica.” 
Rinascita 1, no. 4: 102-46. 

Garin, Eugenio 1950. Lo spirito cristiano di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. 
In Pensée humaniste et tradition chrétienne aux XVe et XVle siecles. 
Essais, notes et documents, ed. Henri Bédarida. Paris: Boivin. 169-84. 

Garin, Eugenio 1952a. Prosatori Latini del Quattrocento. Milan: Ricciardi. 

Garin, Eugenio 1952b. L*umanesimo italiano. Filosofia e vita civile nel 
Rinascimento. Bari: Laterza. 

Garin, Eugenio 1961. La cultura filosofica del Rinascimento italiano. 
Florence: Sansoni. 

Garin, Eugenio 1963. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Parma: Tipografia 
dell” Istituto statale d'arte Paolo Toschi. 

Garin, Eugenio 1965. “Le interpretazioni del pensiero di Giovanni Pico.” In 
L”opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella storia 
dell'Umanesimo. Convegno internazionale (Mirandola: 15-18 settembre 
1963), 2 vols. Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento. 1:3— 
33. 

Garin, Eugenio 1966. Storia della filosofia italiana. I. Turin: Einaudi. 

Garin, Eugenio 1972. La “Dignitas Hominis” e la letteratura patristica. 
Turin: Giappichelli. 

Garin, Eugenio 1985. ““Phantasia? e “Imaginatio” fra Marsilio Ficino e 
Pietro Pomponazzi.” Giornale critico della filosofia italiana 64, no. 3: 
349-61. 

Garin, Eugenio 1988. Ermetismo del Rinascimento. Rome: Editori Riuniti. 

Garin, Eugenio 1995. “Ricordando Giovanni e Gianfrancesco Pico della 
Mirandola.” Giornale critico della filosofia italiana 74:5-19. 

Garin, Eugenio 1996. “L'Umanesimo italiano e la cultura ebraica.” In Gli 
ebrei in Italia, ed. Corrado Vivanti. Storia d'Italia. Annali 11. 2 vols. 
Turin: Einaudi. 1:361-83. 

Gellius, Aulus. 1984. The Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius, trans. John C. Rolfe. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Gellius, Aulus. 1990. Noctes Atticae, ed. P. K. Marshall. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 

Genazzano, Eliyyah Hayyim ben Binyamin da. 2002. La lettera preziosa, ed. 
Fabrizio Lelli. Florence: Giuntina; Nimes: l”éclat. 

Gentile, Giovanni. 1968. “Il concetto dell'uomo nel Rinascimento.” In 
Giovanni Gentile, Il pensiero italiano del Rinascimento, 4th ed. Florence: 
Sansoni. 47-113. 

Gentile, Giovanni. 1991. Giordano Bruno e il pensiero del Rinascimento. 
Florence: Le Lettere. 

Gentile, Sebastiano. 1990. “Sulle prime traduzioni dal greco di Marsilio 
Ficino.” Rinascimento 40:57-104. 

Gersonide [Gersonides]. 2009. Commento al Cantico dei Cantici nella 
traduzione ebraico-latina di Flavio Mitridate. Edizione e commento del 
ms. Vat. Lat. 4273 (cc. 5r-54r), ed. Michela Andreatta. Florence: Olschki. 

Grafton, Anthony. 1997. “Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: Trials and 
Triumphs of an Omnivore.” In Anthony Grafton, Commerce with the 
Classics: Ancient Books and Renaissance Readers. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 93-134, 

Grafton, Anthony. 1999. The Footnote: A Curious History. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Green, Arthur. 2004. A Guide to the Zohar. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford 
University Press. 

Gregory of Nyssa. 1978. Life of Moses, trans. Abraham J. Malherbe and 
Everett Ferguson. New York: Paulist Press. 

Gregory, Tullio. 1961. “Platone e Aristotele nello Speculum di Enrico Bate 
di Malines. Note su una recente edizione.” Studi medievali 2:302-319. 

Grévin, Benoít. 2008. “Une témoin majeur du role des communautés juives 
de Sicile dans la préservation et la diffusion en Italie d'un savoir sur 
Parabe et 1'Islam au XVe siecle: le notes interlinéaires et marginales du 
“Coran de Mithridate” (ms. Vat. Hebr. 357).” In Chrétiens, juifs et 
musulmans dans la Méditeranée médiévale. Études en hommage á Henri 
Bresc réunies par Benoít Grévin, Annliese Nef et Emannuelle Tixiere. 
Paris: De Boccard. 45-56. 

Grévin, Benoít. 2012. “Flavius Mithridates au travail sur le Coran.” In 
Flavio Mitridate mediatore fra culture nel contesto dell*ebraismo siciliano 
del sec. XV. Atti del II Convegno internazionale, Caltabellotta, Biblioteca 
Comunale 30 giugno — 1 luglio 2008, ed. Giacomo Corazzol and Mauro 
Perani. Florence: Giuntina. 

Griffiths, Alan H. 2003a. “Aristeas.” In The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 
ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 15960. 

Griffiths, Alan H. 2003b. “Zalmoxis.” In The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 
ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 1633. 

Habermas, Jiirgen. 2003. The Future of Human Nature. Cambridge: Polity 
Press; Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. 

Hadot, Ilsetraut. 1987. “La vie et 1'Oluvre de Simplicius d'aprés des sources 
grecques et arabes.” In Simplicius: Sa vie, son oevre, sa survie, ed. 1. 
Hadot. Berlin: de Gruyter. 3-39. 

Hankins, James. 1990. Plato in the Italian Renaissance, 2 vols. Leiden: 
Brill. 

Hermes Trismegistus. 1924-36. Hermetica, the Ancient Greek and Latin 
Writings which Contain Religious or Philosophic Teachings Ascribed to 

Hermes Trismegistus, ed. with English trans. and notes by Walter Scott, 4 
vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Hermes Trismegistus. 1960. Corpus Hermeticum, ed. Arthur Darby Nock 
and A. J. Festugiere, 4 vols. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Hermes Trismegistus 1992. Hermetica: The Greek Corpus Hermeticum and 
the Latin Asclepius in a New English Translation, trans. Brian P. 
Copenhaver. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Herodotus. 1991-—. Le storie, ed. David Asheri, 9 vols. Milan: Mondadori. 

Hieronymus, Frank. 1997. 1488 Petri-Schwabe 1988: eine traditionsreiche 
Basler Offizin im Spiegel ihrer frúhen Drucke, 2 vols. Basel: Schwabe and 
Company. 

Hoenig, Sidney Benjamin. 1953. The Great Sanhedrin. Philadelphia: 
Dropsie College for Hebrew and Cognate Learning. 

Homer. 1990. The Odyssey, trans. Allen Mandelbaum. Berkeley: University 
of California Press. 

Horace. 1995a. Epodes, ed. D. Mankin. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Horace. 1995b. Horace for Students of Literature: The Ars Poetica and lts 
Tradition, trans. Leon Golden. Gainesville: University Press of Florida. 

Horace 2004. Odes and Epodes, trans. Niall Rudd. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 

Horace 2005. Satires, Epistles and Ars poetica, trans. H. Rushton 
Fairclough. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Huxley, G. L. 1970-80. “Eudoxus.” Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed. 
Charles Coulston Gillispie et al., 16 vols. New York: Scribner. 4:466. 

lamblichus. 1911. Theurgia, or The Egyptian Mysteries, trans. Alexander 
Wilder. New York: The Metaphysical Publishing Co. 

lamblichus. 1967. Protrepticus. Facsimile copy of the Leipzig 1888 edition, 
ed. Ermenegildo Pistelli. Stuttgart: Teubner. 

lamblichus 1975. De Vita Pythagorica, ed. Ludwig Deubner and Ulrich 
Klein. Stuttgart: Teubner. 

lamblichus 1988. The Exhortation to Philosophy: Including the Letters of 
lamblichus and Proclus? Commentary on the Chaldean Oracles, trans. 
from the Greek by Thomas Moore Johnson, with a foreword by Joscelyn 
Godwin, ed. Stephen Neuville. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Phanes. 

lamblichus 1989. Protreptique, ed. Édouard Des Places. Paris: Les Belles 
Lettres. 

Idel, Moshe. 2001. “Kabbalah and Hermeticism in Dame Frances A. Yates”s 
Renaissance.” In Ésotérisme, gnoses 8: imaginaire symbolique: Mélanges 
offerts a Antoine Faivre, ed. Richard Caron, Joscelyn Godwin, Wouter J. 
Hanegraaff, and Jean-Louis Vieillard-Baron. Leuven: Peters. 71-90. 

Idel, Moshe. 2004, “Man as the “Possible” Entity in Some Jewish and 
Renaissance Sources.” In Hebraica Veritas? Christian Hebraists and the 
Study of Judaism in Early Modern Europe, ed. Allison P. Coudert and 
Jeffrey S. Shoulson. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 33— 
48. 

Idel, Moshe 2005. Kabbalah and Eros. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press. 

Jaeger, Werner Wilhelm. 1923. Aristoteles: Grundlegung einer Geschichte 
seiner Entwicklung. Berlin: Weidmann. 

Jerome. 1995. Saint Jerome' Hebrew Questions on Genesis, ed. C. T. R. 
Hayward. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Katzenellenbogen, Adolf. 1964. Allegories of the Virtues and the Vices in 
Mediaeval Art. New York: Norton. 

Kibre, Pearl. 1936. The Library of Pico della Mirandola. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 

Knibb, Michael A. 1978. The Ethiopic Book of Enoch: A New Edition in the 
Light of the Aramaic Dead Sea Fragments, in consultation with Edward 
Ullendorf. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Knowles, David. 1967. “William of Auvergne.” In Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, ed. Paul Edwards et al., 8 vols. New York: Macmillan. 8:302— 
3: 

Kraut, Richard. 1997. “Plato.” In Encyclopedia of Classical Philosophy, ed. 
Donald J. Zeyl, Daniel Devereux, and Phillip Mitsis. Westport, Comn.: 
Greenwood Press. 389. 

Kristeller, Paul Oskar. 1965. “Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and His 
Sources.” In L*Opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella 
storia dell"'Umanesimo. Convegno internazionale (Mirandola: 15-18 
settembre 1963), 2 vols. Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul 
Rinascimento. 1:35-142. 

Kristeller, Paul Oskar. 1972. Renaissance Concepts of Man and Other 
Essays. New York: Harper and Row. 

Kristeller, Paul Oskar 1988. Il pensiero filosofico di Marsilio Ficino. 
Florence: Le Lettere. 

Kronholm, Tryggve. 1978. Motifs from Genesis HIT in the Genuine Hymns 
of Ephrem the Syrian. Lund: Gleerup. 

Kunitzsch, Paul. 1977-98. “Abu Mashar.” In Lexikon des Mittelalters, ed. 
Robert Auty, 10 vols. Munich: Artemis-LexMA. 1:69. 

Lauer, Hans H. 1977-98. “Abu Marwan ibn Zuhr.” In Lexikon des 
Mittelalters, ed. Robert Auty, 10 vols. Munich: Artemis-LexMA. 1:1290. 

Lelli, Fabrizio. 1994. “Pico tra filosofia ebraica e gabbala.” In Pico, 
Poliziano e 1'Umanesimo di fine Quattrocento, ed. P. Viti. Florence: 
Olschki. 193-223. 

Lelli, Fabrizio. 1997. “Yohann Alemanno, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola e 
la cultura ebraica italiana del XV secolo.” In Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola: Convegno internazionale di studi nel cinquecentesimo 
amniversario della morte (1494-1994). Mirandola, 4-8 ottobre 1994, ed. 
Gian Carlo Garfagnini, 2 vols. Florence: Olschki. 1:303-25. 

Lewy, Hans. 1956. Chaldaean Oracles and Theurgy: Mysticism, Magic and 
Platonism in the Later Roman Empire. Le Caire: L'*Institut Francais 
d'Archéologie Orientale. 

Lohr, Charles H. 1988. “Metaphysics.” In The Cambridge History of 
Renaissance Philosophy, ed. Charles B. Schmitt, Quentin Skinner, 
Eckhard Kessler, and Jill Kraye. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
537-638. 

Lucilius, Caius. 19045. Satyres [Carminum reliquiae], ed. Friedrich Marx, 
2 vols. Leipzig: Teubner. 

Ludovici, Sergio Samek, ed. 1963. Catalogo della mostra delle opere di 
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Modena: Artioli. 

Mahoney, Edward P. 2004. “Aristotle and Some Late Medieval and 
Renaissance Philosophers.” In The Impact of Aristotelism on Modern 
Philosophy, ed. Riccardo Pozzo. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic 
University of America Press. 1-34. 

Maimonides. 1995. The Guide of the Perplexed, trans. Chaim Rabin. 
Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Manetti, Giannozzo. 1532. Opera [de dignitate €: excellentia hominis libri 
4. Ex bibliotheca lo. Alexandri Brassicani iureconsulti, recens in lucem 
aediti]. Basileae: And. Cratandrvm. 

Marrone, Steven. 1998. “William of Auvergne.” In Routledge Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy, ed. Edward Craig et al., 10 vols. London: Routledge. 
9:726-27. 

Masai, Francois. 1956. Pléthon et le platonisme de Mistra. Paris: Les Belles 
Lettres. 

Massetani, Guido. 1897. La filosofia cabbalistica di Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola. Empoli: Edisso Traversari. 

Medici, Lorenzo de”. 1992. Opere, ed. Tiziano Zanato. Turin: Einaudi. 

Meyer, Michael J. 2002. “Dignity as a (Modern) Virtue.” In The Concepts of 
Human Dignity in Human Rights Discourse, ed. David Kretzmer and 
Eckart Klein. The Hague: Kluwer Law International. 195-208. 

Millas, J. M. 1954—. “Abu Mashar.” In The Encyclopaedia of Islam, ed. 
Hamilton Alexander Rosskeen Gibb et al., 11 vols. Leiden: Brill. 1:143. 

Mithridates, Flavius. 1963. Sermo de passione Domini, ed. Chaim 
Wirszubski. Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities. 

Mithridates, Flavius. 2004. The Great Parchment: Flavius Mithridates” 
Latin Translation, the Hebrew Text, and an English Version, ed. Giulio 
Busi with Simonetta M. Bondoni and Saverio Campanini. Turin: Nino 
Aragno Editore. 

Mithridates, Flavius 2005. The Book of Bahir: Flavius Mithridates? Latin 
Translation, the Hebrew Text, and an English Version, ed. Saverio 
Campanini. Turin: Nino Aragno Editore. 

Monfasani, John. 1976. George of Trebizond: A Biography and a Study of 
His Rhetoric and Logic. Leiden: Brill. 

Monfasani, John. 2002. “Marsilio Ficino and the Plato-Aristotle 
Controversy.” In Marsilio Ficino: His Theology, His Philosophy, His 
Legacy, ed. Michael J. B. Allen and Valery Rees. Leiden: Brill. 179-202. 

Montanari, Franco. 1996—. “Hermippus.” In Der neue Pauly: Enzyklopádie 
der Antike, ed. Hubert Cancik, Helmuth Schneider, and August Friedrich 
von Pauly, 17 vols. Stuttgart: Metzler. 5:439. 

Nardi, Bruno. 1945. Sigieri di Brabante nel pensiero del Rinascimento 
Italiano. Rome: Edizioni Italiane. 

Nicholas of Cusa. 1971. Cribratio Alchorani. In Opere religiose, ed. P. Gaia. 
Turin: UTET. 718-33. 

Nonius Marcellus. 1903. De compendiosa doctrina, ed. Wallace Martin 
Lindsay and John Henry Onions, 3 vols. Leipzig: Teubner. 

Onofri, Laura. 1986. “Figure di potere e paradigmi culturali.” In Un 
pontificato e una citta: Sisto IV (1471-1484), ed. Massimo Miglio, 
Francesca Niutta, Diego Quaglioni, and Concetta Ranieri. Citta del 
Vaticano: Scuola Vaticana di Paleografía, Diplomatica e Archivistica. 57— 
79. 

Oreglia, Giuseppe. 1894. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola e la cabala. 
Mirandola: G. Cagarelli. 

Origen. 1982. Homilies on Genesis and Exodus, trans. Ronald E. Heine. 
Washington, D.C.: Catholic University Press. 

Ovid. 1946. Metamorphoses, trans. Frank Justus Miller, 2 vols. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Ovid. 1972. Metamorphoses, Books 6-10, ed. with intro. and commentary 
by William S. Anderson. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Ovid 1988. Tristia. Ex Ponto, trans. Arthur Leslie Wheeler. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Panofsky, Erwin. 1962. Studies in Iconology: Humanistic Themes in the Art 
of the Renaissance. New York: Harper. 

Panofsky, Erwin. 1972. Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art. New 
York: Harper and Row. 

Pape, W. 1914. Griechisch-Deutsches Handworterbuch, ed. W. Pape and M. 
Sengebusch, 2 vols. Braunschweig: Vieweg. 

Pepin, Jean. 1975-98. “Neopitagorismo e neoplatonismo.” In Storia della 
filosofia, ed. Mario Dal Pra, 11 vols. Milan: Vallardi. 4:314. 

Pesce, Mauro, ed. 2004. Le parole dimenticate di Gesú. Milan: Fondazione 
Valla-Mondadori. 

Petrarch [Francesco Petrarca]. 1976. Petrarch' Lyric Poems, trans. and ed. 
Robert M. Durling. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovan Francesco [Gianfrancesco]. 1890. Giovanni 
Pico della Mirandola: His Life by His Nephew Giovanni Francesco Pico, 
ed. James Macmullen Rigg and trans. Sir Thomas More. London: Nutt. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovan Francesco [Gianfrancesco]. 1963. loannis Pici 
Mirandulae viri omni disciplinarum genere consumatissimi vita per 
Toannem Franciscum illustris principis Galeotti Pici filium conscripta, ed. 
Tommaso Sorbelli. Modena: Aedes Muratoriana. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni. 1905. Ausgewáhlte Schriften, ed. Arthur 
Liebert. Leipzig: E. Diederichs. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni. 1940a. Uber die Wiirde des Menschen: 
nebst einigen Briefen und der Lebensbeschreibung Pico della Mirandolas, 
trans. and ed. Herbert Warner Rússel. Amsterdam: Pantheon. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1940b. The Very Elegant Speech on the 
Dignity of Man, trans. Charles Glenn Wallis. Annapolis, Md.: St. John's 
Book Store. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1941. De hominis digitate, ed. Bruno 
Cicognani. Florence: Le Monnier. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1942. De hominis dignitate, Heptaplus, De 
ente et uno e scritti vari, ed. Eugenio Garin. Florence: Vallecchi. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1946-52. Disputationes adversus 
astrologiam divinatricem, ed. Eugenio Garin, 2 vols. Florence: Vallecchi. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1948. “Oration on the Dignity of Man.” In 
The Renaissance Philosophy of Man, ed. Ernst Cassirer, Paul Oskar 
Kristeller, and John Hermann Randall, Jr., trans. of the Oration Elizabeth 
Livermore Forbes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 223-54, 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1953. Oratio de hominis dignitate: Oration 
on the Dignity of Man, trans. Elizabeth Livermore Forbes from Eugenio 
Garin's edition of 1942, postscript by Paul Oskar Kristeller. Lexington, 
Ky.: Anvil Press. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1956. Oration on the Dignity of Man, trans. 
A. Robert Caponigri. Chicago: Regnery. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1967. “Oration on the Dignity of Man,” ed. 
and trans. Arturo B. Fallico and Herman Shapiro. In Renaissance 
Philosophy, 2 vols. New York: Random House. 1:141—71. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1968. De dignitate hominis, ed. Hans H. 
Reich. Bad Homburg: Gehlen. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1969a. La dignita dell'uomo, ed. Fabio 
Sante Pignagnoli. Bologna: Patron. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1969b. Opera omnia, 2 vols. Facsimile copy 
of the Basle 1557 edition with additional writings. Introduction by Cesare 

Vasoli. Hildesheim: Olms. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1971. Opera omnia, 2 vols. Facsimile copy 
of the Basle 1572 edition with additional writings. Turin: Bottega 
d'Erasmo. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1973. Conclusiones sive theses DCCCC 
Romae anno 1486 publice disputandae, sed non admissae, ed. Bohdan 
Kieszkowski. Geneva: Droz. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1984. Commentary on a Canzone of 
Benivieni, ed. and trans. Sears Jayne. New York: P. Lang. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1986a. Commentary on a Poem of Platonic 
Love, trans. Douglas Carmichael. Boston: University Press of America. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1986b. De hominis dignitate, Lettera a 
Ermolao Barbaro. With introductory essay “La filosofia di Pico della 
Mirandola” by Giovanni Semprini. Rome: Atanor. (Reprint of Giovanni 
Semprini, La filosofia di Pico della Mirandola. Milan: Libreria Lombarda, 
1936.) 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1987. Discorso sulla dignita dell*uomo, ed. 
Giuseppe Tognon. Brescia: La Scuola. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1990. De hominis dignitate: Uber die Wiirde 
des Menschen, ed. August Buck. Hamburg: Meiner. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1993. CEuvres philosophiques, trans. Olivier 
Boulnois and Giuseppe Tognon. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1994a. De hominis digitate: La dignita 
dell*uomo, ed. Carlo Carena. Milan: Berlusconi. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1994b. Oratio de Hominis Dignitate, ed. E. 
Garin. Pordenone: Studio Tesi. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1994c. Sonetti, ed. G. Dilemmi. Turin: 
Einaudi. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1995. Conclusiones nongentae: le novecento 
tesi dell?anno 1486, ed. Albano Biondi. Florence: Olschki. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1997. Expositiones in Psalmos, ed. 
Antonino Raspanti. Florence: Olschki. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1998. On the Dignity of Man, trans. Charles 
Glenn Wallis. Also contains On Being and the One (trans. Paul J. W. 
Miller) and Heptaplus (trans. Douglas Carmichael). Indianapolis: Hackett. 
(Originally published in 1965.) 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 1999. 900 conclusions philosophiques, 
cabalistiques et théologiques, ed. Bertrand Schefer. Paris: Allia. 

Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 2003. Discorso sulla dignita dell*uomo, ed. 
Francesco Bausi. Parma: Guanda Editore. 

Piemontese, Angelo Michele. 1996. “Il corano latino di Ficino e i corani 
arabi di Pico e di Monchates.” Rinascimento 36:227—73. 

Piemontese, Angelo Michele. 2008. “Guglielmo Raimondo Moncada alla 
Corte di Urbino.” In Guglielmo Raimondo Moncada alias Flavio 
Mitridate. Un ebreo converso siciliano, Atti del I Convegno 
internazionale, Caltabellotta (Agrigento), 23-24 ottobre 2004, ed. Mauro 
Perani. Palermo: Officina di Studi Medievali. 151—71. 

Piemontese, Angelo Michele 2012. “Pico, Moncada e Abdala Sarracenus 
nella Oratio de hominis dignitate.” In Flavio Mitridate mediatore fra 
culture nel contesto dell*ebraismo siciliano del sec. XV, Atti del II 
Convegno internazionale, Caltabellotta, Biblioteca Comunale 30 giugno — 
1 luglio 2008, ed. Giacomo Corazzol and Mauro Perani. Florence: 
Giuntina. 

Plato. 1921. Hippias majeur, Charmide, Laches, Lysis, ed. and trans. Alfred 
Croiset, in CEuvres completes, ed. Maurice Croiset et al., 13 vols. Paris: 
Les Belles Lettres. 2:1920-—64. 

Plato. 1990. Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus, trans. Harold 
North Fowler. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Plato 1997. Apology of Socrates, ed. and trans. Michael Stokes. Warminster: 
Aris and Phillips. 

Plato 2005. Phaedrus, trans. Christopher Rowe. London: Penguin. 

Pliny the Elder. 1967-70. Natural History, ed. H. Rackham, trans. H. 
Rackham (vols. 1-5, 9), W. H. S. Jones (vols. 6-8), and D. E. Eichholz 
(vol. 10), 10 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Plotinus. 1966-88. Enneads, trans. Arthur Hilary Armstrong, Paul Henry, 
and Hans-Rudolf Schwyzer, 7 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 

Plutarch. 1970. On Isis and Osiris [De Iside et Osiride], ed. with intro., 
trans., and commentary by J. Gwyn Griffiths. Cardiff: University of Wales 
Press. 

Poliziano, Angelo. 1978. Commento inedito alle Selve di Stazio, ed. Lucia 
Cesarini Martinelli. Florence: Sansoni. 

Porphyry. 1977—. De l'abstinence [French and Greek], ed. Jean Bouffartigue 
and Michel Patillon, trans. Jean Bouffartigue, 3 vols. Paris: Les Belles 
Lettres. 

Pozzo, G. M. 1957. “Filolao.” In Enciclopedia filosofica, 4 vols. Venice: 
Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale. 2:390. 

Proclus. 1873. In primum Euclidis Elementorum librum commentarii, ed. 
Gotfried Friedlein. Leipzig: Teubner. 

Proclus. 1968—. Théologie platonicienne, ed. Henri Dominique Saffrey and 
Leendert Gerrit Westerink, 5 vols. Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Proclus 1970. A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements, ed. 
Glen Morrow. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 

Pseudo-Dionysius. 1987. The Complete Works, trans. Colum Luibheid. New 
York: Paulist Press. 

Purnell, Frederick, Jr. 1971. Jacopo Mazzoni and His Comparison of Plato 
and Aristotle. PhD dissertation. New York: Columbia University. 

Purnell, Frederick, 1986. “The Theme of Philosophic Concord and the 
Sources of Ficino”s Platonism.” In Marsilio Ficino e il ritorno di Platone. 
Studi e documenti, ed. Gian Carlo Garfagnini, 2 vols. Florence: Olschki. 
391-415. 

Quaquarelli, Leonardo and Zita Zanardi, eds. 2005. Pichiana: Bibliografia 
delle edizioni e degli studi. Florence: Olschki. 

Raspanti, Antonino. 1991. Filosofia, teologia, religione. L*unita della 
visione in Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Palermo: Edi Oftes. 

Recanati, Menahem. 2008. Commentary on the Daily Prayers: Flavius 
Mithridates” Latin Translation, the Hebrew Text, and an English Version, 
ed. Giacomo Corazzol, 2 vols. Turin: Nino Aragno Editore. 

Reinhardt, Heinrich J. F. 1989. Freiheit zu Gott. Der Grundgedanke des 
Systematikers Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Weinheim: VCH. 

Reinhardt, Heinrich J. F. 1994. “De illis Pici vestigiis quae in regno 
theologiae [...] supersunt.” Vivens homo 5, no. 2: 269-98. 

Reuchlin, Johann. 1993. De arte cabalistica, trans. Martin Goodman and 
Sarah Goodman, intro. G. Lloyd Jones. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press. 

Riva, Massimo. 2008. “Dignita ed enigmi del post-umano.” Annali di 
Italianistica 26:333-52. 

Rombach, Ursula. 1991. Vita activa und vita contemplativa bei Cristoforo 
Landino. Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner. 

Rossi, Paolo. 1974. Francesco Bacone dalla magia alla scienza. Nuova 
edizione riveduta e ampliata. Turin: Einaudi. 

Roth, Catherine. 2002. “Mageia.” In Suda on Line, ed. David Whitehead et 
al. <http://www.stoa.org/sol> [14 July 2002]. 

Roulier, Fernand. 1989. Jean Pic de la Mirandole (1463-1494), umaniste, 
philosophe et théologien. Geneva: Slatkine. 

Ruggieri, Giuseppe. 2007. La verita crocifissa. Il pensiero cristiano di fronte 
all'alterita. Rome: Carocci. 

Schindler, Alfred. 1996. “Huldrych Zwingli e Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola.” In Dalltaccademia neoplatonica fiorentina anna Riforma, 
Celebrazioni del V centenario della morte di Lorenzo il Magnifico, 

Convegno di studio, Firenze, Palazzo Strozzi, 30 ottobre 1992. Florence: 
Olschki. 51-65. 

Schmitt, Charles B. 1965. “Gianfrancesco Pico's Attitude toward His 
Uncle.” In L*opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella 
storia dell?'Umanesimo. Convegno internazionale (Mirandola: 15-18 
settembre 1965). Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento. 
305-13. 

Schmitt, Charles B. 1970. “Prisca Theologia e Philosophia Perennis: due 
temi del Rinascimento italiano e la loro fortuna.” In Il pensiero italiano 
del Rinascimento e il tempo nostro, Atti del V Convegno Internazionale 
del Centro di Studi Umanistici (Montepulciano, Palazzo Tarugi, 8-13 
agosto 1968), ed. Giovannangiola Tarugi. Florence: Olschki. 211-36. 

Scholem, Gershom. 1941. “Merkabah Mysticism and Jewish Gnosis.” In 
Gershom Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. Jerusalem: 
Schocken. 66-69. 

Scholem, Gershom. 1971-72. “Metatron [Matatron].” In Encyclopaedia 
Judaica, ed. Cecil Roth and Geoffrey Wigoder, 16 vols. Jerusalem: Keter; 
New York: Macmillan. 11:1443-46. 

Scholem, Gershom 1979. “Considérations sur l'histoire des débuts de la 
Kabbale Chrétienne.” In Kabbalistes Chrétiens. Paris: A. Michel. 19-46. 

Scholem, Gershom ed. 1980. Das Buch Bahir: Ein Schriftdenkmal aus der 
Frúhzeit der Kabbala auf Grund der kritischen Neuausgabe von Gerhard 
Scholem. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 

Secret, Francois. 1965. “Nouvelles précisions sur Flavius Mithridates maítre 
de Pic de la Mirandole et traducteur de commentaires de Kabbale.” In 
L”Opera e il Pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella Storia 
dell?'Umanesimo. Convegno internazionale (Mirandola: 15-18 settembre 
1963, 2 vols. Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul Rinascimento. 
2:169-87. 

Semprini, Giovani. 1936. La filosofia di Pico della Mirandola. Milan: 
Libreria Lombarda. 

Seneca, Lucius Anneus. 1965. Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales, ed. L. D. 
Reynolds. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Shakir, M. H., trans. 1983. The Holy Qur*an. New York: Tahrike Tarsile 
Qur?an. <http://www.hti.umich.edu/k/koran/index.html> [cited 30 June 
2006]. 

Simplicius. 1907. In Aristotelis Categorias commentarium, ed. Karl 
Kalbfleisch. Berlin: Reimeri. 

Soggin, J. Alberto et al. 2002. Storia d*Israele: Introduzione alla storia 
d'Israele e Giuda dalle origini alla rivolta di Bar Kochba, Seconda 
edizione interamente rifatta e aggiornata. Brescia: Paideia. 

Sudduth, Michael. 2008. “Pico della Mirandola”s Philosophy of Religion.” 
In Pico della Mirandola: New Essays, ed. Michael V. Dougherty. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 61-80. 

Synesius. 1992. I sogni, ed. Davide Susanetti. Bari: Adriatica. 

Tamani, Giuliano. 1997. “I libri ebraici di Pico della Mirandola.” In 
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: Convegno internazionale di studi (1494— 
1994). Mirandola, 4-8 ottobre 1994, ed. Gian Carlo Garfagnini, 2 vols. 
Florence: Olschki. 2:491-530. 

Tatian. 1982. Oratio ad Graecos and Fragments, ed. Molly Wittaker. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Tertullian. 1947. De anima, ed. Jan Hendrik Waszink. Amsterdam: 
Meulenhoff. 

Tertullian. 1990. Thesaurus linguae latinae: Index librorum scriptorum 
inscriptionum ex quibus exempla afferuntur. Leipzig: Teubner. 

Timaios of Locri. 1985. On the Nature of the World and the Soul, ed. T. H. 
Tobin. Chico, Calif.: Scholars Press. 

Toussaint, Stéphane. 1989. Le formes de l'invisible: Essai sull'ineffabilité au 
Quattrocento. Lausanne: L*'Age d'Homme. 

Toussaint, Stéphane. 1995. L*esprit du Quattrocento. Pic de la Mirandole: 
De l'Etre et de 1'Un €: Résponses a Antonio Cittadini. Paris: Honoré 

Champion. 

Toussaint. Stéphane. 1998. “Giovanni Pico e il Picus: un mito per la teologia 
poetica.” In Giovanni e Gianfrancesco Pico. L*opera e la fortuna di due 
studenti ferraresi, ed. Patrizia Castelli. Florence: Olschki. 3-15. 

Valcke, Louis. 1989. “Humanisme et scolastique. Le “conflit des deux 
cultures? chez Jean Pic de la Mirandole.” Recherche de théologie ancienne 
et médiéval 56:164-99. 

Valcke, Louis. 2005. Pic de la Mirandole: Une itinéraire philosophique. 
Paris: Les Belles Lettres. 

Valenziani, Enrichetta. 1950. “Les incunables de Pic de la Mirandole. 
Contribution a une bibliographie.” In Pensée Humaniste et tradition 
chrétienne aux XV* et XVI" siecles, ed. Henri Bédarida. Paris: Boivin. 
333-38. 

Varemne, Jean. 1966. Zarathushtra et la tradition mazdéenne. Paris: Editions 
du Seuil. 

Vasoli, Cesare. 1977. “Giovanni Nesi tra Donato Acciaiuoli and Girolamo 
Savonarola.” Cesare Vasoli, I miti e gli astri. Naples: Guida. 51-128. 

Vasoli, Cesare. 1985. “De Nicolas de Kues et Jean Pic de la Mirandole á 
Jean Bodin: trois “colloques.”” In Jean Bodin. Actes du Colloque 
Interdisciplinaire d'Angers, 24 au 27 Mai 1984, 2 vols. Angers: Presses de 
Université d'Angers. 253—75. 

Vasoli, Cesare 1991. “Dalla “pace della fede” alla “concordia.”” In Cesare 
Vasoli, Tra “maestri,” umanisti e teologi: Studi Quattrocenteschi. 
Florence: Le Lettere. 93-119. 

Vasoli, Cesare 1999. “Marsilio Ficino e la dignitas hominis.” In Cesare 
Vasoli, Quasi sit Deus: Studi su Marsilio Ficino. Lecce: Conte. 74-89. 

Vasoli, Cesare 2003. “Gli studi di Eugenio Garin su Giovanni Pico della 
Mirandola.” In Eugenio Garin: Il percorso storiografico di un maestro del 
Novecento, Giornata di studio, Prato, Biblioteca Roncioniana, 4 maggio 
2002, ed. Felicita Audisio and Alessandro Savorelli. Florence: Le Lettere. 
65-92. 

Vickers, Brian, Ed. 1991. Arbeit, Musse, Meditation: Studies in the Vita 
activa and Vita contemplativa. Ziirich: Verlag der Fachvereine; Stuttgart: 
Teubner. 

Virgil. 1986. Eclogues. Georgics. Aeneid 1-6, trans. H. R. Fairclough. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Virgil. 1990. Georgics, ed. R. A. B. Mynors. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Walker, D. P. 1956. “The Prisca Theologia in France.” Journal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 17:204-59. 

Walker, D. P. 1972. The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism 
from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 
University Press. 

Walzer, Richard. 1967. “Al-Kindi.” In Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Paul 
Edwards et al., 8 vols. New York: Macmillan. 4:340. 

Wellmann, E. 1893-1978. “Aglaophamos.” In Paulys Realencyclopádie der 
classischen Altertumswissenschaften, ed. August Friedrich von Pauly et 
al., 83 vols. Stuttgart: Druckenmiiller. 1, pt.1: 824. 

Widmanstetter, Johann Albrecht et al. 1555. Liber sacrosancti Evangelii de 
Tesu Christo Domino € Deo nostro. Vienna: Zimmermann. 

Wind, Edgar. 1965. “Porus Consilii Filius (Notes on the Orphic *Counsels of 
Night”).” In L*Opera e il Pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola nella 
Storia dell'Umanesimo. Convegno internazionale (Mirandola: 15-18 
settembre 1963, 2 vols. Florence: Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul 
Rinascimento. 2:197-203. 

Wind, Edgar. 1968. Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance. New York: Barnes 
and Noble. 

Wind, Edgar 1983. The Eloquence of Symbols: Studies in Humanist Art. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Wirszubski, Chaim. 1989. Pico della Mirandola' Encounter with Jewish 
Mysticism. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Wolfson, Eliot R. 1995. Along the Path: Studies in Kabbalistic Myth, 

Symbolism, and Hermeneutics. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 

Wolter, Allan B. 1967. “Roger Bacon.” In Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. 
Paul Edwards et al., 8 vols. New York: Macmillan. 1:240-41. 

Yates, Frances Amelia. 1979. The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Yates, Frances Amelia. 2002. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, 
intro. J. B. Trapp. London: Routledge. 

Zambelli, Paola. 1991. L?'ambigua natura della magia. Filosofi, streghe, riti 
nel Rinascimento. Milan: Il Saggiatore. 

Zambelli, Paola. 1995. L*apprendista stregone. Astrologia, cabala e arte 
lulliana in Pico della Mirandola e seguaci. Venice: Marsilio. 

Index of Names 

Abaris the Hyperborean 232, 233 

“Abd-Alláh b. al Tamir 65 

Abdalla Sarracenus (Abdallah the Saracen) 65, 66, 108, 109 
Abraham 90 

Abraham ibn Ezra 265 

Abu Mashar (Abumasar) 224, 225 

Abulafia, Abraham 74, 102, 104 

Abulgal 17 

Adam 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 102 

Aglaophamos 222, 223 

Agli, Pellegrino 90, 165, 167 

Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius 43 
Alan of Lille 121 

Albeck, Chanoch 261 

Alberti, Leon Battista 257 

Albertus Magnus 57, 204, 205, 212, 213 

Alcuin of York 251 

Alemanno, Yohanan 42, 65, 100, 103 
Alexander of Aphrodisias 206, 207 

Alexander the Great 259 

Al-Farabi 206, 207 

Al-Kindi 225, 242, 243 

Alighieri, Dante 39, 40, 66, 73, 85, 119, 133, 187 
Allen, Michael J. B. 121, 159, 163, 165, 169 
Ammianus Marcellinus 257 

Ammonius 17, 206, 207 

Andreatta, Michela 65 

Aphrodite 115, 165 

Apollo 125, 149, 165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 233, 257 
Apollonius of Tyana 227, 238, 239 

Apuleius 133, 195, 227, 237, 239 

123, 
215, 

121, 
278, 

Z2ra 

101, 
145, 
227, 

Aquilon, Pierre 46 

Aristeas of Proconnesus 233 

Aristotle 20, 21, 24, 27, 38, 39, 40, 43, 62, 73, 86, 95, 96, 97, 99, 103, 
133, 151, 153, 189, 192, 193, 199, 201, 202, 203, 207, 216, 217, 218, 
222, 223, 243, 258, 259, 276 

Armstrong, Arthur H. 243 

Arnobius of Sicca 145 

Asclepius 108, 109, 124, 125, 147 

Augustine of Hippo (Saint) 66, 79, 80, 81, 82, 85, 86, 93, 102, 105, 
139, 143, 151, 157, 178, 179, 187, 197, 214, 215, 218, 219, 268, 269, 
273 

Avempace (Ibn Bájja) 206, 207 

Avenzoar of Babylon 224, 225 

Averroes (Ibn Rushd) 17, 38, 39, 84, 97, 99, 206, 207, 218, 219, 225, 

Avicenna (Ibn-Sina) 97, 206, 207, 218, 219 

Bacchelli, Franco 17, 34, 273 

Bacchus 166, 167, 172, 173 

Bacon, Roger 242, 243 

Barbaro, Ermolao 39, 54, 141, 195, 219, 227, 255 

Basil of Caesarea (Saint) 139 

Bate of Malines, Henry 59 

Bausi, Francesco 5, 16, 19, 35, 46, 51, 54, 63, 67, 73, 74, 91, 93, 98, 
104. 105, 109, 111, 113, 117, 121, 125, 125.127, 131, 193, 139, 141, 
151, 161, 163, 169, 171, 175, 179, 181, 183, 187, 191, 193, 195, 199, 
247.253, 4595, 2907, 295 

Bede (the Venerable) 87 

Beffa, B. 273 

Beierwaltes, Werner 55 

Bellanti, Luca 43 

Benedict, Nicolas 47 

Benivieni, Domenico 18, 24 

Benivieni, Girolamo 10, 19, 24, 28, 29, 33, 35, 40, 41, 42, 73, 169 
Bentivoglio, Costanza 12-13 

Berengar of Poitiers 83 

Bernard of Clarivaux (Saint) 72, 78, 79, 83, 85, 157, 251 

Beroaldo, Filippo 105 

Berti, Domenico 11 

Bidez, Joseph 175, 233, 239 

Bietenholz, Peter 48, 49 

Boccaccio, Giovanni 119, 187, 255 

Bodin, Jean 43 

Bodnár, István 231 

Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus 55, 71, 153, 218, 219 

Boiardo, Giulia 30, 37 

Bonaventure (Saint) 79, 84, 87, 151 

Borghesi, Francesco 3, 6, 61 

Bori, Pier Cesare 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 17, 20, 23, 28, 35, 36, 46, 53, 54, 59, 
60, 61, 63, 64, 67, 70, 75, 92, 93, 94, 98, 101, 105, 113, 121, 123, 133, 135, 
137, 151, 155, 183, 189, 191, 193, 213 

Botticelli, Sandro 27 

Boulnois, Olivier 203, 213, 217, 223, 229 

Bracciolini, Poggio 257 

Buck, August 71, 137, 199 

Buondelmonti, Cristoforo 257 

Burckhardt, Andreas 48 

Burckhardt, Jacob 32, 53 

Busi, Giulio 65, 161, 269 

Butler, Harold E. 239 

Buzzetti, Dino 3, 6, 62 

Calcidius 137, 227 
Callimachus 19, 20 

Calypso 130, 131 

Camillo, Giulio 255, 257 
Campanini, Saverio 65, 72, 269 
Cantimori, Delio 64 

Caponigri, Robert 51 

Carducci, Filippo 13 

Carena, Carlo 195, 199, 205, 207, 211 
Carmichael, Douglas 135 
Casini, Paolo 171 

Cassirer, Ernst 32, 52, 53, 75 

Cassuto, Umberto 207, 273 

Castellli, Patrizia 257 

Cavalcanti, Giovanni 159 

Celenza, Christopher 125, 173 

Ceretti, Felice 30 

Chaignet, Antelme- Édouard 247 

Charles VIII 44 

Charondas 238, 239 

Cicero, Marcus Tullius 111, 119, 135, 145, 165, 171, 183, 185, 187, 
189, 199, 201, 205, 219 

Cicognani, Bruno 50, 109, 193, 195, 207, 223, 225 

Clement VIII 253 

Clement of Alexandria 74, 87, 159, 231, 257 

Colonna, Francesco 257 

Columella, Lucius Junius Moderatus 

Copenhaver, Brian 9, 52, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 102, 104, 123, 125, 135, 
147 

Corazzol, Giacomo 65 

Corcella, Aldo 

Cordier, Johannes 41 

Cornelius Celsus 197 

Corneus, Andrea 20, 22, 24, 27, 28, 31, 34, 35, 36, 93, 109, 183, 185, 
187, 189, 191, 197 

Cortesi, Alessandro 22 

Craven, William G. 32 

Croiset, Alfred 233 

Cullman, Karl 49 

Cumont, Franz 175, 233, 239 

Cyriac of Ancona 257 

Cyrus II the Great 260, 261 

da Casale Maggiore, Cristoforo 13 
Dactylus Hebreus 104, 272, 273 
da Diacceto, Francesco 59 

da Fontaneto, Guglielmo 47 
Dancy, R. M. 

Daniélou, Jean 86 

Damascius 210, 211, 247 

Damasus 269 

Damigeron 238, 239 

Dardanus 238, 239 

David 110, 111, 178, 179 

de Aigre, Johannis 47 

d'Este, Ercole I 11, 14, 22 

de León-Jones, Karen 3, 6 

De Lubac, Henri 11, 23, 33, 53, 72, 74, 111, 121, 125 

de Miroldo, Marco 41 

del Medigo, Elia 38, 39, 103 

Del Piazzo, M. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 

del Tuppo, Francesco 4 

della Stufa, Luigi 12, 13 

Della Torre, Arnaldo 273 

Democritus 165, 223, 230, 231, 239 

Des Places, Édouard 165, 233, 247 

d'Este, Ercole I 11, 14, 22 

Dies, Auguste 163 

Di Napoli, Giovanni 33, 53, 86 

Diodorus Siculus 233, 257 

Diogenes Laertius 171, 213, 223, 239, 257, 273 

Dionisotti, Carlo 27 

Dionysius II of Syracuse 258, 259 

di Piacenza, Girolamo 13 

Dodds, E. R. 233 

Dorez, Leon 16, 20, 28, 30, 169 

Dórrie, Heinrich 231 

Dougherty, Michael V. 54 

Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques 175 

Dulles, Avery 33, 155 

Duns Scotus, John 27, 56, 57, 84, 97, 99, 200, 201, 205, 212, 213, 218, 
219 

Dupuis, Jacques 61 

Empedocles 29, 86, 126, 127, 131, 148, 149, 151, 230, 231, 243 
Emser, Hieronymus 47 

Ennius 185 

Enoch 74, 75, 102, 126, 127 
Ephrem the Syrian (Saint) 139 
Epictetus 207 

Erasmus, Desiderius 49 

Eriugena, John Scotus 121, 161, 163 
Eros 68, 69, 70, 73, 91, 115, 165 
Esdras 100, 101, 252, 253, 255, 260, 261, 264, 265 
Eudoxus 213, 238, 239 

Eugenius III 78 

Eusebius of Caesarea 151, 213 
Euler, Walter 53, 58 

Ezra 100, 104 

Faelli, Benedetto 3, 46, 47 

Faggin, Giuseppe 219 

Fallico, Arturo B. 51 

Farmer, Stephen Alan 6, 17, 18, 19, 46, 54, 69, 73, 74, 75, 77, 80, 82, 
44, 95, TÚL, 105, 111, 123, 125, 133, 137, 139, 148, 151, 153, 159, 161, 
175, 20L, 205,207, 211.215, 217, 218, 221, 220, 227, 295 297, 20L, 209, 
269, 273, 275 

Fazio, Bartolomeo 111 

Festugiere, A. J. 92, 163 

Ficino, Marsilio 10, 16, 17, 22, 24, 26, 27, 33, 34, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 
49, 54, 58, 59, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72, 73, 77, 84, 90, 91, 92, 103, 109, 111, 
115, 119, 121, 123, 125, 151,135, 159, 163, 165, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 
217, 223 

Fitt, Mary 

Fornaciari, Paolo Edoardo 125 

Francis of Meyronnes 57, 204, 205, 212, 213 

Fukuyama, Francis 9 

Gabriel (archangel) 90, 180, 181 
Gaffarel, Jacques 22 

Galen 225 

Garcia, Pedro 41 

Garin, Eugenio 9, 16, 22, 32, 33, 46, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60, 61, 64, 73, 
103, 111, 119, 121, 123, 127, 135, 147, 195, 213, 227, 261 

Gellius, Aulus 185, 215, 227, 259, 275 

Gemistus Pletho, George 58, 59, 111, 133, 163, 175 

Gentile, Giovanni 32, 52, 67, 68 

Gentile, Sebastiano 165, 175 

Gerhoh of Reichersberg 159 

Gersonides 65 

Gigante, Marcello 

Giles of Rome 57, 204, 205, 212, 213 

Ginzburg, Carlo 27 

Gorgias of Leontini 198, 199, 201 

Grafton, Anthony 8, 101 

Green, Arthur 153 

Gregory of Nyssa 83, 121, 159 

Gregory the Great 79, 137, 143, 145, 159, 181, 251 

Gregory, Tullio 59 

Grévin, Benoít 65 

Griffiths, Alan H. 233 

Grimani, Domenico 74 

Guarini, Battista 37 

Guidoni, Aldobrandino 11, 12, 13, 14 

Habermas, Jirgen 9 

Hankins, James 59, 60 

Henricopetri, Sebastian 49 

Henry of Ghent 57, 84, 204, 205, 212, 213 

Heraclitus of Ephesus 30, 153 

Hercules 151, 162, 163 

Hermes Trismegistus (Mercurius) 73, 108, 109, 121, 123, 125, 147, 
2158. 216,217 

Hermias 210, 211 

Hermippus 213, 238, 239 

Herodotus 149, 233, 275 

Herold, Johannes 48 

Hesiod 171 

Hieronymus, Frank 49 

Hilary of Poitiers (Saint) 143, 252, 253 
Hippolytus 239 

Hoenig, Sidney B. 

Homer 125, 131, 152, 153, 169, 238, 239 
Horace 197, 201, 203 

Horapollo 257 

Hunink, Vincent 239 

Huxley, G. L. 

lamblichus 121, 143, 155, 171, 173, 210, 211, 223, 231, 239, 257, 272, 
273 

Idel, Moshe 75, 149, 179 

Innocent VIII 5, 10, 19, 29, 35, 41, 63, 264, 265 

Isidore of Seville 131, 143, 145, 151 

Jacob 142, 143, 146, 147, 257 

Jayne, Sears Reynolds 165, 167 

Jeremiah 149, 180, 181 

Jerome (Saint) 72, 80, 105, 139, 143, 157, 161, 191, 268, 269 
Jesus Christ 173, 253, 258, 259, 265, 269 

Job 138, 139, 145, 148, 149, 159, 172, 173, 175, 194, 195 
John of Salisbury 121 

Josephus Flavius 

Joshua (Jesu Nave) 252, 253, 255 

Julius Caesar 195 

Kibre, Pearl 74, 83, 199, 201, 203, 207, 211, 215, 219, 223, 225, 227, 
229, 243, 245 

Knibb, Michael 127 

Knowles, David 243 

Kraut, Richard 223 

Kristeller, Paul Oskar 8, 29, 32, 52, 59, 90, 111, 151, 157 

Kronholm, Tryggve 139 

Kunitzsch, Paul 225 

Lactantius, Lucius Caecilius Firmianus 119 
Landino, Cristoforo 94, 123, 189 
Lanfredini, Giovanni 104-5 

Lauer, Hans H. 225 

Lelli, Fabrizio 65, 125, 269 

Leone, Pietro 22 

Lewy, Hans 247 

Liebert, Arthur 50 

Liverani, Mario 261 

Livermore Forbes, Elizabeth 50, 51 
Lohr, Charles 54, 64 

Lucan 151 

Lucifer 119 

Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus) 195 
Ludovici, Sergio Samek 46 

Macarius 155 

Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius 141, 157, 159, 227 
Magnavacca, Silvia 5 

Mahoney, Edward P. 59 

Maimonides 74, 82, 87, 88, 102, 104, 159 

Manetti, Giannozzo 66, 67, 71, 111, 119, 131, 137 
Marcel, Raymond 68 

Marchignoli, Saverio 3, 4, 6, 63, 98, 133, 213 
Martianus Capella 117 

Marrone, Steven 243 

Masai, Francois 175 

Mazzali, Ludovico 47 

Medici, Cosimo de” 123 

Medici, Lorenzo de” 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 38, 39, 40, 43, 71, 104 
Medici, Giuliano di Mariotto de” 10, 11, 12, 14, 40 
Medici, Margherita de” 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 22, 40, 93 
Melloni, Giorgio 3, 6 

Melozzo da Forli 265 

Merula, Giorgio 30 

Meyer, Michael J. 9 

Michael (archangel) 90, 180, 181, 253, 255 

Millas, J. M. 225 

Miller, Paul J. W. 51, 135 

Mithridates, Flavius (Guglielmo Raimondo de Moncada) 13, 15, 16, 
22, 39, 65, 77, 100, 103, 104, 109, 125, 131, 133, 149, 153, 161, 175, 177, 
201, 207, 217, 265, 269 

Mohammed 109, 130, 131 

Mohammed of Toledo 17 

Monfasani, John 59 

Monisart, Giovanni 41 

Montanari, Franco 

More, Thomas 50 

Moretus, Antonio 47 

Moses 80, 81, 82, 83, 86, 87, 89, 101, 103, 104, 112, 113, 121, 131, 
138, 139, 143, 158, 159, 160, 161, 163, 166, 167, 252, 253, 257, 259, 260, 
261 

Nardi, Bruno 59 

Neoptolemus 185 

Nesi, Giovanni 4, 34, 125 

Nicholas of Cusa 54, 62, 74, 109 
Nicolacci da Marciano, Giovanni 13 
Nogarola, Lorenzo 37 

Nonius Marcellus 171 

Olympiodorus 210, 211 

Onofri, Laura 

Ordelaffi da Forli, Pino 37 

Origen 54, 69, 72, 74, 86, 100, 159, 252, 253, 255, 257, 258, 259 
Oromazes (Oromasius) 232, 233 

Orpheus 272, 273, 274, 275 

Osiris 148, 149, 165 

Osthanes 238, 239 

Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) 76, 197 

Owen, Arthur S. 239 

Pallas 140, 141, 186, 187, 192, 193 
Panofsky, Erwin 26, 27 

Pape, W. 247 

Papio, Michael 3, 4, 6, 7, 135, 193 

Patrizi, Francesco 133 

Paul (Saint) 17, 69, 80, 83, 89, 91, 102, 103, 105, 140, 141, 157, 159, 
167, 173, 256, 257, 268, 269 

Perani, Mauro 65 

Perugino, Baldo 19, 33-34 

Pesce, Mauro 103, 259 

Peter Abelard 83, 84, 139 

Peter Lombard 79, 80, 85 

Petit, Jean 47 

Petrarca, Francesco (Petrarch) 39, 40, 48, 71, 94, 187 

Petri, Heinrich 45, 48, 49, 133 

Philip of Opus 223 

Philippus de Harveng 189 

Philo of Alexandria 54, 80, 87, 139, 143, 153, 159, 163 

Philolaus 223 

Philoponus, John (John the Grammarian) 38, 218, 219 

Philostratus of Athens 199, 239 

Pico della Mirandola, Antonmaria (Anton Maria) 30, 37, 44 

Pico della Mirandola, Galeotto 30, 37 

Pico della Mirandola, Caterina 30, 37 

Pico della Mirandola, Gianfrancesco (Giovan Francesco) 3, 16, 23, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 42, 43, 46, 48, 50, 92, 135, 153, 163, 189, 201 

Pico della Mirandola, Lucrezia 30, 37 

Pico Project 3, 4, 5, 7, 63, 135 

Piemontese, Angelo Michele 16, 65, 109 

Pignagnoli, Fabio Sante 205, 217, 223 

Pio da Carpi, Lionello 37 

Plato 24, 27, 39, 42, 43, 49, 50, 55, 58, 59, 62, 67, 68, 69, 71, 90, 91, 
94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 103, 137, 145, 151, 157, 159, 163, 164, 165, 167, 
170, 171, 173, 175, 181, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 202, 203, 212, 213, 
216, 217, 218, 414, 222, 223, 2248, 225, 230. 23L. 233,.20,.237, 207,295 
Ps ESAS E | 

Plautus 191 

Pliny the Elder 123, 171, 195, 229, 231, 233, 239, 247 

Plotinus 17, 39, 49, 62, 68, 69, 97, 99, 106, 117, 133, 159, 181, 210, 
211, 242, 243, 245 

Plutarch 149, 151, 153, 165, 167, 169, 171, 257 

Plutarch of Athens 211 

Poliziano, Angelo 10, 16, 20, 38, 40, 43, 133, 193, 227 

Pomponazzi, Pietro 43 

Pontano, Giovanni 43 

Porphyry 171, 210, 211, 226, 227, 231, 233, 245 

Pozzo, G. M. 223 

Priani Saisó, Ernesto 5 

Priscian 47, 123 

Proclus 69, 84, 111, 123, 125, 133, 155, 159, 210, 211, 223 

Propertius, Sextus 199 

Proteus 123, 124, 125 

Prúss, Johann 47 

Psellus, Michael 91, 133, 177, 247 

pseudo-Cyprian 47 

Pseudo-Dionysius the Aeropagite 54, 55, 67, 69, 70, 72, 73, 82, 83, 84, 
105, 137, 139, 140, 141, 149, 155, 167, 255, 258, 259, 268, 269 

Purnell, Frederik, Jr. 55, 58, 59, 60 

Pythagoras 76, 97, 100, 103, 105, 125, 170, 171, 172, 173, 197, 216, 
217, 222, 223, 230, Z3L, 239, 239, 256, 297, 272,273, 2/9 

Quaquarelli, Leonardo 46, 47, 48, 49 
Quintilian 141, 201 

Rabanus Maurus 80, 139, 145, 151, 157, 161, 251 
Ramusio, Girolamo 38 

Raphael (archangel) 90, 180, 181 

Raspanti, Antonino 53, 72, 81, 137 

Recanati, Menahem 22, 125 

Reich, Hans H. 199, 215, 217, 219, 239, 247 
Reinhardt, Heinrich 33, 53 

Reuchlin, Johann 48, 49, 103, 261, 265, 269, 273, 275, 277 
Richard of St. Victor 82, 87, 143, 157, 159 

Riva, Massimo 3, 6, 9, 193 

Roger Bacon 242, 243 

Roth, Catherine 227 

Roulier, Fernand 33, 53, 61 

Ruggieri, Giuseppe 61 

Riissel, Herbert Werner 50 

Sacchi, Bartolomeo (Platina) 265 
Salviati, Roberto 42 

Savonarola, Girolamo 34, 37, 43, 44 
Schefer, Bertrand 16 

Schindler, Alfred 64 

Schmitt, Charles 58, 59 

Scholem, Gershom 22, 127, 273 
Scoto, Girolamo 49 

Secret, Francois 201 

Semprini, Giovanni 50 

Seneca, Lucius Annaeus 68, 133, 141, 157, 179, 197, 214, 215 
Shapiro, Herman 51 

Sidonius 191, 193 

Silber, Eucharius 41 

Simplicius of Cilicia 206, 207, 218, 219 
Sixtus IV 264, 265, 269 

Socrates 174, 175, 223 

Soggin, J. Alberto 261 

Sorbelli, Tommaso 31 

Statius, Publius Papinius 123, 193 
Sudduth, Michael 61 

Suigo, Jacobino 47 

Susanetti, Davide 

Swineshead, Richard 38 

Synesius 247 

Tamani, Giuliano 74, 125, 269 

Tatian 239 

Taverna, Stefano 12, 13 

Tertullian 127 

Themistius 127, 206, 207 

Theophrastus 123, 206, 207 

Thomas Aquinas (Saint) 27, 56, 57, 72, 84, 97, 99, 137, 189, 200, 201, 
204, 205, 212, 213. 218, 219 

Timothy 195 

Titus Livius 197 

Tognon, Giuseppe 51, 109, 121, 127, 213, 217, 223, 229, 265 
Torrella, Girolamo 43 

Toussaint, Stéphane 26, 27, 61 

Trevet, Nicholas 215 

Ugolino, Taddeo 18 
Ulysses 131, 238, 239 
Uriel (archangel) 104 

Valcke, Louis 53, 163 

Valenziani, Enrichetta 46 

Valla, Lorenzo 257 

Vasoli, Cesare 34, 52, 55, 61, 64, 68 

Venus 133, 167 

Vernia, Nicoletto 38 

Veronese, Guarino 47 

Vinciguerra, Antonio (Antonius Chronicus) 272, 273 

Virgil (or Vergil: Publius Vergilius Maro) 119, 125, 147, 151, 165 
Vitali, Bernardino 47 

Waleys, Thomas (Thomas Anglicus) 215 

Walker, Daniel P. 34, 59, 163 

Wallis, Charles Glenn 50, 51, 135 

Walzer, Richard 

Waszink, Jan H. 

Wellmanmn, E. 223 

Whittaker, Molly 239 

Widmanstetter, Johann Albrecht 273 

William of Auvergne (William of Paris) 242, 243 

Wimpheling, Jakob 47 

Wind, Edgar 26, 69, 74, 92, 163 

Wirszubski, Chaim 15, 16, 22, 72, 75, 77, 82, 102, 125, 127, 133, 175, 
177, 207, 269 

Wolífson, Eliot R. 143 

Yates, Frances A. 52 

Zalmolxis (Zalmoxis) 232, 233, 236, 237 

Zambelli, Paola 15, 17, 52 

Zanardi, Zita 46, 47, 48, 49 

Zerubbabel 253, 260, 261 

Zeus 115, 191 

Zoroaster 48, 75, 100, 105, 111, 163, 165, 170, 171, 175, 176, 177, 
178, 179, 223,432, 2359, 230, 237, 239, 212,213 

Zwingli, Huldrych 64