“E. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL” 
NEW SERIES XIX 

AVERROES’ | 
TAHAFUT AL-TAHAFUT 

(The Incoherence of the Incoherence) 

TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC 
WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 
BY 

SIMON VAN DEN BERGH 

VOLUMES [AND II 

PUBLISHED AND 
DISTRIBUTED BY 
THE TRUSTEES OF THE 
“£. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL” 

AN rights reserved. No part of this book 
may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph 
or any other means without permission in 
writing from the publishers. 

© EJW Gibb Memorial Trust 1954 
Reprinted 1969 
Reprinted as one volume 1978 and 1987 
ISBN 0 906094 04 6 

Produced in association with 
Book Production Consultants, Cambridge, England 

Reprinted at the University Press, Cambridge 

THIS VOLUME 
IS ONE OF A SERIES 
PUBLISHED BY THE TRUSTEES OF 
THE “E, J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL” 

The funds of this Memorial are derived from the Interest accruing 
from a Sum of money given by the late Mrs GIBB of Glasgow, to 
perpetuate the Memory of her beloved Son 

ELIAS JOHN WILKINSON GIBB 

and to promote those researches into the History, Literature, Philosophy 
and Religion of the Turks, Persians and Arabs, to which, from his ' 
Youth upwards, until his premature and deeply lamented Death in his 
forty-fifth year, on December 5, 1901, his life was devoted. 

ON OS WG « CE a CET ob 

“ These are our works, these works our souls display; 
Behold our works when we have passed away.” 

CLERK OF THE TRUST 
P. R. Bligh, F.C.A. 
c/o Spicer and Oppenheim 
Leda House, Station Read 
Cambridge, England 

A catalogue of other publications by the Trust 
will be sent upon request. 

| VOLUME I 

PREFACE 

I wish to express my warmest thanks to the Trustees of the 
Gibb Memorial Fund for making the publication of this 
work possible, and especially to Professor Sir Hamilton 
Gibb, who asked me to undertake the work and who has not 
only read the proofs but has continually given me his interest 
and encouragement. I am also deeply indebted to Dr. R. 
Watzer, who has read the proofs, carefully checked the 
references in my notes, and composed the indexes and the 
Greek-Arabic and Arabic—Greek vocabutarics. I have also 
to thank Dr. S. M. Stern for his help in completing the 
subject-index. Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to one who 
is no longer amongst us, Father Maurice Bouyges, with- 
out whose admirable text the work could never have 
been undertaken. 

The marginal numbers in Vol. 1 refer to the text of 
Father Bauyges’s edition of the Tohafut at Tahafut 
in his Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum, vol. iii, 
Beyrouth, 1930. 

The asterisks indicate different readings from those 
to be found in Bouyges's text: cf. the Appendix, 
Vol. I, pp. 364 

CONTENTS =~ © 

(VOLUME 1} 

INTRODUCTION Poge ix 

TRANSLATION 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 
Concerning the Eternity of the World 

THE FIRST PROOF t 
THE SECOND PROOF 37 
THE THIRD PROOF 57 
THE FOURTH PROOF 58 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 
be Refutation of their Theory of the Incorruptibitity of the World and of Time and 
lotion 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 

The demonstration of their confusion in saying that God is the agent and the maker of 
the world and that the world in His product and act, and the demonstration that these 
expressions are in their system only metaphors without anp reel sense 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 
Showing that they are unable to prove the existence of a creator of the world 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 
To show their incapacity to prove God’s unity and the impossibility of tino necessary 
existents both without a cause 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 
To refute their denial of attributes 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their claim that nothing can share with the First its genus, and be differentiated 
Srom tt through a specific difference, and that with respect to its intellect the division inte 
gertus and specific difference cannot be applied to it 

THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their theory that the existence of the First is simple, namely that tt is pure 
existence and that its existence stands in relation to no quiddity and to no essence, but 
stands to necessary existence as do other deings to their guiddity 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 
To refute their proof thet the First is incorpureat 

156 

170 

186 

a2zt 

235 

24t 

viii CONTENTS 

THE TENTH DISCUSSION 

To prove their incapacity to demonstrate that the world has a ereator and a cant, and 
that in fact they are forced ta admit atheism 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 

To show the incapacity of those philosophers twho believe that the First knetwe other 
things besides its own self and that it knows the genera and te apecies in a wntipersal 
way, to prove that this is so 

THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION , AP is 
About the impotence of the philosophers to prove that God Knows Himself 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute those who affirm that God is ignorant of the individual things which are 
divided in time into present, past, and future 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their proof that heaven is an ammat moving in a circle in obedience to God 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 
To refute the theory of the philosophers about the aim which moves heaven 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute the philosophical theary that the souls of the heavens observe all the particular 
events of this world 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
THE FIRST DISCUSSION 316 
The denial of a logical necessity between cause and effect 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 333 

The impotence of the philosophers to show by demonstra- 
tive proof that the soul is @ spiritual substance 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 346 
Refutation af the philosophers’ proof for the immortality 

of the soul 
THE FOURTH DISGUSSION 359 

Concerning the philosophers' denial of bodily resurrection 

APPENDIX: Changes proposed in the Arabic Text 
INDEX of Proper Names 

(VOLUME Ir) 
NOTES 

Index of Proper Names mentioned in the Introduction and in the Notes 
Index of Subjects menUoncd in the Notes 

Some contradictions in Aristotle's System 

Arabic-Greek Index to the Notes 

Greek-Arabie Index to the Notes 

250 

255 

285 

293 

300 

gir 

INTRODUCTION 

F it may be said that Santa Maria sopra Minerva is a symbol of 
| iA European culture, it should not be forgotten that the mosque 
also was built on the Greek temple. But whereas in Christian 
Western theology there was a gradual and indirect infiltration of 
Greek, and especially Aristotelian ideas, so that it may be said that 
finally Thomas Aquinas baptized Aristotle, the impact on Islam was 
sudden, violent, and short. The great conquests by the Arabs took 
place in the seventh century when the Arabs first came into contact 
with the Hellenistic world. At that time Hellenistic culture was stil 
alive; Alexandria in Egypt, certain towns in Syria—Edessa for 
instance—were centres of Hellenistic learning, and in the cloisters of 
Syria and Mcsopotamia not only Theology was studied but Science 
and Philosophy also were cultivated. In Philosophy Aristotle was still 
‘the master of those who know’, and especially his logical works as 
interpreted by the Neoplatonic commentators were studied inten- 
sively. But also many Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean writings 
were stilt known, and also, very probably, some of the old Stoic 
concepts and problems were still alive and discussed. 

The great period of translation of Greek into Arabic, mostly 
through the intermediary of Christian Syrians, was between the 
years 750 and 850, but already before that time there was an impact 
of Greek ideas on Muhammadan theology. The first speculative 
theologians in Islam are called Mu'tazilites (from about a.D. 723), 
an exact translation of the Greek word oxsparexot (the general 
name for speculative theologians is Mutakallimun, Sadexrinot, 
dialecticians, a name often given in later Greek philosophy to the 
Stoics}). Although they form rather a heterogeneous group of thinkers 
whose theories are syncretistic, that is taken from different Greek 
sources with a preponderance of Stoic ideas, they have certain points 
in common, principally their theory, taken from the Stoics, of the 
rationality of religion (which is for them identical with Islam), of a 
daumen naturale which burns in the heart of every man, and the opti- 
mistic view of a rational God who has created the best of all 
possible worlds for the greatest good of man who occupics the central 
place in the universe. They touch upon certain difficult problems 
that were perceived by the Greeks. The paradoxes of Zeno concern- 
ing movement and the infinite divisibility of space and time hold 

x a INTRODUCTION 

their attention, and the subtle problem of the status of the non- 
existent, a problem long neglected in modern philosophy, but re- 
vived by the school of Brentano, especially by Meinong, which 
caused an endless controversy amongst the Stoics, is also much 
debated by them, 

A later generation of theologians, the Ash‘arites, named after 
A! Ash'ari, born a.p. 873, are forced by the weight of evidence to 
admit a certain irrationality in theological concepts, and their 
philosophical speculations, largely based on Stoicism, ate strongly 
mixed with Sceptical theories. They hold the middle way between 
the traditionalists who want to forbid all reasoning on religious 
matters and those who affirm that reason unaided by revelation is 
capable of attaining religious truths. Since Ghazali founds his attack 
against the philosophers on Ash‘arite principles, we may consider 
for a moment some of their theories. The difference between the 
Ash‘arite and Mu'tazilite conceptions of God cannot be better ex- 
pressed than by the following passage which is found twice in 
Ghazali (in his Golden Means of Dogmatics and his Vivification of 
Theology) and to which by tradition is ascribed the breach between 
Al Ash‘ari and the Mur tazilites. 

‘Let us. imagine a child and a grown-up in Heaven who both died in 
the True Faith, but the grown-up has a higher place than the child. And 
the child will ask God, “Why did you give that man a higher place?” 
And God will answer, ‘He has done many good works." Then the child 
will say, ‘Why did you let me dic so soon so that 1 was prevented from 
doing good?” God will answer, “I knew that you would grow up a sinner, 
therefore it was better that you should die a child.” Then a cry goes up 
from the damned in the depths of Hell, “Why, O Lord, did you not let us 
die before we became sinners?” ” 

Ghazali adds to this: ‘the imponderable decisions of God cannot be 
weighed by the scales of reason and Mu‘ tazilism’. 

According to the Ash‘arites, therefore, right and wrong are human 
concepts and cannot be applied to God. ‘Cui mali nihil est nec esse 
potest quid huic opus est dilectu bonorum et malorum?’ is the argu- 
ment of the Sceptic Carneades expressed by Cicero (De natura deorum, 
iii. 15. 38}. It is a dangerous theory for the theologians, because it 
severs the moral relationship between God and man and therefore it 
cannot be and is not consistently applied by the Ash‘arites and 
Ghazali. 

The Asb‘arites have taken over from the Stoics their epistemology, 
their sensationalism, their nominalism, their materialism. Some 

INTRODUCTION xi 

details of this epistemology are given by Ghazali in his autobiography : 
the clearness of representations is the criterion for their truth; the 
soul at birth is a blank on which the sensations are imprinted; at the 
seventh year of a man’s life he acquires the rational knowledge of 
right and wrong. Stoic influence on Islamic theology is overwhelm- 
ing. Of Stoic origin, for instance, are the division of the acts of man 
into five classes; the importance placed on the motive of an act when 
judging its moral character; the theory of the two categories of 
substance and accident (the two other categories, condition and 
relation, are not considered by the Muslim theologians to pertain 
to reality, since they are subjective); above all, the fatalism and de- 
terminism in Istam which is often regarded as a feature of the Oriental 
soul, In the Koran, however, there is no definite theory about free 
will. Muhammad was not a philosopher. The definition of will in 
man given by the Ash‘arites, as the instrument of unalterable fate 
and the unalterable law of Ged, is Stoic both in idea and expression. 
(I have discussed several other theories in my notes.) 

Sometimes, however, the theologians prefer to the Stoic view the 
view of their adversarics. For instance, concerning the discussion 
between Neoplatonism and Stoicism whether there is a moral obliga- 
tion resting on God and man relative to animals, Islam answers with 
the Neoplatonists in the affirmative (Spinoza, that Stoic Cartesian, will 
give, in his £thica, the negative Stoic answer). 

The culmination of the philosophy of Islam was in the tenth and 
eleventh centuries. This was the age also of the great theologians. It 
was with Greck ideas, taken in part from Stoics and Secptics, that 
the theologians tried to refute the ideas of the philosophers, The 
philosophers themselves were followers of Aristotle as seen through 
the eyes of his Neoplatonic commentators. This Neoplatonic inter- 
pretation of Aristotle, although it gives a mystical character to his 
philosophy which is alien to it, has a certain justification in the fact 
that there are in his philosophy many clements of the theory of his 
master Plato, which lend themselves to a Neoplatonic conception. 
Plotinus regarded himself as nothing but the commentator of Plato 
and Aristotle, and in his school the identity of view of these two great 
masters was affirmed. In the struggle in Islam between Philosophy 
and Theology, Philosophy was defeated, and the final blow to the 
philosophers was given in Ghazali’s attack on Philosophy which in 
substance is incorporated in Averroés’ book and which he tries to 
tefute, 

xii INTRODUCTION 

Ghazali, who was born in the middle of the eleventh century, is 
one of the most remarkable and at the same time most enigmatic 
figures in Islam. Like St. Augustine, with whom he is often compared, 
he has told us in his autobiography how he had to pass through a 
period of despair and scepticism until God, not through demonstra- 
tion but by the light of His grace, had given him peace and certitude. 
This divine light, says Ghazali, is the basis of most of our knowledge 
and, he adds, profoundly, one cannot find proofs for the premisses 
of knowledge; the premisses are there and one looks for the reasons, 
but they cannot be found. Certitude is reached, he says, not through 
scholastic reasoning, not through philosophy, but through mystical 
illumination and the mystical way of life. Stil! Ghazali is not only 
a mystic, he is a great dogmatist and moralist. He is regarded as 
Islam’s greatest theologian and, through some of his books, as a 
defender of Orthodoxy. It is generally believed that the Tahafut, the 
-book in which he criticizes Philosophy, was written in the period of 
his doubts. The book, however, is a Defence of Faith, and though it 
is more negative than positive, for it aims to destroy and not to con- 
struct, it is based on the theories of his immediate predecessors, many 
of whose arguments he reproduces. Besides, he promises in this book 
to give in another book the correct dogmatic answers, The treatise 
to which he seems to refer does not contain anything but the old 
theological articles of faith and the Ash‘arite arguments and solu- 
tions, But we should not lock for consistency in Ghazali; necessarily 
his mysticism comes into conflict with his dogmatism and he him- 
self has been strongly influenced by the philosophers, especially 
by Avicenna, and in many works he comes very near to the Neo- 
platonic theories which he criticizes. On the whole it would seem to 
me that Ghazali in his attack on the philosophers has taken from the 
vast arsenal of Ash‘arite dialectical arguments those appropriate to 
the special point under discussion, regardless of whether they are 
destructive also of some of the views he holds. 

Averroés was the last great philosopher in Islam in the twelfth 
century, and is the most scholarly and scrupulous commentator of 
Aristotle. He is far better known in Europe than in the Orient, 
where few of his works are still in existence and where he had no 
influence, he being the last great philosopher of his culture. Renan, 
who wrote a big book about him, Averrods et ? Averroisme, had never 
seen a line of Arabic by him, Lately some of his works have been 
edited in Arabic, for instance his Tahafut af Tahafut, in a most 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

exemplary manner. Averroés’ influence on European thought 
during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance has been immense. 

The name of Ghazali’s book in which he attacks the philosophers 
is Tahafut al Falasifa, which has been translated by the medieval 
Latin translator as Destructio Philosophorum. The name of Averroés’ 
book is Tahafut al Tahafut, which is rendered as Destructio Destruc- 
tionts (or destructionum), This rendering is surely not exact. The word 
‘Tahafut’ has been translated by modern scholars in different ways, 
and the title of Ghazali’s book has been given as the breakdown, the 
disintegration, or the incoherence, of the philosophers. The exact 
title of Averroés’ book would be The Jncoherence of the Incoherence. 

In the Reoue des Deux Mondes there was an article published in 1895 
by Ferdinand Brunetiére, ‘La Banqueroute de la Science’, in which he 
tried to show that the solutions by science, and especially by biology, 
of fundamental problems, solutions which were in opposition to the 
dogmas taught by the Church, were primitive and unreasonable. 
Science had promised us to eliminate mystery, but, Brunetiére said, 
not only had it not removed it but we saw clearly that it would never 
do so. Science had been able neither to solve, nor even to pose, 
the questions that mattered: those that touched the origin of man, 
the laws of his conduct, his future destiny. What Brunetiére tried 
to do, to defend Faith by showing up the audacity of Science in 
its attempt to solve uttimate problems, is exactly the same as Ghazali 
tried to do in relation to the pretensions of the philosophers of 
his time who, having based themselves on reason alone, tried to 
solve all the problems concerning God and the world. Therefore a 
suitable titte for his book might perhaps be ‘The Bankruptcy of 
Philosophy’. 

In the introduction to his book Ghazali says that a group of people 
hearing the famous names Socrates, Hippocrates, Plato, and Aris- 
totle, and knowing what they had attained in such sciences as 
Geometry, Logic, and Physics, have left the religion of their fathers 
in which they were brought up to follow the philosophers. The 
theories of the philosophers are many, but Ghazali will attack only 
one, the greatest, Aristatle; Aristotle, of whom it is said that he re- 
futed ail his predecessors, even Plato, excusing himself by saying 
‘amicus Plato, amica veritas, sed magis amica veritas’. | may add that 
this well-known saying, which is a variant of a passage in Plato's 
Phaedo and in Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, is found in this form first 
in Arabic, One of the first European authors who has it in this form 

xiv INTRODUCTION 

is Cervantes (Don Quijote, ii, c. 52). I quote this saying—Ghazali 
adds—to show that there is no surety and evidence in Philosophy. 
According to Ghazali, the philosophers claim for their metaphysical 
proofs the same evidence as is found in Mathematics and Logic. But 
alt Philosophy is based on supposition and opinion. If Metaphysics 
had the same evidence as Mathematics all philosophers would 
agree just as well in Philosophy as in Mathematics. According 
to him the translators of Aristotle have often misunderstood or 
changed the meaning and the different texts have caused diffcrent 
controversies. Ghazali considers Farabi and Avicenna to be the best 
commentators on Aristotle in Islam, and it is their theories that he 
will attack. : 

Before entcring into the heart of the matter I will say a few words 
about Ghazali’s remark that Metaphysics, although it claims to 
follow the same method as Mathematics, does not attain the same 
degrce of evidence. Neither Aristotle nor his commentators ever 
asked the question whether there is any difference between the 
methods of Mathematics and Metaphysics (it is a significant fact that 
most examples of proof in the Posterior Analytics are taken from 
Mathematics) and why the conclusions reached by Metaphysics seem 
so much less convincing than these reached by Mathematics. It 
would scem that Metaphysics, being the basis of all knowledge and 
having as its subject the ultimate principles of things, should possess, 
according to Aristotle, the highest evidence and that God, as being 
the highest principle, should stand at the beginning of the system, as 
in Spinoza. In fact, Aristotle could not have sought God if he had 
not found Him. For Aristotle all necessary reasoning is deductive and 
exclusively based on syllogism. Reasoning—he says—and Y think 
this is a profound and true remark—cannot go on indefinitely. You 
cannot go on asking for reasons infinitely, nor can you reason about 

‘a subject which is not known to you. Reason must come to a stop. 
There must be first principles which are immediately evident. And 
indeed Aristotle acknowledges their existence. When we ask, how- 
ever, what these first principles are, he does not give us any answer 
but only points out the Laws of Thought as such. But from the Laws 
of Thought nothing can be deduced, as Aristotle acknowledges him- 
self. As a matter of fact Aristotle is quitc unaware of the assumption 
on which his system is based. He is what philosophers ‘are wont to 
call nowadays a naive realist. He believes that the world which we 
perceive and think about with all iz contains has a reality indepen- 

INTRODUCTION : xV 

dent of our perceptions or our thoughts. But this view seems so natural 
to him that he is not aware that it could be doubted or that any 
reason might be asked for it. Now I, for my part, believe that the 
objectivity of a common world in which we alt live and die is the 
necessary assumption of all reasoning and thought. I believe indeed, 
with Aristotle, that there are primary assumptions which cannot be 
deduced from other principles. All reasoning assumes the existence of 
an objective truth which is sought and therefore is assumed to have 
an independent reality of its own. Every thinking person is conscious 
of his own identity and the identity of his fellow beings from whom 
he accepts language and thoughts and to whom he can communicate 
his own ideas and emotions. Besides, all conceptual thought implies 
universality, i.e. belief in law and in objective necessity. I can only 
infer from Socrates being a man that he is mortal when I have as- 
sumed that the same thing (in this case man in so far as he is man) in 
the same conditions will always necessarily behave in the same way. 

In his book Ghazali attacks the philosophers on twenty points. 
Except for the last two points which are only slightly touched by 
Averroés, Averroés follows point for point the arguments Ghazali 
uses and tries to refute them. Ghazali’s book is badly constructed, it 
is unsystematic and repetitive. If Ghazali had proceeded systematic- 
ally he would have attacked first the philosophical basis of the system 
of the philosophers—namely their proof for the existence of God, 
since from God, the Highest Principle, everything else is deduced. 
But the first problem Ghazali mentions is the philosphers’ proof for 
the eternity of the world. This is the problem which Ghazali considers 
to be the most important and to which he allots the greatest space, 
almost a quarter of his bonk. He starts by saying rather arbitrarily 
that the philosophers have four arguments, but, in discussing them, 
he mixes them up and the whole discussion is complicated by the fact 
that he gives the philosophical arguments and theological counter- 
arguments in such an involved way that the trend is sometimes hard 
to follow. He says, for instance, page 3, that to ehe first arguments of 
the phifosophers there are two objections. The first objection he gives 
on this page, but the second, after long controversy between the 
philosophers and theologians, on page 32. I will not follow here 
Ghazali and Averroés point for point in their discussions but will 
give rather the substance of their principal arguments {for a detailed 
discussion I refcr to my notes}. 

The theory of the eternity of the world is an Aristotelian one. 

xvi INTRODUCTION 

Aristotle was, as he says himself, the first thinker who affirmed that 
the world in which we live, the universe as an orderly whole, a 
cosmos, is eternal. All the philosophers before him believed that the 
world had come into being either from some primitive matter or 
after a number of other worlds. At the same time Aristotle believes 
in the finitude of causes, For him it is impossible that movement 
should have started or can continue by itself. There must be a prin- 
ciple from which all movement derives. Movement, however, by 
itselfis eternal. It seems to me that this whole conception is untenable. 
If the world is eternal there will be an infinite series of causes and an 
infinite series of movers; there will be an infinite series, for instance, 
of fathers and sons, of birds and eggs (the example of the bird and 
egg is first mentioned in'‘Censorinus, De die natafi, where he discusses 
the Peripatetic theory of the eternity of the world}, and we will 
never reach a first mover or cause, a first father or a first bird. 
Aristotle, in fact, defends the two opposite theses of Kant’s first 
antinomy. He holds at the same time that time and movement are 
infinite and that every causal series must be finite. The contradiction 
in Aristouc is still further accentuated in the Muhammadan philo- 
sophers by the fact that they see in God, not only as Aristotle did, 
the First Mover of the movement of the universe, but that they regard 
Him, under the influence of the Plotinian theory of emanation, as 
the Creator of the universe from whom the world emanates eternally. 
However, can the relation between two existing entities gua existents 
be regarded as a causal one? Can there be a causal relation between 
an eternally unchangeable God and an eternally revolving and chang- 
ing world, and is it sense to speak of a creation of that which exists 
eternally? Besides, if the relation between the eternal God and the 
eternal movement of the world could be regarded as a causal rela- 
tion, no prior movement could be considered the cause of a posterior 
movement, and sequences such as the cternal sequence of fathers and 
sons would not form a causal series. God would not be a first cause 
but the Only Cause of everything. It is the contradiction in the idea 
of an eternal creation which forms the chief argument of Ghazali in 
this book. In a later chapter, for instance, when he refutes Avicenna’s 
proof for God based on the Aristotelian concepts ‘necessary by 
itself’, isc, logical necessity, and ‘necessary through another’, i.e. 
ontological necessity, in which there is the usual Aristotelian 
confusion of the logical with the ontological, Ghazali’s long argu- 
ment can be reduced to the assertion that once the possibility of 

INTRODUCTION xvii 
an infinite series of causes is admitted, there is no sense in positing 
a first cause. 

The first argument is as follows. If the world had been created, 
there must have been something determining its existence at the 
moment it was created, for otherwise it would have remained in the 
state of pure possibility it was in before. But if there was something 
determining its existence, this determinant must have been deter- 
mined by another determinant and so on ad infinitum, or we must 
accept an eternal God in whom eternally new determinations may 
arise. But there cannot be any new determinations in an eterna] God. 

The argument in this form is found in Avicenna, but its elements 
are Aristotelian. In Cicero’s Academics we have a fragment of one of 
Aristotle’s earlier and more popular writings, the lost dialogue De 
philosophia, in which he says that it is impossible that the world could 
ever have been generated. For how could there have been a new 
decision, that is a new decision in the mind of God, for such a magni- 
ficent work? St. Augustine knows this argument from Cicero and he 
too denies that God could have a novum consilium. St. Augustine is 
well aware of the difficulty, and he says in his De civitate det that God 
has always existed, that after a certain time, without having changed 
His will, He created man, whom He had not wanted to create before, 
this js indeed a fact too profound for us. It also belongs to Aristotle’s 
philosophy that in all change there is 2 potentiality and all poten- 
tiality needs an actualizer which exists already. In the form this 
argument has in Avicenna it is, however, taken from a book by a 
late Greek Christian commentator of Aristotle, John Philoponus, 
De aeternitate mundi, which was directed against a book by the great 
Neoplatonist Proclus who had given eighteen arguments to prove the 
eternity of the world. Plato himself believed in the temporal creation 
of the world not by God Himself but by a demiurge. Bue later 
followers of Plato differed from him on this point. Amongst the post- 
Aristotelian schools only the Stoics assumed a periodical generation 
and destruction of the world. Theophrastus had already tried to 
refute some of the Stoic arguments for this view, and it may well 
be that John Philoponus made use of some Stoic sources for his 
defence of the temporality of the world. 

The book by Proclus is lost, but John Philoponus, who as a 
Christian believes in the creation of the world, gives, before refuting 
them, the arguments given by Proclus. The book by Philoponus was 
translated into Arabic and many of its arguments are reproduced in 

xviii INTRODUCTION 

the Muhammadan controversies about the problem (arguments for 
the temporal creation of the world were also given by Philoponus in 
a work against Aristotle’s theory of the eternity of the world, argu- 
ments which are known to us through their quotation and refutation by 
Simplicius in his commentary on Physics viii; one of these arguments 
by Philoponus was well known to the Arabs and is also reproduced by 
Ghazali, see note 3. 3). The argument I have mentioned its the third 
as given by Proclus, Philoponus’ book is extremely important for all 
medieval philosophy, but it has never been translated into a modem 
language and has never been properly studied. On the whole the 
importance of the commentators of Aristotle for Arabic and medieval 
philosophy in general has not yet been sufficiently acknowledged. 

To this argument Ghazali gives the following answer, which has 
become the classic reply for this difficulty and which has been taken 
from Philoponus. One must distinguish, says Philoponus, between 
God’s eternally witling something and the eternity of the object of 
His Will, or, as St. Thomas will say later, ‘Deus voluit ab aeterno 
mundus esset sed non ut ab acterno esset’, God willed, for instance, 
that Socrates should be born before Plato and He willed this from 
eternity, so that when it was time for Plato to be born it happened. 
It is not difficult for Averroés to refute this argument, In willing and 
doing something there is more than just the decision that you will do 
it. You can take the decision to get up tomorrow, but the actual 
willing to get up can be done only at the moment you do it, and there 
can be no delay between the cause and the effect. There must be 
added to the decision to get up the impulse of the will to get up. So 
in God there would have to be a new impulse, and it is just this 
newness that has to be denied. But, says Averroés, the whole basis of 
this argument is wrong for it assumes in God a will like a human will. 
Desire and will can be understood only in a being that has a need; 
for the Perfect Being there can be no need, there can be no choice, 
for when He acts He will necessarily do the best. Will in God must 
have another meaning than human will. 

Averroés therefore docs not explicitly deny that God has a will, but 
will should noe be taken in its human sense. He has much the same 
conception as Plotinus, who denies that God has the power to do one 
of two contraries (for God will necessarily always choose the best, 
which implies that God necessarily will always do the best, but this in 
fact annuls the ideas of choice and will}, and who regards the world 
as produced by natural necessity. Aristotle also held that for the 

INTRODUCTION xix 

Perfect Being no voluntary action is possible, and he regards God as 
in an eternal blissful state of self-contemplation. This would be a 
consequence of His Perfection which, for Averroés at least, invelves 
His Omniscience. For the Perfect the drama of life is ended: nothing 
can be done any more, no decision can be taken any more, for de- 
cisions belong to the condition of man to whom both knowledge and 
ignorance are given and who can have an hypothetical! knowledge of 
the future, knowing that on his decisions the future may depend and 
to whom a sure knowledge of the future is denied, But an Omniscient 
Being can neither act nor decide; for Him the future is irremediable 
like the past and cannot be changed any more by His decisions or 
actions. Paradoxically the Omnipotent is impotent. This notion of 
God as a Self-contemplating Being, however, constitutes one of the . 
many profound contradictions in Aristotle’s system. And this pro- 
found contradiction is also found in all the works of Aristotle’s com- 
mentators. One of Aristotle’s proofs for the existence of God—and 
according to a recent pronouncement of the Pope, the most stringent 
—is the one based on movement. There cannot be an infinite series 
of movers; there must be a Prime Agent, a Prime Mover, God, the 
originator of all change and action in the universe. According to the 
conception of God as a Self-Contemplating Being, however, the love 
for God is the motive for the circular motion of Heaven. God is not 
the ultimate Agent, God is the ultimate Aim of desire which inspires 
the Heavens to action, [t is Heaven which moves itself and circles 
round out of love for God. And in this case it is God who is passive; 
the impelling force, the efficient cause, the spring of all action lics in 
the world, lies in the souls of the stars, 

Let us now return to Ghazali. We have seen that his first argument 
is not very convincing, but he now gives us another argument which 
the Muhammadan theologians have taken from John Philoponus 
and which has more strength, It runs: if you assume the world to 
have no beginning in time, at any moment which we can imagine an 
infinite series must have been ended. To give an example, every one 
of us is the effect of an infinite series of causes; indeed, man is the 
finite junction of an infinite past and an infinite future, the effect of 
an infinite series of causes, the cause of an infinite series of cffects. 
But an infinite series cannot be traversed. If you stand near the bed 
of a river waiting for the water to arrive from an infinitely distant 
source you will never see it arriving, for an infinite distance cannot 
be passed. This is the argument given by Kant in the thesis of his 

xXx INTRODUCTION 

first antimony. The curious fact is that the wording in Kant is almost 
identical with that of John Philoponus, 

The answers Averroés gives are certainly not convincing. He repeats 
the Aristotelian dictum that what has no beginning has no end and 
that therefore there is never an end of time, and one can never say 
that at any moment an infinite time is ended: an infinite time is never 
ended. But this is begging the question and is surely not true, for 
there are certainly finite times. He denies that an infinite time involves 
an infinite causal series and the negation of a First Cause. The series 
involved is but a temporal sequence, causal by accident, since it is 
God who is its essential cause. Averroés also bases his answer on the 
Aristotelian theory that in time there is only a succession. A simul- 
tancous infinite whole is denied by Aristotle and therefore, according 
to Aristotle, the world must be limited in space; but in‘time, accord- 
ing to him, there is never a whole, since the past is no longer existent 
and the future not yet. 

But the philosophers have a convincing argument for the eternity 
of the world. Suppose the world had a beginning, then before the 
world existed there was empty time; but in an empty time, in pure 
emptiness, there cannot be a motive for a beginning and there could 
be nothing that could decide God to start His creation. This is Kant’s 
antithesis of his first antinomy. It is very old and is given by Aristotle, 
but it is already found in the pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides. 
Ghazali’s answer is that God’s will is completely undetermined. His 
will does not depend on distinctions in outside things, but He creates 
the distinctions Himself. The idea of God’s creative will is of Stoic 
origin. According to the Neoplatonic conception God’s knowledge 
is creative. We know because things are; things are because God 
knows them. This idea of the creative knowledge of God has a very 
great diffusion in philosophy (just as our bodies live by the eternal 
spark, of life transmitted to us by our ancestors, so we rekindle in 
our minds the thoughts of those who are no more); it is found, 
for instance, in St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, and 
Kant—who calls it intellektuelle Anschauung, intellectual intuition, 
and it is also used by the Muhammadan philosophers when it suits 
them. Against Ghazali’s conception, however, Averroés has the 
following argument: If God creates the world arbitrarily, if His Will 
establishes the distinctions without being determined by any reason, 
neither wisdom nor goodness can be attributed to Him. We have 
here a difficulty the Greeks had seen already, Either God is beyond 

INTRODUCTION xxi 

the laws of thought and of morals and then He is neither good nor 
wise, or He Himself stands under their dominion and then He is 
not omnipotent. 

Another argument for the eternity of the world is based on the 
eternity of time; God cannot havea priority to time, as the theologians 
affirm, because priority implies time and time implies movement. 
For the philosophers God’s priority to the world consists solely in ‘ 
His being its simultaneous cause. Both parties, however, seem to hald — 
that God’s existence does not imply time, since He exists in timeless 
eternity. But in this case, what neither of the parties has seen, no 
causal relation between God and the world can exist at all, since all 
causation implies a simultaneous time. 

We come now to the most important argument which shows the 
basic difference between the philosophical and theological systems. 
For Aristotle the world cannot have come to be because there is no 
absolute becoming. Everything that becomes comes from some- 
thing. And, as a matter of fact, we all believe this. We all believe 
more or less unconsciously (we are not fully aware of our basic prin- 
ciples: a basement is always obscure) in the dictum rien ne se crée, 
rien ne se perd. We believe that everything that comes to be is but a 
development, an evolution, without being tooc!car about the meaning 
of these words {evolution means litcrally ‘unrotling’, and Cicero says 
that the procession of events outof time is like the uacoiling ofa rope— 
guast rudentis explicatio), and we believe that the plant lics in the seed, 
the future in the present. For example: when a child is born we 
believe it to have certain dispositions; it may have a disposition to 
become a musician, and when all the conditions are favourable it will 
become a musician. Now, according to Aristotle, becoming is nothing 
but the actualization of a potentiality, that isthe becoming actual 
of adisposition. However, there is a difficulty here. It belongs to one of 
the titue ironies of the history of philosophy that Aristotle’s philosophy 
is based on a concept, i.e. potentiality, that has been excluded by alaw 
that he was the first to express consciously. For Aristotle is the first to 
have stated as the supreme law of thought (or is it a law of reality?) 
that there is no intermediary between being and non-being. But the 
potential, ic. the objective possible, is such an intermediary; it is 
namely something which is, still is not yet. Already the Eleatics had 
declared that there is no becoming, either a thing is or it is not. Ifitis, 
it need not become. If it is not—out of nothing nothing becomes. 
Besides, there is another difficulty which the Megarians have shown. 

xxii INTRODUCTION 

You say that your child bas a disposition to become a musician, that he 
can become a musician, but if he dies as a child, or when conditions 
are unfavourable, he cannot become a musician. He can only become 
one when all the conditions for his being a musician are fulfilled. 
But in that case it is not possibly that he will be a musician, neces- 
sarily he will be one. There is in fact no possibility of his being a 
musician before he actually is one. There is therefore no potentiality — 
in nature and no becoming of things out of potencies. Things are 
or are not. This Megarian denial of potentiality has been taken 
over by the Ash‘aritcs, and Ghazali in this book is on the whole, al- 
though not consistently, in agreement with them. I myself regard 
this problem as one of the cruces of philosophy. The Ash‘arites and 
Ghazali believed, as the Megarians did, that things do not become 
and that the future does not lic in the present; every event that occurs 
is new and unconnected with its predecessor, The theologians be- 
lieved that the world is not an independent universe, a self-subsistent 
system, that develops by itself, has its own laws, and can be under- 
stood by itself. They transferred the mystery of becoming to the 
mystery of God, who is the cause of all change in the world, and who 
at every moment creates the world anew, Things are or are not. God 
creates them and annihilates them, but they do not become out of 
each other, there is no passage between being and non-being, Nor 
is there movement, since a thing that moves is neither here nor there, 
since it moves—what we call movement is deag at rest at different 
space-atoms at different time-atoms. It is the denial of potentiality, 
possibility ia rerum natura, that Ghazali uses to refute the Aristotelian 
idea of an eternal matter in which the potentialities are found of 
everything that can or will happen. For, according to Aristotle, 
matter must be eternal and cannot have become, since it is, itself, the 
condition for all becoming. 

It may be mentioned here that the modern static theory of movement 
is akin to the Megarian-Ash‘arite doctrine of the denial of movement 
and becoming. Bertrand Russell, for instance, although he does not | 
accept the Megarian atomic conception, but holds with Aristotle that 
Movement and rest take place in time, not in the instant, defines 
movement as being at different places at different times. At the same 
time, although he rejects the Megarian conception of ‘jumps’, 
he affirms that the moving body always passes from one position 
to another by gradual transition, But ‘passing’ implies, just as 
much as ‘jumping’, something more than mere being, namely, the 

INTRODUCTION xxilf 

movement which beth theories deny and the identity of the moving 
body. 

- On the idea of possibility another argument for the eternity of the 
world is based. It is affirmed that if the world had been created an 
infinite number of possibilities of its creation, that is, an eternal 
duration of its possibility, would have preceded it. Bue nothing | 
possible can be eternal, since everything possible must be realized. 
The idea that everything possible has to be realized is found in 
Aristotle himself, who says that if there could be an eternal possible. 
that were not realized, it would be impossible, not possible, since the 
impossible is that which will never be realized. Aristotle does not sce 
that this definition is contrary to the basic idea of his own philo- 
sophy—the reality of a possibility which may or may not become 
real—and that by declaring that the possible will have to happen 
he reduces it to a necessity, and by admitting that everything that 
happens had to happen he denies that the possibility of its not 
happening could precede it, ic. he accepts, in fact, the Megarian 
conception of possibility which he himself had tried to refute. 
Averroés, who agrees with his master on this point, is not aware 
either of the implication of the definition. On the other hand, the 
Ash‘arites, notwithstanding their denial of potentiality, maintain 
that for God everything is possible, a theory which imphies objective 
possibility {the same inconsistency was committed by the Stoics). 
Both philosophers and theologians, indeed, hold about this difficult 
problem contradictory theories, and it is therefore not astonishing 
that Ghazali’s and Averroés’ discussion about it is full of confusion 
(for the details I refer to my notes). 

In the second chapter Ghazali treats the problem of the incor- 
ruptibility of the world. As Ghazali says himself, the problem of the 
incorruptibility of the world is essentially the same as that of its being 
uncreated and the same arguments can be brought forward. Still, 
there is less opposition amongst the theologians about its incorrupti- 
bility than about its being uncreated. Some of the Muttazilites 
argued, just as Thomas Aquinas was to do later, that we can only 
know through the Divine Law that this world of ours will end and 
there is no rational proof for its annihilation, Just as a series of num- 
bers needs a first term but no final term, the beginning of the world 
does not imply its end. However, the orthodox view is that the 
annihilation of the world, including Heaven and Hell, is in God’s 
power, although this will not happen. Still, in the corruptibility of 

xxiv INTRODUCTION 

the world there is a new difficulty for the theologians. If God de- 
stroys the world He causes ‘nothingness’, that is, His act is related to 
‘nothing’. But can an act be related to ‘nothing’? The questio’ as itis 
posed seems to rest on a confusion between action and effec but its 
deeper sense would be to establish the nature of God’s action and the 
process by which His creative and annihilating power exercises itself, 
As there cannot be any analogy with the physical process through 
which our human will performs its function, the mystery of His 
creative and annihilating action cannot be solved and the naive 
answers the theologians give satisfy neither Averroés nor Ghazali 
himself. Averroés argucs that there is no essential difference between 
production and destruction and, in agreement with Aristotle, he 
affirms that there are three principles for them: form, matter, and 
privation. When a thing becomes, its form arises and its privation 
disappears; when it is destroyed its privation arises and its form 
disappears, but the substratum of this. process, matter, remains 
eternally. I have criticized this theory in my notes and will only 
mention here that for Aristotle and Averroés this process of produc- 
tion and destruction is eterrial, circular, and reversible. Things, 
however, do not revolve in an eternal cycle, nor is there an eternal 
return as the Stoics and Nietzsche held, Inexorably the past is 
gone. Every ‘now’ is new. Every flower in the field has never been, 
the up-torn trees are not rooted again, ‘Thou’ll come no more, Never, 
never, never, never, never! Besides, Averroés, holding as he does 
that the world is eternally produced out of nothing, is inconsistent in 
regarding with Aristotle production and destruction as correlatives. 

In the third chapter Ghazalt maintains that the terms acting and 
agent are falsely applied to God by the philosophers. Acting, accord- 
ing to him, can be said only of a person having will and choice. 
When you say that fire burns, there is here a causal relation, if you 
like, but this implies nothing but a sequence in time, just as Hume 
will affirm later. So when the philosophers say that God’s acting is 
like the fire’s burning or the sun’s heating, since God acts by natural 
necessity, they deny, according to Ghazali, His action altogether. 
Real causation can only be affirmed of a willing conscious being. 
The interesting point in this discussion is that, according to the 
Ash‘arites and Ghazali, there is no causation in this world at all, 
there is only one extra-mundane cause which is God. Even our acts 
which depend on our will and choice are not, according to the 
Ash‘arites, truly performed by ourselves. We are only the instru- 

INTRODUCTION xxv 

ments, and the rea! agent is God. But if this is true, how can we say 
that action and causation depend on will and choice? How can we 
come to the idea of any causal action in God depending on His Will 
if we deny generally that there is a causal relation between will and 
action? The same contradiction is found in modern philosophy in 
Mach. Mach holds that to speak of causation er action in material 
things-~—so to say that fire burns—is a kind of fetishism or animism, 
ie, that we project our will and our actions into physical lifeless 
things. However, at the same time he, as a follower of Hume, says 
that causation, even in acts caused by will, is nothing but a temporal 
sequence of events. He denies causation even in voluntary actions. 
Therefore it would follow that the relation of willing and acting is not 
different from the relation of fire and burning and that there cannot 
be any question of fetishism or animism. According to such a theory 
there is no action at al] in the universe but only a scquence of events. 

Then, after a second argument by which Ghazali sets out to show 
that an eternal production and creation are contradictions in terms, 
since production and creation imply the generation of something 
after its non-existence, he directs a third argument against the 
Neoplatonic theory, held by the philosophers, of the emanation of 
the world from God's absolute Oneness. 

Plotinus’ conception of God is prompted by the problem of 
plurality and relation, All duality implies a relation, and every 
relation establishes a new unity which is not the simple addition of 
its terms (since every whole is more than its parts) and violates there- 
fore the supreme law of thought that a thing is what it is and nothing 
else. Just as the line is more than its points, the stone more than its 
elements, the organism transcending its members, man, notwith- 
standing the plurality of his faculties, an identical personality, so 
the world is an organized well-ordered system surpassing the multitude 
of the unities it encloses, According to Plotinus the Force binding 
the plurality into unity and the plurality of unities into the all- 
containing unit of the Universe is the Archetype of unity, the 
ultimate, primordial. Monad, God, unattainable in His supreme 
Simplicity even for thought. For all thought is relational, knitting 
together in the undefinable unity of a judgement a subject and a 
predicate. But in God’s absolute and highest Unity there is no 
plurality that can be joined, since all joining needs a superior joining 
unit. Thus God must be the One and the Lone, having no attribute, 
no genus, no species, no universal that He can share with any 

XXVI " INTRODUCTION 

creatures of the world. Even existence can be only referred to Him 
when it expresses not an attribute, but His very Essence. But then 
there is no bridge leading from the stable stillness of His Unity to the 
changing and varied multiplicity of the world; all relation between 
Him and the world is severed. If the One is the truly rational, God’s 
rationality can be obtained only by regarding His relation to the 
world as irrational, and all statements about Him will be inconsistent 
with the initial thesis. And if God is unattainable for thought, the 
very affirmation of this will be self-contradictory. 

Now, the philosophers in Islam hold with Plotinus that although 
absolutely positive statements are not admissible about God, the 
- positive statements made by them can be all reduced to negative 
affirmations (with the sole exception, according to Averroés, of His 
possessing intellect) and to certain relative statements, for neither 
negations nor external relations add anything to His essence. 

In this and several following chapters Ghazali attacks the philo- 
sophers from two sides: by showing up the inanity of the Plotinian 
conception of God as pure unity, and by exposing their inconsistency 
in attributing to Him definite qualities and regarding Him as the 
source of the world of varicty and plurality. 

The infinite variety and plurality of the world does not derive 
directly from God according to the philosophers in Islam, who 
combine Aristotle’s astronomical view of animate planets circling 
round in their spheres with the Neoplatonic theory of emanation, 
and introduce into the Aristotelian framework Proclus’ conception 
of a triadic process, but through a series of immaterial mediators. | 
From God's single act—for they with Aristotle regard God as the 
First Agent—only a single effect follows, but this single effect, the 
supramundane Intellect, develops in itself a threefoldness through 
which it can exercise a threefold action. Ghazali objects in a long - 
discussion that if God’s eternal action is unique and constant, only 
one single effect in which no plurality can be admitted will follow (a 
similar objection can be directed against Aristotle, who cannot explain 
how the plurality and variety of transitory movements can follow from 
one single constant movement). The plurality of the world according 
to Ghazali cannot be explained through a series of mediators. Aver- 
rots, who sometimes does not seem very sure of the validity of mediate 
emanation, is rather evasive in his answer on this point. 

In a series of rather intricate discussions which I have tried to 
elucidate in my notes, Ghazali endeavours to show that the proofs of 

INTRODUCTION xxvii 

the philosophers for God’s uniqueness, for their denial of His attri- 
butes, for their claims that nothing can share with Him His genus 
and species, that He is pure existence which stands in no relation to 
an essence, and that He is incorporeal, are all vain. The leading idea 
of the philosophers that all plurality needs a prior joining principle, 
Ghazali rejects, while Averroés defends it. Why—so Giiazali asks, 
for instance—since the essence in temporal things is not the cause of 
their existence, should this ngt be the case in the Eternal? Or why 
should body, although it is composite according to the philosophers, 
not be the First Cause, especially as they assume an eternal body, 
since it is not impossible to suppose a compound without a composing 
principle? From the incorporcatity of God, the First Principle, Avi- 
cenna had tried to infer, through the disjunction that everything 
is either matter or intellect, that He is intellect (since the philo- 
sophers in Islam hold with Aristotle and in opposition to Plotinus 
that God possesses self-consciousness}, Ghazali does not admit this 
disjunction and, besides, argues with Plotinus that self-consciousness 
implies a subject and an object, and therefore would impede the 
philosophers’ thesis of God’s absolute unity. 

The Muhammadan philosophers, following Aristotte’s Neoplatonic 
commentators, affirm that God’s self-knowledge implies His know- 
ledge of all universals (a line of thought followed, for instance, by 
Thomas Aquinas and some moderns like Brentano). In man this 
knowledge forms a plurality, in God it is unified. Avicenna subscribes 
to the Koranic words that no particle in Heaven or Earth escapes 
God’s knowledge, but he holds, as Porphyry had done before, that 
God can know the particular things only in a universal way, whatever 
this means. Ghazali takes it te mean that God, according to Avicenna, 
must be ignorant of individuals, 2 most heretical theory. For Averroés 
God’s knowledge is neither universal nor particular, but transcending 
both, in a way unintelligible to the human mind. 

One thing, however, God cannot know according to Avicenna 
{and he agrees here with Plato’s Parmenides) and that is the passing of 
time, for in the Eternal no relation is possible to the flecting ‘now’. 
There are two aspects of time: the sequence of anteriority and posteri- 
ority which remains fixed for cver, and the eternal flow of the future 
through the present into the past. I¢ will be cternally true that I was 
healthy before I sickencd and God can know its eternal truth. But 
in God’s timeless eternity there can be no ‘now’ simultaneous with 
the trembling present in which we humans live and change and die, 

xxviii | INTRODUCTION 

there is no ‘now’ in God’s eternity in which He can know that I am 
sickening now. In God’s eternal stilJness the fleeting facts and truths 
of human experience can find no rest. Ghazali objects, erroneously, 
I think, that a change in the object of thought need not imply a 
change in the subject of consciousness. 

In another chapter Ghazali refutes the philosophers’ proof that 
Heaven is animated. He does not deny its possibility, but declares 
that the arguments given are insufficient. He discusses also the view 
that the heavens move out of love for God and out of desire to assimi- 
late themselves to Him, and he asks the pertinent question—already 
posed by Theophrastus in his Metaphysics, but which scandalizes 
Averroés by its prosaicness—why it is meritorious for them to circle 
round eternally and whether eternal rest would not be more appro- 
priate for them in their desire to assimilate themselves to God's 
eternal stability, 

In the last chapter of this part Ghazali examines the philosophers’ . 
symbolical interpretation of the Koranic entities ‘The Pen’ and “The 
Tablet’ and their theories about dreams and prophecy, It is interest- 
ing to note that, although he refutes them here, he largely adopts 
them in his own Vivification of Theology. 

In the last part of his book Ghazali treats the natural sciences. He 
enumerates them and declares that there is no objection to them 
according to religion except on four points. The first is that there 
exists a logical nexus between cause and effect; the second, the self- 
subsistent spirituality of the soul; the third, the immortality of this 
subsistent soul; the fourth, the denial of bodily resurrection. The 
first, that there exists between cause and effect a logical necessity, 
has to be contested according to Ghazali, because by denying tt the 
possibility of miracles can be maintained. The philosophers do not 
deny absolutely the possibility of miracles. Muhammad himself did 
not claim to perform any miracles and Hugo Grotius tried to prove 
the superiority of Christianity over Islam by saying ‘Mahumetis se 
missum ait non cum miraculis sed cum armis’, In later times, how- 
ever, Muhammad’s followers ascribed to him the most fantastic 
miracles, for instance the cleavage of the moon and his ascension to 
Heaven. ‘These extravagant miracles are not accepted by the philo- 
sophers. Their theory of the possibility of miracles is based on the 
Stoic-Neoplatonic theory of ‘Sympathia’, which is that all parts of 
the world are in intimate contact and related. In a little weatise of 
Plutarch it is shown how bodily phenomena are influenced by 

INTRODUCTION XXIX 

suggestion, by emotion and emotional states, and it is claimed by 
him, and Jater also by Plotinus, that the emotions one experiences 
cannot only influence one’s own body but also other bodies, and that 
one’s soul can exercise an influence on other bodies without the 
intermediary of any bodily action. The phenomena of telepathy, for 
instance the fascination which a snake has on other animals, they 
explained in this way. Amulets and talismans can receive through 
psychological influences certain powers which can be realized later. 
‘This explanation of occult phenomena, which is found in Avicenna’s 
Psychology, a book translated in the Middle Ages, has been widely 
accepted (for instance, by Ghazali himself in his Vivtficatton of 
Theology), and is found in Thomas Aquinas and most of the writers 
about the occult in the Renaissance, for instance Heinricus Cornelius 
Agrippa, Paracelsus, and Cardanus. It may be mentioned here that 
Avicenna gives as an example of the power of suggestion that a man 
will go calmly over a plank when it is on the ground, whereas he will 
hesitate if the plank be across an abyss. This famous example is 
found in Pascal’s Pensées, and the well-known modern healer, Coué, 
takes it as his chief proof for the power of suggestion. Pascal has taken 
it from Montaigne, Montaigne has borrowed it from his contem- 
porary the great doctor Pictro Bairo, who himself has a lengthy 
quotation from the Psychology of Avicenna, Robert Burton in his 
Anatomy of Melancholy also mentions it. In the Middle Ages this 
example is found in Thomas Aquinas. Now the philosophers limit 
the possibility of miracles only to those that can be explained by the 
power of the mind over physical objects; for instance, they would 
regard it as possible that a prophet might cause rain to fall or an 
earthquake to take place, but they refuse to accept the more extrava- 
gant miracles J have mentioned as authentic. 

The theologians, however, base their theory of miracles on a 
denial of natural law. The Megarian-Ash‘arite denial of potentiality 
already implies the denial of natural law. According to this concep- 
tion there is neither necessity nor possibility tn rerune nature, they are 
or they are not, there is no nexus between the phenomena. But the 
Greek Sceptics also deny the rational relation between cause and 
effect, and it is this Greek Sceptical theory which the Ash‘arites have 
copied, as we can see by their examples, The theory that there is no 
necessary relation between cause and effect is found, for instance, in 
Galen. Fire burns but there is, according to the Greek Sceptics, no 
uecessary relation between fire and burning. Through seeing this 

XXX . INTRODUCTION 

happen many times we assume that it will happen also in the future, 
but there is no necessity, no absolute certainty. This Sceptical theory 
is quasi-identical with the theory of Hume and is based on the same 
" assumptions, that all knowledge is given through sense-impression; 
and since the idea of causation cannot be derived from sense ex- 
perience it is denied altogether. According to the theory of the theo- 
_logians, God who creates and re-creates the universe continually 
follows a certain habit in His creation. But He can do anything He 
desires, everything is possible for Him except the logically impossible; 
therefore all logically possible miractes are allowed. One might say 
that, for the theologians, all nature is miraculous and all miracles 
are natural. Averroés asks a good question; What is really meant by 
habit, is it a habit in man or in nature? I do not know how Hume 
would answer this question. For if causation is a habit in man, what 
makes it possible that such a habit can be formed? What is the objec- 
tive counterpart of these habits? There is another question which 
has been asked by the Greek opponents of this theory, but which is 
not mentioned by Avcrroés: How many times must such a sequence 
be observed before such a habit can be formed? There is yet another 
question that might be asked: Since we cannot act before such a 
habit is formed—for action implies causation—what are we doing 
until then? What, even, is the meaning of ‘I act’ and ‘I do’? If there 
is nothing in the world but a scquence of events, the very word 
‘activity’ will have no sense, and it would seem that we would be 
doomed to an cternal passivity, Averroés’ answer to this dental of 
natural Jaw is that universals themselves imply already the idea of 
* necessity and law. I think this answer is correct. When we speak, for 
instance, of wood or stone, we express by those words an hypo- 
thetica! necessity, that is, we mean 4 certain object, which in such- 
and-such circumstances wilt necessarily behave in a certain way— 
‘that the behaviour of wood, for example, is based on its nature, that 
is, on the potentialities it has. 

I may remark here that it seems to me probable that Nicholas 
of Autrecourt, ‘the medieval Hume’, was influenced by Ghazali’s 
Ash‘arite theories. He denies in the same way as Ghazali the logical 
connexion between cause and effect: ‘ex eo quod aliqua res est 
cognita esse, non potest evidenter evidentia reducta in primum 
principium vel in certitudinem primi principii inferri, quod alia res 
sit’ (cf. Lappe, ‘Nicolaus von Autrecourt’, Beitr. z. Gesch. d. Phil. d. M. 
B.vi, H.2, p. 11); he gives the same example of ignis and stupa, he 

INTRODUCTION XXxi 

seems to hold also the Ash‘arite thesis of God as the sole cause of 
all action (cf. op. cit., p. 24), and he quotes in one place Ghazali’s 
Metaphysics (cf. N. of Autrecourt, ‘Exigit ordo executionis’, in 
Mediaeval Studies, vol. i, ed. by J. Reginald O'Donnell, Toronto, 
1931, p- 208). Now Nicholas’s works were burnt during his Jifetime 
in Paris in 1347, whereas the Latin translation of the Tahafut ail 
Takafut by Calo Calonymus was terminated jn Arles in 1328. 

The second point Ghazali wants to refute are the proofs for the 
aubstantiality and the spirituality of the soul as given by the philo- 
sophers. He himself does not affirm that the sou! is material, and as a 
matter of fact he holds, in other books, the contrary opinion, but the 
Ash‘arites largely adopted the Stoic materialism, The ten arguments 
of the philosophers for the spirituality of the soul derive all from 
arguments given by the Greeks. It would seem to me that Ghazali’s 
arguments for the soul’s materiality may be based on the Stoic 
answers (which have not come down to us) against the proofs of 
Aristotle and the later Platonists for the immateriality of the soul. 
There is in the whole discussion a certain confusion, partly based on the 
ambiguity of the word ‘soul’, The term ‘soul’ both in Greek and Arabic 
can also mean ‘life’. Plants and animals have a ‘soul’. However, it is 
not affirmed by Aristotle that life in plants and animals is a spiritual 
principle. ‘Soul’ is also used for the rational part, the thinking part, 
of our consciousness. It is only this thinking part, according to 
Aristotle, that is not related to or bound up with matter; sensation 
and imagination are localized in the body, and it is only part of our 
thinking soul that seems to possess eternity or to be immortal. Now, 
tost of the ten arguments derive from Aristotle and mean only to 
prove that the thinking part of our soul is incorporeal. Still the 
Mubammadan philosophers affirm with Plato and Plotinus that the 
whole soul is spiritual and incorruptible, and that the soul is a 
substance independent of the body, although at the same time they 
adopt Aristotle’s physiological explanations of al! the non-rational 
functions of the soul and accept Aristotle's definition of the ‘soul’ as 
the first entelechy of an organic body. On the other hand, the 
Muhammadan philosophers do not admit the Platonic theory of the 
pre-existence of the soul. Aristotle’s conception of a material and 
(ransitory element in the soul and an immaterial and immortal 
«hement destroys all possibility of considering human personality as 
« unity. Although he reproaches Plato with regarding the human 
soul as a plurality, the same reproach can be applied to himself. 

cxxxii _ INTRODUCTION 
Neither the Greek nor the Muhammadan philosophers have ever 

been able to uphold a theory that does justice to the individuality of © 

the human personality. That it is my undefinable ego that perceives, 
represents, wills, and thinks, the mysterious fact of the uniqueness 
of my personality, has never been apprehended by them. It is true 
that there is in Aristotle’s psychology a faint conception of a func- 
tional theory of our conscious life, but he is unable to harmonize this 
with his psycho-physiological notions. 

I have discussed in my notes the ten arguments and will mention 
here only two because of their importance. Ghazali gives one of these 
arguments in the following form: How can man’s identity be attri- 
buted to body with all its accidents? For bodies are continually in 
dissolution and nutrition replaces what is dissolved, so that when we 
sec a child, after separation from its mother’s womb, fall ill a few 
times, become thin and then fat again, and grow up, we may safely 
say that after forty years no particle remains of what there was when 
its mother was delivered of it. Indeed, the child began its existence 
out of parts of the sperm alone, but nothing of the particles of the 
sperm remains in it; no, all this is dissolved and has changed into 
something else and then this body has become another, Still we say 
that the identical! man remains and his notions remain with him from 
the beginning of his youth although allbodily parts have changed, and 
this shows that the soul has an existence outside the body and that 
the body is its organ. Now the first part of this argument, that all 
things are in a state of flux and that of the bodily life of man no part 
remains identical, is textually found in Montaigne’s Apology of Raymond 
de Sebend. Montaigne has taken it from Plutarch, and the Arabic 
philosophers may have borrowed it from the same source from which 

Plutarch has taken it. The argument of the philosophers that matter. 

is evanescent, but the soul a stable ‘identity, which is also given by 
the Christian philosopher Nemesius in his De natura hominis (a book 
translated into Arabic), who ascribes it to Ammonius Saccas and 
Numenius, js basically Platonic and Neoplatonic, and strangely 
enough, although he refutes it here, it is adduced by Ghazali himself 
in his Veeification of Theology. Socrates says in the Platonic dialogue 
Cratylus: ‘Can we truly say that there is knowledge, Cratylus, if all 
things are continually changing and nothing remains? For know- 
ledge cannot continue unless it remains and keeps its identity. But 
if knowledge changes its very essence, it will lose at once its identity 
and there will be no knowledge.’ Plotinus (Enn. iv. 7. 3) argues that 

sae 

INTRODUCTION 2oCx1 

matter, in its continual changing, cannot explain the identity of the 
soul. And he says in a beautiful passage (Zan. iv. 7. 10) the idea of 
which Avicenna has copied: 

‘One should contemplate the nature of everything in its purity, since 
what is added is ever an obstacle to its knowledge. Contemplate therefore 
the soul in its abstraction or rather let him who makes this abstraction 
contemplate himself in this state and he will know that he is immortal 
when he will see in himself the purity of the intellect, for he will see his 
intellect contemplate nothing sensible, nothing mortal, but apprehending 
the eternal through the eternal.’ 

This passage bears some relation to Descartes’s dictum cogito ergo 
sum, but whereas Plotinus affirms the self-consciousness of a stable 
‘identity, Descartes states only that every thought has a subject, an 
ego. Neither the one, nor the other shows that this subject is my ego 
in the sense of my undefinable unique personality, my awareness 
who I am: that I am, for instance, John and not Peter, my conscious- 
ness of the continuity of my identity from birth to death, my know- 
ledge that at the same time I am master and slave of an identical 
body, whatever the changes may be in that body, and that as long 
as I live I am a unique and an identical whole of body and soul. 
Plautus’ Sosia, who was not a philosopher, expresses himself (Amphi- 
éruo, line 447) in almost the same way as Descartes—‘sed quom 
cogito, equidem certo idem sum qui fui semper’—but the introduc- 
tion of the words semper and idem renders the statement fallacious; 
from mere consciousness the lasting identity of my personality cannot 
be inferred. 

Ghazali answers this point by saying that animals and plants 
also, notwithstanding that their matter is continually changing, 
preserve their identity, alchough nobody believes that this identity 
is based on a spiritual principle. Averraés regards this objection as 
justified, 

The second argument is based on the theory of universals. Since 
thought apprehends universals which are not in a particular place 
and have no individuality, they cannot be material, since everything 
material is individual and is in space, Against this theory of universals 
(hazali develops, under Stoic influence, his nominalistic theory which 
ia probably the theory held by the Ash‘arites in general. This theory 
is juasi-identical with Berkeley’s nominalistic conception and springs 
{tum the same assumption that thinking is nothing but the having of 
ituages, By a strange coincidence both Ghazali and Berkeley give 

xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

the example of a hand: when we have an idea of a hand as a uni- 
versal, what really happens is that we have a representation of a 
particular hand, since there are no universals. But this particular 
hand is capable of representing for us any possible hand, just as much 
a big black hand as a small white one, The fallacy of the theory fies, 
of course, in the word ‘representing’, which as a matter of fact 
assumes what it tended to deny, namely, that we can think of a hand 
in general which has neither a particular shape, nor a particular ~ 
colour, nor is localized in space. 

The next point Ghazali tries to refute is the argument of the | 
philosophers for the immortality of the soul. According to the philo- 
sophers, the fact that it is a substance independent of a body and is - 
immaterial shows that a corruption of the body cannot affect it. 
This, as a matter of fact, is a truism, since the meaning of sub- 
stantiality and immateriality for the philosophers implies already 
the idea of eternity. On the other hand, if the soul is the form of the 
body, as is also affirmed by them, it can only exist with its matter and 
the mortality of its body would imply its own mortality, as Ghazali 
rightly points out, The Arabic philosophers through their combina- 
tion of Platonism and Aristotclianism hold, indeed, at the same time 
three theories inconsistent with each other, about the relation of 
body and soul: that the soul is the form of the body, that the sout is 
a substance, subsistent by itself and immortal, and that the soul after 
death takes a pneumatic body {a theory already found in Porphyry). 
Besides, their denial of the Platonic idea of pre-existence of the soul 
vitiates their statement that the soul is a substance, subsistent by 
itself, that is, eternal, ungenerated, and incorruptible. Although 
Averroés in his whole book tries to come as near to the Aristotclian 
conception of the soul as possible, in this chapter he seems to adopt 
the eschatology of the late Greek authors. He allows to the souls of 
the dead a pneumatic body and belicves that they cxist somewhere in 
the sphere of the moon. He also accepts the theory of the Djinn, the 
equivalent of the Greek Daimones. What he rejects, and what the 
philosophers generally reject, is the resurrection of the flesh. 

. In his last chapter Averroés summarizes his views about religion. 
There are three possible views. A Sceptical view that religion is 
opium for the people, held by certain Greek rationalists; the view that 
religion expresses Absolute Truth; and the intermediate view, held 
by Averroés, that the religious conceptions are the symbols of a 
higher philosophical-truth, symbols which have to be taken for reality 

INTRODUCTION XXKY 

itself by the non-philosophers. For the unphilosophical, however, 
they are binding, since the sanctity of the State depends on them. 

When we have read the long discusstons between the philosophers 
and theologians we may come to the conclusion that it is sometimes 
more the formula than the essence of things which divides them. 
fioth philosophers and theologians affirm that God creates or has 
created the world, For the philosophers, since the world is eternal, 
this creation is eternal. Is there, however, any sense in calling 
created what has been eternally? For the theologians God is the 
creator of everything including time, but does not the term ‘creation’ 
assume already the concept of time? Both the philosophers and 
theologians apply to Gad the theory that His will and knowledge 
differ from human will and knowledge in that they are creative 
principles and essentially beyond understanding; both admit that 
the Divine cannot be measured by the standards of man. But this, 
in fact, implies an avowal of our complete ignorance in face of the 
Mystery of God. Still, for both parties God is the supreme Artifex 
who in His wisdom has chosen the best of all possible worlds; for 
although the philosophers affirm also that God acts only by natural 
necessity, their system, like that of their predecessors, the Platonists, 
Peripatetics, and Stoics, is essentially teleological. As to the problem 
of possibility, both parties commit the same inconsistencies and hold 
sometimes that the world could, sometimes that it could not, have 
Icon different from what it is. Finally, both parties believe in God's 
ultimate Unity. 

And if one studies the other works of Ghazali the resemblance 
between him and the philosophers becomes still greater. For instance, 
he too believes in the spirituality of the soul, notwithstanding the 
arguments he gives against it in this book; he too sometimes regards 
religious concepts as the symbols of a higher philosophical or mystical 
truth, although he admits here only a literal interpretation. He too 
sometimes teaches the fundamental theory of the philosophers which 
he uries to refute so insistently in our book, the theory that from the 
one supreme Agent as the ultimate source through intermediaries 
all things derive; and he himself expresses this idea (in his Alchemy 
of iappiness and slightly differently in his Vivification of Theology) by 
the charming simile of an ant which seeing black tracings on a sheet 
of paper thinks that their cause is the pen, while it is the hand that 
moves the pen by the power of the will which derives from the heart, 
tiself inspired by the spiritual agent, the cause of causes. The 

Xxxvi INTRODUCTION ©— 

scocmniblanees between Ghazali and Averroés, men belonging to the 
same culture, indeed, the greatest men in this culture, seem some- 
times greater than their differences. 

Emotionally the difference goes deep. Averroés is a philosopher. 
and a proud believer in the possibility of reason to achieve a know- 
ledge of ‘was das Innere der Welt zusammenhal’, He was not’, 
always too sure, he knew too much, and there is much wavering and 
hesitation in his ideas. Still, his faith in reason remains unshaken.< | 
Although he does not subscribe to the lofty words of his master that 
man because of the power of his inteilect is a mortal God, he * 
reproaches the theologians for haying made God an immortal man., 
God, for him, is 2 dehumanized principle. But if God has to respond 
to the needs of man’s heart, can He be exempt from humanity? 
Ghazali is a mu’mtn, that is a believer, he is a mustim, that is he accepts: 
his heart submits to a truth his reason cannot establish, for his heart 
has reasons his reason does not know. His theology is the philosophy 
of the heart in which there is expressed man’s fear and loneliness and 
his feelmg of dependence on an understanding and loving Being to 
whom he can cry out from the depths of his despair, and whase mercy 
is infinite. It is not so much after abstract truth that Ghazali strives; 
his search is for God, for the Pity behind the clouds. 

IN THE NAME OF THE MERCIFUL AND COMPASSIONATE 3 
GOD; AND AFTER PRAISE TO GOD AND BENEDICTION 
UPON ALL HIS MESSENGERS AND PROPHETS: 

Tue aim of this book is to show the different degrees of assent! and 
conviction attained by the assertions in The Incoherence of the Philoso- 
phers, and to prove that the greater part has not reached the degree 
of evidence and of truth. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 
Concerning the Eterntty of the World 

Ghazali, speaking of the philosophers’ proofs for the eternity of the 4 
world,? says: 

Let us restrict ourselves in this chapter to those proofs that make an 
impression on the mind. 

This chapter contains four* proofs, 

THE FIRST PROOF 

The philosophers say: It is impossible that the temporal should proceed 
from the absolutely Eternal. For it is clear—~if we assume the Eternal 
existing without, for instance, the world proceeding from Him, then, at a 
certain moment, the world beginning to proceed fram Him—that it did 
not proceed before, because there was no determining principle for its 
existence, but its existence was pure possibility*. When the world begins 
in time, a new determinant either does or does not arise. If it does not, the 
world will stay in the same state of pure possibility as before; if a new 
determinant does aris¢, the same question can be asked about this new 
aleterminant, why it determines now, and not before, and either we shall] 
have an infinite regress or we shall arrive at a principle determining 
eternally.3 

I say: This argument is in the highest degree dialectical and does 5 ~ 
not reach the pitch of demonstrative proof.4 For its premisses are 
common notions, and common notions approach the equivocal, 
whereas demonstrative premisses are concerned with things proper 
to the same genus.* 

For the term ‘possible’ is used in an equivocal way of the possible 
that happens more often than not, of the possible that happens less 
often than not, and of the possible with equal chances of happening, 
and these three types of the possible do not seem to have the same 
need for a new determining principle.® For the possible that happens § 
mere often than not is frequently believed to have its determining 

a 

5 

7 

2 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

principle in itself, not outside, as is the case with the possible which 
has equal chances of happening and not happening.’ Further, the 
possible resides sometimes in the agent, i.e. the posstbility of acting, 
and sometimes in the patient, i.e. the possibility of receiving, and it 
does not seem that the necessity for a determining principle is the 
same in both cases. For it is welt known that the possible in the 
patient needs a new determinant from the outside; this can be per- 
ceived by the senses in artificial things and in many natural things 
too, although in regard to natural things there is a doubt, for in most 
natural things the principle of their change forms part of them.? 
Therefore it is believed of many natural things that they move 
themselves, and it is by no means self-evident that everything that is 
moved has a mover and that there is nothing that moves itself? But 
all this needs to be examined, and the old philosophers have there- 
fore done so, As concerns the possible in the agent, however, in many 
cases it is believed that it can be actualized without an external prin- 
ciple, for the transition in the agent from inactivity to activity is 
often regarded as not being a change which requires a principle; 
e.g.. the transition in the geometer from non-geometrizing to geo- 
metrizing, or in the teacher from non-teaching to teaching. 

Further, those changes which are regarded as needing a principle 
of change can sometimes be changes in substance, sometimes in 
quahity, or in quantity, or in place.‘ 

In addition, ‘eternal’ is predicated by many of the eternal-by-itself 
and the eternal-through-another.’ According to some, it is permissible 
to admit certain changes in the Eternal, for instance a new volition 
in the Eternal, according to the Karramites,® and the possibility of 
generation and corruption which the ancients attribute to primary 
matter, although it is eternal.” Equally, new concepts are admitted 
in the possible intellect although; according to most authors, it is 
eternal.® But there are also changes which are inadmissible, especially 
according to certain ancients, though not according to others, 

Then there is the agent who acts of his will and the agent which 
acts by nature, and the manner of actualization of the possible act 
is not the same for both agents, i.e. so far as the need for a new deter- 
minant is concerned. Further, is this division into two agents com- 
plete, or does demonstration lead to an agent which resembles neither 
the natural agent nor the votuntary agent of human experience? 

All these are multifarious and difficult questions which need, each 
of them, a special examination, both in themselves and in regard to 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 3 

the opinions the ancients held about them, To treat what is in 

reality a plurality of questions as one problem is one of the well- 

known seven sophisms,' and a mistake in one of these principles 

becomes a great error by the end of the examination of reality.? 
Ghazali says: 

There are two objections to this. The first objection is to say: why* do 
you deny the theory of those who say that the world has been created by 
an eternal will which has decreed its existence in the time in which it 
exists; that its non-existence lasts until] the moment it ceases and that its 
existence begins from the moment it begins; that its existence was not 
willed before and therefore did not happen, and that at the exact moment 
it began it was willed by an eternal will and therefore began?? What is the 
objection to this theory and what is absurd in it? 

I say: 

This argument is sophistical: although it is not allowable for 
him to admit the possibility of the actual effect being delayed 
after the actual cause, and in a voluntary agent, after the decision 
to act, he regards it as possible that the effect should be delayed after 
the will of the agent. It is possible that the effect should be delayed 
after the wilt of the agent, but its being delayed after the actual cause 
is impossible, and equally impossible is its being delayed after a 
voluntary agent’s decision to act. The difficulty is thus unchanged, 
fur he must of necessity draw one of these two conclusions: either 
that the act of the agent does not imply in him a change which itself 
would need an external principle of change, or that there are changes 
which arise by themselves, without the necessity of an agent in whom 
they occur and who causes them, and that therefore there are 
changes possible in the Eternal without an agent who causes them. 
And his adversaries insist on these two very points: (1) that the act 
of the agent necessarily implies a change’ and that each change has 
a principle which causes it; (2) that the Eternal cannot change in 
any way. But all this is difficult to prove.’ 

The Ash‘arites are forced to assume either a first agent or a first 
act of this agent, for they cannot admit that the disposition of the 
agent, relative to the effect, when he acts is the same as his disposi- 
tion, when he does not act.6 This implies therefore a new disposition 
or a new relation, and this necessarily either in the agent, or in the 
elfect, or in both.” But in this case, if we posit as a principle that for 
cach new disposition there is an agent, this new disposition in the 
lirst agente will either need another agent, and then this first agent 

9 

8 

a 

——_——_—___.. 

10 

4 TAHAFUT AL‘TAHAFUT 

was not the first and was not on his own account suffictent for the | 
act but needed another, or the agent of the disposition which is 
the condition of the agent’s act will be identical with the agent of 
the act. Ther this act which we regarded as being the first act arising 
out of him will not be the first, but his act producing the disposition 
which is the condition of the effect will be anterior to the act produc- 
ing the effect.’ This, you see, is a necessary consequence, unless one 
allows that new dispositions may arise in the agents without a cause. 
But this is absurd, unless one believes that there are things which 
happen at haphazard and by themselves,? a theory of the old philo- 
sophers who denied the agent,’ the falsehood of which is self-evident. 

In Ghazali’s objection there is a confusion. For our expressions 
‘eternal will’ and “temporal will’ are equivocal, indced contrary. For 
the empirical will is a faculty which possesses the possibility of doing 
equally ane of two contraries and then of receiving equally one of 
the two contraries willed.4 For the will is the desire of the agent 
towards action.’ When the agent acts, the desire ceases and the thing 
willed happens, and this desire and this act are equally relaied to 
both the contraries, Bu¢ when one says: “Fhere is a Willer who wills 
eternally one of two contraries in Himself’, the definition of the will 
is abandoned, for we have transferred its nature from the possible to 
the necessary. If it is objected that in au eternal will che will does 
not cease through the presence of the object willed, for as an eternal 
will has no beginning there is no moment in it which is specially 
determined for the realization of the object willed, we answer: this 
is not obvious, uniess we say that demonstrative proof leads to the 
existence of an agent endowed with a power which is neither volun- 
tary nor natural, which, however, the Divine Law calls ‘will’, in the 
same way as demonstrative proof leads to middle terms between 
things which seemed at firse sight to be contrary, without being 
really so, as when we speak of an existence which is neither inside 
nor outside the world.® 

Ghazali answers, on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers say: This is clearly impossible, for everything that 
happens is necessitated and has its cause, and as it is impossible that there 
should be an eflect without a necessitating principle and a cause, so it is 
impossible that there should exist a cause of which the effect is delayed, 
when all the conditions of its necessitating, ils causes and elements are com- 
pletely fulfilled. On the contrary, the existence of the effect, when the 
cause is realized with all its conditions, is necessary, and its delay is just 
as impossible as an effect without cause. Before the existence of the world 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 5 

there existed a Willer, a will, and its relation to the thing willed. No 
new willer arose, nor a new will, nor a new relation to the will—for 
all this is change; how then could a new object of will arise, and what 
prevented its arising before? The condition of the new production 
did not distinguish itself from the condition of the non-production in 
any way, in any mode, in any relation—on the contrary, everything 
remained as it was before. At one moment the object of will did not exist, 
everything remained as it was before, and then the object of will existed. 
{s not this a perfectly absurd theory? 

T say: 

This is perfectly clear, except for ane who denies one of the 
premisses we have Jaid down previously. But Ghazali passes from 
this proof to an example based upon convention,' and through this 
he confuses this defence of the phitosophers. 

Ghazali says: 

This kind of impossibility is Found not only in the necessary and essential 
cause and effect but also in the accidental* and conventional. If a man 
pronounces the formula of divorce against his wife without the divorce 
becoming irrevocable immediately, one does not imagine that it will 
become so later.? Far he made the fermula through convention and usage 
a cause of the judgement, and we do not believe that the effect can be 
delayed, except when the divorce depends on an ulterior event, e.g. on the 
arrival of tomorrow or on someone's entering the house, for then the 
divorce does not take place at once, but only when tomorrow arrives or 
someone enters the house; in this case the man made the formula a cause 
only in conjunction with an ulterior event. But as this event, the coming 
of tamorrow and someone's entering the house, is not yet actual, the 
effect is delayed until this future event is realized. The effect only takes 
place when a new event, i.e, entering the house or the arrival of tomorrow, 
has actuaily happened. Even ifa man wanted to delay the effect after the 
formula, without making it dependent on an ulterior event, this would be 
regarded as impossible, although it is he himself who lays down the con- 
vention and fixes its modalities. If thus in conventional matters such a 
delay is meomprehensible and inadmissible, how can we admit it in 
essential, rational, and necessary causal relations? In respect of our con- 
duct and our voluntary actions, there is a delay jn actual volition only 
when there is some obstacle. When there is actual volition and actual 

wer and the obstacles are eliminated, a delay in the oloject willed is 
inadmissible.* A delay in the object willed is imaginable only in decision, 
for decision is not sufficient for the existence of the act;’ the decision to 
write does not produce the writing, if itis not, as a new fact, accompanied 
by an act of volition, ie. an impulse in che man which presents itself at 
the moment of the act. If there is thus an analogy between the eternal Will 
and our will to act, a delay of the object willed is inadmissible, unless 

to 

1i 

qo 

i) 

. 6 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

through an obstacle, and an antecedent existence of the volition is equally 
inadmissible, for 1 cannot will to get up tomorrow except by way of deci- 

_ ston. If, however, the eternal Will is analogous te our decision, it does not 

12 

suffice to produce the thing decided upon, but the act of creation must be — 
accompanied by a new act of volition, and this brings us again to the idea 
of a change. But then we have the same difficulty all over again. Why does 
this impulse or volition or will or whatever you choose to cali it happen 

“ just now and not before? There remain, then, only these alternatives: 

9 

13 

either something happening without a causé, or an infinite regress. This 
is the upshot of the discussion: There is a cause the conditions of which 
are all completely fulfilled, but notwithstanding this the effect is delayed 
and is not realized during a period to the beginning of which imagination 
cannot attain and for which thousands of years would mean no diminu- 
tion; then suddenly, without the addition of any new fact, and without 
the realization of any new condition, this effect comes into existence and 
is produced. And this is absurd. 

I say: 

This example of divorce based on convention seems to strengthen 
the argument of the philosophers, but in reality it weakens it. For 
it enables the Ash‘arites to say: In the same way as the actual 
divorce is delayed alter the formula of divorce till the moment when 
the condition of someone's entering the house, or any other, is ful- 
filled, so the realization of the world can be delayed after God’s act 
of creation until the condition ts fulfilled on which this realization 
depends, i.e. the moment when God willed it. But conventional 
things do not behave like rational. The Literalists, comparing these 
conventional things to rational, say: This divorce is not binding and 
does not become effective through the realization of the condition 
which is posterior to the pronouncement of the divorce by the 
divorcer, since it would be a divorce which became effective without 
connexion with the act of the divorcer.' But in this matter there is 
no relation between the concept drawn from the nature of things 
and that which is artificial and conventional. 

Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the Ash ‘arites: 

The answer is: Do you recognize the impossibility of connecting the 
eternal Will with the temporal production of anything, through the 
necessity of intuitive thought or through a logical deduction, or—to use 
your own logical terminology—do you recognize the clash between these 
two concepts through a middie term or without a middle term?? If you 
claim a middle term—and this is the deductive method—you will have to 
produce it, and if you assert that you know this through the necessity of 
thought, why do your adversaries not share this intuition with you?) For 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION ? 

the party which believes in the creation of the world in time through an 
eternal Will includes so many persons that no country can contain them 
and no number enumerate them, and they certainly do not contradict the 
logically minded out of obstinacy, while knowing better in their hearts. 
A proof according to the rules of logic must be produced to show this 
impossibility, as in ail your* arguments up till now there is only a presump- 
tion of impossibility and a comparison with our decision and our will; and 
this is false, for the eterna] Will does not resemble temporal volitions, and 
a pure presumption of impossibility will not suffice without proof. 

I say: 

This argument is oncof those which have only a very feeble 
persuasive power. It amounts to saying that one who claims the 
impossibility of delay in an effect, when its cause with all its condi- 
tions is realized, must assert that he knows this either by a syllogism 
or from first principles; if through a syllogism, he must produce it— 
but there is none; if from first principles, it must be known to all, 
adversaries and others alike. But this argument is mistaken, for it is 
not a condition of objective truth that it should be known to all. That 
anything should be held by ail docs not imply anything more than 
its being a commen notion, just as the existence of a common notion 
does not imply objective truth. 

Ghazali answers on behalf of the Ash‘arites: 

If it is said, “We know by the necessity of thought that, when all its 
conditions are fulfilled, a cause without effect is inadmissible and that to 
admit it is an affront to the necessity of thought,’ we answer: what is the 
difference between you and your adversaries, when they say to you, ‘We 
know by the necessity of thought the impossibility of a theory which 
affirms that one single being knows all the universals, without this know- 
ledge forming a plurality in its essence or adding anything to it, and with- 
out this plurality of things known implying a plurality in the knowledge’ ?* 
For this is your theory of God, which according to us and our science is 
quite absurd. You, however, say there is no analogy between eternal and 
temporal knowledge. Some of you acknowledge the impossibility involved, 
and say that God knows only Himself and that He is the knower, the 
knowledge and the known, and that the three are one. One might object: 
‘The unity of the knowledge, the knower, and the known is clearly an 
impossibility, for to suppose the Creator of the world ignorant of His own 
work is necessarily absurd, and the Eternal—who is far too high to be 
reached by your* words and the words of any heretics—could, if He knows 
only Himself, never know His work. 

I say: 
This amounts to saying that the theologians do not gratuitously 

15 

wn 

16 

wn 

ro 

8 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and without proof deny the admitted impossibility of a delay between 
the effect and its cause, but base thertselves on an argument which 
leads them to believe in the temporal creation of the world, and that 
they therefore act in the same way as the philosophers, who only 
deny the well-known necessary plurality of knowledge and known, 
so far as it concerns their unity in God, because of a demonstration 
which, according to them, leads them to their theory about Him. 
And that this is still more true of those philosophers who deny it to 
be necessary that God should knaw His own work, affirming that He 
knows only Himself. This assertion belongs to the class of assertions 
whose contrary is equally false.’ For there exists no proof which 
refutes anything that is evidently true, and universally acknowledged. 
Anything that can be refuted by a demonstrative proof is only sup- 
posed to be true, not really true.? Therefore, if it is absolutely and 
evidently true that knowledge and known form a plurality, both in 
the visible and in the invisible world, we can be sure that the 
philosophers cannot have a proof of this unity in God; but if the theory 
of the plurality of knowledge and known is only a supposition, then 
it is possible for the philosophers to have a proof. Equally, if it is 
absolutely true that the effect of a cause cannot be delayed after the 
causation and the Ash‘arites claim that they can advance a proof 
to deny it, then we can be absolutely sure that they cannot have such 
a proof. If there is a controversy about questions like this, the final 
criterion rests with the sound understanding? which does not base 
itself on prejudice and passion, when it probes according to the 
signs and rules by which truth and mere opinion are logically dis- 
tinguished. Likewise, if two people dispute about a sentence and one 
says that itis poetry, the other that itis prosc, the final judgement rests 
with the ‘sound understanding’ which can distinguish poetry trom 
prose, and with the science of prosody. And as, in the case of metre, the 
denial of him who denies it does not interfere with its perception 
by him who perceives it, so the denial of a truth by a contradictor 
does not trouble the conviction of the men to whom it is evident. 

This whole argument is extremely inept and weak, and Ghazali 
ought not to have filled* his book with such talk if he intended to 
convince the learned, 

And drawing consequences which are irrelevant and beside the 
point, Ghazali goes on to say: 

But the consequences of this argument cannot be overcame. And we 
say to them: How wilf you refute your adversaries, when they say the 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 9 

eternity of the world is impossible, for it implies an infinite number and 
an infinity of unities for the spherical revolutions, although they can be 
divided by six, by four, and by two.! For the sphere of the sun revolves in 
one year, the sphere of Saturn in thirty years, and so Saturn’s revolution is 
a thirtieth and Jupiter’s revolution—for Jupiter revolves in twelve years— 
a twelfth of the sun’s revolution. But the number of revolutions of Saturn 
has the same infinity as the revolutions of the sun, although they are in a 
proportion of one to thirty and even the infinity of the sphere of the fixed 
stars which turns round once in thirty-six thousand years is the same as 
the daily revolution which the sun performs in twenty-four hours. If now 
your adversary says that this is plainly impossible, in what does your 
argument differ from his? And suppose it is asked: Are the numbers of these 
revotutions ¢vén or uneven or both even and uneven or neither even nor 
uneven? If you answer, both even and uneven, or neither even nor uneven, 
you say what is evidently absurd. If, however, you say ‘even’ or ‘uneven’, 
even and uneven become uneven and even by the addition of one unit and 
how could infinity be one unit short? You must, therefore, draw the con- 
clusion that they are neither even nor uneven. 

I say: 

This too is a sophistical argument. It amounts to saying: In the 
same way aS you are unable to refute our argument for the creation 
of the world in time, that if it were eternal, its revolutions would be 
acither even nor uneven, so we cannot refute your theory that the 
effect of an agent whose conditions to act are always fuifilled cannot 
be delayed. This argument aims only at creating and establishing a 
doubt, which is one of the sophist’s objectives. 

But you, reader of this book, you have already heard the arguments 
of the philosophers to establish the eternity of the warld and the 
refutation of the Ash‘arites. Now hear the proofs of the Ash‘arites 
for their refutation and hear the arguments of the philosophers to 
refute those proofs in the wording of Ghazali!f 

I say: 

This is in brief that, if you imagine two circular movements in one 
and the same finite time and imagine then a limited part of these 
movements in one and the same finite time, the proportion between 
ihe parts of these two circular movements and between their wholes 
will be the same. For instance, if the circular movement of Saturn in 
tle period which we call a year is a thirtieth of the circular move- 
ment of the sun in this period, and you imagine the whole of the 
circular movements of the sun in proportion to the whole of the 

t [Here, in the Arabic text, the last passage of Ghazali, which previously was given 
ouly ia an abbreviated form, is repeated in full.J 

17 

to 

18 

$ 

19 

ao 

to 

20 

fo 

to Rats TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

circular movements of Saturn in one and the same period", necessarily 
the proportion between their wholes* and between their parts will be 
the same.’ If, however, there is no proportion between two move- 
ments in their totality, because they are both potential, i.e, they have 
neither beginning nor end but there exists a proportion between the 
parts, because they are both actual, then the proportion between 
the wholes is not necessarily the same as the proportion between the 
parts—although many think so, basing their proof on this prejudice 
—for there is no proportion between two magnitudes or quantities 
which are both taken to be infinite.2 When, therefore, the ancients 
believed that, for instance, the totality of the movements of the sun 
and of Saturn had neither beginning nor end, there could be no 
proportion between them, for this would have implied the finitude 
of both these totalities, just as this is implied for the parts of both, 
This is self-evident, Our adversaries believe that, when a proportion 
of more and less exists between parts, this proportion holds good also 
for the totalities, but this is only binding when the totalities are 
finite.3 For where there is no end there is neither ‘more’ nor ‘less’. 
The admission in such a case of the proportion of more and less 
brings with it another absurd consequence, namely that one in- 
finite could be greater than another. This is only absurd when 
one supposes two things actually infinite, for then a proportion 
does exist between them.‘ When, however, one imagines things 
potentially infinite, there exists no proportion at all. This is the 
right answer to this question, not what Ghazali says in the name 
of the philosophers. 

And through this are solved all the difficulties which beset our 
adversaries on this question, of which the greatest is that which they 
habitually formulate in this way: If the movements in the past are 
infinite, then no movement in the actual present can take place, 
unless an infinite number of preceding movements is terminated.5 
This is true, and acknowledged by the philosophers, once granted 
that the anterior movement is the condition for the posterior move- 
ment’s taking place, i.c. once granted that the existence of one single 
movement implies an infinite number of causes. But no philosopher 
allows the existence of an infinite number of causes, as accepted by 
the materialists, for this would imply the existence of an effect without 
cause and a motion without mover. But when the existence of an 
eternal prime mover had been proved, whose act cannot be posterior 
to his being, it follawed that there could as little be a beginning for 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION HI 

his act as for his being; otherwise his act would be possible, not 
necessary, and he would not be a first principle.! The acts of an 
agent who has no beginning have a beginning as little as his existence, 
and therefore it follows necessarily that no preceding act of his is the 
condition for the existence of a later, for neither of them is an agent 15 
by itself and their sequence is accidental. An accidental infinite, not 
an essential infinite, is admitted by the philosophers; nay, this type 21 
of infinite is in fact a necessary consequence of the existence of an 
eternal first principle? And this is not only true for successive or 
continuous movements and the like, but even where the earlier is 
regarded as the cause of the later, for instance the man who engenders 
a man like himself? For it is necessary that the series of temporal 
productions of one individual man by another should lead upwards 
to an eternal agent, for whom there is no beginning either of his 5 
existence or of his production of man out of man. The production of 
one man by another ad infinitum is accidental, whereas the relation 
of before and after in it is essential. The agent who has no beginning 
cither for his existence or for those acts of his which he performs with- 
out an instrument, has no first instrument* cither to perform those acts 
of his without beginning which by their nature need an instrument.* 
But since the theologians mistook the accidental for the essential, 
they denied this eternal agent; the solution of their problem was 
difficult and they believed this proof to be stringent. But this theory 
of the philosophers is clear, and their first master Aristotle has 
explained that, if motion were produced by motion, or clement by 
element, motion and element could not exist.5 For this type of infinite 
the philosophers admit neither a beginning nor an end, and therefore 
one can never say of anything in this series that it has ended or has 
begun, not even in the past, for everything that has an end must 22 
have begun and what does not begin does not end. This can also be 
understood from the fact that beginning and end are correlatives. 
‘Therefore one who affirms that there is no end of the celestial 
revolutions in the future cannot logically ascribe a beginning to them, 
for what has a beginning has an end and what has no end has no 
beginning, and the same relation exists between first and last; ie. 
what has a first term has also a last term, and what has no first term 5 
has no last term, and there is in reality neither end nor beginning 
for any part of a series that has no Jase term, and what has no 
heginning for any of its parts has no end for any of them either. 
When, therefore, the theologians ask the philosophers if the move- 

0 

23 

12 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ments which precede the present one are ended, their answer is 
negative, for their assumption that they have no beginning implies 
their endlessness. The opinion of the theologians that the philosophers 
admit their end is erroneous, for they do not admit an end for what 
has no beginning. It will be clear to you that neither the arguments 
of the theologians for the temporal creation of the world of which 
Ghazali speaks, nor the arguments of the philosophers which he 
includes and describes in his book, suffice to reach absolute evidence 
or afford stringent proof*. And this is what we have tried to show in 
this book. The best answer one can give to him who asks where in 
the past is the starting-point of His acts, is: The starting-point of 
His acts is at the starting-point of His existence; for neither of them 
has a beginning. 

And here is the passage of Ghazali in which he sets forth the defence 
of the philosophers against the argument built on the difference in 
speed of the celestial spheres, and his refutation of their argument. 

Ghazali says: 

If one says, “The error in your argument consists in your considering 
those circular movernents as an aggregate of units, but those movements 
have no real existence, for the past is no more and the future not yet; 
“aggregate” means units existing in the present, but in this case there is 
no existence.” 

Then he says to refute this: 

We answer: Number can be divided into even and uneven; there is no 
third possibility, whether for the numbered permanent reality, or for the 
numbered passing event. Therefore whatever number we imagine, we 
must believe it to be even or uneven, whether we regard i¢ as existent or 
non-existent; and if the thing mumbered vanishes from existence, our 
judgement of its being even or uneven does not vanish or change.* 

T say: 

This is the end of his argument. But this argument—that the 
numbered thing must be judged as even or uneven, whether it 
exists or not—is only valid so far as it concerns external things or 
things in the soul that have a beginning and an end. For of the num- 
ber which exists only potentially, ie. which has neither beginning 
nor end, it cannot truly be said that it is even or uneven, or that it 
begins or ends; it happens neither in the past nor in the future, for 
what exists potentially falls under the law of non-existence.? This is 
what the philosophers meant when they said that the circular move- 
ments of the past and the ftuture are non-existent. The upshot of this 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 13 

question is: Everything that is called a limited aggregate with a 
beginning and an end is so called either because it has a beginning 5 
and end in the world exterior to the soul, or because it is inside, not 
outside, the soul. Every totality, actual and limited in the past, 
whether inside or outside the soul, is necessarily either even or 
uneven. But an unlimited aggregate existing outside the soul cannot 
be other than limited so far as it is represented in the soul, for the 
soul cannot represent unlimited existence. Therefore also this un- 
limited aggregate, as being limited in the soul, can be called even or 
uneven; in so far, however, as it exists outside the soul, it can be 
called neither even nor uneven. Equally, past aggregates which are 
considered to exist potentially outside the soul, i.e. which have no 
beginning, cannot be called even or uneven unless they are looked 
upon as actual, i.e. as having beginning and end. No motion possesses 
totality or forms an aggregate, i.e. is provided with a beginning or an 
end, except in so far as it is in the soul, as is the case with time,' And 
it follows from the nature of circular movement that it is neither even 
nor uneven except as represented in the soul. The cause of this mis- 25 
take is that it was believed that, when something possesses a certain 
quality in the soul, it must possess this quality also outside the soul, 
and, since anything that has happened in the past can only be 
represented in the soul as finite, it was thoughe that everything that 
has happened in the past must also be finite outside the soul. And as 
the circular movements of the future are regarded by the imagination*® § 
as infinite, for it represents them as a sequence of part after pare,? 
Plato? and the Ash‘arites believed that they might be infinite, but 
this is simply a judgement based on imagination, not on proof. 
Therefore those* who beliceve—as many theologians have done—that, 

if the world is supposed to have begun, it must have an end, are truer 

to their principlest and show more consistency. 19 

Ghazali says after this: 

“ 

And we say moreover to the philosophers: According to your principles 
it is not absurd that there should be actual units, qualitatively differen- 
tiated, which are infinite in number; I am thinking of human souls, 
separated through death from their bodies. These are therefore realities 
that can neither be called even nor uneven. How will you refute the man 
who affirms that this is necessarily absurd in the same way as you claim 
the connexion between an eternal will and a temporal creation to be 
necessarily absurd? This theory about souls is that which Avicenna 26 
accepted, and it is perhaps Aristotle’s. 

to 

27 

“ 

14 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

I say: ; 

This argument is extremely weak. It says, in brief, ‘You philoso- 
phers need not refute our assertion that what is a logical necessity for 
you is not necessary, as you consider things possible which your adver- 
saries consider impossible by the necessity of thought, That is to say, 
just as you consider things possible which your adversaries consider 
impossible, so you consider things necessary which your adversaries 
do not consider so. And you cannot bring a criterion for judging the 
two claims.’ It has already been shown in the science of logic that this 
is a weak rhetorical or sophistical kind of argument.! The answer is 
that what we* claim to be necessarily true is objectively true, whereas 
what you claim as necessarily absurd is not as you claim it to be, For 
this there is no other criterion than immediate intuttive apprehension,” 
just as, when one man claims that a line is rhythmical and another 
denies it, the criterion is the intuition of the sound understanding. 

As for the thesis of a numerical plurality of immaterial souls, this 
is not a theory acknowledged by the philosophers,} for they regard 
matter as the cause of numerical plurality* and form as the cause of 
congruity in numerical plurality. And that there should be a numeri- 
cal plurality without matter, having one unique form, is impossible. 
For in its description one individual can only be distinguished from 
another accidentally, as there is often another individual who 
participates in this description,’ but only through their matter do 
individuals differ in reality. And also this: the impossibility of an 
actual infinite is an acknowledged axiom in philosophical theory, 
equally valid for material and immaterial things. We do not know of 

‘ any one who makes a distinction here between the spatial and the 

28 

nen-spatial, with the single exception of Avicenna.® I do not know 
of any other philosopher who affirms this, it does not correspond with 
any of their principles and it makes no sense, for the philosophers 
deny the existence of an actual infinite equally for material and for 
immaterial things, as it would imply that one infinite could be 
greater than another. Perhaps Avicenna wanted only to satisfy the 
masses, telling them what they were accustomed to hear about the 
soul. But this theory is far (rom satisfactory. For ifthere were an actual 
infinite and it were divided in two, the part would equa! the whole; 
e.g. if there were a line or 2 number actually infinite in both direc- 
tions and it were divided in two, both the parts and the whole would 
be actually infinite; and this is absurd.” All this is simply the conse- 
quence of the admission of an actual and not potential infinite. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION , 15 
Ghazali says: 

If it ts said, ‘The truth lies with Plato’s theory of one eternal soul which 
is only divided in bodies and returns after its separation from them to its 
original unity’,' we answer: This theory is still worse, more objectionable 
and more apt to be regarded as contrary to the necessity of thought. For 
we say that the soul of Zaid is either identical with the soul of Amr or 
different from it; but their identity would mean something absurd, for 
everyone is conscious of his own identity and knows that he is not another, 
and, were they identical, their knowledge, which is an essential quality of 
their souls and enters into ali the relations inte which their souls enter, 
would be identical too.? If you say their soul is unique and only divided 
through its association with bodies, we answer that the division of a unity 
which has no measurable volume®* is absurd by the necessity of thought. 
And how could the one become two, and indeed a thousand, and then 

return to its unity? This can be understood of things which have volume - 
and quantity, like the water of the sea which is distributed into brooks and _ 
rivers and flows then back again into the sea, but how can that which has 

ana quantity be divided?) We seck te show by all this that the philosophers 
cannot shake the conviction of their adversaries that the eternal Will is 
connected with temporal creation, except by claiming its absurdity by the 
necessity of thought, and that therefore they are in no way different from 
ihe theologians who make the same claim against the philosophical doc- 
trines opposed to theirs. And out of this there is no issue. 

I say: 

Zaid and Amr are numerically different, but identical in form. If, 
for example, the soul of Zaid were numerically different from the 
soul of Amr in the way Zaid is numerically different from Amr, the 
soul of Zaid and the soul of Amr would be numerically two, but one 
in their form, and the soul would possess another soul.* The necessary 
conclusion is therefore that the soul of Zaid and the soul of Amr are 
identical im their form. An identical form inheres in a numerical, i.e. 
a divisible, multiplicity, only through the multiplicity of matter. If 
then the soul does not die when the body dies, or if it possesses an 
immortal element, it must, when it has left the bodies, form a 
numerical unity.’ But this is not the place to go deeper into this 
subject. 

His argument against Plato is sophistical. It says in short that the 
soul of Zaid is either identical with the soul of Amr or different from 
it; but that the soul of Zaid is not identical with the soul of Amr and 
that therefore it is different from it. But ‘different’ is an equivocal 
term, and ‘identity’ too is predicated of a number of things which 
are also called ‘different’.° The souls of Zaid and Amr are one in one 

30 

10 

31 

16 : TAHAFUT AL TARAFUT 

sense and many in another; we might say, one in relation to their 
form, many in reJation to their substratum. His remark that division 
can only be imagined of the quantitative is partially false; it is true of 
essential division, but not of accidental division, i.e. of those things 
which can be divided, because they exist in the essentially divisible.’ 
The essentially divisible is, for example, body; accidental division is, 
for instance, the division of whiteness, when the bodies in which it 
is present are divided, and in this way the forms and the soul are 
accidentally divisible, i.e. through the division of the substrate. The 
soul is closely similar to Light: light is divided by the division of 
illuminated bodies, and is unified when the bodies are annihilated, 
and this same relation holds between soul and bodies.* ‘To advance 
such sophistical arguments is dishonest, for it may be supposed that 
he is not a man to have overlooked the points mentioned. What he 
said, he said only to flatter the masses of his times, but how far 
removed is such an attitude from the character of those who seek to 
set forth the truth! But perhaps the man may be forgiven on 
account of the time and place in which he lived; and indeed he only 
proceeded in his books in a tentative way.* 

And as these arguments carry no evidence whatsoever, Ghazati 
says: 

We want to show by all this that the philosophers cannot shake the 
conviction of their adversaries that the eternal Will is connected with 
temporal creation, by claiming its absurdity by the necessity of thought, 
and that therefore they do not distinguish themselves from the theologians, 
who inake the same claiin against the philosophical doctrines opposed to 
theirs. And out of this there is no issue. 

Tsay: 

When someone denies a truth of which it is absolutely certain that 
it is such-and-such, there exists no argument by which we can come 
to an understanding with him; for every argument is based on known 
premisses about which both adversaries agree. When each point 
advanced is denied by the adversary, discussion with him becomes 
impossible, but such people stand outside the pale of humanity and 
have to be educated. But for him who denies an evident truth, 
because of a difficulty which presents itself to him there is a remedy, 
i.e. the solution of this difficulty. He who does not understand evident 
truth, because he is lacking in intelligence, cannot be taught any- 
thing, nor can he be educated.® It is like trying to make the blind 
imagine colours or know their existence. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 17 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers may object: This argument (that the present has 
been preceded by an infinite past) can be turned against you, for God 
before the creation of the world was able to create it, say, one year or two 
years* before He did, and there is no limit to His power; but He seemed 
to have patience and did not create. Then He created, Now, the duration 
of His inactivity is either finite or infinite. If you say finite, the existence 
of the Creator becomes finite; if you say infinite, a duration in which there 
is an infinite number of possibitities receives its termination.! We answer: 
Duration and time are, according to us, created, but we shall explain the 
real answer to this question when we reply to the second proof of the 
philosophers.? 

I say: 

Most people who accept a temporal creation of the world believe 
time to have been created with it. Therefore his assertion that the 
duration of His inactivity was either limited or unlimited is untrue. 
For what has no beginning does not finish or end. And the oppo- 
nent does not admit that the inactivity has any duration at all. 
What one has to ask them about the consequences of their theory is: 
Is it possible, when the creation of time is admitted, that the term of 
its beginning may lic beyond the real time in which we Jive?) If they 
answer that it is not possible, they posit a limited extension beyond 
which the Creator cannot pass, and this is, in their view, shocking 
and absurd. If, however, they concede that its possible beginning 
may lie beyond the moment of its created term, it may further be 
asked if there may not lie another term beyond this second. If they 
answer in the affirmative—and they cannot do otherwise—it will be 
said; Then we shall have here a possible creation of an infinite num- 
ber of durations, and you will be forced to admit—according to your 
argument about the spherical revolutions—that their termination is 
a condition for the real age which exists since then. If you say what 
is infinite does not finish, the arguments you use about the spherical 
revolutions against your opponents your opponents will use against 
you* on the subject of the possibility of created durations. If it is 
objected that the difference between those two cases is that these 
infinite possibilities belong to extensions which de not become actual, 
whereas the spherical revolutions do become actual, the answer is 
that the possibilities of things belong to their necessary accidents and 
that it does not make any difference, according to the philosophers, 
if they precede these things or are simultaneous with them, for of 
necessity they are the dispositions* of things. If, then, it is impossible 

ory 

Oo 

om 

33 

wn 

34 

18 " TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that before the existence of the present spherical revolution there 
should have been infinite spherical revolutions, the existence of 
infinite possible revolutions is equally impossible. If one wants to 
avoid these consequences, one can say that the age of the world is a 
definite quantity and cannot be longer or shorter than it is, in con- 
formity with the philosophical doctrine about the size of the world.! 
Therefore these arguments are not stringent, and the safest way for 
him who accepts the temporal creation of the world is to regard time 
as of a definite extension and not to admit a possibility which pre- 
cedes the possible;? and to regard also the spatial extension of the 
world as finite. Only, spatial extension forms a simultaneous whole; 
not so time, 

Ghazali expounds a certain kind of argument attributed to the 
philosophers on this subject against the theologians when they 
denied* that the impossibility of delay* jn the Creator's act after His 
existence is known by primitive intuition:? 

How will you defend yourselves, theologians, against the philosophers, 
when they drop this argument, based on the necessity of chought, and 
prove the eternity of the world* in this way, saying that times are equiva- 
lent so far as the possibility that the Divine Will should attach itself to 
them is concerned, for what differentiates a given time from an earlier or 
a later time? And it is not absurd to believe that the earlier or the later 
might be chosen when on the contrary you theologians say about white, 
black, movement, and rest that the white ts realized through the eternal 
Will although its substrate accepts equally black and white. Why, then, 
does the eternal Will attach itself to the white rather than to the black, 
and what differentiates one of the two possibles from the other for con- 
nexion with the eternal Will? But we philosophers know by the necessity 
of thought that one thing does not distinguish itself from a similar except 
by a differentiating principle, for if not, it would be possible that the 
world should come into existence, having the possibility both of existing 
and of not existing, and that the side of existence, although it has the same 
possibility as the side of non-existence, should be differentiated without a 
differentiating principle. If you answer that the Will of God is the differen- 
tiating principle, then one has to inquire what differentiates the Will, i.e. 
the reason why it has been differentiated in such or such way. And if you 
answer; One does not inquire after the motives of the Eternal,’ well, let 
the world then be eternal, and let us not inquire alter its Creator and its 
cause, since one does not inquire after the motives of the Eternal! Ii it is 
regarded as possible that the Eternal should differentiate one of the two 
possibles by chance, it will be an extreme absurdity to say that the world 
is diflerentiated in differentiated forms which might just as well be other- 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 19 

wise, and one might then say that this has happened by chance in the 
same way as you say that the Divine Will has differentiated one time rather 
than another or one form rather than another by chance. If you say that 
such a question is irrelevant, because it refers to anything God can will or 
decide, we answer that this question is quite relevant, for it concerns any 
time and is pertinent for our opponents to any decision God takes. 

We answer: The world exists, in the way it exists, in its time, with its 
qualities, and in its space, by the Divine Will and will is a quatity which has 
the faculty of differentiating one thing from another,' and if it had not this 
faculty, power in itself would suffice.* But, since power ts equally related to 
two contraries’ and a differentiating principle is needed to differentiate one 
thing from a similar, it is said that the Eternal possesses besides His power 
a quality which can differentiate between two similars.* And to ask why 
will differentiates one of two similars is like asking why knowledge must 
comprehend the knowable, and the answer is that ‘knowledge’ is the term 
for a quality which has just this nature. And in the same way, ‘will’ is the 
term for a quality the nature or rather the essence of which is to differen- 
tiate one thing from another. 

The philosophers may object: The assumption of a quality the nature 
of which is to differentiate one thing from a similar one is something incom- 
prehensible, nay even contradictory, for ‘similar’ means not to be differen- 
Uiated, and ‘differentiated’ means not similar, And it must not be believed 
that two blacks in two substrates are similar in every way, since the one is 
in one place and the other in another, and this causes a distinction; nor are 
two blacks at two times in one substrate absolutely similar, since they are 
separated in time, and how could they therefore be similar in every way? 
When we say of two blacks that they are similar, we mean that they are 
similar in blackness, in their special relation to it—not absolutely. Cer- 
tainly, if the substrate and the time were one without any distinction, one 
could not speak any more of iwe blacks or of any duality at all. This proves 
that the term ‘Divine Will’ is derived from our will, and one does not 
imagine that through our will two similar things can be differentiated.5 On 
the contrary, if someone who is thirsty has before him two cups of water, 
similar in everything in respect to his aim, it will not be possible for him 
to take either of them. No, he can only take the one he thinks more 
heautiful or Jighter or nearer to his right hand, if he is right-handed, or act 
from some such reason, hidden or known, Without this the differendation 
of the one from the other cannot be imagined. 

I say: 

The summary of what Ghazali relates in this section of the proofs 
of the philosophers for the impossibility of a temporal proceeding 
from an eternal agent is that in God there cannot be a will, The 
philosophers could only arrive at this argument after granting to 
their opponents that all opposites—oppasites in time,* like anterior 

35 

ow 

36 

10 

+ 

20 ' TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and posterior, as well as those in quality, like white and black—are 
equivalent in relation to the eternal Will. And also non-existence and 
existence are, according to the theologians, equivalent in relation to 
the Divine Will. And having granted their opponents this premiss, 
although they did not acknowledge its teuth, they said to them: It is 
of the nature of will that it cannot give preponderance to one thing 
rather than to a similar one, except through a differentiating prin- 
ciple! and a cause which only exist in one of these two similar things; 
if not, one of the two would happen by chance—and the philosophers 
argued for the sake of discussion, as if they had conceded thae, if the 
Eternal had a will, a temporal could proceed from an eternal. As the 
theologians were unable to give a satisfactory answer, they took 
refuge in the theory that the eternal Will is a quality the nature of 
which is to differentiate between two similar things, without there 
being for God a differentiating principle which inclines Him to one 
of two similar acts; that the eternal Will is thus a quality like warmth 
which gives heat or like knowledge which comprehends the know- 
able? But their opponents, the philosophers, answered: It is impos- 
sible that this should happen, for two similar things are equivalent 
for the willer, and his action can only attach itself to the one rather 
than to the other through their being dissimilar, ic. through one’s 
having a quality the other has not. When, however, they are similar 
in every way and when for God there is no differentiating principle 
at all, His will will attach itself to both of them indifferently and, 
when this is the case—-His will being the cause of His act—the act 
will not attach itself to the one rather than te the other, it will attach 
itself either to the two contrary actions simultancously or to neither 
of them at all, and both cases are absurd. ‘he philosophers, there- 
fore, began their argument, as if they had it granted to them that 
all things were equivalent in relation to the First Agent, and they 
forced them to admit that there must be for God a differentiating 
principle which precedes Him, which is absurd. When the theolo- 
gians answered that will is a quality the natmre of which is to 
differentiate the similar from the similar, in so far as it is similar, 
the philosophers objected that this is not understood or meant by 
the idea of will. They therefore appear to reject the principle which 
they granted them in the beginning.? This is in short the content of 
this section. It waves the argument from the original question to the 
problem of the will; to shift one’s ground,* however, is an act of 
sophistry. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 25 

Ghazali answers in defence of the theological doctrine of the 
Divine Will: 

There are two objections: First, as to your affirmation that you cannot 
imagine this, do you know it by the necessity of thought or through deduc- 
tion? You can claim neither the one nor the other. Your comparison with 
our will is a bad analogy, which resembles that employed on the question 
of God’s knowledge. Now God’s knowledge is different from ours in several 
ways which we acknowledge. Therefore it is not absurd to admit a difler- 
ence in the will. Your affirmation is like saying that an essence existing 
neither outside nor inside the world, neither continuous with the world 
nor separated from it, cannot be understood, because we cannot under- 
stand this according to our human measure; the right answer is that it is 
the fault of your imagination, for rational proof has led the learned to 
accept its truth. How, then, will you refute these who say that rational 
proof has led to establishing in God a quality the nature of which is to 
differentiate between two similar things? And, if the word ‘will’ does not 
apply, cail it by another name, for let us not quibble about words! We 
only use the termi ‘will’ by permission of the Divine Law.' It may be 
objected that by its conventional meaning ‘will’ designates that which 
has desire, and God has no desire, but we are concerned here with a ques- 
tion not of words but of fact. Besides, we do not even with respect to our 
human will concede thac this cannot be imagined. Suppose two similar 
dates in front of a man who has a strong desire* for them, but who is 
unable to take them both, Surely he will take one of them through a 
quality in him the nature of which is to differentiate between two similar 
things. Alf the distinguishing qualities you have mentioned, like beauty or 
nearness or facility in taking, we can assume to be absent, but still the 
possibility of the taking remains. You can choose between two answers: 
either you merely say that an equivalence in respect to his desire cannot 
be imagined—but this is a silly answer, for to assume it is indeed possible— 
or you say that if an equivalence is assumed, the man will remain for 
ever hungry and perplexed, looking at the dates without taking one of 
them, and without a power to choose or to will, distinct from his desire.? 
And this again is one of those absurdities which are recognized by the 
necessity of thought. Everyone, therefore, who studies, in the human and 
the divine, the real working of the act of choice, must necessarily admit a 
quality the nature of which is to differentiate between two similar things. 

I say: 

This objection can be summarized in two parts: In the first 
Ghazali concedes that the human will is such that it is unable to 
dillerentiate one thing from a similar one, in so far as it is similar, 
but that a rational proof forces us to accept the existence of such a 
«tality in the First Agent. To believe that such a quality cannot exist 

~ 

5 

38 

9 

39 

ow 

to 

40 

22 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

would be like believing that there cannot exist a being who is neither 
inside nor outside the world. According to this reasoning, will, which 
is attributed to the First Agent and to man, is predicated in an equi- 
vocal way, like knowledge and other qualities which exist in the 
Eternal in a different way from that in which they exist in the 
temporal, and it is only through the prescription of the Divine Law 
that we speak of the Divine Will. It is clear that this objection cannot 
have anything more than a dialectical value. For a proof that could 
demonstrate the existence of such a quality, f.e, a principle deter- 
mining the existence of one thing rather than that of a similar, 
would have to assume things wilted that are similar; things willed 
are, however, not similar, but on the contrary opposite, for all 
opposites can be reduced to the opposition of being and not being, 
which is the extreme form of opposition; and opposition is the con- 
trary of similarity.! The assumption of the theologians that the things 
to which the will attaches itself are similar is a false one, and we shall 
speak of it later. If they say: we affirm only that they are similar in 
relation to the First Willer, who in His holiness is too exalted to 
possess desires, and it is through desires that two similar things are 
actually differentiated,? we answer: as to the desires whose realiza- 
tion contributes to the perfection of the essence of the willer,? as 
happens with our desires, through which our will attaches itself to 
the things willed—those desires are impossible in God, for the will 
which acts in this way is a longing for perfection when there is an 
imperfection in the essence of the willer; but as to the desires which 
belong to the essence of the things willed,* nothing* new comes to the 
willer from their realization. It comes exclusively to the thing willed, 
for instance, when a thing passes into existence from non-existence, 
for it cannot be doubted that existence is better for it than non- 
existence. It is in this second way that the Primal Will is related to 
the existing things, for it chooses for them eternally the better of two 
opposites, and this essentially and primally, This is the first part of 
the objection contained ia this argument. 

In the second part he no longer concedes that this quality cannot 
exist in the human will, but tries to prove that there is also in us, in 
the face of similar things, a will which distinguishes one from the 
other; of this he gives examples. For instance, it is assumed that in 
front of 2 man there are two dates, similar in every way, and it is 
supposed that he cannot take them both at the same time. It is sup- 
posed that no special attraction need be imagined for him in either 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 23 

of them, and that nevertheless he will of necessity distinguish one of 
them by taking it. But this is an error. For, when one supposes such 
a thing, and a willer whom necessity prompts to eat or to take the 
date, then it is by no means a matter of distinguishing between two 
similar things when, in this condition, he takes one of the two dates. 
It is nothing but the admission of an equivalence of two similar 
things; for whichever of the two dates he may take, his aim will be 
attained and his desire satisfied. His will attaches itself therefore 
merely to the distinction between the fact of taking one of them and 
the fact of leaving them altogether; it attaches itself by no means 
to the act of taking one definite date and distinguishing this act from 
the act of leaving the other (that is to say, when it is assumed that the 
desires for the two are equal); he does not prefer the act of taking the 
one to the act of taking the other, but he prefers the act of taking one 
of the two, whichever it may be, and he gives a preference to the act of 
taking over the act of leaving.' This is selFeevident. For distinguishing* 
one from the other means giving a preference* to the one over the 
other, and one cannot give a preponderance to one of two similar 
things in so far as it is similar to the othcr—although in their existence 
as individuals they are not similar since cach of two individuals is 
different from the other by reason of a quality exclusive to it. If, there- 
fore, we assume that the will attaches itself to that special character of 
onc of them, then it can be imagined that the will attaches to the-one 
rather than the other because of the element of difference existing in 
both, But then the will does not attach itself to two similar objects, in 
so far as they are similar. This is, in short, the meaning of Ghazali’s 
first objection. Then he gives his second objection against those who 
deny the existence of a quality, distinguishing two similar objects 
from one another. 

Ghazati says: 

‘The second objection is that we say: You in your system also are unable 
to do without a principle differentiating between two equals, for the world 
exists in Virtue of a cause which has produced it in its peculiar shape out of 
a number of possible distinct shapes which are equivalent; why, then, has 
this cause differentiated some of them? If to distinguish two similar things 
is impossible, it is irrelevant whether this concerns the act of God, natural 
causality, or the logical necessity of ideas. Perhaps you will say: the 
universal order of the world could not be different from what it is; if the 
world were smaller or bigger than it actually is, this order would not be 
perfect, and the same may be asserted of the number of spheres and of 
stars. And perhaps you will say: The big differs from the small and the 

41 

wn 

o 

a4 | “TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

many from the few, in so far as they are the object of the will, and there- 
fore they are not similar but different; bue human power is too feeble to 
perceive the modes of Divine Wisdom in its determination of the measures 
and qualities of things; only in some of them can His wisdom be perceived, 
as in the obliquity of the ecliptic in relation to the equator, and in the 
wise contrivance of the apogee and the eccentric sphere,’ In most cases, 
however, the secret is not revealed, but the differences are known, and it 
is not impossible that a thing should be distinguished from another, 
because the order of the world depends on it; but certainly the times are 
absotutely indifferent in relation to the world’s possibility and its order, 
and it cannot he claimed that, if the world were created one moment later 
or earlier, this order could nut be imagined; and this indifference is 
known by the necessity of thought.—But then we answer: Although we 
can employ the same reasoning against your argument in the matter of 
different times, for it might be said that God created the world at the 
time most propitious for its creation, we shall not limit ourselves to 
this refutation, but shall assume, according to your own principle, a 
differentiation in two points about which there can be no disagreement: 
(1) the difference in the direction of spherical movement; (2) the definite 
place of the poles in relation to the ecliptic in spherical movement.’ The 
proof of the statement relating to the poles is that heaven is a globe, 
Moving on two poles, as on two immovable points, whereas the globe of 
heaven is homogeneous and simple, especially the highest sphere, the 
ninth,? which possesses no stars at all, and these two spheres* move on 
two poles, the north and the south. We now say: of all the opposite points, 
which are infinite, according to you philosophers, there is no pair one 
could not imagine as poles. Why then have the ewo points of the north 
and south pole been fixed upon as poles and as immovable; and why does 
the ecliptic not pass through these two poles, so that the poles would 
become the opposite points of the ecliptic? And if wisdom is shown in 
the size and shape of heaven, what then distinguishes the place of the 
Poles from others, so that they are fixed upon to serve as poles, to the 
exclusion of all the other parts and points? And yet all the points are 
similar, and all parts of the globe are equivalent, And to this there is no 
answer. 

One might say: Perhaps the spot in which the point of the poles is, is 
distinguished from other points by a special quality, in relation to its 
being the place of the poles and to its being at rest, for it does not seem to 
change its place or space or position or whatever one wishes to call it; 
and all the other spots of the sphere by turning change their position in 
relation to the earth and the other spheres and only the poles are at rest; 
perhaps this spot was more apt to be at rest than the others. We answer: 
If you say so, you explain the fact through a natural differentiation of the 
parts of the first sphere; the sphere, then, ceases to he homogeneous, and 
this is in contradiction with your principle, for one of the proofs by which 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 25 

you prove the necessity of the globular shape of heaven, is that its nature 
is simple, homogeneous, and without differentiation, and the simplest 
shape is the globe; for the quadrangle and the hexagon and other figures 
demand a salience and a differentiation of the angles,' and this happens 
only when its simple nature is added to. But although this supposition of 
yours is in contradiction with your own theory, it does not break the 
strength of your opponents’ argument; the question about this special 
quality still holds good, namely, can those other parts accept this quality 
or not? If the answer is in the affirmative, why then is this quality limited 
to a few only of those homogeneous parts? If the answer is negative, we 
reply: the other parts, in so far as they constitute bodies, receiving the 
form of bodies, are homogeneous of necessity, and there is no justification 
for attributing this special quality to this spot exclusively on account of 
its being a part of a body and a part of heaven, for the other parts of 
heaven participate in this qualification. Therefore its differentiation must 
rest on a decision by God, or on a quality whose nature consists in 
differentiating between two similars, Therefore, just as among philosophers 
the theory is upheld that all times are equivalent in regard to the creation 
of the world, their opponents are justified in claiming that the parts of 
heaven are equivalent for the reception of the quality through which 
stability in position becomes more appropriate than a change of position. 
And out of this there is no issue. 

I say: 

This means in brief that the philosophers must acknowledge that 
there is a quality in the Creator of the world which differentiates 
between two similars, for it seems that the world might have had 
another shape and another quantity than it actually has, for it might 
have been bigger or smaller. Those different possibilities are, there- 
fore, equivalent in regard to the determination of the existence of 
the world. On the other hand, if the philosophers say that the world 
can have only one special shape, the special quantity of its bodies 
and the special number of them it actually has, and that this equiva- 
lence of possibilities can only be imagined in relation to the times of 
temporal creation—since for God no moment is more suitable than 
another for its creation—they may be told that it is possible to answer 
this by saying that the creation of the world happened at its most 
propitious moment. But we, the theologians say, want to show the 
philosophers two equivalent things of which they cannot affirm that 
there exists any difference between them; the first is the particular 
direction of the spherical movement and the second the particular 
position of the poles, relative to the spheres; for any pair whatever of 
opposite points, united by a line which passes through the centre of 

42 

45 

19 

26 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the sphere, might constitute the poles. But the differentiation of these 
two points, exclusive of all other points which might just as well be 
the poles of this identical sphere cannot happen except by a quality 
differentiating between two similar objects. If che philosophers assert 
that it is not wue that any other place on the sphere might be the seat 
for these poles, they will be told: such an assertion implies that the 
parts of the spheres are not homogeneous and yet you have often 
said that the sphere is of a simple nature and therefore has a simple 
form, viz. the spherical. And again, if the philosophers affirm that 
there are spots on the sphere which are not homogeneous, it will be 
asked how these spots came to be of a heterogeneous nature; is it 
because they are a body or because they are a celestial body? But 
the absence of homogeneity cannot be explained in this way. There- 
fore—Ghazali says—just as among philosophers the theory is upheld 
that all times are equivalent in regard to the creation of the world, 
the theologians are justified in claiming that the parts of heaven are 
equivalent in regard to their serving as poles, and that the poles do 
not seem differentiated from the other points through a special posi- 
tion or through their being in an immovable place, exclusive of all 
other places. 

This then in short is the objection; it is, however, a rhetorical one, 
for many things which by demonstration can be found to be necessary 
seem at first sight mercly possible.! The philosophers’ answer is that 
they assert that they have proved that the world is composed of five 
bodies: a body neither heavy nor light, i.e. the revolving spherical 
body of heaven? and four other bodics, two of which are earth, 
absolutely heavy, which is the centre of the revolving spherical body, 
and fire, absolutely light, which is seated in the extremity of the 
revolving sphere; nearest to earth is water, which is heavy relatively 
to air, light relatively to earth; next to water comes air, which is 
light relatively to water, heavy relatively to fire. The reason why 
earth is absolutely heavy is that it is farthest away from the circular 
movement, and therefore it is the fixed centre of the revolving body; 
the reason why fire is absolutely light is that ie is nearest to the 
revolving sphere; the intermediate bodies are both heavy and light, 
because they are in the middle between the two extremes, i.c. the 
farthest point and the nearest. [f there were not a revolving body, 
surely there would be neither heavy nor light by nature, and neither 
high nor low by nature,* and this whether absolutely or rela- 
tively; and the bodies would not differ by nature in the way in 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 27 

which, for instance, earth moves by nature to its specific place and 
fire moves by nature to another place, and equally so the inter- 
mediary bodies. And the world is only finite, because of the spherical 46 
body, and this because of the essential and natural finiteness of the 
apherical body, as one single plane circumscribes it.' Rectilinear 
bodies are not essentially finite,? as they allow of an increase and 
decrease; they are only finite because they are in the middle of a 
body that admits neither increase nor decrease, and is therefore $ 
essentially finite, And, therefore, the body circumscribing the world 
cannot but be spherical, as otherwise the bodies would either have 
to end in other bodies, and we should have an infinite regress, or 
they would end in empty space, and the impossibility of both sup- 
positions has been demonstrated.* He who understands this knows that 
every possible world imaginable can only consist of these bodies, and 
that bodies have to be either circular—and then they are neither 
heavy nor light—or rectilinear—and then they are either heavy or 
light, ic. either fire or earth or the intermediate bodies; that these 
bodies have to be either revolving, or surrounded by a revolving 
periphery, for each body either moves from, towards, or round the 
centre; that by the movements of the heavenly bodies to the right 
and to the left* all bodies are constituted and all thae is produced 47 
from opposites is generated ; and that through these movements the 
individuals of these four bodies never cease being in a continual pro- 
duction and corruption.’ Indeed, if a single one of these movements 
should cease, the order and proportion of this universe would dis- 
appear, for it is clear that this order must necessarily depend on the 
actual number of these movements—for if this were smaller or greater, 
either the order would be disturbed, or there would be another 5 
order—and that the number of these movements is as it is, either 
through its necessity for the existence of this sublunary world, or 
hecause it is the best.° 

Do not ask here for a proof for all this, but if you are interested in 
mience, look for its proof, where you can find it. Here, however, 
listen to theories which are more convincing than those of the theo- 
logians and which, even if they do not bring you complete proof, 
will give your mind an inclination to lead you to proof through 
scientific speculation, You should imagine that each heavenly 
sphere is a living being, in so far as it possesses a body of a definite 
measure and shape and moves itself in definite directions, not at 
random. Anything of this nature is necessarily a living being; i.e. 

-~ 

o 

2 

to 

49 

10 

28 a TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

when we see a body of a definite quality and quantity move itself in 
space, in a definite direction, not at random, through its own power, 
not through an exterior cause, and move in opposite directions at 
the same time, we are absolutely sure that it is a living being, and we 
said only ‘not through an exterior cause’ because iron moves towards 
a magnet when the magnet is brought to it from the outside—and 
besides, iron moves to a magnet from any direction whatever.' The 
heavenly bodies, therefore, possess places which are poles by nature, 
and these bodies cannot have their poles in other places, just as 
earthly animals have particular organs in particular parts of their 
bodies for particular actions, and cannot have them in other places, 
e.g. the organs of locomotion, which are located in definite parts. 
The poles represent the organs of locomotion in animals of spherical 
form, and the only difference in this respect between spherical and 
non-spherical animals is that ia the latter these organs differ in both 
shape and power, whereas in the former they only differ in power.? 
For this reason it has been thought on first sight that they do not 
differ at all, and that the poles could be in any two points on the 
sphere. And just as it would be ridiculous to say that a certain move- 
ment in a certain species of earthly animal could be in any part 
whatever of its body, or in that part where jt is in another species, 
because this movernent has been localized in each species in the 
place where it conforms most to its nature, or in the only place where 
this animal can perform the movement, so it stands with the differen- 
tiation in the heavenly bodies for the place of their poles. For the 
heavenly bodies are not one species and numerically many, but they 
form a plurality in species, like the plurality of different individuals 
of animals where there is only one individual in the species.3 
Exactly the same answer can be given to the question why the 
heavens move in different directions: that, because they are animals, 
they must move in definite directions, like right and left, before and 
behind, which are directions determined by the movements of ani- 
mals, and the only difference between the movements of earthly 
animals and those of heavenly bodies is that in the different animals 
these movements are different in shape and in power, whereas in 
the heavenly animals they only differ in power. And ie is for this 
reason that Aristotle thinks that heaven possesses the directions of 
right and left, before and behind, high and tow.* The diversity of the 
heaventy bodies in the direction of their movements rests on their 
diversity of species, and the fact that this difference in the directions 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 29 

of their movements forms the specific differentia of their species is 
something proper to them. Imagine the first heaven as one identical 
animal whose nature obliges it—either by necessity or because it is 
for the best—to move with all its parts in one movement from east to 
west, The other spheres are obliged by their nature to have the 
opposite movement. The direction which the body of the universe is 
compelled te follow through its nature is the best one, because its 
body is the best of bodies and the best among the moving bodies 
must also have the best direction. All this is explained here in this 
tentative way, but is proved apodictically in its proper place. This is 
also the manifest sense of the Divine Words, “There is no changing 
the words of God’,' and ‘There is no altering the creation of God’.* 
If you want to be an educated man, proceeding by proof, you should 
look for the proof of this in its proper place. 

Now if you have understood all this, it will not be difficult for you 
to see the faults in Ghazali’s arguments here about the equivalence 
of the two opposite movements in relation to each heavenly body and 
io the sublunary world. On first thoughts it might be imagined that 
the movement from cast to west might also belong to other spheres 
hesides the first, and that the first sphere might equally well move 
from west to east. You might as well say* that the crab could be 
imagined as having the same direction of movement as man. But, 
as a matter of fact, such a thought will not occur to you about men 
and crabs, because of their difference in shape, whereas it might 
uccur to you about the heavenly spheres, since they agree in shape. 
He who contemplates a product of art does not perceive its wisdom 
if he does not perceive the wisdom of the intention embodied in it, 
and the effect intended. And if he does not understand its wisdom, 
hie may well imagine thit this object might have any form, any 
«quantity, any configuration of its parts, and any composition what- 
ever. This is the case with the theologians in regard to the body of 
the heavens, but all such opinions are superficial. He who has such 
licliefs about products of art understands neither the work nor the 
artist, and this holds also in respect of the works of God’s creation. 
Understand this principle, and do not judge the works of God’s 
creation hastily and superficially—so that you may not become one 
ol those about whom the Koran says: ‘Say, shail we inform you of 
those who lose most by their works, those who erred in their endea- 
vour after the life of this world and who think they are doing good 
tleeds ?’ May God make us perspicacious and lift from us the veils of 

50 

2? 

on 

oy 

33 

39 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ignorance; indeed He is the bounteous, the generous! To contem- 
plate the various actions of the heavenly bodies is like contemplating 
the kingdom of heaven, which Abraham contemplated, according to 
the words of the Koran: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom 
of heaven and of the earth, that he should be of those who are sure.’! 
And let us now relate Ghazali’s argument about the movements. 

Ghazali says: 

The second point in this argument concerns the special direction of the 
movement of the spheres which move partially from east to west, partially 
in the opposite direction, whereas the equivalence of the directions in 
relation to their cause is exactly the same as the equivalence of the times. 
If it is said: If the universe revolved in only one direction, there would 
never be a difference in the configuration of the stars, and such relations 
of the stars as their being in trine, in sextile, and in conjunction? would. 
never arise, but the universe would remain in one unique position without 
any change; the difference of these relations, however, is the principle of 
all production in the world—we answer: Our argument does not concern 
the difference in direction of movement; no, we concede that the highest 
sphere moves from east to west and the spheres beneath it in the opposite 
direction, but everything that happens in this way would happen equally 
if the reverse took place, i.e. if the highest sphere moved froin west to east 
and the lower spheres in the opposite direction. For ail the same differences 
in configuration would arise just as well. Granted that these movements 
are circular and in opposite directions, both directions are equivalent; 
why then is the one distinguished from the other, which is similar to it?? 
If it is said; as the ewo directions are opposed and contrary, how can they 
be similar?—-we answer; this is like saying ‘since before and after are 
opposed in the existing world, how could it be claimed that they are 
equivalent?’ Still, it is asserted by you philosophers that the equivalence 
of times, so far as the possibility of their realization and any purpose one 
might imagine in their realization is concerned, is an evident fact. Now, we 
regard it as equally evident that spaces, positions, situations, and directions 
are equivalent so far as concerns their receiving movement and any purpose 
that might be connected with it. 1f{therefore the philosophers are allowed to 
claim that notwithstanding this equivalence they are different, their oppo- 
nents are fully justified in claiming the same in regard to the times.” 

I say: 

From what I have said previously, the speciousness of this argu- 
ment and the way in which it has to be answered will not be obscure 
to you. All this is the work of one who does not understand the 
exalted natures of the heavenly bodies and their acts of wisdom for 
the sake of which they have been created, and who compares God’s 
knowledge with the knowledge of ignorant man. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 31 

Ghazali says: 

If it is said: as the two directions are opposed and contrary, how can 
they be similar?—we answer; this is like saying ‘since before and after 
in the existing world are opposed, how could it be claimed that they are 
equivalent?’ Still, it is asserted by you philosophers that the equivalence of 
times so far as the possibility of their realization, and any purpose one 
might imagine in their realization is concerned, is an evident fact. Now, we 
regard it as equally evident that spaces, positions, situations, and direc- 
tions are equivalent so far as concerns their receiving the movement and 
any purpose that might be connected with it. 

I say: 

The falsehood of this is self-evident. Even if one should admit that 
the possibilities of man’s existence and non-existence are equivalent 
in the matter out of which he has been created, and that this is a 
proof for the existence of a determining principle which prefers his 
existence to his non-existence, still it cannot be imagined that the 
possibilities of seeing and not seeing are equivalent in the eye.' Thus 
no one can claim that the opposite directions are equivalent, 
although he may claim that the substratum for both is indifferent, 
and that therefore out of both directions similar actions result.? And 
the same holds good for before and after: they are not equivalent, in 
so far as this event is earlier and that event later; they can only be 
claimed to be equivalent so far as their possibility of existence is 
concerned. But the whole assumption is wrong: for essential oppo- 
sites also need essentially opposite substrata and a unique substratum 
giving rise to opposite acts at one and the same time is an impossibi- 
lity. The philosophers do not believe that the possibilities of a 
thing’s existence and of its non-existence are equivafent at one and 
the same time; no, the time of the possibility of its existence is 
different from the time of the possibility of its non-existence,5 time 
for them is the condition for the production of what is produced, and 
fur the corruption of what perishes.® If the time for the possibility 
of the existence of a thing and the time for the possibility of its 
non-existence were the same, that is to say in its proximate matter, 
its existence would be vitiated, because of the possibility of its non- 
existence, and the possibility of its existence and of its non-existence 
would be dependent only on the agent, not on the substratum.” 

Thus he who tries to prove the existence of an agent in this way 
gives only persuasive, dialectical arguments, not apodictic proof, It 
is believed that Farabi and Avicenna followed this line to establish 

54 

= 
> 

32 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

. that every act must have an agent, but it is not a proof of the ancient 

w 

56 

ow 

philosophers, and both of them merely took it over from the theo- 
iogians of our religion.' In relation, however, to the temporal creation 
of the world—for him who believes in it—before and after cannot 
even be imagined,* for before and after in time can only be imagined 
in relation to the present moment, and as, according to the theo- 
logians, there was before the creation of the world no time, how 
could there be imagined something preceding the moment when the 
world was created? A definite moment cannot be assigned for the 
creation of the world, for either time did not exist before it, or there 
was an infinite time, and in neither case could a definite time be 
fixed to which the Divine could attach itself. Therefore it would be 
more suitable to call this book ‘Incoherence’ without qualification 
rather than ‘The Incoherence of the Philosophers’, for the only profit 
it gives the reader is to make him incoherent, 

Ghazali says: 

Vf, therefore, the philosophers are allowed to claim that, notwithstand- 
ing this equivalence, they are different, their opponents are fully justified 
in claiming the same in regard to times. 

I say: 

He wants to say: If the philosophers are justified in claiming a 
difference in the direction of movement, the theologians have the 
right to assert a difference in times, notwithstanding their belief in 
their equivalence. This is only a verbal argument, and does not refer 
to the facts themselves, even if one admits an analogy between the 
opposite directions and the different times,* but this is often objected 
to, because there is no analogy between this difference in times and 
directions.’ Our adversary, however, is forced to admit that there is 
an analogy between them, because they are both claimed to be 
different, and both to be equivalent! These, therefore, are one and 
all only dialectical arguments. 

Ghazali says: 

The second objection® against the basis of their argument is that the 
philosophers are told: ‘You regard the creation of a temporal being by an 
tternal as impossible, but you have to acknowledge it too, for there are 
new events happening in the world and they have causes. It is absurd to 
think that these events lead to other events ad infinitum, and no intelligent 
person can believe such a thing. If such a thing were possible, you need 
not acknowledge a creator and establish a necessary being on whom 
possible existences depend. If, however, there is a limit for those events 
in which their sequence ends, this limit will be the eternal and then 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION ; 33 

indubitably you too acknowledge the principle that a temperal can 
proceed from an eternal being.”! 

I say: 

If the philosophers had introduced the eternal being into reality 
from the side of the temporal by this kind of argument, ie. if they 
had admitted that the temporal, in so far as teraporal, proceeds from 
an eternal being, there would be no possibility of their avoiding the 
difficulty in this problem. But you must understand that the philo- 
sophers permit the existence of a temporal which comes out of a 
temporal being ad infinitum in an accidental way, when this is repeated 
in a limited and finite matter—whken, for instance, the corruption of 
one* of two things becomes the necessary condition for the existence 
of the other. For instance, according to the philosophers it is neces- 
sary that man should be produced from man on condition that the 
anterior man perishes so as to become the matter for the production 
of a third.? For instance, we must imagine two men of whom the 
first produces the second from the matter of a man who perishes; 
when the second becomes a man himself, the first perishes, then the 
second man produces a third man out of the matter of the first, and 
then the second perishes and the third produces out of his matter a 
fourth, and so we can imagine in two matters an activity continuing 
ad infinitum, without any impossibility arising. And this happens as 
long as the agent fasts, for if this agent has neither beginning nor end 
for his existence, the activity has neither beginning nor end for its 
existence, as it has been explained before.? And in the same way you 
may imagine this happening in them in the past: When a man exists, 
there must before him have been a man who produced him and a 
man who perished, and before this second man a man who produced 
iim and a man who perished, for everything that is produced in this 
way is, when it depends on an eternal agent, of a circular nature in 
which no actual totality can be reached.‘ If, on the other hand, a 
nan were produced from another man out of infinite matters, or 
there were an infinite addition of them, there would be an impossi- 
bility, for then there could arise an infinite matter and there could 
be an infinite whole. For if a finite whole existed to which things 
were added ad infinitum without any corruption taking place in it, 
an infinite whole could come into existence, as Aristotle proved in 
his Phystes.5 For this reason the ancients introduce an eternal abso- 
lutely unchanging being, having in mind not temporal beings, 
proceeding from him in so far as they are temporal, but beings 

57 

a 

38 

10 

59 

wn 

60 

34 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

proceeding from him as being eternal generically,’ and they hold 
that this infinite series is the necessary consequence of an eternal 
agent, for the temporal needs for its own existence only a temporal 
cause.? Now there are two reasons why the ancients introduce the 
existence of an eternal numerically unique being which does not 
suffer any change. The first is that they discovered that this revolving 
being is eternal, for they discovered that the present individual is 
produced through the corruption of its predecessor and that the 
corruption of this previous individual implies the production of the 
one that follows it, and that it is necessary that this everlasting change 
should proceed from an eternal mover and an eternal moved body, 
which does not change in its substance,? but which changes only in 
place so far as concerns its parts,t and approaches certain of the 
transitory things and recedes from certain of them, and this is the 
cause of the corruption of one half of them and the production of 
the other half.s And this heavenly body is the being that changes in 
place only, not in any of the other kinds of change,® and is through 
its temporal activities the cause of ail things temporal; and because of 
the continuity of its activities which have neither beginning nor end, 
it proceeds from a cause which has neither beginning nor end. The 
second reason why they introduce an eternal being absolutely with- 
out body and matter is that they found that all the kinds of move- 
ment depend on spatial movement,’ and that spatial movement 
depends on a being moved essentially by a prime mover, absolutely 
unmoved, both essentially and accidentally,* for otherwise there 
would exist at the same time an infinite number of moved movers, 
and this is impossible. And it is necessary that this first mover should 
be eternal, or else it would not be the first. Every movement, there- 
fore, depends on this mover and its setting in motion essentially, not 
accidentally. And this mover exists simultaneously with each thing 
moved, at the time of its motion, for a mover existing before the 
thing moved *—such as a man producing a man—sets only in motion 
accidentally, not essentially; but the mover who is the condition of 
man’s existence from the beginning of his production till its end, or 
rather from the beginning of his existence till its end, is the prime 
mover. And likewise his existence is the condition for the existence 
of all beings and the preservation'® of heaven and earth and all that 
is between them." All this is not proved here apodictically, but only 
in the way we follow here and which is in any case more plausible 
for an impartial reader than the arguments of our opponents. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 35 

If this is clear to you, you certainly are in no need of the subterfuge 5 
by which Ghazali in his argument against the philosophers tries to 
conciliate them with their adversaries in this matter; indeed these 
artifices will not do, for if you have not understood how the philoso- 
phers introduce an eternal] being into reality, you have not under- 
stood how they settle the difficulty of the rise of the temporal out of 
the eternal; they do that, as we said, either through the medium of 
a being eternal in its essence but generable and corruptible in its to 
particular movements, not, however, in its universal circular move- 
ment,' or through the medium of what is generically eternal?—i.e. 
has neither beginning nor end—in its acts. 

Ghazali answers in the name of the philosophers: 

The philosophers may say, ‘we do not consider it impossible that any 
temporal being, whatever it may he, should proceed from an eternal 
being, but we regard it as impossible that the first temporal should 
proceed from the eternal, as the mode of its procession does not differ 
from that which precedes it, either in a greater inclination* towards 
existence or through the presence of some particular time, or through an 
instrument, condition, nature, accident, or any caus¢ whatever which 61 
might produce a new mode. If this therefore is not the first temporal, it 
will be possible that it should proceed from the eternal, when another 
thing proceeds from it, because of the disposition of the receiving sub- 
stratum, or because the time was propitious or for any other reason,’* 

Having given this reply on the part of the philosophers, Ghazali 
answers it: 

This question about the actualization of the disposition, whether of the $ 
time and of any new condition which arises in it, still holds good, and we 
must either come to an infinite regress or arrive at an eternal being out of 
which a first temporal being proceeds. 

I say: 

This question is the same question all over again as he asked the 
philosophers first,* and this is the same kind of conclusion as he made 
them draw then, namely that a temporal proceeds from an eternal, 
and having given as their answer something which does not corre- 
spond with the question, 1.e. that it is possible that a temporal being 
should proceed from the Eternal without there being a first temporal 
being, he turns the same question against them again, The correct 
answer to this question was given above: the temporal proceeds from 
the First Eternal, not in so far as it is temporal but in so far as jt is 
eternal, ie. through being eternal generically, though temporal in 

a 

°° 

36 ’ TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

. its parts. For according to the philosophers an eternal being out of. 

io 

63 

10 

which a temporal being proceeds essentially! is not the First Eternal, 
but its acts, according to them, depend on the First Eternal; i.e. 
the actualization of the condition for activity of the eternal, which is 
not the First Eternal, depends on the First Eternal in the same way 
as the temporal products depend on the First Eternal and this is a 
dependence based on the universal, not on individuals.? 

After this Ghazali introduces an answer of the philosophers, in one 
of the forms in which this theory can be represented, which amounts 
to this: A temporal being proceeding from an eternal can only be 
represented by means of a circular movement which resembles the 
eternal by not having beginning or end and which resembles the 
temporal in so far as cach part of it is transient, so that this movement 
through che generation of its parts is the principle of temporal things, 
and through the eternity of ils totality the activity of the eternal. 

Then Ghazali argues against this view, according to which in the 
opinion of the philosophers the temporal proceeds from the First 
Ecernal, and says to them: 

Is this circular movement teinporal or eternal? Tf it is eternal, how does 
it become the principle for temporal things? And if it is temporal, it will 
need another temporal being and we shail have an infinite regress. And 
when you say that it partially resembles the eternal, partially the tem- 
poral, for it resembles the eternal in so far as it is permanent and the 
temporal in so far as it arises anew, we answer: Is it the principle of 
ternporal things, because of its permanence, or because of its arising anew? 
In the former case, how can a temporal proceed from something because 
of tts permanence? And in the latter case, what arises anew will need a 
cause for its arising anew, and we have an infinite regress.’ 

I say: 

This argument is sophistica!. The temporal does not proceed from 
it in so far as it is eternal, but in so far as it is temporal; it does not 
necd, however, for its arising anew a cause arising anew, for its arising 
anew is not a new fact, but is an eternal act, ic. an act without 
beginning or end, Therefore its agent must be an eternal agent, for 
an eternal act has an eternal agent, and a temporal act a temporal 
agent. Only through the eternal element in it can it be understood 
that movement has neither beginning nor end, and this is meant by 
its permanence, for movement itself is not permanent, but changing. 

And since Ghazali knew this, he said: 

In order to elude this consequence the philosophers have a kind of artifice 
which we will expose briefly. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 37 
Ghazali says: 

THE SECOND PROOF OF THE PHILOSOPHERS 
CONCERNING THIS PROBLEM?! 

They assert that he who aflirms that the world is posterior to God and 
God prior to the world cannot mean anything but that He is prior not 
temporally but essentially,* like the natural priority of one to two, 
although they can exist together in temporal existence, or like the priority 
of cause to effect, for instance the priority of the movement of a man to 
the movement of his shadow which follows him, or the movement of the 
hand to the movement of the ring, or the movement of the hand in the 
water to the movement of the water, for all these things are simultaneous, 
hut the one is cause, the other effect, for it is said that the shadow moves 
through the movement of the man and the water through the hand in the 
water, and the reverse is not said although they are simultaneous.’ If this is 
what you mean by saying that God is prior to the world, then it follows 
that they muse both either he temporal or etecnal, for it is absurd that the 
one should be temporal and the other eternal.t If it is meant that God is 
prior to the world and to time, not essentially, but temporally, then there 
was, before the existence of the world and of time, a time in which the 
world was non-existent, since non-existence preceded the world and God 
preceded it during a long duration which had a final term but no initial 
one, and then there was before time an infinite time, which is self- 
contradictory, Therefore the assertion that ame had a beginning is 
absurd. And if time—which is the expression of the measure of movement 
~—is eternal, movement must be eternal, And the necessity of the eternity 
of movement implies the necessity of the eternity of the thing in motion, 
through the duration of which time endures. 

I say: 

The mode of their reasoning which he reproduces docs not consti- 
tute a proof. It amounts to saying that the Creator, if He is prior to 
the world, must cither be prier not in ime, but in causation, like the 
priority of a man to his shadow, or prior in time, like a builder to a 
walls If He is prior in the same way as the man is prior to his shadow, 
and if the Creator is eternal, then the workl too is cternal. But if He 
ia prior in time, then He must precede the world by a time which has 
no beginning, and time will be cternal, for if there is a time before 
the actual, its starting-point cannot be imagined. And if time is 
eternal, movement too is eternal, for time cannet be understood 
without motion. And if motion is eternal, the thing in motion will be 
eternal, and its mover will necessarily be eternal too. But this proof 
is unsound, for it is not of the nature af the Creator to be in time, 
whereas it belongs to the nature of the world to be so; and for (his 

to 

65 

98 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

lo very reason it is not true that He is cither simultaneous with it or 
prior to it in time or in causation.' 
Ghazali says: 

The objection to this is: Time is generated and created, and before it 
there was no time at all, The meaning of our words that God is priar to the 
world and to time is: He existed without the world and without time, then 
He existed and with Him there was the world and there was time. And 
the meaning of our words that He existed without the world is: the ex- 

66 istence of the essence of the Creator and the non-existence of the essence of 
the world, and nothing else. And the meaning of our words that He existed 
and with Him there was the world is: the existence of the two essences, 
and nothing else. And the meaning of priority: the uniqueness of His 
existence, and nothing else. And the world is like a singular person; if we 
should say, for instance: God existed without Jesus, then He existed with 
Jesus-—these words contain nothing but, first, the existence of an essence 
and the non-existence of an essence, then, the existence of two essences, 
and there is no need to assume here a third essence, namely time, although 
imagination cannot desist from assuming it. But we should not heed the 
errors of the imagination.? 

- 

I say: 

These words are erroncous and mistaken, for we have already 
proved that there are two kinds of existence: one in the nature of 
which* there is motion and which cannot be separated from time; the 
other in the nature of which there is no motion and which is eternal 
and cannot be described in terms of time. The first is known by 
the senses and by reason; the existence of the second—in the nature 

10 of which there is neither motion nor change—is known by proof to 
everyone who acknowledges that each motion needs a mover and 
each cHfect 2 cause, and that the causes which move each other do 
not regress infinitely, but end in a first cause which is absolutely 
unmeved, And it has also been established that the entity in the 
nature of which there is no movement is the cause of the entity in 
the nature of which there is movement. And it has been proved also 

67 that the entity in the nature of which there is motion cannot be 
separated from time, and that the entity in the nature of which there 
is no movement is entirely free from time, Therefore the priority of 

5 the one entity over the other is based neither on a priority in time, 
nor on the priority of that kind of cause and effect, which belongs to 
the nature of things in motion, like the priority of a man to his 
shadow. For this reason anyone who compares the priority of the 
unmoved being to the thing in motion to the priority existing be- 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 39 

tween two things in motion is in error; since it is only true of each 
one in pairs of moving things that, when it is brought in relation 
to the other, it is either simultaneous with it or prior or posterior in 
time to it, It is the later philosophers of Islam who made this mistake, 
since they enjoyed but slight comprehension of the doctrine of the 
ancients. So the priority of this one being to the other is the priority 
of the unchanging timeless existence to the changing existence 
which is jn time, and this is an altogether different type of priority. 
It is therefore not true of these existences that they are simultaneous, 
or that the one precedes the other, and Ghazali’s observation that 
the priority of the Creator to the world is not a temporal! priority is 
true. But the posteriority of the world to the Creator, since He does 
not precede the world in time, can only be understood as the pos- 
teriority of effect to cause,’ for posteriority and priority are opposites 
which are necessarily in one genus, as has been shown in the sciences.? 
Since therefore this priority is not in time, the posteriority also cannot 
be in time, and we have the same difficulty all over again: how can 
the effece be delayed after the cause when the conditions of acting 
are fulfilled?? The philosophers, however, since they do not recognize 
a beginning in the totality of this existence in motion, are not touched 
by this difficulty, and it is possible for them to indicate in what way 
the temporal beings proceed from the eternal. One of their proofs* 
that existence in motion has no beginning, and that in its totality it 
does not start, is that, when it is assumed to start, it is assumed to 
exist before its existence, for to start is a movement, and movement 
is of necessity in the thing in motion,* equally whether the move- 
ment is regarded as taking place in time or at an instant.* Another 
proof is that everything that becomes has the potentiality of becom- 
ing before it actually becomes, although the theologians deny this {a 
discussion with them on this point will follow); now potentiality is 
a necessary attribute of being in motion, and it follows necessarily 
that, if it were assumed to become, it would exist before ils exist- 
ence.® What we have here are only dialectical arguments; they have, 
however, a much greater plausibility than what the theologians ad- 
vance. 
As for Ghazali’s words: 

If we should say, for instance, that God existed without Jesus, and then He 
existed with Jesus, these words contain nothing but, first, the existence of an 
essence and the non-existence of an essence, then, the exisience of two 
essences, and there is no need 10 assume here a third essence, namely time. 

68 

o 

69 

19 

70 

1 

fad 

40 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

I say: 

This is true, provided that Jesus’ posteriority is not regarded as an 
essential temporal posteriority, but, if there is a posteriority, it is an 
accidental posteriority, for time precedes this posterior entity*, Le. 
it is a necessity of Jesus’ existence that time should precede Him and 
that His existence should have begun, but the world is not subject 
to such a necessity, except in so far as it is a part of a moving existence 
beyond which time extends in two directions,' as happens to Jesus* 
and other transitory individuals.? Nothing of this is proved here; here 
it is simply explained that the objection is not valid. In addition, what 
he says afterwards of the proofs of the philosophers is untrue. 

Answering in the name of the philosophers, Ghazali says: 

One might say that our expression ‘God existed without the world’ 
means a third thing, besides the existence of one being and the non- 
existence of another, because, if we should suppose that in the future God 
should exist without the world, there would be in the future the existence 
of one being and the non-existence of another, still it would not be right 
to say ‘God existed without the world’, but we should say ‘God will exist 
without the world’, for only of the past do we say ‘God existed without 
the world’; and between the words ‘existed’ and ‘will exist’ there is a 
difference, for they cannot replace each other, And if we try to find out 
where the difference between the two sentences lies, it certainly does not 
lie in the words ‘existence of one being’ and ‘non-existence of another 
being’, lout in a third entity, for if we say of the non-existence of the world 
in the future ‘God was without the world’, it will be objected: this is 
wrong, for ‘was’ refers only te the past. This shows therefore that the word 
‘was’ comprises a third entity, namely the past, and the past by itself is 
time, and through another existent it is movement, for movement passes 
only through the passing of time. And so it follows necessarily that, before 
the world, a time finished which terminated in the existence of the world.J 

I say: 

In this in brief he shows that when it is said ‘such-and-such was 
without such-and-such’ and then ‘such-and-such was with such- 
and-such’ a third entity is understood, namely time. The word ‘was’ 
shows this, because of the difference in the meaning of this concept 
in the past and in the future, for if we assume the existence of one 
thing with the non-existence of another in the past, we say ‘such a 
thing existed without such a thing’, but when we assume the non- 
existence of the one with the existence of the other in the future, we 
say ‘such a thing will exist without such a thing’, and the change in 
meaning implies that there is here a third entity. [fin our expression 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 40 

‘such-and-such existed without such-and-such’ the word ‘existed’ 
did not signify an entity, the word ‘existed’ would not differ from 
‘will exist’. All this is self-evident, but it is only unquestionable in 
relation to the priority and posteriority of things which are by nature 5 
in time. Goncerning the timeless the word ‘was’ and the like indicate 
in such 4 proposition nothing but the copula between predicate and 
subject, when we say, for example, ‘God was indulgent and com- 
passionate’ ;' and the same holds when either predicate or subject is 
timeless, ¢.g. when we say ‘God was without the world, then God was 
with the world’, Therefore for such existents the time-relation to 
which he refers* docs not hold. This relation is, however, unquestion- 
ably real when we compare the non-existence of the world with its 
existence, for if the world is in time, the non-existence of the world 
has to be in time too, And since the non-existence and the existence 
of the world cannot be in one and the same time, the non-existence 
must precede; the non-existence must be prior and the world pos- 
terior to it, for priority and posteriority in the moving can only be 
understood in this relation to time, The only flaw in this argument is 72 
to assume this relation between God and the world. Only in this 
point 1s the argument which Ghazali relates fautty and does ic fail 
to constitute a proof. 

Then Ghazali gives the theologians’ objection to this argument of 
the philosophers :? 

” 

oO 

The primitive meaning of the two wards is the existence of one thing 
and the non-existence of another. The third element which is the con- 
nexion* between the two words is a necessary relation to us, The proof is 
that, if we should suppose a destruction of the world in the future and 
afterwards a second existence for us, we should then say ‘God was without 
the world’, and this would be true, whether we tneant ils original non- 
existence or the second non-existence, its destruction alter its existence, And 
x sign that this is a subjective relation is that the future can become past 
and can be indicated by the word ‘past’. All thist is the consequence of 
the inability of our imagination to imagine the beginning of a thing 
without something preceding it, and this ‘before’ of which the imagination 
cannot rid itself is regarded as a really existing thing, namely time. This 
resembles the inability of the imagination to admit a limited body, e.g. 
overhead, without anything beyond its surlace, so that it is imagined that 
behind the world there is a space either occupied or empty; and when it 
is said there is ubove the surface of the world no beyond and no farther 
extension, this is beyond the grasp of the imagination. Likewise, when it is 
said that there is no real anterior to the existence of the world, the imagina- 
tion refuses to believe it. But the imagination may be called false in allow- 

al 

9 

73 

14 

aw 

42 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ing above the world an empty space which is an infinite extension by our 
saying to it: empty space cannot be understood by itself, for extension is 
the necessary attribute of a body whose sides comprise space;’ a finite 
body implies the finiteness of extension, which is its attribute, and the 
limitation of occupied space; empty space is unintelligible, therefore there 
js neither empty nor occupied space behind the world, although the 
imagination cannot admit this. And in the same way as it is said that 
spatial extension is an attribute of body, temporal extension is an attribute 
of motion, for time is the extension of movement just as the space between 
the sides of a body is the extension of space. And just as the proof that the 
sides of a body are finite prevents the admission of a spatial extension 
behind the world, so the proof of ihe finite character of movement in 
both directions prevents the supposition of a temporal extension behind 
the world, although the imagination, subject to its illusion and supposi- 
tion, admits it and dees not hold back from it. There is no difference 
between temporal extension, which is apprehended as divided through the 
relation of before and after, and spatial extension, which is apprehended as 
divided through the relation of high and low.? If it is therefore permissible to 
admit a highest point above which there is nothing, it is equally permissible 
to admic a beginning, not preceded by anything real, except through an 
iusion similar to that which permits a beyond for the highest space. ‘This is 
a legitimate cansequence ; notice it carefully, as the philosophers themselves 
agreed that behind the world there is neither empty nor occupied space. 

I say: 

There are two parts to this objection; the first is that, when we 
imagine the past and the future, i.c. the prior and the posterior, they 
are two things existing in relation to our imagination, because we 
can imagine a future event as becoming past and a past event as 
having been future. Bui if this is so, past and future are not real 
things in themselves and do not possess existence outside the soul; 
they are only constructs of the sou!. And when movement is annihi- 
lated, the relation and measure of time will not have sense any more. 

The answer is that the necessary connexion of movement and time 
is real and time is something the soul constructs in movement,? but 
neither movement nor time is annihilated: they are only abolished 
in those things which are not subject to motion, but in the existence 
of moving things or in their possible existence time inheres neces- 
sarily. For there are only two kinds of being, those that are subject to 
motion and those that are not, and the one kind cannot be converted 
into the other, fur otherwise a conversion of the necessary into the 
possible would become possible.4 For if movement were impossible 
and then afterwards occurred, the nature of things which are not sub- 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 43 

ject to motion would have changed into the nature of things subject 
to motion, and this is impossible. This is a consequence of the fact 
that motion inheres necessarily in a substratum. If movement were 
possible before the existence of the world, the things which are sub- 
ject to movement would be necessarily in time, for movement is only 
possible in what is subject co rest,! not in absolute non-existence, for 
in absolute non-existence there is no possibility whatever, or one 
would have to admit that absolute non-existence could be converted 
into existence.? Therefore, the non-existence or privation? which 
necessarily precedes the occurrence of a thing has to be connected 
with a substratum, and will be disconnected from it when the sub- 
stratum actually receives this occurrence, as happens with all contra- 
ries. For instance, when a warm thing becomes cold, the essence of 
warmth does not change into coldness; it is only the receptacte and 
the substratum of warmth that exchange their warmth for coldness. 

The second part of this objection—and it is the most important of 
these objections—is sophistical and malicious. It amounts to saying 
that to imagine something before the beginning of this first move- 
ment (which is not preceded by any moving body) is like the illusion 
that the end of the world, for example, its highest part, ends necessarily 
either in another body or in empty space, for extension is a necessary 
attribute of body, as time is a necessary attribute of movement. And 
if it is impossible that there should be an infinite body, it is impossible 
that there should be an infinite extension, and, if it is impossible 
that there should be infinite extension, it is impossible that every 
body should end in another body or in something which has the 
potentiality of extension, i.e. for instance, emptiness, and that this 
should continue without end.* And the same applies to movement 
which has time as a necessary attribute, for if it is impossible that 
there should be infinite past movements* and there exists therefore 
a first movement with a finite initial term, it is impossible that there 
should exist a ‘before’ before it, for, if so, there would be another 
movement before the firss. 

This objection is, as we said, malicious, and belongs to the class 
of sophistical substitutions—you will recognize what I mean if 
you have read the book On sophistic refutations.$ In other words, 
Ghazali treats the quantity which has ne position and dees not form 
a totality, ie. time and motion, as the quantity which possesses 
position and totality, i.e. body.6 He makes the impossibitity of end- 
lessness in the latter a proof of its impossibility in the former, and he 

rs) 

o 

oO 

16 

wn 

Tu 

Ti 

itt 

18 

44 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

deals with the act of the soul when it imagines an increase in the one 
quantity which is assumed to be actual, i.c. body, as if it concerned 
both quantities. This is a manifest error. For to imagine an increase 
in actual spatial magnitude, so that it must end in another actual 
spatial magnitude, is to imagine something which does not exist in 
the essence and definition of spatial magnitude, but to imagine 
priority and posteriority in a movement that occurs is to imagine 
something that belongs to its essence. For a movement can only occur 
in time, ie. time has to pass beyond its beginning. For this reason 
one cannot represent a time the initial term of which is not the final 
term of another time, for the definition of ‘the instant is that it is 
the endl of the past and the beginning of the future,! for che instant is 
the present which necessarily is the middie between the past and the 
future, and to represent a present which is not preceded by a past is 
absurd.? ‘This, however, docs not apply to the point, for the point is 
the end of the line? and exists at the same time as the line, for the line 
is at rest. ‘Therefore one can imagine a point which is the beginning 
of a linet without its being the end of another line, but the instant 
cannot exist without the past and the future, and exists necessarily 
after the past and before the future, and what cannot subsist in itself 
cannot exist before the existence of the future without being the end 
of the past. ‘The cause of this error is the comparison of the instant 
with the point, The proof that each movement which occurs is pre- 
ceded by time is this: everything must come to cxist out of a priva- 
tion, and nothing can become in the instant—of which it can be 
truly said that its becoming is a vanishing’—and so it must be true 
that its privation must be ia another moment than that in which it 
itself exists, and there is time between each pair of instants, because 
instant is not continuous with instant, nor point continuous with 
point.® This has been proved in the sciences. Therefore before the 
instant in which the movement occurs there must necessarily be a 
time, because, when we represent two instants in reality, there must 
uccessarily be time between them. 

And what is said in this objection that ‘higher’ resembles ‘before’ 
is not truc, nor does the instant resemble the point, nor the quantity 
which possesses position the quantity which docs not possess posi- 
tion.? He who alfows the existence of an instant which is not a 
present, or of a present which is not preceded by a past, denies time 
and the instant, for he assumes an instant as having the description 

which we have mentioned,® and then assumes a time which has no 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 45 

beginning—which is a seff-contradictory assumption. It is, therefore, 
wrong to ascribe co an act of imagination the fact that there is a prior 
event for every occurrence, for he who denies priority denies the 
event in time, The contrary is the case with the man who denies the 
real character of the high*, for he denies the absolutely high and, 
when he denies the absolutely high, he denies also the absolutely 
low,' and when these two are denied, also the heavy and the 
light are denied? and the act of the imagination that a body with 
straight dimensions must end in another body is not false; no, this is a 
necessary truth, for the body with straight dimensions has the pos- 
sibility of increasing, and what has this possibility is not limited by 
nature.’ Therefore the body with straight surfaces must end in the 
circumscribing circular body, since this is the perfect body which is 
liable neither to increase nor to decrease. Therefore when the mind 
seeks to imagine that the circular body must cnd in another body, it 
imagines the impossible, These are all matters of which the theologians 
and those who do not start their inquiry in the proper scientific 
order are unaware, 

Further, the relation between time and mation is not the same as 
that between spatial limit and spatial magnitude, for the spatial limit 
is an attribute of spatial magnitude, in so far as it inhercs in it, in the 
way that the accident inheres in its substratum and is individualized 
by the individuality of its substratum and is indicated by pointing 
at its substratum and by its being in the place in which its substratum 
is.* But this is noe the case with the necessary relation between time 
and motion. For the dependence of time on motion is much like the 
dependence of number on the thing numbered :5 just as number does 
not become individualized through the individuation of the thing 
numbered, nor pluralized through its plurality, so it stands with the 
relation between time and movement.® Time, therefore, is unique 
for atl movement and for each thing moving, and exists everywhere, 
so that if we should suppose people confined from youth in a cave in 
the earth, still we should be sure that they would perceive time, even 
if they did not perceive any of the movements which are perceived in 
the world.? Aristotle therefore thought that the existence of move- 
ments in time is much like the existence of the things numbered in 
number,® for number is not pluralized through the plurality of the 
things numbered, nor is it localized through the individuation of the 
places numbered. He thought, therefore, that its specific quality was 
to mesaure the movements and to measure the existence of moving 

79 

° 

10 

81 

w 

46 ‘ TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

things, in so far as they are moving, as number counts the individual 
moving things, and therefore Aristotle says in his definition of time 
that it is the number of movement according to the relations of 
anterior and posterior.’ Therefore, just as the supposition that a 
thing numbered occurs does not imply that number comes into 
existence, but it is a necessary condition for the occurrence of a thing 
numbered that number should exist before it, so the occurrence of 
movement implies that there was time before it. If time occurred 
with the occurrence of any individual movement whatever, time 
would only be perceived with that individual movement,? This will 
make you understand how different the nature of time is from the 
nature of spatial magnitude. 
Ghazali answers on behalf of the philosophers : 

Tt may be said: This comparison’ is lame, for there ia neither above nor 
below in the world; for the world is spherical, and in the sphere there is 
neither above nor below; if the one direction is called above, because it 
is overhead, and the other below, because it is under foot, this name is 
always determined* in relation to you, and the direction which is below 
in relation to you is above in relation to another, if you imagine him 
standing on the other side of the terrestrial globe with the sole of his foot 
opposite the sole of your foot. Yes, these parts of heaven which you reckon 
above during the day are identical with what is below during the night, 
and what is below the earth comes again above the earth through the 
daily revolution, But it cannot be imagined that the heginning of the 
world becomes its end. If we imagined a stick with one thick and one thin 
end and we agreed to call the part nearest the thin end ‘above’ and the 
other ‘below’, there would not arise from this an essential differentiation 
in the parts of the world; it would simply be that different names would 
have been applied to the shape of the stick, so that if we substituted the 
one name for the other, there would be an exchange of names, but the 
world itself would remain unchanged. So ‘above’ and ‘below’ are a mere 
relation to you without any differentiation in the parts and places of the 
world. The non-existence, however, preceding the world and the initial 
term of its existence are essential realities, a substitution or a change of 
which cannot be imagined. Nor can it be imagined that the non-existence 
which is supposed ¢o occur at the disappearance of the world and which 
follows the world can become the non-existence preceding it, The initial 
and final terms of the world’s existence are permanent essential terms, in 
which no change can be imagined through the change of the subjective 
relation to them, in contrast with ‘above’ and ‘below’. Therefore we 
philosophers, indeed, are justified in saying that in the world there is 
neither ‘above’ nor ‘below’, but you theologians have not the right to 
assert that the existence of the world has neither a ‘before’ nor an ‘after’. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 47 

And when the existence of ‘before’ and ‘after’ is proved, time cannot mean 
anything but what is apprehended through the anterior and the posterior.! 

T say: 

This answer given in the name of the philosophers is extremely 
unsound. Lt amounts to saying that ‘above’ and ‘below’ are relative 
to us and that therefore imagination can treat them as an infinite 
sequence, but that the sequence of ‘before’ and ‘after’ does not rest 
. On imagination—for there is here no subjective relation—but is a 
purely rational concept. This means that the order of above and 
below in a thing may be reversed in imagination, but that the priva- 
tion before an event and the privation after an event, its before and 
its after, are not interchangeable for imagination. But by giving this 
answer the problem is not solved,* for the philosophers think that 
there exists a natural above? to which light things move and a natural 
below to which heavy things move, or else the heavy and the light 
would be relative and exist by convention, and they hold* that in 
imagination the limit of a body, having by nature its place above, may 
end either in occupied or in empty space.t And this argument is in- 
valid as a justification of the philosophers for two reasons. First, that 
the philosophers assume an absolute above and an absolute below, 
but no absolute beginning and no absolute end; secondly that their 
opponents may object that it is not the fact of their being relative 
that causes the imagination to regard the sequence of low and high 
as an infinite series, but that this happens to the imagination because 
it observes that every spatial magnitude is continuous with another 
spatial magnitude, just as any event is preceded by another event. 
Therefore Ghazali transfers the question from the words ‘above’ and 
‘below’ to ‘inside’ and ‘outside’s and he says in his answer to the 
philosophers: 

There is no real difference in the words ‘above’ and ‘helow’, and there- 
fore there is no sense in defining them, but we will apply ourselves rather 
to the words ‘inside’ and ‘outside’. We say: The world has an inside and 
an outside; and we ask: Is there outside the world an occupied or empty 
space? The philosophers will answer: There is outside the world neither 
occupied nor empty space, and if you mean by ‘outside’ its extreme surface, 
then there is an outside, but if you mean anything else, there is no outside.® 
Therefore if they ask us theologians if there is anything before the existence 
of the world, we say: If you mean by it the beginning, i.e. its initial term, 
then there is a before, just as there is an outside to the world according to 
your explanation that that is its ultimate limit and its final plane, but if 

82 

you mean anything else, then there is not, in analogy with your answer. . 

83 

48 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

If you say: A beginning of existence, without anything preceding it, 
cannot be understood, we say; A limit of a body existing without anything 
outside it cannot be understood.’ If you say: Its exterior is its furthest 
plane and nothing else, we say: Its before is the beginning of its existence, 
nothing else. The conclusion is that we say: We affirm that God has an 
existence without the world’s existing, and this assumption again does not 
force us to accept anything else. That to assume more rests on the act of 
imagination is proved by the fact that imagination acts in the same way 
in regard to time as in regard to place, for although our opponents believe 
in the eternity of the world, their imagination is willing to suppose it 
created; whereas we, who believe in its creation, are often allowed by our 
imagination to regard it as eternal. So much as far as body is concerned ; 
but to revert to time, our opponents do not regard a time without 2 
beginning as possible, and yet in opposition to this belief their imagination 
can represent it as a possible assumption, although time cannot be repre- 
sented by the imagination in the way that body is represented, for neither 
the champion nor the opponent of the finitude of body can imagine a body 
not surrounded by empty or occupicd space; the imagination simply 
refuses to accept it. Vherefore one should say: a clear thinker pays no 
attention to the imagination when he cannot deny the finitude of body 
by proof, nor does he give attention to the imagination when he cannot 
deny the beginning of an existence without anything preceding it, which 
the imagination cannot grasp, For the imagination, as it is only accustomed 
to a body limited by another body or by air, represents emptiness in 
this way, although emptiness, being imperceptible,? cannot be occu- 
pied by anything, Likewise the imagination, being only accustomed to 
an event occurring aficr another event, fears to suppose an event not 
preceded by another event which is terminated. And this is the reason 
of the error. 

I say: 

Through this transference, by his comparing the time-limit with 
the spatial limit in his argument ayainst the philosophers, this argu- 
ment becomes invalid and we have already shown the error through 
which it is specious and the sophistical character of the arguinent, 
and we need not repeat ourselves. 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers have a second way of forcing their opponents to 
admit the eternity of time. ‘hey say; You do nut doubt that God was able 
to create the world one year, a hundred years, a thousand years, and so 
ed infinitum, before He created it and that those possibilities are different 
in magnitude and number. Therefore it is necessary to admit before the 
existence of the world a measurable extension, one part of which can be 
longer than another part, and therefore it is necessary that something 
should have existed before the existence of the world. If you say the word 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 49 

‘years’ cannot be applied before the creation and revolution of heaven, 
let us drop the word ‘years’ and let us give another turn to our argument 
and say: If we suppose that from the beginning of the world till now the 
sphere of the world has performed, for instance, a thousand revolutions, 
was God alle to create a second world before it, which, for example, would 
have performed eleven hundred revolutions up to now? If you deny it, 
it would mean that the Eternal had passed from impotence to power or 
the world from impossibility to possibility, but if you accept it, and you 
cannot but accept it, it may be asked if God was able to create a third 
world which would have performed twelve hundred revolutions up to now 
and you will have to admit this. We philosophers say: ‘Then, could the 
world which we called by the order uf our supposition the third, although 
as a matter of fact it is the first, have been created at the same lime as the 
world we called the second, so that the former would have performed 
twelve hundred revolutions and the latter eleven hundred revolutions, 
it being understood that both, in revolving, complete the same distance 
at the same speed? IT you were to admit this, you would be admitting 
something absurd, fur it would be absurd that in that case the number of 
the two revalutions, having the same speed and finishing at the same 
moment, should be different. But, if you answer that it is impossible that 
the third world which has up to now performed twelve hundred revolu- 
tions could have been created at ihe same time as the second world which 
has up to now performed eleven hundred revolutions, and that on the 
contrary it must have been created the same number of years earlier than 
the second, as the second has been created before the first-—we call it 
first, as it comes first in order, when in imagination we proceed from our 
time to it—then there exists a quantity of possibility doulole that of another 
possibility, and there is doubtless another possibility which doubles the 
whole of the others. These measurable quantitative possibilities, of which 
some are longer than others by a definite measure, have no other reality 
than time, and those measurable quantities are not an attribute of the 
essence of God, who is too exalted to possess measure,’ nor an attribute 
of the non-existence of the world, for non-existence is nothing and there- 
fore cannot be measured with diflerent measures. Still, quantity is an 
attribute which demands a substratum, and this is nothing other than 
movement, and quantity is nothing but the time which measures move- 
ment. Therefore also for you theologians there existed before the world a 
substratum of diflerentiated quantity, namely time, and according to you 
time existed before the world. 

I say: 

The summary of this argument is that, when we imagine a move- 
ment, we find with it an extension which measures it, as if it were its 
measurement, while reciprocally the movement measures the exten- 
sion,? and we find that we can assume in this measure and this 

84 

85 

w 

10 

86 

87 

50 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

extension a movement longer than the first supposed movement, and 
we affirm through the corresponding and congruous units of this 
extension that the one movement is longer than the other.’ If there- 
fore for you theologians the world has a certain extension from its 
beginning till now—let us suppose, for instance, a thousand years— 
and since God according to you is able to create before this world 
another world, we may suppose that the extension He can give it will 
be Jonger than the extension of the first world by a certain definite 
quantity, and that He can likewise create a third world before this 
second and that the existence of each of them must be preceded by an 
extension through which its existence can be measured.* If this is 
true, and there is an infinite regress of this possibility of anterior 
worlds, there is an extension which precedes all these worlds. And 
this extension which measures all of them cannot be absolute non- 
existence, for non-existence cannot measure; it has, therefore, to be 
a quantity, for what measures a quantity has to be quantity itself, 
and the measuring quantity is that which we call time. And it is 
clear that this must precede in existence anything we imagine to 
occur, just as the measure must precede the measured in existence. 
If this extension which is time were to occur at the occurrence of the 
first movement, then it would have to be preceded by an extension 
which could measure it, in which it could occur, and which could 
be like its measurement. And in the same way any world which could 
be imagined would have to be preceded by an extension which 
measures it. Therefore this extension has no beginning, for if it had a 
beginning it would have to have an extension which measured it, 
for each event which begins has an extension which measures it and 
which we call time. 

This is the most suitable exposition of this argument, and this is 
the method by which Avicenna proves mfinite time,’ but there is a 
difficulty in understanding it, because of the problem that each pos- 
sible has one extension and each extension is connected with its own 
possible and this forms a point of discussion ;* or one must concede 
that the possibilities prior to the world are of the same nature as the 
possible inside the world, i.e. as it is of the nature of this possible 
inside the world that time inheres in it, so also with the possible 
which is prior to the world. This is clear concerning the possible in- 
side the world, and therefore the existence of time may be imagined 
from it.$ 

Ghazali says: 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 51 

The objection is that all this is the work of imagination, and the most 
convenient way of refuting it is to compare time with place; therefore 
we say: Was it not in God’s power to create the highest sphere in its 
heaven a cubit higher than He has created it? If the answer is negative, 
this is to deny God’s power, and if the answer is affirmative, we ask: And 
by two cubits and by three cubits and so on ad infinitum? Now we affirm 
that this amounts to admitting behind the world a spatial extension which 
has measure and quantity, as a thing which is bigger by two or three 
cubita than another occupies a space bigger by two or three cubits, and 
by reason of this there is behind the world a quantity which demands a 
substratum and this is a body or empty space. Therefore, there is behind 
the world empty or occupied space. And how can you answer this? And 
likewise we may ask, whether God was not able to create the sphere of the 
world smaller than He has created it by a cubit or two cubits? And is 
there no difference between those two magnitudes in regard to the occupied 
space taken away from them and the space they still occupy, for the 
occupied space withdrawn is bigger when two cubits are taken away than 
when one cubit is taken away? And therefore empty space has measure. 
But emptiness is nothing; how can it have measure? And our answer is: 
‘It belongs to the iJlusion of imagination to suppose possibilities in time 
before the existence of the world’, just as your answer is: ‘Tt belongs to the 
illusion of imagination to suppose possibilities in space behind the existence 
of the world.’ There is no difference between those two points of view.! 

T say: 

This consequence is true against the theory which regards an 
infinite increase in the size of the world as possible, for it follows from 
this theory that a finite thing proceeds from God which is preceded 
by infinite quantitative possibilities. And if this is allowed for possibi- 
lity in space, it must also be allowed in regard to the possibility in 
time, and we should have a time limited in both directions*, although 
it would be preceded by infinite temporal possibilities. The answer is, 
however, that to imagine the world to be bigger or smaller does not 
conform to truth but is impossible. But the impossibility of this does 
not imply that to imagine the possibility of a world before this world 
is to imagine an impossibility, except in case the nature of the possible 
were already realized and there existed before the existence of the 
world only two natures, the nature of the necessary and the nature of 
the impossible.? But it is evident that the judgement of reason con- 
cerning the being of these three natures is eternal, like its judgement 
concerning the necessary and the impossible, 

This objection, however, does not touch the philosophers, because 
they hold that the world could not be smailer or bigger than it is, 

88 

5 

89 

a 

90 

52 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

If it were possible that a spatial magnitude could infinitely increase, 
then the existence of a spatial magnitude without end would be 
possible and a spatial magnitude, actually infinite, would exist, and 
this is impossible and Aristotle has already shown the impossibility 
of this.* But against the man who believes in this possibility, because 
the contrary would imply a denial of God’s power, this argument is 
valid, for this spatial possibility is just as much a purely rational con- 
cept? as the possibility of temporal anteriority according to the philo- 
sophers. Therefore, he who believes in the temporal creation of the 
world and affirms that all body is in space, is bound to admit that 
before the creation of the world there was space, cither occupied by 
hody, in which the production of the world could occur, or empty, 
for it is necessary that space should precede what is produced, The 
man who denies empty space and aftirms the finiteness of body—like* 
certain later Ash‘arites who, however, separated themselves from the 
principles of the theologians; but t have not read it in their books 
and it was told ‘to me by some who studied their doctrinest—cannot 
admit the tempor] production of the world. If the fact of this exten- 
sium which measures movement and which stands in relation to it 
as its measurement were indeed the work cf an illusion—like the 
representilion of a world bigger or smaller than it really is—time 
would not exist, for time is nothing but what the mind perceives of 
this extension which measures movement. And if it is self-evident 
that time exists, then the act of the mind must necessarily be a 
veracious one, embodying reason, not one embodying illusion. 

Ghazali says: 

It has been objected :s we declare that what is not possible is what 
cannot be done and increase or decrease in the size of the world is impos- 
sible, and therefore could not be brought about.® 

I say: 

This is the answer to the abjection of the Ash‘arites that to admit 
that God could not have made the world bigger or smaller is to 
charge Him with impotence, but they have thereby compromised 
themselves, for impotence is not inability to do the impossible, but 
inability to do what can be done.7 

Ghazali, opposing this, says: 

This excuse is invalid for three reasons: The first is that it is an affront 
to reason, for when reason regards it as possible that the world might be 
higger or smaller than it is by a cubit, this is not the same as regarding it 
as possible to identify black with white and existence with non-existence; 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 53 
impossibility lies in affirming the negative and the positive at the same 
time, and all impossibilities amount to this. This is indeed a silly and faulty 
assertion.’ 

T say: 

This statement is, as he says, an affront to reason, but only to the 
reason of him who judges superficially; it is not an affront to true 
reason, for a statement about its being possible or not? requires a 
proof. And therefore he is right when he declares that this is not 
impossible in the way in which the assumption that black might be 
white is impossible, for the impossibility of the latter is self-evident. 
The statement, however, that the world could not be smaller or larger 
than it is is not self-evident, And although all impossibilities can be 
reduced to self-evident impossibilities, this reduction can take place 
in two ways. The first is that the impossibility is self-evident; the 91 
second is that there follows sooner or later from its supposition an 
impossibility of the same character as that of self-evident impossibili- 
tics.* For instance, if it is assumed that the world might be larger or 
smaller than it is, it follows that outside it there would be occupied 
or empty space. And from the supposition that there is outside it 
occupied or empty space, some of the greatest impossibilitics follow: 
from empty space the existence of mere extension existing by itself; 
from occupied space a body moving either upward or downward or 
in a circle which therefore must be part of another world. Now it has 
becn proved in the science of physics that the existence of another 
world at the same time as this is an impossibility’ and the most un~ 
likely consequence would be that the world should have empty space: 
for any world must needs have four elements and a spherical body 
revolving round them. He who wants to ascertain this should Sook up 
the places where its exposition ts demanded—this, of course, aller 
having fulfilled the preliminary conditions necessary for the student 
to understand strict proofs 

Then Ghazali mentions the second reason: 

ow 

o 

If the world is in the state it is, without the possibility of being larger 
or smaller than it is, then its existence, as it is, is necessary, not possible. 
But the necessary needs no cause. Sa say, thea, as dhe materialists do that 
you deny the creator and that you deny the cause of causes! But this is not 
your dectrme.® 

I say: 
To this the answer which Avicenna gives in accordance with his 92 

93 

54 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

doctrine is quite appropriate." According to him necessity of exis- 
tence is of two kinds: the necessary, existent by itself, and the neces- 
sary, existent through another. But my answer on this question is still 
more to the point: things necessary in this sense need not have an agent 
or a maker; take, for example, asaw which is used to saw wood—it isa 
too! having a certain determined quantity, quality, and matter, that is, 
itis not possible for it to be of another materia! than iron and it could 
not have any other shape than that of a suw or any other measure 
than the measure of a saw, Still nobody would say that the saw has a 
necessity of being.* See, therefore, how crude this mistake is! If one 
were to take away the necessity from the quantities, qualities, and 
matters of things produced by art, in the way the Ash‘arites imagine 
this to happen concerning the created in relation to the creator, the 
wisdom which lics in the creator and the created would have been 
withdrawn, any agent could be an artificer and any cause in existence 
a creator. But all this is a denial of reason and wisdom? 

Ghazali says: 

The third reason is that this faulty argument authorizes its opponent* 
to oppose it by a similar one, and we may say: The existence of the world 
was not possible before its existence, for indeed possibility—according to 
your theory—is coextensive with existence, neither more nor less.5 If you 
say; ‘But then the eternal has passed from impotence to power’, we answer: 
‘No, for the existence was not possible and therefore could not be brought 
about and the impossibility of a thing’s happening that could not happen 
does not indicate impotence.’ If you say: ‘How can a thing which is 
impossible become possible?” We answer: ‘But why should it be impossible 
that a thing should be impossible at one moment and possible at another?’6 
If you say: “The times are similar,” the answer is: ‘But so are the measures, 
and why should one measure be possible and another, bigger or smaller 
by the width of a nail, impossible?’ And if the latter assumption is not 
impossible, the former is not impossible either.’ And this is the way to 
oppose them. 

But the true answer is that their supposition of possibilities! makes no 
sense whatever. We concede only that God is eternal and powerful, and 
that His action never fails, even if He should wish it. And there is nothing 
in this power that demands the assumption of a temporal extension, unless 
imagination, confusing God's power with other things*, connects it with 
time*.° 

I say: 

The summary of this is that the Ash‘arites say to the philosophers: 
this question whether the world could be larger or smaller is impos- 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 55 

sible according to us; it has sense only for the man who believes in 
a priority of possibility in relation to the actualization of a thing, i.e. 
the realization of the possible. We, the Ash‘arites, however, say: 
‘Possibility occurs together with the actuality as it is, without adding 
or subtracting anything,’ 

Now my answer is that he who denics the possibility of the possible 
before its existence denies the necessary, for the possible is the con- 
trary of the impossible without there existing a middle term, and, 
if a thing is not possible before its existence, then it is necessarily 
impossible.! Now to posit the impossible as existing is an impossible 
falsehood, but to posit the possible as cxisting is a possible, not an 
impossible, falschood.? Their assertion that possibility and actuality 
exist together is a falschood, for possibility and actuality are contra- 
dictory, and do not exist together in one and the same moment. The 
necessary consequence for them is that possibility exists neither at the 
same time as the actuality nor before it. The true consequence for 
the Ash‘arices in this discussion is not that the eternal passes from 
impotence to power, for he who cannot do an impossible act is not 
called impotent, but that a thing can pass from the nature of the 
impossible to the nature of existence, and this is like the changing 
of the necessary into the possible, ‘To posit a thing, however, as 
impossible at one lime and possible at another docs nat cut it off from 
the nature of the possible, for this is the genera! character of the 
possible; the existence of anything possible, for instance, is impos- 
sible at the moment when its contrary exists in its substratum.‘ If the 
opponent concedes that a thing impossible at onc time is possible at 
another, then he has conceded that this thing is of the nature of the 
absolutely possibles and that it has not the nature of the impossible. 
If it is assumed that the world was impossible for an infinite time be- 
fore its production, the consequence is that, when it was produced, it 
changed over from impossibility to possibility.* This question is not 
the problem with which we are concerned here, but as we have 
said before, the transference from onc problem to another is an act of 
sophistry. 

And as to his words: 

But the true answer is that their supposition of possibilities makes no 
sense whatever. We concede only that Gad is eternal and powerful and 
that His action never fails, even if Heshould wishit. And thereis nothing in 
this power that demands the assumption of a temporal extension, unless ima- 
gination confusing God’s power with other things* connects with it time*. 

° 

94 

95 

96 

Aes 

97 

56 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

I say: 

Even if there were nothing in this suppositian—as he says—that 
implies the eternity of time, there is something in it that demands 
that the posstbility of the occurrence of the world and equally of time 
should be eternal. And this is that God never ceases to have power 
for action, and that it is impossible that anything should prevent His 
act from being eternally connected with His existence; and perhaps 
the opposite of this statement indicates the impossibility better still, 
namely, that He should have no power at one time but power at 
another, and that He could be called powerful oniy at definite 
limited times, although He is an eternal and perpetual being. And 
then we have the old question again whether the world may be 
either eternal or temporal, or whether the world cannot be cternal, 
or whether the world cannot be temporal, or whether the world may 
be temporal but certainly cannot be eternal, and whether, if the 
world is temporal, it can be a first uct or not. And if reason has no 
power to pronounce for one of these opposite propositions, Ict us go 
back to tradition, but do not then regard this question as a rational 
one! We say that the First Cause cannot omit the best ace and 
perform an interior, because this would be an imperfection; but can 
there be a greater imperfection than to assume the act of the Eternal 
as finite and limited, like the act of a temporal product, although a 
limited act can only be imagined of a limited agent, not of the 
eternal agent whose existence and action are unlimited? All this, as 
you sec, cannot be unknown to the man who has even the slightest 
understanding of the rational, And how can it be thought that the 
present act proceeding from the Eternal cannot be preceded by 
another act, and again by another, and so in our thinking infinitely, 
like the infinite continuation of His existence? For it is a necessary 
consequence that the uct of Him whose existence time cannot 
measure nor comprehend in either direction cannot be compre- 
hended in time nor measured by a limited duration. For there is no 
being whose act is <lelayed after its existence, except when there is 
an impediment which prevents its existence from attaining its perfec- 
tion,' or, in voluntary beings, when there is an obstruction in the 
execution of their choice. He, therefore, who assumes that from the 
Eternal there proceeds only a temporal act presumes that His act is 
constrained in a certain way and in this way therefore does not 
depend on His choice. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 57 

THE THIRD PROOF FOR THE ETERNITY 
OF THE WORLD 
Ghazali says: 5 

They insist on saying: The existence of the world is possible before its 
existence, as it is absurd that it should be impossible and then become 
possible;! this possibility has no beginning, it is eternally unchangeable 
and the existence of the world remains eternally possible, for at no time 
whatever can the existence of the world be described as impossible; and if 
the possibility never ceases, the possible, in conformity with the possibility, 
never ceases either; and the meaning of the sentence, that the existence 
of the world is possible, is that the existence of the world is not impossible; 
and since its existence is eternally possible, it is never impossible, for if it 
were ever impossible, it would not be true that the existence of the world 
is eternally possible; and if it were not true that the existence of the world 
is eternally possible, it would not be true that its possibility never ceases; 
and if it were not true that its possibility never ceases, it would be true that 
its possibility had begun; and if it were true that its possibility had begun, 
its existence before this beginning would noc be possible and tliat would 
lead to the assumption of a time when the world was not possible and God 
had no power over it. 

C) 

I say: 

He who concedes that the world before its existence was of a 
never-ceasing possibility must admit that the world is eternal, for 
the assumption that what is eternally possible* is eternally existent 98 
implies no absurdity.3 What can possibly exist eternally must neces- 
sarily exist eternally, for what can reccive eternity cannot become 
corruptible, except if it were possible that the corruptible could 
become eternal.+ Therefore Aristotle has said that the possibility in 
the eternal beings is necessary.’ 

Ghazali says: 

The objection is that it is said that the temporal becoming of the world 
never ceased to be possible, and certainly there is no time at which its 
hecoming could not be imagined. But although it could be at any time, 
it did not become at any time whatever, for reality does not conform to 
possibility, but differs from it. You yourself hotd, for instance, in the 
matter of place, that the world could be bigger than it is, or that the 
creation of an infinite series of bodies above the world is possible, and that 
there is no limit to the possibilities of increase in the size of the world, but 
still che actual existence of absolutely infinite occupied space and of any 
infinite and limitless being is impossible. What is said to be possible is an 
actual body of a limited surface, but the exact size of this body, whether it 
is larger or smaller, is not specified. In the same way, what is possible is 

9 

58 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the coming into existence of the world in time, but the exact time of its 
coming into existence whether earlier or later, is not specified. The 
principte of its having come into being is specified and this is the possibte, 
nothing else," 

I say: 

The man who assumes that before the existence of the world there 
was one unique, never-ceasing possibility must concede that the 
world is eternal, The man who affirms, tike Ghazali in his answer, 

~ that before the world there was an infinite number of possibilities of 
. worlds, has certainly to admit that before this world there was 

Boe 

100 

another world and before this second world a third, and so on ad 
infinitum, as is the case with human beings, and especially when it is 
assumed that the perishing of the earlier is the necessary condition 
for the existence of the later.* For instance, if God had the power to 
create another world before this, and before this second world yet 
another, the series must continue infinitely, or else we should arrive 
at a world before which no other world could have been created 
(however, the theologians do not affirm this nor use it as a proof for 
the temporal production of the world)? Although the assumption 
that before this world there inight be an infinite number of others 
docs not seem an impossible one, it appears after closer examination 
to be absurd, for it would follow from it that the universe had the 
nature of an individual person in this transitory world, so that its 
procession from the First Principle would be like the procession of 
the individual person from Him—that is to say, through an eternal 
moving body and an eternal motion. Rut thea this world would be 
part of another world, like the transient beings in this world, and 
then necessarily either we end finally in a world individually eternal 
or we have an infinite series. And if we have to bring this series to a 
standstill, it is more appropriate to arrest it at this world, by regard- 
ing it as cternally unique. 

THE FOURTH PROOF 
Ghazalt says: 

The fourth proof is that they say everything that becomes is preceded 
by the matter which is in it, for what becomes cannot be free from matter.* 
For this reason matier never becomes; what becomes is only the form, the 
accidents and the qualities which add themselves to matter.5 The proof is 
that the existence of each thing that becomes must, before its becoming, 
either be possible, impossible, or necessary: it cannot be impossible, for the 
essentially impossible will never exist; it cannot be necessary, for the 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 59 

essentially necessary will never be in a state of non-existence, and there- 
fore it is the essentially possible.! Therefore, the thing which becomes has 
before its becoming the possibility of becoming, but the possibility of 
becoming is an attribute which needs a relation and has no subsistence in 
itself? It needs, therefore, a substratum with which it can be connected, 
and there is no substratum except matter, and it becomes connected with it 
in the way in which we say this matter receives warmth and coldness, or 
black and white, or movement and rest, ic, it is possible that these 
qualities and these changes occur in it and therefore possibility is an 
attribute of matter. Matter does not possess other matter,’ and cannot 
become; for, if it did, the possibility of its existence would precede its 
existence, and possibility would subsist by itself without being related to 
anything else, whereas it is a relative attribute which cannot be understood 
as subsisting by itself. And it cannot be said that the meaning of possibility 
amounts to what can be done and what the Eternal had the power to do, 
because we know only that a thing can be done, because it is possible, and 
we say ‘this can be done because it is possible and cannot be done because 
it is not possible’ ;* and if ‘this is possible’ meant ‘this can be done’, to 
say ‘this can be done because it is possible’ would mean ‘this is possible 
because it is possible’, and this is a circular definition; and this shows 
that ‘this is possible’ is a first judgement in the mind, evident in itself, 
which makes the second judgement ‘that it can be done’ intelligible. It 
cannot be said, either, that to he possible refers to the knowledge of the 
Eternal, for knowledge depends on a thing known, whereas possibility 
is undoubtedly an object of knowledge, not knowledge ;5 further, it is a 
relative attribute, and needs something to which it can be related, 
and this can only be matter, and everything that becomes is preceded 
by matter, 

I say: 

The summary of this is that everything that becomes is possible 
before it becomes, and that possibility needs something for its subsis- 
tence, namely, the substratum which receives that which is possible. 
For it must not be believed that the possibility of the recipient is the 
same as the possibility of the agent. It is a different thing to say about 
Zaid, the agent, that he can do something and to say about the 
patient that it can have something done to it. Thus the possibility of 
the patient’ is a necessary condition for the possibility of the agent, for 
the agent which cannot act is not possible but impossible. Since it is 
impossible that the possibility prior to the thing’s becoming should be 
absolutely without* substratum, or that the agent should be its sub- 
stratum or the thing possible—for the thing possible loscs its possibi- 
lity, when it becomes actual—there only remains as a vehicle for 
possibility the recipient of the possible, i.e. matter. Mattcr, in so far as 

101 

102 

a 

103 

wn 

60 TAUHAFUT AL FAHAFUT 

it is matter, does not become; for if it did it would need other matter 
and we should have an infinite regress. Mattcr only becomes in so far 
as it is combined with form. Everything that comes into being comes 
into being from something else, and this must either give rise to an in- 
finite regress and lead directly (o infinite matter which is impossible, 
even if we assume an cternal mover, for there is no actual infinite; or 
the forms must be interchangeable in (he ingencrable and incorrupt- 
ible substratum, eternally and in rotation.' There must, therefore, be 
an eternal movement which produces this interchange in the eternally 
transitory things. And therefore it is clear that the generation of the 
one in each pair of generated beings is the corruption of the other; 
otherwise a thing could come into being from nothing, for the mean- 
ing of ‘becoming’ is the alteration of a thing and its change, from 
what it has potentially, into actuality, It is not possible that the 
privation itself should change into the existent, and it is not the 
Privation of which it is said that it has become, There exists, there- 
fore, a substratum for the contrary forms, and it is in this substratum 
that the forms interchange, 

Ghazali says: 

The objection is that the possibility of which they speak is a judgement 
of the intellect, and anything whose existence the intellect supposes, pro- 
vided no obstacle presents itself to the supposition, we call possible and, if 
there is such an obstacle, we call it impossible and, if we suppose that it 
cannot be supposed not to be, we call it necessary.? These are rational 
judgements which need no real existent which they might qualify. There 
are three proofs of this. The first is: If possibility needed an existent to 
which it could be related, and of which i¢ could be said chat it is its possi- 
bility, impossibility also would need an existent of which it might be said 
that it is és impossibility; but impossibility has no real existence, and there 
is no matter in which it occurs and to which it could be related. 

I say: 

That possibility demands an existing matter is clear, for all true 
intellectual concepts need a thing outside the soul, for truth, as it 
has been defined, is the agreement of what is in the soul with what 
is outside the soul.? And when we say that something is possible, we 
cannot but understand that it needs something in which this possi- 
bility can be.* As regards bis proof that the possible is not dependent 
on an existent, because the impossible is not dependent on an exis- 
tent, this is sophistical. Indeed the impossible demands a substratum 
just as much as the possible docs, and this is clear from the fact that 
the impossible ts the opposite of the possible and opposite contraries 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 61 

undoubtedly require a substratum. For impossibility is the negation 
of possibility, and, if possibility needs a substratum, impossibility 
which is the negation of this possibility requires a substratum too, 
e.g. we say that the existence of empty space is impossible, because 
the existence of independent dimensions outside or inside natural 
bodies is impossible, or that the presence of opposites at the same 
time in the same substratum is impossible, or that the equivalence 
of one to two is impossible, i.e. in reality. All this is self-evident, and 
it is not necessary to consider the errors here committed. 

Ghazali says: 

The second proof is that the intellect decides that black and white are 
possible before they exist.‘ If this possibility were related to the body in 
which they inhere, so that it might be said that the meaning is that this 
body can be black and white, then white would not be possible by itself 
and possibility would be related only to the body. But we aflirm, as con- 
cerns the judgement about black in itself, as to whether it is possible, 
necessary, or impossible, that we, without doubt, will say that it is possible, 
And this shows that the intellect in order to decide whether something is 
possible need not admit an existing thing to which the possibility can be 
related, 

I say: 

This is a sophism. For the possible is predicated of the recipient and 
of the inherent quality. In so far as it is predicated of the substratum, 
its opposite is the impossibic, and in so far as it is predicated of the 
inherent, its opposite is the necessary.* ‘Thus the possible which is 
described as being the opposite of the impossible is not that which 
abandons its possibility so far as it is actualized, when it becomes 
actual, because this latter loses its possibility in the actualizing pro- 
cess.’ This latter possible ts only described by possibitity in so far as 
it is in potency, and the vehicle of this potency is the substratum 
which changes from existence in potency into existence in actuality.* 
This is evident from the definition of the possible that it is the non- 
existence which is in readiness to exist or not to exist. This possible 
non-existent is possible neither in so far as it is non-existent nor in so 
far as it is actually exiscent.® It is only possible in so far as it is in 
potency, and for this reason the Mu'tazilites affirm that the non- 
existent is a kind of entity.” For non-existence is the opposite of 
existence, and cach of the two js succeeded by the other, and when 
the non-existence of a thing disappears it is followed by its existence, 
and whien its existence disappears it is succeeded by its non-existence. 
As non-existence by itself cannot change into existence, and existence 

1% 

o 

105 

to 

106 

107 

62 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

by itself cannot change into non-existence, there must be a third 
entity which is the recipient for both of them, and that is what 
is described by ‘possibility’ and ‘becoming’ and ‘change from the 
quality of non-existence to the quality of existence’. For non-existence 
itself'is not described by ‘becoming’ or ‘change’; nor is the thing that 
has become actual described in this way, for what becomes loses the 
quality of becoming, change, and possibility when it has become 
actual. Therefore there must necessarily be something that can be 
described by ‘becoming’ and ‘change’ and ‘transition from non- 
existence to existence’, as happens in the passage of opposites into 
Opposites; that is to say, there must be a substratum for them in 
which they can interchange—with this one difference, however, that 
this substratum exists in the interchange of all the accidents in 
actuality, whereas in the substance it exists in potency,? 

And we cannot think of regarding what is described by ‘possibility’ 
and ‘change’ as identical with the actual, ie. which belongs to the 
becoming in so far as it is actual, for the former again vanishes and 
the latter must necessarily be a part of the product. Therefore there 
must necessarily be a substratum which is the recipient for the 
possibility and which is the vehicle of the change and the becoming, 
and it is dhis of which it is said that it becomes, and alters, and 
changes from non-existence into existence. Nor can we think of 
making this substratum of the nature of the actualized, for if this 
were the case the existent would not become, for what becomes 
comes into being from the non-existent not from the existent.? Both 
philosophers and Mu tazilites agree about the existence of this entity; 
only the philosophers are of the opinion that it cannot be exempt 
from a form actually existent, i.c. that ic cannot be free from exis- 
tence, like the transition, for example, from sperma to blood and the 
transition from blood to the members of the embryo.* The reason is 
thac if it were excmpt from existence it would have an existence of 
its own, and if it had an existence of its own, becoming could not 
come from it.s This entity is called by the philosophers ‘kyle’, and it 
is the cause of generation and corruption. And according to the 
philosophers an cxistent which is free from Aple is neither generable 
nor corruptible.® 

Ghazali says: 

The third proof is that the souls of men, according to the philosophers, 
are substances which subsist by themselves? without being in a body or in 
inatier or impressed on matter;® they had a beginning in time, accurding 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 63 

to the theory of Avicenna and the acknowledged philosophers, they had 
possibility before their beginning, but they have neither essence nor 
matter and their possibility is a relative attribute,* dependent neither on 5 
God’s power nor on the Agent;? but on what then is it dependent? The 
difficulties are therefore turned against them themselves. 

I say: 

I do not know any philosopher who said that the soul has a begin- 
ning in the true sense of the word and is thereafter everlasting except * 
—as Ghazali relates—Avicenna,* AH other philosophers agree that 
in their temporal existence they are related to and connected with 
the bodily possibilities, which receive this connexion like the possibi- 
lities which subsist in mirrors for their connexion with the rays of the ' 
sun.§ According to the philosophers this possibility is not of the 
nature of the generable and corruptible forms, but of a kind to which, 
according to them, demonstrative proof leads, and the vehicle of this 
possibility is of another nature than the nature of the Ayle. He alone 
can grasp their theories in these matters who has read their books 
and fulfilled the conditions there laid down by them, and has besides 
a sound understanding and a learned master.® That Ghazali should 108 
touch on such questions in this way is not worthy of such a man, but 
there are only these alternatives: cicher he knew these matters in 
their true nature, and sets them out here wrongly, which is wicked; 
or he did not understand their real nature and touched on problems 
he had not grasped, which is the act of an ignoramus. However, he 5 
stands too high in our eyes for either of these qualifications. But even 
the best horse will stumble? and it was a stumble of Ghazaii’s that he 
brought out this book. but perhaps he was forced to do so by the 
conditions of his time and his situation. 

Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the phitosophers: 

Te may be said: To reduce possibitity to a judgement of the intellect is 
ahsurd, for the meaning of ‘judgement of the intellect’ is nothing but che 
knowledge of possibility, and possibility is an object of knowledge, not 
knowledge itself; knowledge, on the contrary, comprises possibitity and 12 
follows it and depends on it as it is, and if knowledge vanished the object 
of knowledge would not, but the disappearance of the object of knowledge 
would imply the disappearance of knowledge. For knowledge and the 
object-known are two things, the former dependent on the latter, and if 
we supposed rational beings to turn away from possibility and neglect it, 
we should say; ‘It is not possibility that is annuiled, for the possibilities 
subsist by thernselves, but it is simply that minds neglect them or that 
minds and rational beings have disappeared; but possibility remains, 

109 

19 

110 

64 TAHAFUT AL TARAFUT 

without any doubt." And the three proofs are not valid, for impossibility 
requires an existent to which it can be related, and impossibility means 
identifying two opposites, and if the substratum were white it could not 
become black as long as the white existed, and therefore we need a sub- 
stratum, qualified by the quality during the inherence of which its oppo- 
site is spoken of as impossible in this substratum, and therefore impossibi- 
lity is a relative attribute subsistent in a substratum and related to it. 
And where the necessary is concerned it is evident that it is related to 
necessary existence. 

As concerns the second proof, that black is in itself possible, this is 
a mistake, for if it is taken, abstracted from the substratum in which it 
inheres, it is impossible, not possible; it only becomes possible when it can 
become a form in a body; the body is then in readiness for the interchange, 
and the interchange is possible Jor the body; but in itself black has no 
individuality, so as to be characterizable by possibility. 

As cancerns the third proof about the sou, it is eternal for one school of 
philosophers, and is only possible in the attaching of itself to bodies, and 
therefore against those philosophers the argument does not apply.* But 
for those who admit that the soul comes into ¢xistence—and one school 
of philosophers has believed that it is impressed on matter and follows its 
teinperament, as is indicated by Galen in certain passages—it comes into 
existence in matter and its possibility is related to its matter.* And accord- 
ing lo the theory of those who admit that it comes into existence, although 
it is not impressed on matter—which means that it is possible for the 
rational soul to direct matter—the possibility prior to the becoming is 
relative to matter,t and although the soul is not impressed on matter, it is 
attached to it, for it is its directing principle and uses it as an instrument, 
and in this way its possibility is relative to mateer.$ 

I say: 

What he says in this section is truce, as will be clear to you from 
our explanation of the nature of the possible. 

Then Ghaazali, objecting to the philosophers, says: 

And the answer is: Tv reduce possibility, necessity, and impossibility 
to rational concepts is correct, and as for the assertion that dhe concepts 
of reason form its knowledge, and knowledve implies a thing known, let 
them be answered: it cannot be said that receptevity of colour and ani- 
malty and the other concepts, which are fixed in the mind according 
to the philosophers—and this is what constitales the scienees—have no 
objects ;® still these objects have no real existence in the external world, 
and the philosophers are certainly right in saying that aniversals exist 
only in the mind, not in the external world, and that in the external world 
there are only particular individuals, whiek are apprehended by the senses, 
not by reason; and yet these individuals are the reason why the mind 
abstracts from them a concept separated from its rational matter; therefore 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 65 

receptivity of colour is a concept, separate in the mind from blackness and 
whiteness, although in reality a colour which is neither black nor white 
nor of another colour cannot be imagined,’ and receptivity of colour is 
fixed in the mind without any specification—now, in the same way, it 
can be said that possibility is a form which exists in minds, not in the 
exterior world, and if this is not impossible for other concepts,* there is no 
impossibility in what we have said.? 

I say: 

This argument is sophistical because possibility is a universal which 
has individuals outside the mind like all the other universals, and 
knowledge is not knowledge of the universal concept, but it is a 
knowledge of individuals in a universal way which the mind attains 
in the case of the individuals, when it abstracts from them one com- 
mon nature which is distributed among the different matters.* The 
nature, therefore, of the universal is not identical with the nature of 
the things of which it is a universa!. Ghazali is here in error, for he 
assumes that the nature of possibility is the nature of the universal, 
without there being individuals on which this universal, ie, the 
universal concept of possibility, depends. The universal, however, is 
not the object of knowledge; on the contrary through it the things 
become known, although it exists potentially in the nature of the 
things known;’ otherwise its apprehension of the individuals, in so 
far as they are universals, would be false. This apprehension would 
indeed be false if the nature of the object known were essentially 
individual, not accidentally individual, whereas the opposite is the 
case: it is accidentally individual, essentially universal. Therefore 
if the mind did not apprehend the individuals in so far as they are 
universal, it would be in error and make false judgements about 
them. But if it abstracts those natures which subsist in the individual 
things from their matter, and makes them universal, then it is pos- 
sible that it judges them rightly; otherwise it would confuse those 
natures, of which the possible is one. 

The theory of the philosophers that universals exist only in the 
mind, not in the external worid, only means that the universals exist 
actually only in the mind, and not in the external world, not that 
they do not exist at all in the external world, for the meaning is that 
they exist potentially, not actually in the external world; indeed, if 
they did not exist at all in the outside world they would be false. 
Since universals exist outside the mind in potency and possibilities 
exist outside the soul in potency, the nature of universals in regard 

11k 

4)2 

a 

113 

66 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

to this resembles that of possibilities. And for this reason Ghazali 
tried to deceive people by a sophism*, for he compared possibility 
to the universals because of their both being potentially in reality, 
and then he assumed that the philosophers assert that universals 
do not exist at all outside the soul; from which he deduced that 
possibility does not exist outside the soul. What an ugly and crude 
sophism! 
Ghazali says: 

As regards their assertion that, if it were assumed that rational beings 
had vanished or had neglected possibility, possibility itself would not have 
disappeared, we answer; ‘If it were assumed that they had vanished, 
would nat the universal concepts, i.e. the genera and species, have dis- 
appeared too?’ and if they agree to this, this can only mean that universals 
are only concepts in the mind; but this is exactly what we say about 
possibility, and there is no difference between the two cases; if they, 
however, affirm that they are permanent in the knowledge of God,' the 
same may be said about possibility, and the argument is valid, and our 
aim of showing the contradiction in this theory has been attained, 

I say: 

This argument shows his foolishness and proneness to contradic- 
tion, The most plausible form in which it might be expressed would 
be to base it* on two premisses: the first, that the evident proposition 
that possibility is partially individual, namely, outside the soul, 
partially universal, namely, the universal concept of the individual 
possibles, is not true; and the second, that it was said that the nature 
of the individual possibles outside the soul is identical with the nature 
of the universal of possibility in the mind; and in this case the possible 
would have neither a universal nor an individual nature, or else the 
nature of the individual would have to be identical with that of the 
universal, All this is presumptuous, and how should it be else, for in a 
way the universal has an existence outside the soul. 

Ghazali says: 

And as regards their subterfuge where the impossible is concerned, that 
it is related to the matter qualitied by its opposite, as it cannet take the 
place of iss opposite,” this cannot be the case with every impossible, for 
that God should have a rival is impossible, but there is no matter to which 
this impossibility could be related. If they say the impossibility of God’s 
having a rival, means that the solitude of God in His essence and His 
uniqueness are necessary and that this solitude is proper to Him, we 
answer: This is not necessary, fur the world exists with Him, and He is 
therefore not solitary. And if they say that His solitude so far as a rival is 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 67 

concerned is necessary, and that the opposite of the necessary is the 
impossible, and that the impossible is related to Him, we answer: In this 
case the solitude of God in regard to the world is different from His 
solitude in regard to His equal and in this case His solitude in regard to 
His rival is necessary, and in regard to the created world not necessary.’ 

I say: 

All this is vain talk, for it cannot be doubted that the judgements 
of the mind have value only in regard to the nature of things outside 
the soul. If there were outside the soui nothing possible or impossible, 
the judgement of the mind that things are possible or impossible 
would be of as much value as no judgement at all, and there would 
be no difference between reason and iliusion. And that there should 
be a rival to God is just as impossible in reality as God’s existence is 
necessary in reality. But there is no sense in wasting more words on 
this question. 

Ghazali says: 

The subterfuge concerning the becoming of the souls is worthless too, 
for they have individual essences and a possibility prior to their becorning,* 
and at that time there is nothing with which they could be broughe into 
relation.? Their argument contends that it is possible for matter that the souls 
direct it is a remote relation‘ and, if this satishes you, you might as well 
say that the possibility of the souls’ becoming* fies in the power of Him 
whe can on His own authority produce them,’ fer the souls are then 
related to the Agent—although they are not impressed on Him~—in the 
same way as to the body, on which they are not impressed either. And 
since the imprint is made neither on the one substrate nor on the other*, 
there is no difference between the relation to the agent and that to the 
patient. 

I say: 

He wants to force those who assume* the possibility ef the soul's 
becoming without there being an imprint in matter to concede that 
the possibility in the recipient is like the possibility in the agent, 
because the act proceeds from the agent and therefore these two 
possibilities are similar, But thisis a shocking supposition, for, accord- 
ing to it, the soul would come to the body as if it directed it from the 
outside, as the artisan directs his product, and the soul would not be 
a form in the body, dgst as the artisan is not a form in his product. 
The answer is that it not impossible that there should be amongst 
the entelechies which conduct themselves like forms® something that 
is separate from its substratum as the steersman is from his ship? and 
the artisan from his tool, and if the body is like the instrument of the 

114 

5 

wa 

116 

wn 

68 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

soul, the soul is a separate form, and then the possibility which is in 
the instrument is not like the possibility which is in the agent; no, the 
instrument is in both conditions, the possibility which is in the patient 
and the possibility which is in the agent, and therefore the instru- 
ments are the mover and the moved, and in so far as they are the 
mover, there is in them the possibility which is in the agent, and in 
so far as they are moved, the possibility which is in the recipient.* 
But the supposition that the soul is a separate entity does not force 
them into the admission that the possibility which is in the recipient 
is identical? with the possibility which is in the agent. Besides, the 
possibility which according to the philosophers is in the agent is not 
only a rational judgement, but refers to something outside the soul.? 
Therefore his argument does not gain by assimilating one of these two 
possibilities to the other. And since Ghazali knew that all these argu- 
ments have no other effect than to bring doubts and perplexity to those 
who cannot solve them—which is an act of wicked sophists, he says: 

And if it is said you have taken good care in all your objections to oppose 
the difficulties by other difficulties, but nothing of what you yourself 
have adduced is free from difliculty, we answer: the objections do show 
the falsity of an argument, no doubt, and certain aspects* of the problem 
are solved in stating the opposite view and its foundation.* We have not 
committed ourselves to anything more than to upsetting their theories, 
and to showing the faults in the consequence of their proofs so as to demon- 
strate their incoherence. We do not seek to attack from any definite point 
of view, and we shall not transgréss the aim of this book, nor give full 
proofs for the temporal production of the world, for our intention is 
merely to refute their alleged knowledge of its eternity, But after finishing 
this book we shall, if it pleases God, devote a work te establishing the 
doctrine of truth, and we cail it ‘The Golden Mean in Dogmatic Beliefs’*,5 
in which we shall be engaged in building up, as in this book we have 
been in destroying. 

I say: 

To oppose difficulty with difficulty does not bring about destruc- 
tion, but only perplexity and doubts in him who acts in this way, or 
why should he think one of the two conflicting theories reasonable and 
the opposite one vain? Most of the arguments with which this man 
Ghazali opposes the philosophers are doubts which arise when cer- 
tain parts of the doctrine of the philosophers come into conflict with 
others, and when those differences are compared with each other; 

‘but this is an imperfece refutation. A perfect refutation would be one 

that succeeded in showing the futility of their syseem according to 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION . 69 

the facts themselves, not such a one as, for instance, his assumption. 

that it is permissible for the opponents of the philosophers to claim | .. 
that possibility is a mental concept in the same way as the philoso- ~ 

phers claim this for the universal. For if the truth of this comparison 
between the two were conceded, it would not follow that it was 
untrue that possibility was a concept dependent on reality, but only 
either that the universal existed in the mind only was not true, or 

that possibility existed in the mind only was not true. Indeed, it © 

would have been necessary for him to begin by establishing the truth, 
before starting to perplex and confuse his readers, for they might die 
before they could get hold of that book, or he might have died him- 
self before writing it. But this book has not yet come into my hands! 
and perhaps he never composed it, and he only says that he docs not 
base this present book on any doctrine, in order that it should not be 
thought that he based it on that of the Ash‘arites. It appears from 
the books ascribed to him that in metaphysics he recurs to the 
philosophers. And of all his books this is most clearly shown and 
most truly proved in his book called The Niche for Lights,* 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 

The Refutation of their Theory of the Incorruptibility of the World 
and ofs{ime and Motion 

Ghazali says: “. 

Know that this is part of the first question, for according to the philo- 
sophers the existence of the world, having no beginning, does not end 
either; it is eternal, without a final term. Its disappearance and its 
corruption cannot be imagined; it never began to exist in the condition 
in which it exists? and i will never cease to exist in the condition in which 
it exists. 

Their four arguments which we have mentioned in our discussion of 
its eternity in the past refer also to its eternity in the future, and the 
objection is the same without any difference. They say that the world is 
caused, and that its cause is without beginning or end, and that this 
applies both te the effect and to the cause, and that, if the cause does not 
change, the effect cannot change either; upon this they build their proof 
of the impossibility of its beginning, and the same applies to its ending. 
This is their first proof. 

i127, 

118 

pe) 

i@ 

119 

120 

ow 

70 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

The second proof is that an eventual annihilation of the world must 
occur after its existence, but ‘after’ implies an affirmation of time. 

The third proof is that the possibility of its existence does not end, and 
that therefore its possible existence may conform to the possibility.’ But 
this argument has no force, for we regard it as impossible that the world 
should not have begun, but we do not regard it as impossible that it 
should last eternally, if God should make it hast eternally, for it is not 
necessary that what begins has also an end, although it is necessary for 
an act to have a beginning and an initial term. Only Abu Hudhail al-Allaf 
thought that the world must needs have an end, and he said that, as in the 
past infinite circular movements are impossible, so they are in the future;? 
but this is wrong, for the whole of the future never enters into existence 
either simultaneously or successively, whereas the whole of the past is 
there simultaneously but not successively? And since it is clear that we 
do not regard the incorruptibility of the world as impossible from a 
rational point of view—we regard indeed its incorruptibitity and cor- 
ruptibility as equally possible—we know only through the Divine Law+ 
which of the two possibilities will be realized. ‘Therefore let us not try to 
solve this problem by mere reason! 

I say: 

His assertion that the argument of the philosophers for the eternity 
of the world in the past applies also to its eternity in the future is 
true, and equally the second argument applies to both cases. But his 
assertion that the third argument is not equally yalid for the future 
and for the past, that indeed we regard the becoming of the world in 
the past as impossible, but that with the exception of Abu Hudhail 
al-Allaf, who thought that the eternity of the world was impossible 
in cither direction, we do not regard its eternity in the future as 
absolutely impossible, is not true. For when it was conceded to the 
philosophers that the possibility of the world had no beginning 
and that with this possibility a condition of extension, which could 
measure this possibility, was connected in the same way as this 
condition of extension is connected with the possible existent, when 
it is actualized, and it was also evident that this extension had no 
initial term, the philosophers were convinced that time had no initial 
term, for this extension is nothing but time, and io call it timeless 
eternity’ is senseless. And since time is connected with possibility 
and possibility with existence in motion, existence in motion has no 
first term either. And the assertion of the theologians that everything 
which existed in the past had a first term is futile, for the First exists 
in the past eternally, as it exists eternally in the future.® And their 
distinction here between the first term and its act? requires a proof, 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 3! 

for the existence of the temporal which occurs in the past is different 
from the existence of the eternal which occurs in the past. For the 
temporai which has occurred in the past is finite in both directions, 
ie. it has a beginning and an end, but the eternal which has occurred 
in the past has neither beginning nor end.’ And therefore, since the 
philosophers have not admitted that the circular movement has a 
beginning, they cannot be forced to admit that it has an end, for 
they do not regard its existence in the past as transitory, and, if some 
philosopher does regard it as such, he contradicts himself and there- 
fore the statement is true that everything that has a beginning has 
an end.? That anything could have a beginning and no end is not 
true, unless the possible could be changed into the eternal, for every- 
thing that has a beginning is possible. And that anything could be 
liable to corruption and at the same time could be capable of eternity 
is something incomprehensible? and stands in need of examination. 
The ancient philosophers indeed examined this problem, and Abu 
Hudhail agrees with the philosophers in saying that whatever can 
be generated is corruptible, and he kept strictly to the consequence 
which follows from the acceptance of the principle of becoming. As 
to those who make a distinction between the past and the future, 
because what is in the past is there in its totality, whereas the future 
never enters into existence in its totality (for che future enters reality 
only successively), this is deceptive, for what is in reality past is that 
which has entered time and that which has entered time has time 
beyond it in both directions and possesses totality. But that which 
has never entered the past in the way the temporal enters the past 
can only be said in an equivocal way to be in the past; it is infinitely 
extended, with the past rather than in the past,’ and possesses no 
totality in itself, although its parts are totalities. And this, if it has 
no initial term beginning in the past, is in face time itself, For each 
temporal beginning js a present, and cach present is preceded by a 
past, and both that which exists commensurable with time, and time 
commensurable with it, must necessarily be infinite. Only the parts 
oftime which are limited by time in both directions can enter the past, 
in the same way as only the instant which is everchanging and only 
the instantaneous motion of a thing in movement in the spatial magni- 
tude in which it moves can really enter the existence of the moved.® 
And just as we do not say that the past of what never ccased to exist 
in the past ever entered existence at an instant—lor this would mean 
that its existence had a beginning and that time limited it in both 

121 

oO 

122 

to 

123 

to 

124 

5 

32 TAHAFUT AL FABAFUT . 

directions—so it stands with that which is simultaneous with time, 
not in time. For of the circular movements only those that time limits 
enter into represented existence,' but those that are simultaneous 
with time do not afterwards enter past existence, just as the eternally 
existent does not enter past existence, since no time limits it. And 
when one imagines an eternal entity whose acts are not delayed after 
its existence—as indeed must be the case with any entity whose 
existence is perfect*—-then, if it is eternal and does not enter past 
time, it follows necessarily that its acts also cannot enter past time, 
for if they did they would be finite and this eternal existent would be 
eternally inactive and what is eternally inactive is necessarily impos- 
sible. And it is most appropriate for an entity, whose existence does 
not enter time and which is not limited by time, that its acts should 
not enter existence cither, because there is no difference between the 
entity and its acts, If the movements of the celestial bodies and what 
follows from them are acts of an eternal entity, the existence of which 
docs not enter the past, then its acts do not cnter past time cither. 
For it is not permissible to say of anything that is eternal that it 
has entered past time, nor that it has ended, for that which has an 
end has a beginning. For indeed, our statement that it is eternal 
means the denial of its entering past time and of its having had a 
beginning, He who, assuming that it entered past time, assumes that 
it must have a beginning begs the question. It is, therefore, untrue 
that what is coexistent with eternal existence, has entered existence, 
unless the cternal existence has enterect existence by entering past 
time. Therefore our statement ‘everything past must have entered 
existence’ must be understood in two ways: first, that which has 
entered past existence must have entered existence, and this is a 
true statement; secondly, that which is past and is inseparably con- 
nected with eternal existence cannot be truly said to have entered 
existence, for our expression ‘entered existence’ is incompatible with 
our expression ‘connected with eternal existence’, And there is here 
no difference between act and existence. For he who concedes the 
existence of an entity which has an eternal past must concede that 
there exist acts, too, which have no beginning in the past. And it by 
no means follows from the existence of His acts that they must have 
entered existence, just as it by no means follows from the past 
permanency of His essence that He has ever entered existence. And 
all this is perfectly clear, as you sec. 

Through this First Existent acts can exist which never began and 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 73 

will never cease, and if this were impossible for the act, it would be 
impossible, too, for existence, for every act is connected with its exis- 
tent in existence. The theologians, however, regarded it as impossible 
that God’s act should be eternal, although they regarded His exis- 
tence as cternal, and (hat is the gravest error. To apply the expres- 
sion ‘production’ for the world’s creation as the Divine Law does 

is more appropriate than to use it of temporal production, as the . 

Ash‘arites did," for the act, in so far as it is an act, is a product, and 
etcrnity is only represented in this act because this production and 
the act produced have neither beginning nor.end. And I say that it 
was therefore difficult for Muslims to call God eternal and the world 
eternal, because they understood by ‘eternal’ that which has no cause.? 
Still I have seen some of the theologians tending rather to our 
opinion. 

Ghazali says: 

Their fourth proof is similar to the third, for they say that if the world 
were annihilated the possibility of its existence would remain, as the 
possible cannot become impossible. This possibility is a relative attribute 
and according to them everything that becomes needs matter which 
precedes it and everything that vanishes needs matter from which it can 
vanish, but the matter and the elements do not vanish, only the forms and 
accidents vanish which were in them, 

I say: 

Tfitis assumed that the forms succeed cach other ia one substraturn 
in a circular way aud that the agent of this succession is an eternal 
one, nothing impossible follows from this assumption. But if this 
succession is assumed to take place in an infinite number of matters 
or through an infinite number of specifically different forms, it is 
impossible, and equally the assusnplion is impossible that such a 
succession could occur without an eternal agent or through a temporal 
agent. For if there were an infinite number of matters, an actual 
infinite would exist, and this is impossible. [t is still more absura to 
suppose that this succession could occur chrough temporal agents, 
and therefore from this point of view it is only true that a man must 
become from another man, on condition that the successive series 
happens in one and the same matter and the perishing of the earlier 
men can become the matter of the later. Besides, tie existence of the 
earlier men ts also in some respect the efficient cause and the instru- 
ment for the later —alf this, however, in an accidental way, for those 
men are nothing but the instrument for the Ageut, who does not 

125 

126 

wu“ 

327 

74 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

cease to produce a man by means of a man and through the matter 
of a man. The student who does not distinguish all these points will 
not be able to free himself from insoluble doubts. Perhaps God wiil 
place you and us among those who have reached the utmost truth 
concerning what may and must be taught about God’s infinite acts. 
What I have said about all these things is not proved here, but must 
be examined by the application of the conditions which the ancients 
have explained and the rules which they have established for scientt- 
fic research. Besides, he who would like to be one of those who 
possess the truth should in any question he examines consult those 
who hold divergent opinions,? 

Ghazali says: 

The answer to all this kas been given above, I only single out this 
question because they have two proofs for it. 

The first proof is that given by Galen, who says: If the sun, for instance, 
were liable to annihilation, decay would appear in it over a long period. 
But observation fur thousands of years shows uo change in its size, and the 
fact that it has shown ne loss of power through such a long time shows that 
it does not sufler corruption? There are two objections to this: The first 
is dhat (he made of this proof--that if the sun suffers carcuption, it must 
sufter loss of power, and as the consequence is impossible, the antecedent 
must be impossible too~is what the philosophers call a conjunctive 
hypothetical proposition,’ and this inference is not conchisive, because its 
antecedent is not true, unless it is connected with another condition. In 
other words the falscheod of the consequence of the proposition ‘if the sun 
suffers corruption, it must become weaker’ does not imply the Lalschood 
af the antecedent, unless cither (1) the antecedent is bound wp with the 
additional condition that, if it sulfers corruption through decay, it must 
clo se during a long period, or (2) it is seriously proved that there is no 
cormiptien except dhevugh decay. For only then does the Elselioad of the 
consequence inyply the falsehood of the antecedent, Now, we do not 
concede Cutt a thing can only become corrupt through decay; decay is 
only onc forin of corruption, for it is not impossible that what is in a state 
of perfection should suddenly suffer corruption. 

I say: 

He says in his objection here to this argument that there is no 
necessiry telation between antecedent and consequent, because 
that which suilers corruption need not become weaker, since it can. 
suffer corruption before it has become weaker. The conclusion, 
however, is quite sound, when it is assumed that the corruption 
takes place in a matural way, not by violence, and it is assumed 
besides that the celestial body is an animal, for all animals suffer 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 6 

corruption only in a natural way—they necessarily decay before their 
corruption. However, our opponents do not accept these premisses, 
so far as they concern heaven, without proof. And therefore Galen’s 
statement is only of dialectical value. The safest way to use this 
argument is to say that, if heaven should suffer corruption, it would 
either disintegrate into the elements of which it is composed or, 
losing the form it possesses, receive another, as happens with the 
four elements when they change into one another. If, however, 
heaven passed away into the elements, those elements would have to 
be part of another world, for it couk! not have come into being from 
the elements contained in this world, since these elements are infi- 
nitely smafl, compared with its size, something like a point in rela- 
tion to a circle.’ Should heaven, however, lose its form and receive 
another there would exist a sixth element opposed to all the others, 
being neither heaven, nor earth, nor water, nor air, nor fire.? And 
all this is impossible. And his scacement that heaven does not decay 
is only a comnion opinion, lacking the force of the immediately evi- 
dent axioms; and it is explained in the Posterior Analytics of what kind 
these premisses are.* 
Ghazali says: 

The second objection is that, if it were conceded to Galen that there is 
no corruption except through decay, how can it be known that decay 
does not affect the sun? His reliance on observation is iropossible, for 
observations determine the size only by approximation, and if the sun, 
whose size is said to be approximately a hundred and seventy dimes that 
of the earth,* decreased, for instance, by the size of mountains the differ- 
ence would not be perceptible to the senses. Indeed, it is perhaps already 
in decay, and has decreased up to the present by the size of mountains 
or more; but perception cannot ascertain this, for its knowledge in the 
science of optics works only by supposition and approximation. The same 
takes place with sapphire and gold, which, according to them, are com- 
posed out of elements and which are liable to corruption. Stil, if you left 
a sapphire for a hundred years, its decrease would be imperceptible, and 
perhaps the decrease in the sun during the period in which it has been 
observed stands in proportion to its size as the decrease of the sapphire 
to its size in a hundred years. This is imperceptible, and this fact shows 
that his proof is utterly futile. 

We have abstained from bringing many proofs of the same kind as the 
wise disdain. We have given only this one to serve as an example of what 
we have omitted, and we have restricted ourselves to the four proofs 
which demand that their solution should be attempted in the way 
indicated above. 

a 

129 

to 

130 

oo] 

76 TAHAFUT AY. TAHAFUT 

T say: 

Ifthe sun had decayed and the parts of it which had disintegrated 
during the periad of its observation were imperceptible because of the 
size of its body, still the effect of its decay on bodies in the sublunary 
world would be perceptible in a definite degree, for everything that 
decays docs so only through the corruption and disintegration of its 
patts, and those parts which clisconnect themselves from the decaying 
mass must necessarily remain in the world in their totality or change* 
into other parts, and in cither case an appreciable change must occur 
in the world, either in the number or in the character of its parts. 
And if the size of the bodies could change, their actions and affections 
would change too, and if their actions and affections, and especially 
those of the heavenly bodies, could change, changes would arise in 
the sublunary world. To imagine, therefore, a dissipation of the 
heavenly bodies is to admit a disarrangement in the divine order 
which, according to the philosopher, prevails in this world. This 
proof is not absolutely strict. 

Ghazati says: 

‘the philosophers have a second proof of the impossibility of the 
annihilation of the world. They say: The substance of the world could 
not be annihilated, because no cause could be imagined for this and the 
passage from existence to non-existence cannot take plare without a cause. 
This cause must be either the Will of the Eternal, and this is impossible, 
for if He willed the annihilation of the world after not having willed it, 
He would have changed; or it must be assumed that God and His Will 
are in all conditions absolutely the same, althongh the ohject of His Will 
changes from non-existence to existence and then again from existence to 
non-existence. And the impossibility of which we have spoken in che matter 
of a temporal existence throngh an eternal will, holds also for the problem 
of annihilation. But we shall add here a still greater difficulty, namely, 
that the object willed is without daube an act of the willer, for the act 
of him who acts afler not having acted—even if he does not alter in his 
own nature —nust necessarily exist after having not existed: if he remained 
absolutely in the state he was in before, his act would not be there. But 
when the world is annihilated, there is no object for God's act, and if He 
does not perform anything (for annihilation is nothing), how could there 
be an action? Suppose the annihilation of the world needed a new act 
iv God which did not exist before, what could such an act be? Could it 
he the existence of the world? But this is impossible, since what happens 
is on the contrary the termination of its existence. Could this act then be 
ihe annihitation of the world? But annihilation is nothing at all, and it 
could therefure net be an ict. For even in its slightest intensity an act 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION "7 
must be existent, but the annihilation of the world is nothing existent at 
all; how could it then be said that he who caused it was an agent, or he 
who effected it its cause?! 

The philosophers say that to escape this difficulty the theologians are 
divided into four sects and that each sect falls into an absurdity. 

I say: ~ 

He says here that the philosophers compel the theologians who 
admit the annihilation of the world to draw the consequence that 
from the Eternal, who produced the world, there proceeds a new 
act, i.e. the act of annihilation, just as they compelied them to draw 
this consequence in regard to His temporat production. About this 
problem everything has been said already in our discussion of tem- 
poral production, for the same difficulties as befall the problem of 
production apply to annihilation, and there is no sense in repeating 
ourselves, But the special difficulty he mentions here is that from 
the assumption of the world’s temporal production it follows that 
the act of the agent attaches itself to non-existence,” so that in fact 
the agent performs a non-existing act and this scemed to ail the 
parties too shocking to be accepted,? and therelore the} took refuge 
in theories he mentions later. But this consequence follows necessarily 
from any theory which affirms that the act of the agent is connected 
with absolute creation—that is, the production of something that did 
not exist before in potency and was not a possibility which its agent 
converted from potency into actuality, a theory which affirms in 
fact that the agent created it out of nothing, But for the philosophers 
the act of the agent is nothing but the actualizing of whae is in 
potency, and this act is, according to them, attached to an existent 
in two ways, either* in production, by converting the thing from its 
potential existence into actuality so that its non-existence is termi- 
nated, or* in destruction, by converting the thing from its actual 
existence into potential existence, so that it passes into a relative 
non-existence. But he who does nat conceive the act of the agent in 
this way has to draw the consequence that the agent’s act is attached 
to non-existence in both ways, in production as in destruction; only 
as this seems clearer in the case of desiruction, the theologians could 
not defend themselves against their opponents. For it is clear that 
for the man who holds the theory of absolute annihilation the agent 
must perform something non-existent, for when the agent converts 
the thing from existence into absolute non-existence, he directs his 
first intention to something non-existent, by contrast with what 

131 

5 

o 

132 

10 

133 

19 

78 TAWAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

happens when he converts it from actual existence inte potential exis- 
tence; for in this conversion the passage into non-existence is only a 
secondary fact. The same consequence applies to production, only 
here it is not so obvious, for the existence of the thing implies the 
annulment of its non-existence, ard therefore production is nothing 
but the changing of the non-existence of a thing into its existence; 
but since this movement is directed towards production, the theo- 
Jogians could say that the act of the agent is attached solely to pro- 
duction. They could not, however, say this in regard to destruction, 
since this movement is directed towards non-existence. They have, 
therefore, no right to say that in production the act of the agent 
attaches itself only to production, and not to the anaulment of 
non-existence, for in production the annulment of non-existence is 
necessary, and therefore the act of the agent must necessarily be 
attached to non-existence. For according to the doctrine of the 
theologians, the existent possesses only two conditions: 2 condi- 
tion in which it is absolutely non-existent and a condition in which 
it is actually existent.£ The act of the agent, therefore, attaches itself 
to it, neither when it is actually existent, nor when it is non-existent*. 
Thus only the following alternatives remain: cither the act of 
the agent does not attach itsclf to it at all, or it attaches itself 
to non-existence,* and non-existence changes itself into existence, He 
who conccives the agent in this way must regard the change of non- 
existence itse!finto existence, and ofexistence itselfinto non-existence, 
as possible, and must hold that the act of the agent can attach itself 
to the conversion of cither of these opposites into the other. This is 
absolutely impossible in respect to the other opposites, not to speak of 
non-existence and existence? 

The theologians perceived the agent in the way the weak- 
sighted perceive the shadow of a thing instead of the thing itself 
and then mistake the shadow for it.+ But, as you see, all these 
difficulties arise for the man who has not understood that produc- 
tion is the conversion of a ching from potential into actual exis- 
tence, and that destruction is the reverse, i.e, the change from 
the actual into the potential,s It appears from this that possibility 
and matter are necessarily connected with anything becoming, 
and that what is subsistent jn itself can be ncither destroyed nor 
produced.® 

The theory of the Ash‘arites mentioned here by Ghazali, which 
regards the production of a substance, subsistent in itself, as possible, 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 79 

but not so its destruction, is an extremely weak one, for the conse- 
quences which apply to destruction apply also to production, only, 
it was thought, because in the former case it is more obvious that 
there was here a real difference. Sle then mentions the answers of the 
different sects co the difficulty which faces them on the question of 
annihilation." 

Ghazali says: 

The Mu'tazilites say: the act proceeding from Him is an existent, i.e, 
extinction, which He does not create in a substratum; at one and the 
same moment it annibilates* the whole world and disappears by itself, so 
that it does not stand in need of another extinction and thus of an infinite 
regress? 

And mentioning this answer to the difficulty, he says: 

This is wrong for different reasons. First, extinction is not an intelligible 
existent, the creation of which can be supposed, Moreover, why, if it is 
supposed to exist, does it disappear by itself without a cause for its dis- 
appearance? Further, why does it annihilate the world? For its creation 
and inherence in the essence of the world are impossible, since the inherent 
meets its substratum and exists together with it if only in an instant; if 
the extinction and existence of the world could meet, extinction would 
not be in opposition to existence and would not annihilate it? and, if 
extinction is created neither in the world nor in a substratum, where 
could its existence be in order to be opposed to the existence of the world? 
Another shocking feature in this doctrine is that God cannot annihilate 
part of the world without annihilating the remainder; indeed He can 
only create an extinction which annihilates the world in its totality, for if 
extinction is not in a substratum, it stands in one and the same relation to 
the totality of the world, 

I say: 

The answer is too foolish to merit refutation. Extinction and 
annihilation are synonymous, and if God cannot create annihilation, 
He cannot create extinction either. And even if we suppose extinc- 
tion to be an existent, it could at most be an accident, but an accident 
without a substratum is absurd. And how can one imagine that the 
non-existent causes non-existence? All this resembles the talk of the 
delirious. 

Ghazali says: 

The second sect, the Karramites, say that the act of God is annihilation, 
and annihilation signifies an existent which He produces in His essence 
and through which the world becomes non-existent.* In the same way, 
aceording to them, existence arises out of the act of creation which He 

134 

- 

° 

135 

10 

136 

to 

137 

Bo TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

produces in His essence and through which the world becomes existent. 
Once again, this theory is wrong as it makes the Eternal a substratum for 
temporal production*. Further it is incomprehensible, for creation and 
likewise annihilation cannot be understood except as an existence, related 
to will and power, and to establish another entity besides the will and the 
power and their object, the world, is inconceivable. 

I say: 

The Karramites believe that there are here three factors: the agent, 
the act—which they call creation—and an object, ie. that to which 
the act attaches itself, and likewise they believe chat in the process of 
annihilation there are three factors; the annihilator, the act—which 
they cat} annihilation—and a non-existent. They believe that the act 
inheres in the essence of the agent and according to them the rise of 
such a new condition! in the agent does not imply that the agent is 
determined by a temporal cause, for such a condition is of a relative 
and proportional type, and a new relation and proportion does not 
involve newness in the substratum; only those new events involve a 
change in the substratum which change the essence of the sub- 
stratum, ¢.g, the changing of a thing from whiteness to blackness. 
Their statement, however, that the act inheres in the essence of the 
agent is a mistake; it is only a relation which exists between the agent 
and the object of the act which, when assigned to the agent, is called 
‘act’ and when assigned to the object is called ‘passivity’? Through 
this assumption the Karramites are not obliged to admit that, as the 
Ash‘arites believed, the Eternal produces temporal reality? or that 
the Eternal is not etertial,4 but the consequence which is forced upon 
them is that there must be a cause anterior to the Eternal, for, when 
an agent acts after not having acted, all the conditions for the exis- 
tence of his object being fullilled at the time he did not act, there 
must have arisen a new quality in the agent at the time when he 
acis, and cach new event demands a new cause.S So there must be 
another cause before the first, and so on ad infinitum. 

Ghazali says: 

The third sect is that of the Ash‘arites, who say that accidents pass 
away by themselves and cannot be imagined to persist, for if they per- 
sisted they could not, for this very reason, be imagined ever to pass 
away.® Substances do not persist by themselves either, but persist by a 
persistence added to their existence. And if God had not created persist- 
ence, substances would have become non-existent through the non+ 
existence of persistence. This too is wrong, in so far as it denies the 
evidence of the senses by saying that black and white do not persist and 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 8: 

that their existence is continually renewed; reason shrinks from this, 
as it does, too, from the statement that the body renews its existence at 
each moment, for reason judges that the hair which is on a man’s head 
today is identical with, not similar to, the hair that was there yesterday, 
and judges the same about the black and the white,! There is yet another 
difficulty, namely, that when things persist through persistence, God’s 
attributes must persist through persistence and this persistence persists 
through persistence and so on ad infinttum.* 

I say: 

This theory of the flux of all existing things is a useless one, 
although many ancients held it, and there is no end to the impossibili- 
ties it implies.> How could an existent come into existence, when it 
Passes away by stsclf and existence passes away through its passing 
away? Ifit passed away by itself, it would have to come into existence 
by itself, and in this case that by which it becomes existent would be 
identical with that by which it passes away and this is impossible. 
For existence is the opposite of passing away, and it is not possible 
that two opposites should occur in the same thing in one and the 
same connexion. Therefore in a pure existent no passing away can 
be imagined, for if its existence determined its passing away, it would 
be non-existent and existent at one and the same moment, and this is 
impossible, Further, if che existents persist through the persistence 
of an attribute by itself, will this absence of change in them occur 
through their existence or through their non-existence? The latter is 
impossible, so it follows that they persist because of their existence. 
if, then, all exiseents must persist because they are existent, and 
non-existence is something that can supervene upon them, why in 
Heaven’s name do we necd this attribute of persistence to make 
them persist? Alt this resembles a case of mental disorder. But let us 
leave this sect, for the absurdity of their theory is too clear to need 
refutation. 

Ghazali says: 

The fourth sect are a group of Ash‘arites who say that accidents pass 
away by themselves, but that substances pass away when God does not 
create motion or rest or aggregation and disintegration in them, for it is 
impossible that a body should persist which is neither in motion nor at 
rest, since in that case it becomes non-existent.t The two parties of the 
Ash‘arites incline to the view that annjhifation is not an act, but rather 
a refraining from acting, since they do not understand how non-existence 
can be an act. All these different theories being false—say the philosophers 
—it cannot any longer be asserted that the annihilation of the world is 

138 

139 

o 

140 

82 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

possible, even if one were to admit that the world had been produced in 
time; for although the philosophers concede that the human soul has 
been produced, they claim the impossibility of its annihilation by means 
of arguments which are very close to those we have mentioned. For, 
according to the philosophers, nothing that is self-subsistent and does not 
inhere in a substratum! can be imagined as becoming non-existent after 
its existence, whether it is produced or eternal If one objects against 
them, that when water is boiled it disappears, they answer that it does 
not disappear, but is only changed into steam and the steam becomes 
water again, and its primary matter, i.e. its Ayle, the matter in which the 
fornt of water inhered, persists when the water has become air, for the 
Ayle only loses the form of water and takes up that of air; the air, having 
become cold again, condenses into water, but does not receive a new 
matter, for the matter is common to the elements and only the forms are 
changed in it, 

I say: 

He who affirms that accidents do not persist for two moments, and 
that their existence in substances is a condition of the persistence of 
those substances, does not know how he contradicts himself, for if 
the substances are a condition of the existence of the accidents—since 
the accidents cannot exist without the substances in which they 
inhere—and the accidents are assumed to be a condition lor the 
existence of the substances, the substances must be necessarily a con- 
dition for their own existence; and it is absurd to say that something 
is a condition for its own existence. Further, how could the accidents 
be such a condition, since they themselves do not persist for two 
moments? For, as the instant is at the same time the end of their 
privation and the beginning of their period of existence, the substance 
must be destroyed in this instant, for in this instant there is neither 
anything of the privative peried nor anything of the existent. If 
there were in the instant anything of the privative period or of the 
existent, it could not be the end of the former and the beginning of 
the latter.) And on the whole, that something which does not persist 
two moments should be made a condition for the persistence of 
something lor two moments is absurd. Indeed, a thing that persists 
for two moments is more capable of persisting than one which does 
not persist for twa moments, for the existence of what does not persist 
for two moments is at an instant, which is in flux, but the existence 
of what persists for two moments is constant, and how can what is in 
flux be a condition for the existence of the constant, or how can what 
is only specifically persistent be a condition for the persistence of the 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 83 

individually persistent? This is all senseless talk. One should know 
that he who does not admit a éy/e for the corruptible* must regard 
the existent as simple and as not liable to corruption, for the simple 
does not alter and does not exchange its substance for another sub- 
stance. Therefore Hippocrates says ‘if man were made out of one 
thing alone, he could not suffer by himself’, i.e. he could not suffer 
corruption or change. And therefore he could not have become 
either, but would have to be an eternal existent. What he says here 
about Avicenna of the difference between the production and the 
destruction of the soul is without sense.* 

Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 

The answer is: So far as concerns the different sects you have men- 
tioned, although we could defend each of them and could show that your 
refutation on the basis of your principle is not valid, because your own 
principles are liable to the same kind of objection, we will not insist on 
this point, but we will restrict ourselves to one sect and ask: How will 
you refute the man who claims that creation and annihilation take place 
through the will of God; if God wills, He creates, and if He wills, He 
annihilates, and this is the meaning of His being absolutely powerful, 
and notwithstanding this He does not alter in Himself, but it is only His 
act that alters? And concerning your objection that, inasmuch as an act 
must proceed from the agent, it cannot be understood which act can pro- 
ceed from Him, when Ele annihilates, we answer: What proceeds from 
Him is a new fact, and the new fact is non-existence, for there was no 
non-existence; then it happened as something new, and this is what 
proceeds from Him, And if you say: Non-existence is nothing, how could it 
then proceed from Him? we reply: If non-existence is nothing, how could 
it happen? Indeed, ‘proceeding from Him’ does not mean anything but 
that its happening is related to His power. If its happening has an intel~ 
ligibie meaning, why should its relation to His power not be reasonable ?3 

I say: 

All this is sophistical and wrong. The philosophers do not deny 
that a thing becomes non-existent when a destroying agent destroys 
it; they only say that the destroying act does not attach itself to it, in 
so far as the thing becomes non-existent, but in so far as it changes 
from actual being to potential being, and non-existence results from 
this change, and it is in this way ihat non-existence is related to the 
agent. But it does not follow from the fact that its non-existence 
occurs after the act of the agent that the agent performs it primarily 

141 

5 

142 

and essentially. For when it was conceded to Ghazali during the 5 

discussion of this problem that the non-existence of the corrupting 

143 

to 

84 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

thing will necessarily occur after the act of the corrupting agent, he 
drew the conclusion that its non-existence would follow essentially 
and primarily from the act, but this is impossible. For the agent’s act 
does not attach itself to its non-existence jn so far as it is non-existent, 
i.e, primarily and essentially. And therefore*, if the perceptible exis- 
tences were simple, they could neither be generated nor destroyed 
except through the act of the agent being attached to their non- 
existence essentially and primarily, But the act of the agent is only 
attached to non-existence accidentally and secondarily through its 
changing the object from actual existence into another form of exis- 
tence in an act followed by non-existence, as from the change of a 
fire into air there follows the non-existence of the fire. This is the 
philosophical! theory of existence and non-existence. 

Ghazali says: 

And what is the difference between you and the man who denies 
absolutely that non-existence can occur to accidents and forms, and who 
says that non-existence is nothing at all and asks how then it could occur 
and be called an occurrence and a new event? But no doubt non-existence 
can be represented as occurring to the accidents, and to speak of it as 
occurring has a sense whether you call it something real or not. And the 
relation of this occurrence, which has a reasonable sense, to the power of 
the Omnipotent, also has an intelligible meaning." 

I say: 

That non-existence of this kind occurs is true, and the philosophers 
admit it, because it proceeds from the agent according to a second 
intention and accidentally; but it dees not follow from its proceeding 
or from its having a reasonable meaning that it happens essentially 
or primarily, and the difference between the philosophers and those 
who deny the occurrence of non-existence is that the philosophers do 
not absolutely deny the occurrence of non-existence, but only its 
occurring primarily and essentially through the agent. For the act 
of the agent docs not attach itself necessarily, primarily, and essen- 
tially to non-existence, and according to the philosophers non-exis- 
tence happens only subsequently to the agent’s act in reality. The 
difficulties ensue only for those who affirm that the world can be 
annihilated in an absolute annihilation. 

Ghazali says: 

Perhaps the philosophers will answer: This difficulty is only acute for 
those who allow the non-existence of a thing after its existence, for those 
may be asked what the reality is that occurs. But according to us philo- 
sophers the existing thing does not become non-existent, for we under- 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION &s 

stand by the fact that the accidents become non-existent the occurrence 
of their opposites, which are existing realities, and not the occurrence of 
mete non-existence which is nothing at all, and how could what is nothing 
at ail be said to occur? For if hair becomes white, it is simply whiteness 
that occurs, for whiteness is something real; but one cannot say that what 
occurs is the privation of blackness.* 

I say: 

This answer on behalf of the philosophers is mistaken, for the 
philosophers do not deny that non-existence occurs and happens 
through the agent, not, however, according to 4 primary intention 
as would be the consequence for one who assumes that a thing can 
change into pure nothingness; no, non-existence, according to them, 
occurs when the form of the thing that becomes non-existent dis- 
appears, and the opposite form appears. Thercfore the following 
objection which Ghazati makes is valid. 

Ghazali says: 

This is wrong for two reasons. The first is: Does the occurrence of 
whiteness imply the alsscnce of blackness? If they deny it, this is an affront 
to reason, and if they adiaic it, it may be asked: Is what is implied 
identical with that which implies? ‘lo admit this is a contradiction, for a 
thing does not imply itself, and if they deny it, it may be asked: Has that 
which is implied an intelligible meaning? If they deny it, we ask, “How do 
you know, then, that it is implied, for the judgeinent that it is implied pre- 
supposes that it has a sensjlle meaning?’ If they admit this, we ask; ‘Is this 
thing which is imptied and has a sensible meaning, i.e. the absence of 
blackness, eternal or temporal?’ The answer ‘eternal’ is impossilte; if they 
answer ‘temporal’, how should what is described as occurring temporally 
not he clearly understood? And ifthey answer ‘neither eternal nor temporal’, 
this is absurd, for if ic were said before the occurrence of whiteness that 
blackness was non-existent, it would be false, whereas afterwards it 
would be true? It occurred, therefore, without any denbt, and this occur 
rence is perfectly intelligible and must be related to the Omnipotent. 

I say: 

This is an occurrence which is perfectly intelligible and must be 
related to the Omnipotent, but only accidentally and not essentially, 
for the act of the agent docs not attach itself to absolute non-existence, 
nor to the non-existence of anything, for even the Omnipotent cannot 
bring it about that existence should become identical with non- 
existence? The man who docs not assume matter cannot be freed 
from this difficulty, and he will have to admit that the act of the agent 
is attached to non-existence primarily and essentially. All this is 

144 

86 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

145 clear, and there is no need to say more about it. The philosophers, 

146 

therefore, say that the essential principles of transitory things are two: 
matter and form, and that there is a third accidental principle, 
privation, which is a condition of the occurrence of what becomes, 
namely as preceding it: if a thing becomes, its privation disappears, 
and if it suffers corruption, its privation arises,' 

Ghazali says: 

The second objection is that according to the philosophers there are 
accidents which can become non-existent otherwise than through their 
contrary, for instance, motion has no contrary, and the opposition between 
motion and rest is, according to the philosophers, only the opposition of 
possession and non-possession,? i.e. the opposition of being and not-being, 
not the opposition of one being to another being,? and the meaning of rest 
is the absence of motion, and, when motion ceases, rest does not supervene 
as its contrary, but is a pure non-existence.* The same is the case with 
those qualities which belong to the class of entelechies, like the impression 
of the sensible species on the vitreous humour of the eye‘ and still more 
the impression of the forms of the intelligibles on the soul; they become 
existent without the cessation of a contrary, and their non-existence only 
means the cessation of their existence without the subsequent occurrence 
of their opposites, and their disappearance is an exainple of pure non- 
existence which arises. The occurrence of such a non-existence is an 
understandable fact, and that which can be understood as occurring by 
itself, even if it is not a real entity, can be understood as being related to 
the power of the Omnipotent. Through this it is clear that, when one 
imagines an event as occuring through the eternal Will, it is unessential, 
whether the occurring event is a becoming or a vanishing. 

I say: 

On the contrary, when non-existence is assumed to proceed from 
the agent as existence proceeds from it, there is the greatest difference 
between the two. But when existence is assumed as a primary fact 
and non-existence as a secondary fact, ie. when non-existence is 
assumed to take place through the agent by means of a kind of 
existence, i.c. when the agent transforms actual existence into poten- 
tial existence by removing the actuality—which is a quality possessed 
by the substrate—then it is truce. And from this point of view the 
philosophers do not regard it as impossible that the world should 
become non-existent in the sense of its changing into another form,® 
for non-existence is in this case only a subsequent occurrence and a 
secondary fact. But what they regard as impossible is that a thing 
should disappear into absolute nothingness, for then the act of the 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 87 

agent would have attached itself to non-cxistence, primarily and 
essentially. 

Throughout this discussion Ghazali has mistaken the accidental 
for the essential, and forced on the philosophers conclusions which 
they themselves regard as impossible. This is in general the character 
of the discussion in this book. A more suitable name, therefore, for 
this book would be ‘The Book of Absolute Incoherence’, or ‘The In- 
coherence of Ghazali’, not ‘The Incoherence of the Philosophers’, 
and the best name for my book ‘The Distinction between Truth and 
Incoherent Arguments’.! 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 

The demonstration of their confusion in saying that God 1s the 

agent and the maker of the world and that the world is His pro- 

duct and act, and the demonstration that these expressions are in 
their system only metaphors without any real sense 

Ghazali says: 

All philosophers, except the materialists, agree that the world has a 
maker, and that God is the maker and agent of the world and the world 
is His act and His work. And this is an imposture where their principle is 
concerned, nay it cannot be imagined that according to the trend of their 
principle the world is the work of God, and this for three reasons, fram 
the point of view of the agent, from the point of view of the act, and from 
the point of view of the relation common to act and agent. As concerns the 
first point, the agent must be willing, choosing, and knowing what he 
wills to be the agent of what he wills, but according to them Gad does not 
will, He has no attribute whatever, and what proceeds Irom Him pro- 
ceeds by the compulsion of necessity. The second point is that the world is 
eternal, but ‘act’ implies production. And the third point is that God 
is unique, according Lo their principles, from all points of view, and from 
one thing—according to their principles—there can only proceed one 
thing. The world, however, is canstituted out of diverse components; how 
could it therefore proceed from Him?? 

T say: 

Ghazali’s words ‘The agent must be willing, choosing, and knowing 
what he wills to be the agent of what he wills’ are by no means sell- 
evident and cannot be accepted as a definition of the maker of the 

5 

o 

147 

148 

world without a proof, unicss one is justified in inferring from the 5 

to 

149 

an 

88 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

empirical to the divine. For we observe in the empirical world two 
kinds of agents, one which performs exctusively one thing and this 
essentially, for instance warmth which causes heat and coldness 
which causes cold; and this kind is called by the philosophers 
natural agents, The second kind of agents are those that perform a 
certain act at one time and its opposite at another; these, acting only 
out of knowledge and deliberation, are called by the philosophers 
voluntary and setective agents, But the First Agent cannot be described 
as having either of these two actions, in so far as these are ascribed to 
transitory things by the philosophers, For he who chooses and wills 
lacks the things which he wills, and God cannot lack anything He 
wills. And he who chooses makes a choice for himself of the better 
of two things, but God is in no need of a better condition. Further, 
when the willer has reached his object, his will ceases and, generally 
speaking, will is a passive quality and a change, but God is exempt 
from passivity and change.' God is still farther distant from natural 
action, fur the act of the natural thing is a necessity in its substance, 
but is not a necessity in the substance of the willer, and belongs to its 
entelechy.? In addition, natural action does not proceed from know- 
ledge: it has, however, been proved that God’s act does proceed from 
knowledge. The way in which God becames an agent and a willer 
has not become clear in this place, since there is no counterpart to 
His will in the empirical world, How is it therefore possible to assert 
that an agent can only be understood as acting through deliberation 
and choice? For then this definition is indifferently applied to the 
empirical and the divine, but the philosophers do not acknowledge 
this extension of the definition, so that from thcir refusal to acknow- 
ledge this definition as applying to the First Agent, it cannot be in- 
ferred that they deny that He acts at all, 

This is, of course, self-evident and not the philosophers are impos- 
tors, but he who speaks in this way, for an impostor is one who seeks 
to perplex, and does not Jook for the truth. He, however, who errs 
while seeking the truth cannot be called an impostor, and the philoso- 
phers, as a matter of fact, are known to seck the truth, and therefore 
they are by no means impostors. There is no difference between one 
who says that God wills with a will which does not resemble the 
human wilt, and one who says that God knows through a knowledge 
which does not resemble human knowledge; in the same way as the 
quality of His knowtedge cannot be conceived, so the quatity of His 
wili cannot be conceived. 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 89 

Ghazali says: 

We will now test each of these three reasons at the same time as the 
illusory arguments which the philosophers give in their defence. 

The first reason. We say: ‘Agent’ means someone from whom there 
proceeds an act with the will to act according to choice and with the know- 
ledge of the object willed. But according to the philosophers the world 
stands in relation to God as the effect to the cause, in a necessary con- 
nexion which God cannot be imagined to sever, and which is like the 
connexion between the shadow and the man, tight and the sun, but this is 
not an act at all, On the contrary, he who says that the lamp makes the 
light and the man makes the shadow uses the term vaguely, giving i¢ a 
sense much wider than its definition, and uses it metaphorically, relying 
on the fact that there is an analogy between the object originally meant 
by it and the object to which it is transferred, i.c. the agent is in a general 
sense a cause, the lamp is the cause of the light, and the sun is the cause of 
luminosity; but the agent is not called a creative agent from the sole fact 
that it is a cause, but by its being a cause in a special way, namely that it 
causes through will and through choice.! [f, therefore, one said that neither 
a wall, nor a stone, nor anything inanimate is an agent,? and that only 
animals have actions, this could not be denied and his statement would 
not be called false. But according to the philosophers a stone has an action, 
namely falling and heaviness and a centripetal tendency, just as fire has 
an action, namely heating, and a wall has an action, namely a centripetal 
tendency and the throwing of a4 shadow, and, according to them each of 
these actions proceeds from it as its agent; which is absurd.* 

I say: 

There are in brief two points here, the first of which is that only 
those who act from deliberation and choice are regarded as acting 
causes, and the action of a natural agent producing something else is 
not counted among acting causes, while the second point is that the 
philosophers regard the procession of the world from God as the 
necessary connexion obtaining between shadow and the person, and 
luminosity and the sun, and the downward rolling in relation to the 
stone, but that this cannot be called an action because the action can 
be separated* from the agent.* 

T say: 

All this is false. For the philosophers believe that there are four 
causes: agent, matter, form, and end. The agent is what causes 
some other thing to pass from potency to actuality and from non- 
existence to existence; this actualization occurs sometimes from deli- 
beration and choice, sometimes by nature, and the philosophers do 
not call a person who throws a shadow an agent, except metaphori- 

151 

cally, because the shadow cannot be separated from the man, and by — 

10 

182 

o 

go TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

common consent the agent can be separated from its object, and the 
philosophers certainly believe that God is separated! from the world 
and according to them He is not to be classed with this kind of 
natural cause. Nor is He an agent in the sense in which any empirical 
agent, cither voluntary or involuntary, is; He is rather the agent of 
these causes, drawing forth the Universe from non-existence to exis- 
tence and conserving it,? and such an act is a more perfect and 
glorious one than any performed by the empirical agents. None of 
these objections therefore touch them, for they believe that God's 
act proceeds from Him through knowledge, not through any neces- 
sity which calls for it, cither in His essence or outside His essence, but 
through His grace and His bounty.? He is necessarily endowed with 
will and choice in their highest form, since the insufficiency which is 
proper to the empirical willer does not pertain to Him. And these are 
the very words of Aristotle in one of his metaphysical treatises: We 
were asked how God could bring forth the world out of nothing, and 
convert it into something out of nothing, and cur answer js this: the 
Agent must be such that His capacity must be proportionate to His 
power and His power proportionate to His will and His will propor- 
tionate to His wistlom, if not, His capacity would be weaker than His 
power, His power weaker than His will, and His will weaker than 
His wisdom. And if some of His powers were weaker than others, 
there would be no difference hetween His powers and ours, and 
imperfection would attach to Him as to us—a very blasphemous 
theory. But in the opposite case cach of these powers is of the utmost 
perfection. When He wills He has the power, and when He has the 
power He has the capacity and alf this with the greatest wiscom. 
And He exists, making what He wants out of nothing. And this is 
only astonishing through this imperfection which is in us.4 And Aris- 
totle said also: Everything that is in this world is only set together 
through the power which is in it from God; if this power did not 
exist in the things, they could not last the twinkling of an eye.5 

I say: 

Composite existence is of two classes; in the one class the com- 
position is something additional to the existence of the composed, 
but in the other the composition is like the existence of matter and 
form and in these existents the existence cannot be regarded as 
anterior to the composition, but on the contrary the composition is 
the cause of their existence and anterior to it.° If God therefore is 
the cause of the composition of the parts of the world, the existence 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 91 

of which is in their composition, then He is the cause of their existence 
and necessarily he who is the cause of the existence of anything 
whatever is its agent. This is the way in which according to the 
philosophers this question must be understood, if their system is 
truly explained to the student. 

Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers may say: we call an object anything that has no 
necessary existence by itself, but exists through another, and we call its 
cause the agent, and we do not mind whether the cause acts by nature 
or voluntarily, just as you do not mind whether it acts by means of an 
instrument or without an instrument, and just as ‘act’ is a genus sub~ 
divided into ‘acts which occur by means of an instrument’ and ‘acts which 
occur without an instrument’, so it is a genus subdivided into ‘acts which 
occur by nature’ and ‘acts which occur voluntarily’. The proof is that, 
when we speak of an act which occurs by nature, our words ‘by nature’ are 
not contradictory to the term ‘act’; the words ‘by nature’ are not used to 
exclude or contradict the idea of act, but are meant only to explain the 
specific character of the act, just as, when we speak of an act effected 
directly without an instrument, there is no contradiction, but only a 
specification and an explanation. And when we speak of a ‘voluntary act’, 
there is not a redundancy as in the expression a ‘living being-man’ ;' 
it is only an explanation of its specific character, like the expression, ‘act 
performed by means of an instrument’. If, however, the word ‘act’ 
included the idea of will, and will were essential to act, in so far as it is 
an act, our expression ‘natural act’ would be a contradiction. 

I say: 

The answer, in short, has two parts. The first is that everything 
that is necessary through another thing is an object of what is neces- 
sary by itself? but this can be opposed, since that through which 
the ‘necessary through another’ has its necessary existence need not 
be an agent, unless by ‘through which it has its necessary existence’ 
is meant that which is really an agent, i.e., that which brings potency 
into act.> The second part is that the term ‘agent’ seems like a genus 
for that which acts by choice and deliberation and for that which acts 
by nature; this is true, and is proved by our clefinition of the term 
‘agent’. Only this argument wrongly creates the impression that the 
philosophers do not regard the first agent as endowed with will. And 
this dichotomy that everything is either of necessary existence by 
itself or existent through another is not sell-evident. 

Ghazali, refuting the philosophers, says: 

This designation is wrong, for we do not call any cause whatsoever an 

153 

154 

5 

3 

92 TAHAFUT AL TABAPUT 

agent, nor any effect an object; for, if this were so, it would be not right 
to say that the inanimate has no act and that only the living exhibit 
acts—a statement generally admitted. 

I say: 

His assertion that not every cause is called an agent is true, but his 
argument that the inanimate is not called an agent is false, for the 
denial that the inanimate exhibits acts excludes only the rational and 
voluntary act, not act absolutely, for we find that certain inanimate 
things have powers to actualize things like themselves; e.g. fire, which 
changes anything warm"® and dry into another fire like itself, through 
converting it from what it has in potency into actuality, Therefore 
fire cannot make a fiec like itself in anything that has not the potency 
or that is not in readiness to receive the actuality of fire. The theolo- 
gians, however, deny that fire is an agent, and the discussion of this 
problem wil! follow later. Further, nobody doubts that there are in 
the bodies of animals powers which make the food a part of the 
animal feeding itself and generally direct the body of the animal. If 
we suppose them withdrawn, the animal would die, as Galen says.? 
And through this direction we call it alive, whereas in the absence of 
these powers we call i dead. 

Ghazali goes on: 

If the inanimate is called an agent, it is by metaphor, in the saine way 
as it ts spoken of metaphorically as tending and willing, since it is said 
that the stone falls down, because it tends and has an inclitiation to the 
centre, but in reality tendency and will can only be imagined in coumexion 
with knowledge and an object desired anid these can only he imagined in 
animals. 

T say: 

If by ‘agent’ or ‘tendency’ or ‘willing’ is meant the performance of 
an act of a willer, itis a metaphor, but when by these expressions is 
meant that it actualizes another's potency, it is really an agent in the 
full meaning of the word. 

Ghazali then says: 

When the philosophers say that the term ‘act’ is a genus which is 
stuidivided into ‘natural act’ and ‘voluntary act’, this camnet be conceded ; 
it is as fone were to say that ‘willing? is a genus whieh is subdivided into 
willing accompanied by knowledge of the object willed. and willing 
without knowledge of the abject willed. ‘This is wromg, because will 
necessarily nplies knowledge, and likewise act necessarily inipties will. 

Tsay: 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 93 

The assertion of the philosophers that ‘agent’ is subdivided into 
‘voluntary’ and ‘non-voluntary agent’ is true, but the comparison 
with a division of will inte rational and irrational is false, because in 
the definition of will knowledge is included, so that the division has 
no sense. But in the definition of ‘act’ knowledge is not included, 
because actualization of another thing is possible without knowing it. 
This is clear, and therefore the wise say that God’s word: ‘a wall 
which wanted to fall to pieces’ is a metaphor. 

Ghazali proceeds: 

When you affirm thar your expression ‘natural act’ is not a contradic- 
tion in terms, you are wrong; there is as a matter of fact a contradiction 
when ‘natural act’ is taken in a real sense, only this contradiction is not at 
once evident to the understanding nor is the incompatibility of nature and 
act felt acutely, Lecause this expression is employed metaphorically; for 
since nature is in a certain way a cause and the agent is also a cause, 
nature is culled an agent metaphorically. The expression ‘voluntary act’ 
is as much redundant as the expression *he wills and knows what he wills’. 

I say: 

This statement is undoubtediy wrong, for what actualizes another 
thing, i.e. acts. on it, is not called agent simply by a metaphor, but 
in reality, for the definition of ‘agent’ is appropriate to it. The divi- 
sion of ‘agent’ into ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary agent’ is not the division 
of an equivocal term, but the division of a genus. Therefore the 
division of ‘agent’ into ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary agent’ is right, since 
that which actualizes another can also be divided into these two 
classes. 

Ghazali says: 

However, as it can happen that ‘act’ is used metaphorically and also in 
its real sense, people have no objection in saying ‘someone acted velun- 
tarily’, meaning that he acted not in a metapharical sense, but really, in 
the way in which it is said ‘he spoke with his tongue’, or ‘he saw with his 
eye’. For, since one is permitted to use ‘heart’ metaphorically for ‘sight’, 
and motion of the head or hand for word—for one can say ‘He nodded 
assent’—it is not wreng to say ‘He spoke with his tongue and he saw with 
his eye’, in order to exclude any idea of inetaphor. ‘This is a delicate point, 
but let us be careful to heed the place where those stupid people slipped. 

I say: 

Certainly ic is a delicate point that a man with scientific preten- 
sions should give such a bad example and such a false reason to 
explain the repugnatice people seem to have in admitting the division 

157 

w 

to 

158 

159 

5 

94 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

of ‘act’ into ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary act’. No one ever says ‘He saw 
with his eye, and he saw without his eye’ in the belief that this is a 
division of sight; we only say ‘He saw with his eye’ to emphasize the 
fact that real sight is meant, and to exclude the metaphorical sense 
of ‘sight’. And the intelligent in fact think that for the man who 
understands immediately that the real meaning is intended, this 
connecting of sight with the eye is almost senseless. But when one 
speaks of ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary act’, no intelligent person disagrees 
that we have here a division of ‘act’. If, however, the expression 
‘voluntary act’ were similar to ‘sight with the eye’ the expression 
‘natural act’ would be metaphorical. But as a matter of fact the 
natural agent has an act much more stable than the voluntary agent, 
for the natural agent’s act is constant-—which is not the case with the 
act of the voluntary agent.’ And therefore the opponents of the theo- 
logians might reverse the argument against them and say that 
‘natural act’ is like ‘sight with the eye’ and ‘voluntary act’ is a 
metaphor—especially according to the doctrine of the Ash‘arites, 
who do not acknowledge a free will in man and a power to exercise 
an influence on reality. And if this is the case with the agent in the 
empirical world, how can we know that it is an accurate description 
of the real Agent in the divine world to say that He acts through 
knowledge and will?? 

Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers may reply: The designation ‘agent’ is known only 
through language. However, it is clear to the mind that the cause of a 
thing can be divided into voluntary and non-voluntary cause, and it 
may he disputed whether or not in both cases the word ‘act’ is used in a 
proper seuse, but it is not possible to deny this, since the Arabs say that 
fire burns, a sword cuts, that snow makes cold, that scammony purges, 
that bread stills hunger and water thirst, and our expression ‘he beats’ 
means he performs the act of beating, and ‘it burns’ it performs the act of 
burning, and ‘he cuts’ he performs the act of cutting; if you say, therefore, 
that its use is quite metaphorical, you are judging without any evidence. 

I say: 

This, in short, is a common-sense argument. The Arabs indeed call 
that which* exerts an influence on a thing, even if not voluntary, an 
agent, in a proper, not in a metaphorical, sense, This argument, how- 
ever, is dialectical and of no importance. 

Ghazali replies to this: 

The answer is that all this is said in a metaphorical way and that only 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 95 

a voluntary act is a proper act. The proof is that, if we assume an event 
which is based on two facts, the one voluntary, the other involuntary, the 
mind relates the act to the voluntary fact. Language expresses itself in 
the same way, for if a man were to throw another into a fire and kilt him, 
it is the man who would be called his killer, not the fire. If, however, the 
term were used in the same sense of the voluntary and the non-voluntary, 
and it were not that the one was a proper sense, the other a metaphorical, 
why should the killing be related to the voluntary, by language, usage, 
and reason, although the fire was the proximate cause of the killing and the 
man who threw the other into the fire did nothing but bring man and fire 
together? Since, however, the bringing together is a voluntary act and 
the influence of the fire non-voluntary, the man is called a killer and the 
fire only metaphorically so. This proves that the word ‘agent’ is used of 
one whose act proceeds from his will, and, behold, the philosophers do 
not regard God as endowed with will and choice. 

I say: 

This is an answer of the wicked who heap fallacy on fallacy. 10 
Ghazali is above this, but perhaps the people of his time obliged him 160 
to write this book to safeguard himself against the suspicion of sharing 
the philosophers’ view. Certainly nobody attributes the act to its 
instrument, but only to its first mover.' He who killed a man by fire 
is in the proper sense the agent and the fire is the instrument of the 
killing, but when a man is burned by a fire, without this fact’s 
depending on someone's chvice, nobody would say that the fire 5 
burned him metaphorically. The fallacy tie employs here is the well- 
known one a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simplictter, e.g. to say 
of a negro, because his teeth are white, that he is white abso- 
lutely.2 The philosophers do not deny absolutely that God wills, 
for He is an agent through knowledge and from knowledge, and 
He performs the beiter of two contrary acts, although both are 
possible; they only affirm that He does not will in the way that man 
wills. 

Ghazali says, answering in defence of the philosophers: 

o 

If the philosophers say; We do not mean anything by God’s being an 
agent but that He is the cause of every existent besides Himself and that the 
world has its subsistence through Him, and if the Creator did not exist, 
the existence of the world could not be imagined. And ifthe Greator should 
be supposed notrexistent, the world would be non-existent too, just as the 
supposition that the sun was non-existent would imply the non-existence 
of light. This is what we mean by His being an agent. If our opponents 
refuse to give this meaning to the word ‘act’, well, we shal! not quibble 
about words. 

161 

162 

ow 

g6 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

I say: 

Such an answer would mean that the philosophers would concede 
to their opponents that God is not an agent, but one of those causes 
without which a thing cannot reach its perfection; and the answer is 
wrong, for against them it might be deduced from it that the First 
Cause is a principle, as if it were the form of the Universe, in the way 
the soul is a principle for the body; no philosopher, however, affirms 
this. 

Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 

We say: Our aim is to show that such is not the meaning of ‘act’ and 
‘work’. These words can mean only that which really proceeds from the 
will. But you reject the real meaning of ‘act’, although you use this word, 
which is honoured amongst Muslims. But one’s religion is not perfect 
when one uses words deprived of their sense. Declare therefore openly that 
God has no act, so that it becomes clear that your belief is in opposition 
to the religion of istam, and do not deceive by saying that God is the 
tnaker of the world and that the world is His work, for you use the words, 
but reject their real sense! 

I say: 

This would indeed be a correct conclusion against the philosophers, 
if they should really say what Ghazali makes them say. For in this 
case they cauld indeed be forced to admit that the world has neither 
a natural nor u voluntary agent, nor that there is another type of 
agents besides these two, He does not unmask their imposture by his 
words, but he himself deceives by ascribing to them theories which 
they do not hold, 

Ghazali says: 

The second reason for denying that the world is according to the 
principle of the philosophers an act of God is based an the implication of 
the nation of an act. ‘Act’ applies to temporal production, but for them the 
world is eternal and is net produced in time. The meaning of ‘act’ is ‘to 
convert from not-being into being by producing it’ and this cannot be 
imagined in the eternal, as what exists already cannet be brought into 
existence. ‘Therefore ‘act’ implics a temporal product, but according to 
thein the world is eternal; how then could it be God's act? 

I say: 

If the world were by itself eternal and existent (not in so far as it is 
moved, for cach movement is composed of parts which are produced), 
then, indeed, the world would not have an agent at all. But if the 
meaning of ‘eternal’ is that it is in everlasting production and that 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 97 

this production has neither beginning nor end, certainly the term 
‘production’ is more truly applied to him who brings about an ever- 
lasting production than to him who procures a hmited production. 
In this way the world is God’s product and the name ‘production’ 
is even more suitable for it than the word ‘eternity’, and the philoso- 
phers only call the world eternal to safeguard themselves against the 
word ‘product’ in the sense of ‘a thing produced after a state of non- 
existence, from something, and in time’. 
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers may perhaps say: The meaning of ‘product’ is ‘that 
which exists after its non-existence’, Let us therefore examine if what 
proceeds from the agent when He produces, and what is connected with 
Hirn, is cither pure existence, or pure non-existence, or Loth together. 
Now, it is impossible to say that previous non-existence was connected 
with Him, since the agent caanot exert influence upott non-existence, and 
it is equally impossible to say ‘both together’, fur it is clear that non- 
existence is in no way connected with the agent, for non-existence que 
non-existence needs no agent at all. Fe follows therefore that what is 
connected with Him is connected with Hin in so far as it is an existent, 
that what proceeds from Him is pure existence, and that there is ne other 
relation to Him that that of existence. H existence is regarded as ever- 
lasting, then this relation is everlasting, and if this relation is everlasting, 
then the term to which this relation refers is the most illustrious and the 
most enduring in influence, because at no moment is non-existence con- 
nected with it. Temporal production implies therefore the contradictory 
statements that it must be connected with an agent, that it cannot be 
produced, if it is not preceded by non-existence, and that nun-existence 
cannot he connected with the agent. 

And if previous non-existence is made a condition of the existent, and it 
is said that what is connected with the agent is a special existence, not any 
existence, numely an existence preceded by non-existence, it may be 
answered that its being preceded hy tion-existence camnot be an act of an 
agent or a deed of a maker, for the procession of this existence from its 
agent cannot be imagined, unless preceded by non-existence; neither, 
therefore*, can the precedence of Utis non-existence be an act of the agent 
and connected with him, nor* the fact that this existence is preceeded by 
non-existence. ‘Therefore to make non-existence a condition for the act's 
becoming an act js to impose as a condition one whereby the agent carmot 
exert any influence under any condition 

I say: 
This is an argument put forward on this question by Avicenna 
from the philosophical side. It is sophistical, because Avicenna leaves 

163 

out one of the factors which a complete division would have to state.? 10 

164 

is 

165 

98 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

For he says that the act of the agent must be connected either with an 
existence or with a non-existence, previous to it and in so far as it is 
non-existence, or with both together, and that it is impossible that it 
should be connected with non-existence, for the agent does not bring 
about non-existence and, therefore, neither can it effect both together. 
Therefore the agent can be only connected with existence, and pro- 
duction is nothing but the connexion of act with existence, i.e. the 
act of the agent is only bringing into existence, and it is immaterial 
whether this existence be preceded by non-existence or not. But this 
argument is faulty, because the act of the agent is only connected with 
existence in a state of non-existence, i.e. existence in potentiality, and 
is not connected with actual existence, in so far as it is actual, nor 
with non-existence, in so far as it is non-existent. [t is only connected 
with imperfect existence in which non-existence inheres, The act of 
the agent is not connected with non-existence, because non-existence 
is not actual; nor is it connected with existence which is not linked 
together with non-existence, for whatever has reached its extreme 
perfection of existence needs neither causation nor cause? But exis- 
tence which is linked up with non-existence only exists as long as the 
producer exists. The only way to escape this difficulty is to assume 
that the existence of the world has always been and will always be 
linked together with non-existence, as is the case with movement, 
which is always in need of a mover. And the acknowledged philoso- 
phers believe that such is the case with the celestial world in its 
relation to the Creator, and a fortiori with the sublunary world. Here 
lies the difference between the created and the artificial, for the 
artificial product, once produced, is not tied up with non-cxistence 
which would be in need of an agent for the continued sustenance of 
the product.? 
Ghazali continues: 

And your statement, theologians, that what exists cannot be made to 
exist, if you mean by it, that its existence does not begin after its non- 
existence, is rue; but if you mean that it cannot become an effect* at the 
time when it exists, we have shown that it can only become an effect at 
the time when it exists, not at the time when it does not exist. For a thing 
only exists when its agent causes it to exist, and the agent only canses it 
to exist at the time when, proceeding from it, it exists, not when the thing 
does not exist; and the causation is joined with the existence of the agent 
and the object, for causation is the relation between cause and effect. 
Cause, effect, and causation are simultaneous with existence and there is 
no priority here, and therefore there is causation only for what exists, if 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 99 

by ‘causation’ is meant the rejation through which the agent and its 10 

object exist. The philosophers say: It is for this reason that we have come 
to the conclusion that the world, which is the work of God, is without 
beginning and everlasting, and that never at any moment was God not its 
agent, for existence is what is joined with the agent and as long as this 
union lasts existence fasts, and, if this union is ever discontinued, existence 
ceases, It is by no means what you theologians mean, that if the Creator 
were supposed to exist no longer, the world could still persist; you, 
indeed, believe that the same relation prevails as between the builder 
and the building, for the building persists when the builder has dis- 
appeared. But the persistence of the building does not depend on the 
builder, but on the strength of the structure in its coherence, for if it had 
not the power of coherence—if it were like water, for example—it would 
not be supposed to keep the shape which it received through the act of 
the agent.? 

I say: 

Possibly the world is in such a condition, but in general this argu- 
ment is not sound. For it is only true that the causing agent is always 
connected with the effect*, in so far as the effect actually exists with- 
out dis uctuality’s having any insufliciency and any potency, if one 
imagines that the essence of the effect* lics in its being an effect, for 
then the effect can only be an effect through the causation of the 
agent. But if its becoming an effect through a cause is only an addi- 
tion to its essence, then it is not necessary that its existence should 
cease when the relation between the causing agent and the effect is 
interrupted. If, however, it is not an addition, but its essence consists 
in this relation of being an effect, then what Avicenna says is true. 
However, it is not true of the world, for the world does not exist on 
account of this rclation, but it exists on account of its substance and 
the relation is only accidental to it.* Perhaps what Avicenna says is 
true concerning the forms of the celestial bodies, in so far as they 
perceive the separate immaterial forms; and the philosophers allirm 
this, because it is proved that there are immaterial forms whose 
existence consists in their chinking, whereas knowledge in this sublue 
nary world only differs frum its object because its object inheres in 
magter.3 

Ghazali, answering the philosophers, says: 

Our answer is that the act is connected with the agent only in so far as 
it comes into being, but not in so far as it is preceded by non-existence nor 
in so far as it is inerely existent. According to us the act is not connected 
with the agent for a second moment after its coming to be, for then it 
exists; it is only connected with it at the time of its coming to be in so far 

166 | 

wn 

o 

167 

a 

10 

168 

o 

10 

100 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ag it comes to be and changes from non-existence jato existence. If it is 
denied the name of becoming, it cannot be thought to be an act nor to be 
connected with the agent. Your statement, philosophers, that a thing's 
coming to be means its being preceded by non-existence, and that its 
being preceded by non-existence does not belong to the act of the agent 
and the deed of the producer, is true; but this prior non-existence is a 
necessary condition for the existent’s being an act of the agent. For existence 
not preceded by non-existence is everlasting, and cannot be truly said* to 
be an act of the agent, Not ali conditions necessary to make an act an act 
need proceed from the agent’s act; the essence, power, will, and knowledge 
of the agent are a condition of his being an agent, but do not derive from 
him. An act can only be imagined as proceeding from an existent, and the 
existence, will, power, and knowledge of the agent are a condition of his 
being an agent, although they do noe derive from him.’ 

I say: 

All this is true. The act of the agent is only connected with the 
effect, in so far as it is moved, and the movement from potential to 
actual being is what is called becoming. And, as Ghazali says, non- 
existence is one of the conditions for the existence of a movement 
through a mover. Avicenna’s argument that when it is a condition 
for the act of the agent io be connected with the existence, the 
absence of this connexion implies that the agent is connected with its 
opposite, ie. non-existence, is not truc. But the philosophers affirm 
that there are existents whose essential specific differences consist in 
motion, e.g, the winds? and so on;3 and the heavens and the sublu- 
nary bodies belong to the genus of existents whose existence lies in 
their movement, and if this is true, they are eternally in a continual 
becoming. And therefore, just as the cterna! existent is more truly 
existent than the temporal, similarly that which is eternally in becom- 
ing is more truly coming to be than that which comes to be only 
during a definite time.* And if the substance of the world were not 
in this condition of continual movement, the world would not, after 
its existence, need the Creator, just as a house after being completed 
and finishec does not need the builder’s existence, unless that were 
true which Avicenna tried to prove in the preceding argument, that 
the existence of the world consists only in its relation to the agent; 
and we have already said that we agree with him so far as this con- 
cerns the forms of the heavenly bodies. 

Therefore the world is during the time of its existence in need of 
the presence of its agent for both reasons together, namely, because 
the substance of the world is continually in motiou and because its 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 10t 

form, through which it has its subsistence and existence, is of the 
nature of a relation, not of the nature of a quality, ie. the shapes 
and states which have been enumerated in the chapter on quality.! 
A form which belongs to the class of quality, and is included in it, is, 
when it exists and its existence is finished, in no need of an agent. 
All this will solve the problem for you, and will remove from you the 
perplexity which befalls man through these contradictory statements.? ; 

Ghaaali says, on behalf of the phitosophers: 16 

The philosophers might say: If you acknowledge that it is possible that 
the act should be simultaneous with the agent and not posterior to it, it 
follows that if the agent is temporal the act must be temporal, and if the 
agent is eternal the act must be eternal. But to impose as a condition that 
the act must be posterior in time to the agent is impossible, for when a 
man moves his finger in a bowl of water, the water moves at the same time 5 
as the finger, neither before nor after, for if the water moved later than the 
finger, finger and water would have to be in one and the same space before 
the water disconnected itself? and if the water moved before the finger, the 
water would beseparated from the tngerand notwithstanding itsanteriority* 
would be an effect* of the finger performed for its sake,* But if we suppose 
the finger eternally moving in the water, the movement of the water will 
be eternal too, and will be, notwithstanding its eternal character, an effect 
and an object, and the supposition of clernity does not make this impos- 
sible. And such is the relation between the world and God, 

[ say: 

This is true in so far as it concerns the relation of movement and 
mover, but in regard to the stable existent or to that which exisis 10 
without moving or resting by nature (if there exist such things*) and 
their relation to their cause, it is not truc.* Let us therefore admit this 
reJation between the agent and the world only in so far as the wortd 
is in motion. As for the fact that the act of every existent must be 
conjoined with its existence, this is truc, unless something occurs to 
this existent which lies outside its nature, or one or another accident 
occurs fo it,° and it is immaterial whether this ace be natural or 
voluntary. See, therefore, what the Ash‘arites didl who assumed an 
eternal existent, butalenied that He acted during His eternal existence, 
but then, however, allowed this agent to act eternally in the future, 
so that the eternal existence of the Erernal would become divided inte 
two parts, an eternal past during which He does net act and an 170 
eternal future during which He acts! But for the phitosophers al} this 
is confusion and error. 

io 

171 

102 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Ghazali answers the philosophers on the question of priority: 

We do not say that the simultaneity of agent and act is impossible, 
granted that the act is temporal, ¢.g. the motion of the water, for this 
happens after its non-being and therefore it can be an act, and it is 
immaterial whether this act Le posterior to the agent or simultaneous 
with him. It is only an eternal act that we consider impossible, for to call 
an act that which does not come into being out of not-being is pure 
metaphor and does not conform to reality.’ As to the simultaneity of cause 
and effect, canse and effect can be either both temporal or both eternal, 
in the way in which it may be said that the eternal knowledge is the cause 
of the fact that the Eternal is knowing; we are not discussing this, but only 
what is called an act.? For the effect of a cause is not called the act of a 
cause, except metaphorically? It can only be called an ace on condition 
that it comes into being out of nen-being. And if a man thinks he may 
describe the everlasting Eternal metaphorically as acting on something, 
what he thinks possible is only the use of a metaphor.‘ And your argument, 
philosophers—that if we suppose the movement of the water to be eternal 
and everlasting with the movement of the finger, this does not prevent the 
movement of the water from being an act—rests on a confusion, for the 
finger has no act, the agent is simply the man to whom the finger belongs, 
that is the man who wills the movement; and, if we suppose him to be 
¢ternal, then the movernent of the finger is his act, because every part of 
this muvement comes out of not-being,! and in this sense it is an act. 
So far as the motion of the water is concerned, we do not say that it 
occurs through the act of this man—it is simply an act of God. In any 
case, it is only an act in so far as it has come to be, and ifits coming to be 
is everlasting, it is still an act, because it has come to be. 

Then Ghazali gives the philosophers’ answer: 

‘The philosophers may say: ‘If you acknowledge that the relation of the 
act to the agent, in so far as this act is an existent, is tike the relation of 
etfect and cause and you adinit that the causal relation may be everlasting, 
we affirm that we de not understand anything else by the expression “that 
the world is an act’? than that it is an effect having an everlasting relation 
to God. Speak of this as an “act"’ or not just as you please, for do not fet us 
quibble about words when their sense has once been established.’ 

Ghazali says: 

Our answer is that our aim in this question is to show that you philo- 
sophers use those venerable names without justification, and that God 
according to you is not a true agent, nor the world truly Flis act, and that 
you apply this word metaphoricafly—not in its real sense. This has now 
been shown. 

I say: 

THE THIRD PISCUSSION 103 

In this argument he supposes that the philasophers concede to him 
that they only mean by God’s agency that He is the cause of the 

world, and nothing elsc, and that cause and effect are simultancous." ‘ 

But this would mean that the philosophers had abandoned their 
original statement, for the effect follows only from its cause, in so 
far as it is a formal or final cause, but does not necessarily follow from 
its effictent cause, for the efficient cause frequently exists without the 
effect’s existing.? Ghazali acts here like a guardian who trics to 
extract from his ward the confession* of having donc things he did not 
allow him to do. The philosophers’ theory, indeed, is that the world 
has an agent acting from eternity and everlasting, i.c, converting the 
world eternally from non-being into being. This question was for- 
merly 4 point of discussion between Aristotelians and Ptatonists. 
Since Plato believed in a beginning of the world, there could not in 
his system be any hesitation in assuming a creative agent for the 
world. But since Aristotle supposed the world to be eternal, the 
Platonists raised difficulties against him, like the one which occupies 
us here, and they said ihat Aristotle did not secm to admit a creator 
of the world. If was therefore necessary for the Aristotelians to defend 
him with arguments which establish that Aristotle did indeed believe 
that the world has a creator and an agent.? This will be fully ex- 
plained in its proper place. 

The principal idea is that according to the Aristotelians the celes- 
tial bodies subsist through their movement, and that He who be- 
stows this movement is in reality the agent of this movement and, 
since the existence of the celestial bodies only attains its perfection 
through their being in motion, the giver of this motion is in fact the 
agent of the celestial bodies. Further, they prove that God is the 
giver of the unity through which the world is united, and the giver 
of the unity which is the condition of the existence of the composite; 
that is to say, He provides the existence of the parts through which 
the composition occurs, because this action of combining is their 
cause {as is proved), and such is the relation of the First Principle to 
the whole world. And the statement that the act has come to be,* is 
true, for it is movement, and the expression ‘eternity’ applied to it 
means only that it has neither a first nor a last term. Thus the philo- 
sophers do not mean by the expression ‘eternal’ that the world is 
eternal through eternal constituents,’ for the world consists of move- 
ment. And since the Ash‘arites did not understand this, it was difficult 
for them to attribute eternity at the same time to God and to the 

° 

172 

173 

174 

5 

104 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

world. Therefore the term‘ eternal becoming’ is more appropriate to 
the world than the term ‘eternity’. 

Ghazali says: 

The third reason why it is impossible for the philosophers to admit 
according to their principle that the world is the act of God is because of 
a condition which is common to the agent and the act, namely, their 
assertion that out of the one only one can proceed.* Now the First Principle 
is one in every way, and the world is composed out of different constituents. 
Therefore according to their principle it cannot be imagined that the 
world is the act of God, 

T say: 

Ifone accepts this principle, and its consequences, then indeed the 
answer is difficult. But this principle has only been put forward by the 
later philosophers of Islam.? 

Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers may say perhaps: The world in its totality does not 
proceed from God without a mediator; what proceeds from Him is one 
single existent, and this is the first of the created principles, namely, 
abstract intellect, that is a substance subsisting by itself, not possessing any 
volume, knowing itself and knowing its principle, which in the language 
of the Divine Law is called ‘angel’, From it there proceeds a third principle, 
and from the third a fourth, and through this mediation the existent 
heings come to be many. ‘Phe differentiation and multiplicity of the act 
can proceed either from a differentiation in active powers, in the way that 
we act differently through the power of passion and through the power of 
anger; or through a differentiation of matters, as the sun whitens a gar- 
ment which has been wasted, blackens the face of man, melts certain 
substances and hardens others; or through a differentiation of instruments, 
as one and the same carpenter saws with a saw, cuts with an axe, bores 
with an awl;? or this multiplication of the act can proceed through media- 
tion, so that the agent does one act, then this act performs another act, 
and in this way the act multiplies. All these divisions are impossible in 
the First Principle, because there is no differentiation nor duality, nor 
multiplicity in His essence, as will be proved in the proofs of His unity. 
And there is here neither a differentiation of matters—and the very dis- 
cussion refers to the first effect, which is, for example, primary matter, 
nor a differentiation of the instrument, for there is no existent an the 
same level as God—and the very discussion refers to the coming into ex- 
istence of the first instrument. The onty conclusion possible is that the 
multiplicity which is in the world proceeds from God through mediation, 
as has been stated previously.* 

I say: 
This amounts to saying that from the One, if He is simple, there 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 105 

can proceed only one. And the act of the agent can only be differen- 
tiated and multiplied either through matters (but there are no mat- 
ters where He is concerned), or through an instrument (but there is 
no instrument with Him). The only conclusion therefore is that this 
happens through mediation, so that first the unit proceeds from Him, 
and from this unit another, and from this again another, and that it 
is in this way that plurality comes into existence. : 
Then Ghazali denies this, and says: Ty 

We answer: The consequence of this would be that there is nothing in 
the world composed of units, but that everything that exists is simple and 
one, and each unit is the effect of a superior unit and the cause of an 
inferior, till the series ends in an effect which has no further effect, just as 
the ascending series ends in a cause which has no other cause. But in 
reality it is not like this, for, according to the philosophers, body is com- 175 
posed of form and fyle, and through this conjunction there arises one 
single thing; and man is composed out of body and soul and body does 
not arise out of soul, nor soul out of body: they exist together through 
another cause. The sphere, too, is, according to them, like this, for it is 
a body possessing a soul and the soul does not come to be through the 
body, nor the body through the soul; no, both proceed from another 
cause. How do these compounds, then, come into existence? Through 
one single cause? But then their principle that out of the one only one 
arises is false. Or through a compound cause? But then the question can 
be repeated in the case of this cause, till one necessarily arrives at a point 
where the compound and the simple meet, For the First Principle is simple 
and the rest are compound, and this can only be imagined through their 
contact.' But wherever this contact takes place, this principle, that out of 
the one only one proceeds, is false. 

wa 

I say: 

This consequence, that everything which exists is simple, is a 
necessary consequence for the philosophers, if they assume that the 
First Agent is like a simple agent in the empirical world. But this 
consequence is binding only upon the man who applies this principle 
universally to everything that exists? But the man who divides exis- 
tents into abstract existents and material, sensible existents, makes 
the principles to which the sensible existent ascends different from 
the principles to which the intetligible existent ascends, for he regards 
as the principles of the sensible existents matter and form, and he 
makes some of these existents the agents of others, till the heavenly 
body is reached, and he makes the intelligible substances ascend to a 
first principle which is a principle to them, in one way analogous to 

o 

176 

10 

7 

A 

0 

106 : | ‘TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

a formal cause, in another analogous to a final cause, and in a third 
way analogous to an efficient cause. All this has been proved in the 
works of the philosophers, and we state* this proposition here only 
in a general way. Therefore these difficulties do not touch them. And 
this is the theory of Aristotle,? 

About this statement—that out of the one only one proceeds—all 
ancient philosophers were agreed,* when they investigated the first 
principle of the world in a dialectical way (they mistook this investiga- 
tion, however, for a real demonstration), and they all came to the 
conclusion that the first principle is one and the same for everything, 
and that from the one only one can proceed. Those two principles 
having been established, they started to examine where multiplicity 
comes from. For they had already come to the conclusion that the 
older theory was untenable. This theory held that the first principles 
are two, one for the good, one for the bad; for those older philoso- 
phers did not think that the principles of the opposites could be one 
and the same; they believed that the most general opposites which 
comprehend all opposites are the good and the bad, and held there- 
fore that the first principles must be two.? When, however, after a 
close examination, it was discovered that all things tend to one end, 
and this end is the order which exists in the world, as it exists in an 
army through its leader, and as it exists in cities through their govern- 
ment,* they came to the conclusion that the world must have one 
highest principle; and this is the sense of the Holy Words ‘If there 
were in heaven and earth gods beside God, both would surely have 
been corrupted’.s They believed therefore, because of the good which 
is present in everything, that evil occurs only in an accidental way,® 
jike the punishments which goad governors of cities ordain; for they 
are evils instituted for the sake of the good, not by primary intention.’ 
For there exist amongst goed things some that can only exist with an 
admixture of evil, for instance, in the being of man who is composed 
of a rational and an animal soul. Divine Wisdom has ordained, 
according to these philosophers, that a great quantity of the good 
should exist, although it had to be mixed with a small quantity of 
evil, for the existence of much good with a little evil is preferable to 
the non-existence of much good because of a little evil.* 

Since therefore these later philosophers were convinced that the first 
principle must of necessity be one and unique, and this difficulty about 
the one occurred, they gave three answers to this question. Some, like 
Anaxagoras and his school, believe that plurality is only introduced 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 107 

through matter,? some believe that plurality is introduced through 
the instruments, and some believe that plurality comes only through 
the mediators; and the first who assumed this was Plato.* This is the 
most convincing answer, for in the case of both the other solutions 
one would have to ask again; from where does the plurality come in 
the matters and in the instruments? But this difficuley touches any- 
one* who acknowledges that from the one only one can proceed: he 
has to explain how plurality can derive from the one. Nowadays, 
however, the contrary of this theory, namely, that out of the one all 
things proceed by one first emanation, is generally accepted, and 
with our contemporaries we need discuss only this latter statement.? 

The objection which Ghazali raises against the Peripatetics, that, 
if plurality were introduced through mediators, there could only 
arise a plurality of qualitatively undifferentiated agglomerates which 
could only form a quantitative plurality, does not touch them. For 
the Peripatetics hold that there exists a twofold plurality, the plurality 
of simple beings, those beings namely that do not exist in matter, and 
that some of these are the causes of others and that they ail ascend to 
one unique cause which is of their own genus, and is the first being of 
their genus, and that che plurality of the heavenly bodies only arises 
from the plurality of these principles; and that the plurality of the 
sublunary world comes only from matter and form and the heavenly 
bodies.* So the Peripatetics are not touched by this difficulty. The 
heavenly bodies are moved primarily through their movers, which 
are absolutely immaterial, and the forms of these heavenly bodies are 
acquired from these movers and the forms in the sublunary world are 
acquired from the heavenly bodies and also from each other, indiffer- 
ently, whether they are forms of the elements which are in imperish- 
able prime matter’ or forms of bodies composed out of the elements, 
and, indeed, the composition in this sublunary world arises out of the 
heavenly bodies.® This is their theory of the order which exists in the 
world. The reasons which led the philosophers to this theory cannot 
be explained here, since they built it on many principles and proposi- 
tions, which are proved in many sciences and through many sciences 
in a systematic way. But when the philosophers of our religion, like 
Farabi and Avicenna, had once conceded to their opponents that the 
agent in the divine world is like the agent in the empirical, and that 
from the one agent there can arise but one object (and according to 
all the First was an absolutely simple unity), it became difficult 
for them to explain how plurality could arise from it. This difficulty 

178 

179 

180 

a 

181 

Io 

108 sah TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

compelled them finally to regard the First as different from the 
mover of the daily circular movement; they declared that from the 
First, who is a simple existent, the mover of the highest sphere 
proceeds, and from this mover, since he is of a composite nature, as 
he is both conscious of himself and conscious of the First, a duality, 
the highest sphere, and the mover of the second sphere, the sphere 
under the highest can arise. This, however, is a mistake,' according 
to philosophical teaching, for thinker and thought are one identical 
thing in human intellect and this is still more true in the case of the 
abstract intellects.2 This does not affect Aristotle's theory, for the 
individual agent in the empirical world, from which there can 
only proceed one single act, can only in an equivocal way be com- 
pared to the first agent.? For the first agent in the divine world 
is an absolute agent, while the agent in the empirical world is a 
relative agent, and from the absolute agent only an absolute act 
which has no special individual object can proceed. And thereby 
Aristotle proves that the agent of the human intelligibles is an intel- 
lect free from matter, since this agent thinks all things,* and in the 
same way he proves that the passive intellect is ingenerable and 
incorruptible, because this intellect also thinks all things. 
According to the system of Aristotle the answer on this point is that 
everything whose existence is only effected through a conjunction of 
parts, like the conjunction of matter and form, or the conjunction 
of the elements of the world, receives its existence as a consequence 
of this conjunction. The bestower of this conjunction is, therefore, the 
bestower of existence. And since everything conjoined is only con- 
joined through a unity in it, and this unity through which it is con- 
joined must depend on a unity, subsistent by itself, and be related to 
it, there must exist a single unity, subsistent by itself, and this unity 
must of necessity provide unity through its own essence.® This unity 
is distributed in the different classes of existing things, according 
to their natures, and from this unity, allotted to the individual 
things, their existence arises; and all those unities lead upwards to 
the First Monad, as warmth which exists in all the individual warm 
things proceeds from primal warmth, which is fire, and leads upwards 
to it.? By means of this theory Aristotle connects sensible existence 
with intelligible, saying that the world is one and proceeds from one, 
aud that this Monad is partly the cause of unity, partly the cause of 
plurality. And since Aristotle was the first to find this solution, and 
because of its difficulty, many of the later philosophers did not 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 109 

understand it, as we have shown. It is evident, therefore, that there 
is a unique entity from which a single power emanates through which 
all beings exist. And since they are many, it is necessarily from the 
Monad, in so far as it is one, that plurality arises or proceeds or 
whatever term is to be used.? This is the sense of Aristotle’s theory, a 
sense very differcne from that in which those thinkers believe who 
aflirm that froin the one only one can proceed. See therefore how 
serious this error proved among the philosophers! You should, there- 
fore, see for youself in the books of the ancients whether these philoso- 
phical theories are proved, not in the works of Avicenna and others 
who changed the philosophical doctrine in its treatment of meta- 
physics so much that it became mere guessing. 

Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

Tt may be said: If the philosophical theory is properly understood, the 
difficulties disappear. Existents can be divided into what exists in a sub- 
stratum, like accidents and forms, and what does nut exist in a substratum. 
The latter can be divided again into what serves as a substratum for other 
things, ¢.g. bodies, and what does not exist in a substratum, e.g. sub- 
stances which subsist by themselves. ‘These latter again are divided into 
those which exert in influence on bodies and which we call souls, and those 
which exert an intlacnce not an Ladies Int on souls, and which we call 
abstract intellects. Existents which tnhere in a substratum, like accidents, 
are temporal and have demporal causes which terminate in a principle, 
in one way tetnporal, in another way everlasting, namely, circular move- 
ment. But we are not discussing this here. Here we are discussing only 
those principles which exist by themselves and do not here in a sub- 
stratum, which are of three kinds: (1) bodies, which are the lowest type, 
{2) abstract intellects, which are not attached to bodies, cither by way of 
action or by being impressed upon them, which are Ute highest type, and 
(3) souls, which are the intermediate agencies, attached to the bodies in 
a certain way, namely, through their influence and their action upon them, 
and which stand midway in dignity; they undergo an influence from the 
intellects and cxert an influence upon the bodies. 

Now the number of bodies is ten. ‘here are nine heavens, and the tenth 
body is the matter which fills the concavity of the sphere of ihe moon.? 
The nine heavens are anitnated; they possess bedies and souls, and they 
have an order in existence which we stall mention here. From the exis- 
tence of the First Principle Chere cenanates the first intelleet—an existent 
which subsists by itself, immaterial, not impressed on body, conscious of its 
principle and which we philosophers cull First Fniellect,? but which (for 
we do not quibble about words) may be called angel, or intellect, or what 
you will, From its existence there derive three things, an intellect, the soul, 
and the body of the farthest sphere, ie. the ninth heaven. ‘Phen from the 

182 

183 

to 

184 

110 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

second intellect there derive a third intellect and the soul and the body of 
the sphere of the fixed stars, then from the third intellect there derive a 
fourth intellect and the sou] and the body of the sphere of Satura, then 
from the fourth intellect there derive a fifth intellect and the soul and 
the body of the sphere of Jupiter, and so on till one arrives at the intel- 
ect from which there derive the intellect, the soul and the body of the 
sphere of the moon, and this last intellect ts that which is called the 
active intellect. Then there follows that which fills the sphere of the 
moon, namely, the matter which receives generation and corruption from 
the active intellect and from the natures of the spheres. Then through the 
action of the movements of the spheres and the stars the matters are mixed 
in different mixtures from which the minerals, vegetables, and animals 
arise, I¢ is not necessary that from cach intellect another intellect should 
derive endlessly, for these intellects are of a different kind, and what is 
valid for the one is not valid for the other.‘ I¢ follows from this that the 
intellects after the First Principle are ten in number and that there are 
nine spheres, and the sum of these noble principles after the First Principle 
is therefore ninctcen; and that under cach of the primary intellects there 
are three things, another intellect and a soul and body of a sphere. There- 
fore there must be in each intellect a triple character, atid in the first 
effect a plurality can only be imagined in this way: (t) it is consctous of 
its principle, (2) it is conscious of itself, (3) it is in itself possible, since the 
necessily of its existence derives from another. These are three conditions, 
and the most noble of these three effects must be relaicd to the most 
noble of these conditions? Therefore the intellect proceeds from the first 
effect? in so far as the first effect is conscious of its principle; the soul of 
the sphere proceeds from the first effect, in so far as the first effect is 
conscious of itself; and the body of the sphere proceeds from the first 
effect, in so far as by itself the first elJect belongs to possible existence. 
We must still explain why this triple character is found in the first effect, 
although its principle is only one. We say that from the First Principle 
only one thing proceeds, namely, the essence of this intellect through 
which it is conscious of itself. ‘The effect, however, must by itself become 
conscious of its principle, and this kind of consciousness cannot derive 
from its cause. Also the effect by itself belongs to possible existence, and 
cannot receive this possibility from the First Principle, but possesses it in 
its own essence. We do indeed regard it as possible that one effect should 
proceed from the one, although this effect possesses by itself and not 
through its principle certain necessary qualities, either relative or nen- 
relative.4 In this way a plurality ariscs, and so it becomes the principle 
of the existence of plurality. Thus the composite can mect the simple, as 
their meeting must needs take place and cannot take place in any other 
manner, and this is the right and reasonable explanation, and it is in this 
way that this philosophical thcory must be understood.$ 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION tit 

I say: 
All these are inventions fabricated against the philosophers by 

Avicenna, Farabi, and others. But the true theory of the ancicnt . 

philosophers is that there are principles which are the cclestiat bodies, 
and that the principles of the celestial bodies, which are immaterial 
existents, are the movers of those celestial bodies, and that the celes- 
tial bodies move towards them in obedience to them and out of love 
for them, to comply with their order to move and to understand 
them, and that they are only created with a view to movement. For 
when it was found that the principles which move the celestial bodies 
are immaterial and incorporeal, there was no way left to them 
in which they might move the bodies other than by ordering them to 
move. And from this the philosophers concluded that the celestial 
bodies are rational animals, conscious of themselves and of their 
Principles, which move them by command.’ And since it was estab- 
lished—in the De Anima—that there is no diflerence between know- 
ledge and the object of knowledge, except for the latter’s being in mat- 
ter,* of necessity the substance of immaterial beings—if there are such 
—had to be knowledge or intellect or whatever you wish to call it. 
And the philosophers knew that these principles must be immaterial, 
because they confer on the celestial bodies everlasting movement in 
which there is no fatigue or weariness,? and that anything which 
bestows such an everlasting movement must be immaterial, and can- 
not be a material power. And indeed the celestial body acquires its 
permanence only through these immaterial principles. And the philo- 
sophers understood that the existence of these immaterial principles 
must be connected with a first principle amongst them; if not, there 
could be no order in the world. You can find these theories in the 
books of the philosophers and, if you want to make sure of the truth 
in these matters, you wil] have to consult them. It also becomes clear 
from the fact that all the spheres have the daily circular movement, 
although besides this movement they have, as the philosophers had 
ascertained, their own special movements, that He who commands 
this movement must be the First Principle, ie. God, and that He 
commands the other principles to order the other movements to the 
other splieres. ‘Through this heaven and carth are ruled as a state is 
ruled by the commands of the supreme monarch, which, however, 
are transmitted to all classes of the population by the men he has 
appointed for this purpose in the different affairs of the state. As it 
saysin the Koran: ‘And He inspired every Heaven with its bidding.’ 

185 

oO 

186 

to 

187 

= 

img TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

This heavenly injunction and this obedience are the prototypes of the 
injunction and obedience imposed on man because he is a rational 
animal.'! What Avicenna says of the derivation of these principles 
from each other is a theory not known amongst the ancients, who 
merely state that these principles hold certain positions? in relation 
to the First Principle, and that their existence is only made real through 
this relation to the First Principle. As is said in the Koran: “There is 
none amongst us but has his appointed place.’3 It is the connexiont 
which exists between them which brings it about that some are the 
effect of others and that they all depend on the First Principle. By 
‘agent’ and ‘object’, ‘creator’ and ‘creature’, in so far as it concerns 
this existence nothing more can be understood than just this idea of 
connexion. But what we said of this connexion of every existent with 
the One is something different from what is meant by ‘agent? and 
‘object’, ‘maker’ and ‘product’ in this sublunary world, If you ima- 
gine a ruler who has many men under his command who again 
have others under their command, and if you imagine that those 
commanded receive their existence only through receiving this com- 
mand and through their obedience to this command, and those who 
are under those commanded can only exist through those com- 
manded, of uccessity the fiest ruler will be the one who bestows on 
all existents the characteristic through which they become existent, 
and that which exists through its being commanded wilt only exist 
because of the first ruler. And the philosophers understood that this 
is what is meant by the divine laws when they speak of creation, of 
calling into existence out of nothing, and of command. This is the 
best way to teach people to understand the philosophical ductrine 
without the ignominy attaching to it, which scems to attach when 
you listen to the analysis Ghizali gives of it here. ‘Phe philosophers 
assert that all this is proved in their books, and the man who, having 
fulfilied the conditions they impose,’ is able to study their works will 
find the truth of what they say---ur perhaps its opposite--and will 
not understand Aristotle’s theory or Plato’s in any other sense than 
that here indicated. And their philosophy is the highest point human 
intelligence can teach, Tt may be that, when a man discovers these 
exphinauons of philosophical theory, be will find that bey happen 
not only to be true but to be generally acknowledyed, and teachings 
which are generally acceptable are pleasing and delightlul to all.® 
One of the premisses from: which this explanation is deduced is 
that whew one observes this sublunary world, one finds that what is 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 13 

called ‘living’ and ‘knowing’ moves on its own account in well- 
defined movements towards well-defined ends and well-defined acts 
from which new well-defined acts arise. For this reason the theolo- 
gians say that any act can only proceed from a living, knowing being. 
When once has found this first premiss, that what moves in well- 
defined movements from which arise well-defined and ordered actions 
is living and knowing, and one joins to this a second premiss which 
can be verified by the senses, that the heavens move on their own 
account in well-defined movements from which there follow in the 
existents under them well-defined acts, order, and rank through which 
these existents under them receive their subsistence, one deduces 
from this, no doubt, a third principle, namely, that the heavenly 
bodies are living beings endowed with perception.’ That from thetr 
movements there follow well-defined acts from which this sublunary 
world, its animals, vegetables, and minerals receive their subsistence 
and conservation,? is evident from observation, for, were it not that 
the sun in its ecliptic’ approaches the sublunary world and recedes 
from it, there would not be the four seasons, and without the four 
seasons there would be no plants and no animals, and the orderly 
origination of elements out of cach other necessary for the conserva- 
tion of their existence would not take place. For instance, when the 
sun recedes towards the south the air in the north becomes cold and 
rains occur and the production of the watery element increases, 
whereas in ihe south the production ef the airy clement becomes 
greater; whereas in summer, when the sun approaches our zenith, 
the opposite takes place.t Those actions which the sun exercises 
everlastingly through ils varying distance from the different existents 
which always occupy one and the same place are also found in the 
moon and all the stars which have oblique spheres, and they produce 
the four seasons through their circular movements, and the most 
important of aJl these movements, in its necessity for the existence 
and conservation of the creation, is the highest circular movement 
which produces day and night. The Vencrable Book refers in several 
verses to the providential care for man which arises out of God's 
subjection of all the heavens to His bidding, as, lor instance, in the 
Koranie verse ‘And the sun and the moon and the stars are subjected 
to His bidding’,$ anct when man observes these acts and this guidance 

which proceed necessarily and permanently from the movements of 

the stars, and sees how these stars move in fixed movements, and 
that they have well-defined shapes and move in well-defined direc- 

188 

a 

189 

190 

oe 

191 

ws 

114 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

tions towards well-defined actions in opposite motions, he under- 
stands that these well-defined acts can only arise from beings percep- 
tive, living, capable of choice and of willing. 

And he becomes still more convinced of this when he sees that 
many beings in this world which have small, despicable, miserable, 
and insignificant bodics are not wholly devoid of life, notwithstand- 
ing the smallness of their size, the feebleness of their powers, the 
shortness of their fives, the insignificance of their bodies; and that 
divine mumiticence has bestowed on them life and perception, 
through which they direct themselves and conserve their existence. 
And he knows with absolute certainty that the heavenly bodies 
are better fitted to possess life and perception than the bodies of 
this sublunary world, because of the size of their bodies, the magni- 
ficence of their existence, and the multitude of their lights," as it 
says in the Divine Words: ‘Surely the creation of the heavens and 
the carth is greater than the creation of man, but most men know it 
not.”? Bul especially when he notices how they direct the living beings 
of this sublunary world, does he understand with absolute certainty 
that they are alive, for the living can only be guided by a being 
Jeading a more perfect lite. And when man observes these noble, 
living, rational bodics, capable of choice, which surround us, and 
recognizes a third principle, namely, that they do not need for their 
own existence the providence with which they guide the sublunary 
world,* he becomes aware that they are commanded to perform these 
movements and to control the animals, vegetables, and minerals of 
this sublunary world, and that He who commands them is not one of 
them and that He is necessarily incorporeal (for, if not, He would be 
one of them) and that all these heavenly bodies control the existents 
which are under them, but serve Him, who for His existence is in 
no need of them. And were it not for this Commander, they would 
not give their care everlastingly and continuously to this sublunary 
world which they guide willingly, without any advantage to them- 
selves, especially in this act. They move* thus by way of command 
and obligation the heavens which repair to them, only in order to 
conserve this sublunary world and to uphold its existence. And the 
Commander is God (glory be to Him}, and all this is the meaning 
of the Divine Words ‘We come willingty’ 

And another proof of all this is that, if a man sees a great many 
people, distinguished and meritorious, applying themselves to defi- 
nite acts without a moment’s interruption, although these acts are 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION ¥I5 

not necessary for their own existence and they do not need them, it 
is absvlutely evident do bim that these acts have been prescribed and 
ordered to them and that they have a leader who has obhiged them 
in his everlasting service to act continually for the good of others.! 
This leader is the highest among them in power and rank and they 
are, as it were, his submissive slaves. And this is the meaning to which 
the Venerable Book refers in the words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham 
the kingdom of heaven and the carth that he should be of those who 
are safe."* And when man observes stilt another thing, namely, that 
all the seven planets in their own special movements are subservient 
to their universal daily motion and that their awn bodies as parts of 
the whole are subimissive to the universal body, as if they were all one 
in fulfilling this service, he knows again with absolute certainty that 
each planet has its own commanding principle, supervising it as u 
depuly of the first Commander. Just as, in the organization of armics, 
where cach body of troeps has one commander, calied a centurion, 
each centurion is subordinate to the one Commander-in-chief of the 
army, so also in regard to the movements of the heavenly bodies 
which the ancients obseryed. They number somewhat more than 
forty, of which seven or cight?—for the ancients disagreed about this 
—dominate the others and themselves depend on the first Comman- 
der, praise be to Him! Man acquires this knowledge in this way, 
whether or not he knows how the principle of the creation of these 
heavenly bodies acis, or what the connexion is between the existence 
of these commanders and the first Commander. In any case he does 
not doubt that, if these heavenly bodies existed by themselves, thit 
is, # they were eterna! and had no cause, they might refuse to serve 
their own commanders or might not obcy them, and the commanders 
might refuse to obey the first Commander. But, since it is not possible 
for them to behave in this way, the relation between them and the 
first Commander is determined by absolute obedicice, and this 
means nothing more than that they possess this obedience in the 
essence of their being, not accidentally, as is the case in the relation 
between master and servant.‘ Servitude, therefore, is not something 
additional ¢o their essence, but these essences subsist through servi- 
tude and this is the meaning of the Divine Words: “There 3s none in 
the heavens or the earth but comes to the Merciful as a servant.’s 
And their possession is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth 
which God showed to Abraham, as it is expressed in the Devine 
Words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven and 

o 

192 

o 

193 

5 

194 

wn 

195 

116 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

earth that he should be of those who are safe.’! Therefore you will 
understand that the creation of these bodies and the principle of 
their becoming cannot be like the coming to be of the bodies of this 
sublunary world, and that the human intellect is too weak to under- 
stand how this act works, although it knows that this act exists. He 
who trics to compare heavenly with earthly existence, and believes 
that the Agent of the divine world acts in the way in which an agent 
in this sublunary world works, is utterly thoughtless, profoundly 
mistaken, and in complete error. 

This is the extreme limit we can reach in our understanding of the 
theories of the ancients about the heavenly bodies, of their proof for 
the existence of a Creator for these bodies who is immaterial, and of 
their statements concerning the immaterial existents under Him, one 
of which is the soul. But to believe in His existence as if He were the 
cause through which these bodies had been produced in time, in the 
way we see the production of the bodies of this sublunary world, 
as the theologians desired—this, indced, is very difficult, and the 
premisses they use for its proof do not lead them where they desire. 
We shall show this later, when we discuss the different proofs for the 
existence of God. 

And since this has been firmly established, we shall now go back 
to relate and refute in detail what Ghazali tells of the philosophers, 
and to show the degree of truth reached by his assertions, for this is 
the primary intention of this book. 

Ghazalt says, refuting the philosophers: 

What you affirm are only suppositions and in fact you do nothing but 
add obscurities to obscurities. If a man were to say that he had seen such 
things in a dream, it would be a proof of his bad constitution, or if one 
should advance such arguments in juridical controversies, in which 
everything under discussion is conjectural, one would say these were 
stupidities which could net command any assent. 

I say: 

This is very much the way the ignorant treat the learned and the 
vulgar the eminent, and in this way, too, the common people behave 
towards the products of craftsmanship. For, when the artisans show 
the common people the products of their craftsmanship which possess 
many qualities from which they draw wonderful actions, the masses 
scof* at them and regard them as insane, whereas in reality they 
themselves are insane and ignorant in comparison with the wise.? 
With such utterances as these the learned and the thoughtful need 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION WI? 

not occupy themselves. What Ghazali ought to have done, since he 
relates these theories, is to show the motives which led to them, so 
that the reader might compare them with the arguments through 
which he wants to refute them. 

Ghazali says: 

The ways of refuting such theories are countless, but we shall bring 
here a certain number. The first is that we say: You claim that one of the 
meanings of plurality in the firse effect is that it is possible in its existence, 
but we ask whether its being possible in its existence is identical with its 
being or something different? If you say ‘identical’, then no plurality 
proceeds from it, but if you say that it is different, why then do you not 
assert that there is a plurality in the First Principle, for it not only has 
existence, but is necessary in its existence, and existence and necessary 
existence are not identical. Therefore, because of this plurality in the First 
Principle, fet us allow that different entities proceed from it. If it is said: 
‘Necessity of existence cannot mean anything but existence’, we answer: 
‘Possibility of existence cannot mean anything but existence.’ If, however, 
you say: ‘Its existence can be known without its possibility being known, 
and therefore they are different,’ we answer: ‘In the same way the exist- 
ence of the necessary existent can be known without its necessity being 
known, unless another proof is added,' let them therefore be different! 
Generally speaking, existence is a universal which can be divided into 
necessary and possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition to 
the universal, the other specific difference is also an addition, for both 
cases are the same,” Jf you say, ‘It possesses the possibility of its existence 
through itself and its existence through another, how then can what it 
possesses through itselfand what it possesses through another be identical?” 
we answer: ‘Flow then can the necessity of its being be identical with its 
being, so that the necessity of its existence can be denied and its existence 
affirmed? And to God, the One, the Absolute Truth, negation and afiirma- 
tion cannot be applied equivocally, for one cannot say of Him that He is 
and is not, or that His existence is at the same time necessary or not 
necessary; but it can be said of Him that He exists, but that His existence 
is not necessary, as it can be said of Him that He exists, but that His 
existence is not possible. And it is through this that His Unity can be 
recognized. But this unity in the First cannot be upheld*, if what you say 
is true, that possibility of existence is something different from the possible 
existent*,"? 

I say: 

Ghazali affirms that, when we say of a thing that it ts possible in 
its existence, this must either mean that it is identical with its exis- 
tence or different from it, ic. something additional to its existence. 
If i¢ is identical, there is no plurality, and the statement of the 

196 

197 

uu 

10 

198 

118 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

philosophers that there is 2 plurality in the possible existent has no 
sense. If, however, it is not identical, the philosophers will have to 
make the same admission about the necessary existent, i.e. that there 
is a plurality in it, but this is in contradiction to their own principle. 
This reasoning, however, is not valid, for Ghazali has oyerlooked a 
third case, namely, that necessity of being might be not something 
added to existence outside the soul but 2 condition! in the necessary 
existent which adds nothing to its essence; it might be said to refer 
to the denial of its being the effect of something else, a denial of that 
which is affirmed of all other entities,” juse as, when we say of some- 
thing that it is one, nothing additional to its essence existing outside 
the soul is meant—as is, on the contrary, the case when we speak of 
a white existent—but only a negative condition, namely, indivisibi- 
lity. In the same way, when we speak of the necessary existent, we 
mean by the necessity of His existence a negative condition which 
is the consequence of His existence, namely, that His existence is 
necessary through Himself, not through something else. And also 
when we speak of the existent which is possible through itself, it is 
not something additional to its essence outside the soul—as is the 
case with the real possible*—that should be understood, but merely 
that its essence determines that its existence can become necessary 
only through @ cause; what is meant, therefore, is an essence which 
will not be by itself necessary in its existence when its cause is 
removed and therefore is not a necessary existent, i.e. it is denied the 
quality of necessary existence.’ It is as if Ghazali said that the neces- 
sary existent is partially necessary through itself, partially through a 
cause, and that which is necessary through a cause is not necessary 
through itself:* Nobody doubts that these specific differences are 
neither substantial differences which divide the essence nor additions 
to the essence, but that they are only negative or relative relations, 
just as, when we say that a thing exists, the word ‘exists’ does not 
indicate an entity added to its essence outside the soul, which is the 
case when we say of a thing that it is white.” It is here that Avicenna 
erred, for he believed that unity is an addition to the essence and also 
that existence, when we say that a thing exists, is an addition to the 
thing.* This question will be treated later. And the first to develop 
this theory of the existent, possible by itself and necessary through 
another, was Avicenna;® for him possibility was a quality in a thing, 
different from the thing in which the possibility is, and from this it 
seems to follow that what is under the First is composed of two things, 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 1tg 

one to which possibility is attributed, the other to which necessity is 
attributed; but this is a mistaken theory.' But he who has understood 
our explanation will not be concerned about the difficulty which 
Ghazali adduces against Avicenna. The only question he will have 
to ask, when he has understood the meaning of ‘possibility of exis- 
tence’ for the first effect, is whether this possibility brings about a 
compound character in the first effect or not, for if the quality is 
relative, it dees not bring about a compound character. For not all 
the different dispositions which can be imagined in a thing need 
determine additional qualities in its essence outside the soul; indeed, 
this is the case with the disposition of privations and relations, and 
for this reason certain philosophers do not count the category of rela- 
tion among things which exist outside the soul, i.e. the ten categories.* 
Ghazali, however, implies in his argument that any additional mean- 
ing must apply to an additional entity actually outside the soul; but 
this is a mistake, and a sophistical argument.’ This follows from his 
words: 

Generally speaking, existence is a universal which can be divided into 
necessary and possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition to 
the universal, the other specific difference also is an addition, for both 
cases are the same. 

But the division of existence into possible and necessary is not like 
the division of animal into rational and irrational, or into walking, 
swimming, and flying animals, for those things are additional to the 
genus and provide additional species—animality is their common 
concept and they are specific differences added to it. But the possible 
into which Avicenna divides existence is not an entity actually out- 
side the soul, and his theory is wrong, as we said before. For the 
existence which for its existence is in need of a cause can, as an entity 
by itself, only be understood as non-existence—that is to say, any- 
thing that exists through another thing must be non-existent by itself, 
unless its nature is the nature of the true possible.* Therefore the 
division of existence into necessary and possible existence is not a 
valid one, if one does not mean by ‘possible’ the true possible; but 
we will treat of this later. The summary of what we said here is that 
the existent can be divided either into essential differences or into 
relative conditions or into accidents additional to its essence; out of 
the division iato essentia! differences there must necessarily result a 
plurality of acts which arise out of the existent, but out of the division 
into relational and accidental dispositions no such plurality of 

= 

o 

9 

o 

200 

201 

wn 

120 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

: different acts results, And ifit should be claimed that out of relational 

qualities a plurality of‘acts results, well then, a plurality will proceed 
from the First Principle of necessity without need of the intervention 
of.an effect as the principle of plurality; on the other hand, ifit should 
be claimed that out of relational qualities no plurality of acts results, 
well then, out of the relational qualities of the first effect also there 
will result no plurality of acts, and this latter assumption is the 
better. 

Ghazali says: 

How then can what it possesses through itself, and what it possesses 
through another, be identical]? 

But how can this same man who affirms that possibility exists only 
in the mind, say such a thing? Why then does he not apply this doc- 
trine here, for it is not impossible for the one essence to be positive 
and negative in its relations without there resulting a plurality in this 
essence—which, however, Ghazali denies. But if you have under- 
stood this, you will be able to solve the problem Ghazali poses in this 
section. 

If it is said: ‘It follows from this that there is no composition, either 
in existence, necessary by itself, or in existence, necessary through 
another,’ we answer: As to what is necessary through another, the 
mind perceives in it a composition through cause and effect; if it is 
a body*, there must be in it both a unity actually, and a plurality 
potentially ;? ifit is, however, incorporeal, the mind does not perceive 
a plurality either in act or in potency*.? For this reason the philoso- 
phers call this kind of existent simple, but they regard the cause as 
more simple than the effect and they hold that the First is the most 
simple* of them all, because it cannot be understood as having any 
cause or effect at all. But composition can be understood of the 
principles which come after the First; therefore, according to the 
philosophers, the second principle is more simple than the third, and 
it is in this way that their theory must be understood, The meaning 
of ‘cause’ and ‘effect’ in these existents is that a potential plurality (as 
it were} exists in them which shows itself in the effect, i.e. there pro- 
ceeds out of it a plurality of effects which it never contains actually 
in any definite moment.5 If the hearer has understood their theory in 
this way and accepted it, he will see that they are not affected by the 
objections of Ghazali, But one should not understand this theory in 
the way Ghazali does, namely, that out of the second principle, 
because it knows its own essence and knows its principle, and there- 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 121 

fore possesses two forms or a dual existence, there proceed two differ- 
ent things, for this.is a false theory. For this would mean that this 
second principle is composed of more than one form and that there- 
fore this form! js one in its substratum, many by its definition, as is 
the case with the soul.? But the theologians keep tenaciously to this 
false explanation in their statements about the derivation of these 
principles from each other, as if they wanted to understand the divine 
through an analogy with perceptible acts; indeed, when metaphysics 
contains such theories, it becomes more conjectural than jurispru- 
dence. You will have seen from this that the conclusion Ghazali 
wants the philosophers to draw concerning the plurality in the neces- 
sary existent, because of the plurality which he considers must exist 
in the possible existent, has no validity. For, if possibility were under- 
stood as real possibility, it would indeed imply here a plurality, but 
since this is impossible, according to what we have said and shall 
show later, nothing similar follows concerning the necessary existent. 
But if possibility is understood as being a concept of the mind, it 
follows that neither the necessary existent nor the possible existent 
must be regarded as composite for this reason; the only reason why 
composition must be admitted here is because of the relation of cause 
and effect. 

Ghazali says: 

The second objection is that we say: ‘Is the knowledge the first effect 
has of its principle identical with its own existence and with the knowledge 
ic has of itself?’ If so, there is only a plurality in the expression used to 
describe the essence, not in the essence itself; if not, this plurality will exist 
also in the First, for He knows Himself and He knows others. 

I say: 

What is truc is that the knowledge the first effect has of tts principle 
is identical with its own essence and that the first effect belongs to the 
domain of relation and is therefore of a lesser rank than the First who 
belongs to the domain of what exists by itself. It is true, according 
to the philosophers, that the First thinks only His own essence— 
not something relative, namely, that He is a principle—but His 
essence, according to the philosophers, contains all intellects, nay, 
all existents, in a nobler and more perfect way than they all possess 
in reality, as we shall explain later? Therefore this theory does not 
imply the abominable consequences he ascribes to it.’ 

Ghazali says: 

It may be said by the philosophers that His knowing Himself is identical 

10 

202 

3 

203 

TO 

204 

id 

122 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

with His essence, and that he who does not know that he is a principle for 
others does not know his own essence, for knowledge confurms to the thing 
known and refers therefore to His essence. 

T say: 

This statement is wrong, for His being a principle is something 
relative and cannot be identical with His essence. If He could think 
that He is a principle, He would be conscious of the things the prin- 
ciple of which He is, in the way these things really exist, and in this 
case the higher would be perfected through the lower, for the thing 
known is the perfection of the knower according to the philosophers, 
as is set forth in the sciences about the human intellect.' 

Ghazali says: 

But we answer: In-this case the knowledge the effect has of itself is 
identical with its essence, for it thinks with its substance and knows itself, 
and intellect and knower and thing known are all one. Therefore, if its 
knowing itself is identical with its essence, well then, let it think itself as 
the effect of a cause, for this it really is. But the intellect conforms to the 
thing known; therefore all this refers solely to its essence and so there is no 
plurality. If, indeed, there is a plurality, it must exist in the First, ‘Ihere- 
fore, let differentiation proceed from the First. 

T say: 

What he says here of the philosophers, about the exclusive existence 
ofa plurality in the principles under the First Principle, is wrong and 
does not follow from their principles. There is, according to them, no 
plurality in these intellects, and they do not distinguish themselves 
by simplicity? and plurality, but only by being cause and effect. And 
the difference between the knowtedge of the First Principle, as know- 
ing itself, and the knowledge of the other principles, as knowing 
themselves, is that the First Principle thinks itself as existing by itself, 
not as being related to a cause, whercas the other intellects think 
themselves as related to their cause and in this way plurality is intro- 
duced into them. ‘They need not all have the same degree of simpli- 
city, since they are not of the same rank in relation to the First 
Principle and none of them is simple in the sense in which the First 
Principle is simple, because the First Principle is regarded as an 
existence by itself whereas they are in related existenee. 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

‘Therefore, if its knowing itself is identical with its essence, well then, let 

at think itself as the effect of a cause, for this it really is, But the intellect 
conforms to the thing known, and therefore al] this refers solely to its 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 123 
essence and so there is no plurality. If, indeed, there is a plurality, it must 
_exist in the First Principle. 

I say: 

It does not follow from the fact that intellect and the thing known 
are identical in the separate intellects that they are all similar in 
simplicity, for in this, according to the philosophers, some are 
superior to others in a greater or lesser degree; absolute simplicity is 
only found in the First Intellect, and the reason is that the essence of 
the First Intelectis subsistent by itself, and the other intellects, when 
they think themselves, are conscious that they subsist by it; if intellect 
and the intelligible were in each of them of the same degree of unity 
as in the First Principle, either the essence existing by reason of itself 
and the essence existing by reason of another would be congruous, 
or intellect would not conform to the nature of the intelligible thing ;' 
which is impossible, according to the philosophers. All these argu- 
ments and their answers, as set forth by Ghazalt, are dialectical and 
the only man who can—notwithstanding the deficiency of the human 
understanding concerning these questions—give a demonstrative 
argument about them is the man who knows (to begin with) what 
the intellect is, and the only man who knows what the intellect is is 
the man who knows what the soul is, and the only man who knows 
what the soul is is the man who knows what a living being is.* There 
is no sense in discussing these maticrs in a superficial way and accord- 
ing to the common notions, which do not contain specific knowledge 
and are not properly related to the problem, To discuss these ques- 
tions, before knowing what the inteifect is, is nothing more than 
babbling. The Ash‘arites, therefore, when they relate the philoso- 
phical doctrines, make them extremely hateful and something very 
different from even the first speculation of man about what exists. 

Ghazali says: 

Let us therefore drop the claim of its absolute unity, if this unity is 
annulled through plurality of this kind. 

I say: 

Ghazati means that, when the philosophers assume that the First 
thinks its own essence and knows through this that it is the cause of 
others, they must conclude that it is not absolutely one. For it has 
not yet been proved that Ged must be absolutely one. This isthe theory 
ofsome Peripatetics who interpreted it as the theory of Aristotle himself. 

Ghazali says: 

Tf it is said that the First knows only its own essence, and the knowledge 

~ 

oO 

205 

aA 

o 

206 

10 

207 

wn 

124 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

of its own essence is identical with its essence, for intelligence, thinker, and 
intelligible are all one and it does not know anything but itself—this can 
be refuted in two ways. First, because of its worthlessness this theory was 
abandoned by Avicenna and other philosophers of repute, who affirm 
that the First knows itself as the principle of what emanates from it and 
knows all other existents in their species by a universal thought, and not 
individually. For they repudiate the theory that there emanates out of the 
First Principle, which does not know what emanates from it, only one 
intellect; that its effect is an intellect from which there emanates an 
intetlect and the soul and the body of a sphere, and that this intellect 
knows itself and its three effects, whereas its cause and principle knows 
only itself, For according to this theory the effect is superior to the cause, 
since from the cause only one thing emanates, whereas from the effect 
three things emanate; moreover, the First Principle knows only itself, but 
the cflect knows its principle and effects besides itself. Who can be satisfied 
with the idea that such words can apply to the status of God, for indeed 
they make Him lower than any of His creatures, who know themselves 
and know Him, and he who knows Him and knows himself is of a nobler 
rank than He is, since He knows none but Himself. Their profound 
thoughts about God’s glory end therefore in a denial of everything that 
is understood by His greatness, and assimilate the state of God to that of 
a dead body which has no notion of what happens in the world, with the 
sole exception that God possesses self-knowledge.’ So does God deal with 
those who turn aside from His way and deviate from the path of His 
guidance, denying His words: ‘I did not make them witnesses of the 
creation of the heavens and the earth nor of the creation of themselves,’ 
who think wicked thoughts about God,? who believe that the powers of 
man suffice to reach the essence of the divine, who, deceived in their minds, 
believe that the human understanding is competent to free itself from the 
authority of the prophets and from obedience to them. For no doubt they 
are now forced to acknowledge that the quintessence of their thought is 
reduced to absurdities which would make one wonder if they were told 
in 2 dream, : 

I say: 

One who wants to enter deeply into these speculations must know 
that much of what is firmly established in the speculative sciences 
seems at first sight, and compared to the opinions the common man 
holds about them, like the visions of a dreamer, as Ghazali truly says; 
many of these truths are deduced from a different kind of premisses 
from that which satisfies the masses; indeed there is no other way for 
anyone to become convinced of their truth than that of comprehend- 
ing them by logical proof and evidence. If, for example, the common 

to man, and even he who has reached a somewhat higher degree of 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 125 

culture, is told that the sun, which appears to the eye as being the 
size of a foot, is about a hundred and seventy times bigger than the 
earth, he will say that it is absurd, and will regard him who believes 
it as a dreamer; and it is difficult for us to convince him through 
propositions which he can easily understand and acknowledge in a 
short time. The only way, indeed, to attain such knowledge is 
through deductive proof—that is, for the man who is amenable to 
proof. If it is the case even with geometrical questions and mathe- 
matical problems in general, that, when a solution is explained to 
the common man, it will appear to him fallacious and open to 
criticism at first sight and to have the character of a dream, how 
much more this will be the case in the metaphysical sciences, since 
for this kind of knowledge there are no plausible premisses which 
satisfy the superficial understanding, by which | mean the under- 
standing of the masses. One might say that the final knowledge the 
understanding can reach will seem to the common man at first sight 
something absurd. And this happens not only in the theoretical 
sciences but in the practical sciences as well. Therefore, the assumption 
that one of the sciences should vanish and then come into existence 
again, at first sight would seem to be impossible.' For this reason 
many have thought that those sciences are of supernatural origin 
and some attribute them to the Jinn, others to the prophets, so 
that Ibn Hazm goes so far as to allirm that the strongest proof of the 
existence of prophecy is the existence of these sciences.* ‘Therefore, 
if a lover of truth finds a theory reprehensible and does not find 
plausible premisses which remove its reprehensible character, he 
must not at once believe that the theory is false, but must inquire 
how he who puts it forward has arrived at it, must employ much 
time in learning this, and follow the systematic order corresponding 
to the nature of the topic. And if this is necessary in other sciences 
than metaphysics, how much more will this hold for metaphysics, 
since that sctence is so remote from the sciences built on common 
sense. Thus it should be learned that in metaphysics rhetorical 
reasoning cannot be applied, as it may be applied in other questions; 
for dialectics is useful and permissible in the other sciences but for- 
bidden in this. For this reason most students of this science seck 
refuge in the theory that metaphysics is wholly concerned with the 
qualification of the substance? which the human mind cannot qualify, 
for if it could do so, the eternal and the transitory would be on the 
same level. If this is so, may God judge him who discusses these 

208 

°° 

209 

1 

210 

uw 

211 

Oo 

126 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

questions with common opinions and who argues about God without 
scientific knowledge. So it is often thought that the philosophers are 
extremely inefficient in this science, and for this reason Ghazali says 
that metaphysics is only conjectural. 

But in any case* we shall try to show some plausible premisses and 
true propositions—and we tury this only because Ghazati gave such 
a false representation of this nable science and denied people the 
possibility of attaining happiness through excellent acts, and God is 
the inquirer and the reckoner!'—in order to set out the motives which 
moved the philosophers to believe these theortes about the First Prin- 
ciple and other existents, the limit which the human understanding 
can reach in this matter, and the doubts which beset these problems; 
and we shall show all this also in respect to the Muslim theologians 
and indicate how far their wisdom attained, We hope through this to 
help the lover of knowledge to find the truth, and to urge him to 
study the sciences of both parties, hoping also that God may assist 
him in alt this! 

We say: 

The philosophers tried to acquire knowledge about reality through 
speculation alone, without relying on the words of anyone who 
should induce them to acquiesce in them without proof; on the con- 
trary, sometimes through speculation they came into contradiction 
with the facts as shown by the senses? They discovered that the 
sublunary world can be divided into two classes, the living and the 
inanimate, any instance of which only comes into being through 
something, called form, which is the entity by which it comes into 
being after having been non-existent; through something, called 
matter, out of which it comes into being; through something, called 
the agent, from which it comes into being; and through something, 
called the end, for the sake of which it comes into being; and so they 
established that there are four causes. And they found that the form 
by which a thing comes into being, i.e. the form of the thing gene- 
rated, is identical with the proximate agent, fram which it comes into 
being, cither in species, like the generation of man out of man, or in 
genus, like the generation of the mule from a horse and a donkey.3 
And since, according to them, the causes do not form an infinite 
series, they introduced a primary, permanent efficient cause. Some 
of them believed that the heavenly bodies are this efficient cause,* 
some that it is an abstract principle, connected with the heavenly 
bodies, some that it is the First Principle, some again that it is a prin- 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 127 

ciple inferior to it,! and these philosophers thought it sufficient to 
regard the heavens and the principles of the heavenly bodies* as the 
cause for the coming into being of the elements,” since according to 
them they too need an efficient cause. As to the generation of living 
beings from cach other in the sublunary world, the philosophers had, 
because of this faculty of life, to introduce another principle, which 
was the bestower of soul and of form, and of the wisdom which is 
manifested in this world. This is what Galen calls the formative 
faculty? and some regard it as an abstract principle,+ some as an 
intellect, some as a soul,5 some as the body of the heavens, and some 
as the First. Galen called this potency the demiurge® and was in 
doubt whether it is God or another principle. This faculty acts in the 
generative animals and in plants, and is needed still more in those 
plants and animals which have an equivocal generation.” This was 
the point they reached in the examination of the sublunary world. 
When they had agreed that the heavens were the principles of the 
perceptible bodies, they investigated the heavens also and agreed that 
the heavenly bodies are the principles of che changeable perceptible 
bodies and of the species in the sublunary world, either by themselves 
or in combination with an abstract principle. And from their investi- 
gation of the heavenly bodies it appeared to them that these do not 
come into being in the way that the transitory things of the sublunary 
werld come into being, lor what comes into being, in so far as it 
comes into being, is seen to be a part of this perceptible world and its 
coming into being is only effected in so far as it is a part of it, for 
what has come into being has come into being out of something, 
through the act of something, by means of something, in time and in 
space. And they discovered that the celestial bodies are, as remote 
efficient causes, a condition for the coming into being of perceptible 
things. If, however, the celestial bodics themselves had come into 
being in this way, they would, as a condition of their becoming, have 
required prior to them other bodies which would have needed to be 
parts of another world, and there would be in this other world bodies 
like these, and if these bodies had also come into being, they would 
have required other ceestial bedics before, and so ad infinitum.’ And 
since this was established in this way and many others, they were 
convinced that the heavenly badies neither come into being nor are 
destroyed in the way that sublunary things come into being and are 
destroyed, for ‘coming into being’ has no other definition or descrip- 
tion’ or explanation er meaning than that which we have laid down 

212 

213 

2i4 

to 

215 

128 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

here. Then they found that the celestial bodies have also moving 
principles by means of which and by the agency of which they are 
moved. And when they investigated their principles, they found that 
the moving principles were neither bodies nor potencies in bodies. 
They are not bodies because they are the first principles of the bodies 
encircling the world; they are not potencies in bodies, i.e. their bodies 
are not a condition for their existence (as is the case in this sublunary 
world with the composite principles in animals), because any potency 
in a body is, according to the philosophers, finite, since it can be 
divided through the division of the body? and every body which can 
be divided is generable and corruptible, i.e. composed of matter and 
form, and the existence of its matter* is a condition for the existence 
of its form.* And again, if the principles of heavenly bodics were like 
the principles of earthly bodies, the former would be like the latter 
and would need other bodies prior to them,} Thus they were con- 
vinced of the existence of incorporcal principles which are not poten- 
cies in a body, 

Moreover, they had already found, concerning the human intel- 
lect, that form has two mades of existence, a sensible existence in 
matter, as in the stone there is the form of the inorganic which exists 
in the matter outside the soul, and an intelligible existence, namely, 
perception and intellect, which is separate from matter and exists in 
the soul.+ From this they concluded that these absolutely abstract 
existences are pure intellects, for if what* is separated from another 
is already intellect, how much better suited to be intellect will some- 
thing be that is absolutely separate.s And so, of necessity, they 
deduced that the objects of thought of those intellects are the forms 
of the existents and of the order which exists in the world, as is the 
case with the human intelfect, for the human intellect is nothing 
other than the perception of the forms of the cxistents, in so far as 
they are without matter. They concluded, therefure, that existents 
have two modes of existence, a sensible existence and an intelligible 
existence, and that the relation between sensible and intelligible 
existence is ike the relation between the products of art and the arts 
of the craftsman,® and they believed therefore that the heavenly 
bodics are conscious of these principles and that they can only guide 
what exists in the sublunary world because they are animated. And 
when they compared the separate intellects with the human intellect, 
they found that these intellects are superior to the human intellect, 
although they have it in common with the human intellect that their 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 129 

intelligtbies are the forms of existents, and that the form of each of 
these intellects is nothing but the forms and the order of the existents 
it perceives, in the way that the human intellect is nothing but the 
forms and the order of the existents it perceives. The difference 
between these two kinds of intcilect is that the forms of the existents 
are a cause of the human intellect, since it receives its perfection 
through them, in the way that the existent is brought into being 
through ils form, whercas the intelligibles of these intellects are the 
cause of the forms of the existents.' For the order and arrangement in 
the existents of this sublunary world are only a consequence and result 
of the order which exists in these separate intellects; and the order 
which exists in the intellect which is in us is only a consequence of 
the order and arrangement which it perceives in the existents, and 
therefore it is very imperfect, for most of this order and arrangement 
it does not perceive, If unis is true, there are different degrees in the 
forms of the sensible existents; the lowest is their existence in matters, 
then their existence in the human imtellect is superior to their exis- 
tence in matters, and their existence in the separate intellects is still 
superior to their existence in the human intellect. Then again they 
have in the separate intellects different degrees of superiority of 
existence, according to the diflerent degrees of superiority in these 
intellects in Uhemselves. 

And again when they investigated the body of the heavens they 
found that in reality it is one unique body similar to one single animal, 
and that it has one general movement—which is like the general 
movement of the animal which moves the whole body of the animal 
—namely, the daily movement, and they found that the other 
heavenly bodies and their individual movements were similar to the 
particular members of a singic animal and its particular movements.* 
And they believed, because of this connexion between these bedics, 
their referring to one body and to one end, and their collaboration in 
one act—namely, the world in its totality—that they depended on one 
principle, as happens to different arts which aim at one product and 
which depend on one primary art. For this reason they believed that 
these abstract principles depend on a unique abstract principle which 
is the cause of all of them, that the forms and the order and arrange- 
ment in ihis principle are the noblest existence which the forms, the 
order, and the arrangement in all reality can possess, that this order 
and arrangement are the cause of all the orders and arrangements in 
this sublunary world, and that the intellects reach their different 

216. 

o 

217 

130 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

degrees of superiority in this, according to thcir lesser or greater dis- 
tance from this principle, The First amongst all these princip!es thinks 
only its own essence and, by thinking its essence, thinks at the same 
time all existents in the noblest mode of existence and in the noblest 
order and arrangement. The substance of everything under the First 
Principle depends on the way in which it thinks the forms, order, 
and arrangement which exist in the First Intellect; and their greater 
or lesser superiority consists only in this, They conclude therefore that 
the inferior cannot think the superior in the way the superior thinks 

- its own essence, nor does the superior think the inferior in the way 

ne 

the inferior thinks its own essence; this means that no one of any 
pair of existents can be of the same rank as its fellow, since if this 
were possible they would have become one and would not form a 

* numerical plurality.’ Because of this they say that the First thinks 

ao 

pou) 

219 

only its own essence, and that the next principle can think only the 
First, but cannot think what is under itself, because this is its effect 
and if it should think its effect, the effect would become a cause. The 
philosophers believe that the consciousness which the First has of 
its own essence is the cause of all existents, and that which each of 
the intellects inferior to it thinks is in part the cause of those existents 
the creation of which pertains especially to it, in part the cause of its 
own essence, i.c. the human intellect in its universality.? 

It is in this way that the doctrine of the philosophers concerning 
these things and concerning the motives which lead them to these 
beliefs about the world must be understood. On examination they 
will not be fess convincing than the snotives of the theologians of our 
religion, first the Mu'‘tazilites and secondly the Ash‘arites, which 
lead them to their view of the First Principle. They belicved, namely, 
that there exists an essence—neither corporeal, nor in a body——which 
is living, knowing, willing, provided with power, speaking, hearing, 
and secing,? while the Ash‘arites, but not the Mu'tazilites, held 
besides that this essence is the agent of everything without inter- 
mediary* and knows them with an infinite knowledge, since the exis- 
tents themselves are infinite.’ The Ash‘arites denied the existence of 
causes, and professed that this living, knowing, willing, hearing, 
seeing, powerful, speaking essence exists in continuous existence con- 
nected with everything and in everything. But this assumption may 
be thought to imply consequences open to criticism, for an essence 
with qualities as mentioned above must necessarily be of the genus of 
the soul, for the soul is an essence, incorporeal, living, knowing, pro- 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 131 

vided with power, willing, hearing, seeing, speaking, and therefore 
these theologians assumed the principle of reality to be a universal 
soul, separated from matter in a way they did not understand.! 

We shall now mention the difficulties which result from this 
assumption. The most obvious one concerning their theory of the 
qualities is that there must exist a composite, eternal essence and 
therefore an eternal compound, which contradicts the Ash‘arite 
theory that every compound is temporal, because it is an accident 
and every accident is according to them a temporal product.? They 
assumed besides that ail existents are possible acts, and they did not 
believe that there is in them an order, a proportion, and a wisdom 
which the nature of these existents requires;* no, they held that all 
things could be different from what they are and this applies neces- 
sarily also to the intellect ;+ still, they believed that in the products of 
art, to which they compared the products of nature, there exist order 
and proportion, and this was called wisdom, and they called the 
Creator wise.’ The argument by which they tried to show that there 
is in the universe something like this principle was that they com- 
pared natural acts to acts of will and said that every act, in so far as 
it is an act, proceeds from an agent endowed with will, power, chaice, 
life, and knowledge, and that the nature of an act, in so far as it is an 
act, demands this; and they tried to prove the truth of this by arguing 
that what is not living is inorganic and dead, and, since from the 
dead there cannot proceed any act, there does not proceed any act 
from what is not alive. Thus they denied the acts which proceed 
from natural things and moreover they refused to admit that the 
living beings which we see in the empirical world have acts; they 
said that these acts seem connected with the living in the empirical 
world, but their agent is only the living God in the divine world. But 
the Jogical conclusion for them would be that there is in the empirical 
world no life at alk, for life is inferred from things in the empirical 
world, because of their acts; and, further, it would be interesting 
to know how they arrived at this judgement about the divine world.7 

The manner in which they established this creator was by assum- 
ing that every temporal product must have a cause, but that this 
cannot go on infinitely, and that therefore of necessity the series 
must end in an etcrmal cause; and this is true enough, only it does 
not follow from this that this eternal principle cannot be body. 
They need therefore the additional proposition that a body cannot 
be eternal, but this proposition causes them many difficulties. For it 

o 

220 

o 

221 

w 

222 

fo 

132 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

is not sufficient for them to prove that this world is produced, since 
it might still be argued that its cause is an eternal body which has 
none of the accidents, no circular movements, nor anything else, 
through which---although they themselves admitted an eternal com- 
posite being'—they proved that the heavens must be produced.? Now, 
having assumed that tle htaventy body has been produced, they 
supposed that this production had taken place in quite a different 
way from what is understood by production in the empirical world.? 
In the empirical world, namely, things are produced from something, 
in time and space, and with a defunite quality, not in their totality,+ 
and in the empirical world there is no production of a body from that 
which is not a body. Nor did they suppose its agent to act like an 
agent in the empirical world, for the empirical agent changes one 
quality in the existent into another; it does not change absolute non- 
existence into existence~-no, it brings the existent into a form and an 
intelligible quality through which this existent becomes another 
existent instead of this, different from it in substance, definition, 
name, and act, as it is expressed in the Divine Words: ‘We have 
created man from [an extract of] clay, then we made him a clot in 
a sure depository, then we created the clot congealed blood, and we 
created the congeuled blood a imorsel, &c.’s It is for this reason that 
the ancient philosophers believed that the absolute existent neither 
comes into existence nor can be destroyed. 

Now, if one concedes to the theologians that the heavens were 
createcl in time, they are unable to prove that they are the first of 
created things, us is the evident meaning of what is said in the 
Venerable Book in more than one verse, for instance, in the Divine 
Words, ‘Do not those who misbelieve see that the heavens and the 
earth were both solid, &c.?’* and in the words, ‘and His throne was 
upon the water’,? and in the words, ‘then He made for heaven and 
it was but smoke, &c.’® And as concerns this agent, according to the 
theologians, it creates the matter and the form of that which becomes, 
if they believe dhat it has a matter, or it creates the thing in its 
totality, if ahey believe it to be simple in the way they believe the 
atom to be simple;? and if this is so, this kind of agent changes cither 
non-existence into existence, namely, when there is generation, that 
is when the atom, which according to them is the element of the 
bodies, comes into being; or existence into non-existence, namely, 
when there is destruction, that is, when the atom is destroyed. But it 
is clear that an opposite cannot be changed into iis opposite, and that 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 143 

non-existence itself cannot become existence nor warmth itself cold. 
It is the privation which becomes existent, it is the warm thing which 
becomes cold and the cold thing which becomes warm, and for this 
reason the Mu'tazilites say that privation is an entity although they 
deprive this entity of the attribute of existence before the becoming 
of the world.t And their arguments by which they believe it can be 
proved that a thing does not come into being from another thing are 
incorrect. The most plausible of them is their affirmation that, if a 
thing came into being from another thing, this would imply an infi- 
nite regress. The answer is that this is only impossible for production 
in a straight line, which, indeed, needs an infinite existence in act; 
but, as to circular production, it is not impossible that, for instance, 
fire should come from air and air from fire ad infinitum, while the sub- 
stratum is eternal. They support their theory of the temporal produc- 
tion of the universe by saying that that which cannot be devoid of 
things produced must itself be produced, and the universe, being the 
substratum of the things that are produced, must therefore be pro- 
duced. The greatest mistake in this argument, when its premiss is 
conceded, is that it is a false gencralization, for that which cannot 
be devoid of things produced in the empirical world is a thing pro- 
duced out of something else, not out of nothing, whereas they 
assume that the universe is produced out of nothing, Further, this 
substratum which the philosophers call primary matter cannot be 
devoid of corporeality according to the philosophers, and, according 
to the philosophers, absolute corporeality is not produced. Besides, 
the premiss which affirms that what cannot be devoid of things pro- 
duced is produced, is only true when the things produced of which it 
cannot be devoid are individual things, but if the things produced are 
one gencrically, they have no initial term; and from whence then 
should it follow that their substratum must be produced?’ And 
since among the theologians the Ash‘arites understood this, they 
added to this proposition another, namely, that it is not posstble that 
infinite generated things (i.e. without initial and final term) should 
exist, a proposition which the philosophers regard as necessary.+ 
Such difficulties follow from the assumption of the theologians, and 
they are much more numerous than those which can be held against 
the philosophers. 

And again their assumption that the identical agent which is the 
First Principle is an agent for everything in the world without an 
intermediary contradicts the evidence of the senses that things act 

223 

° 

224 

5 

225 

10 

134 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

upon other things, Their most convincing argument on this point is 
that, if the agent were an effect, this would lead to an infinite regress." 
But this would only follow if the agent were agent only in so far as it 
is effect, and if what is moved were the mover, in so far as it is moved, 
but this is not the case; on the contrary the agent is only agent in so 
far as it is an actual existent, for the non-existent does not produce 
any effect.? What follows from this is not that there are no acting 
effects,? as the theologians thought, but that the acting effects end+ 
in an agent which itself is not an effect at all. Further, the impossibi- 
lity which is the consequence of their deduction is still greater than 
the impossibility which follows from the premisses from which they 
draw this conclusion. For if the principle of the existents is an 
essence, endowed with life, knowledge, power, and will, and if these 
qualities are additional to its essence and this essence is incorporeal, 
then the only difference between the soul and this existent is that the 
soul is tn @ body and this existent is a soul which is not in a body. 
But that which has such a quality is necessarily composed of an 
essence and attributes, and each compound requires of necessity a 
cause for its being a compound, since a thing can neither be com- 
pounded by itself nor produced by itself, for producing, which is an 
act of the producer, is nothing but the putting together of the pro- 
duct. And, in general, just as for each effect there must be an agent, 
so for each compound there must be an agent which puts it together, 
for the putting together is a condition of the existence of the com- 
pound.’ And nothing can be a cause of the condition of its own exis- 
tence, because this would imply that a thing should be its own cause. 
Therefore the Mu'‘tazilites assumed that these attributes in the First 
Principle refer to its essence and are nothing additional to it, in the 
way in which this happens with many essentia] qualities in many 
existents, like a thing’s being existent and one and eternal and so on.® 
This comes nearer to the truth than the theory of the Ash‘arites,? and 
the philosophers’ theory of the First Principle approaches that of the 
Mu'tazilites, 

We have now mentioned the motives which led these two parties 
to their theories about the First Principle, and the conclusions which 
their adversaries can draw from them and hold against them. As 
concerns the objections against the philosophers, Ghazali has related 
them in full; we have answered some of them already, and we will 
answer some of them* later. The difficulties which beset the theo- 
Jogians we have shown in this discussion in detail, 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 135 

We shall now return to distinguish the degree of conviction and 
plausibility reached by the different statements which Ghazali makes 
in this book, as we proposed to do, and we were only compelled to 
mention the plausible propositions which led the philosophers to their 
theories about the principles of the universe because they answer the 
objections which their adversaries, the theologians, adduce against 
them; on the other hand, we mentioned the difficulties which beset 
the theologians because it is only right that their arguments on this 
problem should be known and their views represented, since they are 
free to use them as they wish. It is right, as Aristotle says, that a man 
should adduce the arguments of his adversaries as he brings forward 
his own; that is, he should exert himself to find the arguments of his 
opponents in the same way as he exerts himself to find the arguments 
of his own school of thought, and he should accept the same kind of 
arguments from them as he accepts when he has found the argu- 
ments himself.’ 

We say: The objection that the First Principle, if it can think only 
its own essence, must be ignorant of everything it has created would 
be only a valid inference if the way it thinks its essence were to exclude 
all existents absolutely, But the philosophers mean only that the man- 
ner in which it thinks its own essence includes the existents in their 
noblest mode of existence, and that it is the intellect which is the 
cause of the existents; and that it is not an intellect because it thinks 
the existents, in so far as they are the cause of its thinking, as is the 
case with our intellect. The meaning of their words, that it does not 
think the existents which are under it, is that it does not think them 
in the way we think them, but that it thinks them in a way no other 
thinking existent can think them, for if another existent could think 
them in the way it thinks them, it would participate in the knowledge 
of God, and God is far too exalted for this.* This is a quality which is 
peculiar to God, and for this reason certain theologians concluded 
that God, besides the seven qualities which they attribute te Him, 
has yet another which is peculiar to Him.? Therefore His knowledge 
can be described neither as universa) nor as individual, for both the 
universal and the individual are effects of existents, and the know- 
ledge of both universal and individual is transitory,* We shall explain 
this still better when we discuss the question whether God knows 
individuals or does not know them, as the philosophers mostly assert 
when they pose this problem, and we shall explain that the whole 
problem is absurd in relation to God.* This probiem as a whole is 

226 

lo 

227 

228 

wn 

229 

uw 

136 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

based on two necessary points. First, if God thought existents in such 
a way that they should be the cause of His knowledge, His intellect 
would necessarily be transitory and the superior would be brought 
into being through the inferior. Secondly, if His essence did not con- 
tain the intelligibles of ail things and their order, there would exist 
a supreme inteJlect which would not perceive the forms of existents 
in their order and proportion.’ And since these two cases are absurd, 
it follows that when this principle thinks its own essence,* these 
existents exist in it in a nobler mode than that in which they exist 
by themselves. And that one and the same existent can have dif- 
ferent degrees of existence can be shown from what occurs with 
colour*.? For we find that colour has different degrees of existence, 
some higher than others; the lowest degree is its existence in matter, 
a higher degree is its existence in sight, for it exists in such a way that 
the colour becomes conscious of itself,} whereas existence in matter 
is an inorganic existence without consciousness; further, it has been 
proved in the science of psychology that colour has also an existence 
in the imaginative facully,4 and this is a superior existence to its exis- 
tence in the faculty of sight; it has equally becn shown that it has an 
existence in the remembering faculty supertor to that in the imagina- 
tive faculty,$ and, finally, it has in the intellect an existence superior to 
al] these existences, Now, in the same way, we are convinced that it 
has in the essence of the First Knowledge an existence superior to all 
its other existences, and that this is the highest degree of existence 
possible. 

As for what Ghazali mentions concerning the philosophical theory 
of the order in the emanation of these separate principles and of the 
number of entities which emanate out of each of them, there is no 
proof that this really takes place and that this happens exactly in this 
way; and the form in which Ghazali relates it is therefore not to be 
found in the works of the ancient philosophers. But these philosophers 
all agree on the theory that the principles, both separate and non- 
separate, all emanate from the First Principle, and that through the 
emanation of this unique power the world in its totality becomes a 
unity, and that through this power all its parts are connected, so that 
the universe aims at one act, as happens with the one body of an 
animal; which, however, has different potencies, members, and acts; 
and indeed the world is according to the learned one and the same 
existent* only because of this one power which emanates from the First 
Principle.* And they agree about all this, because according to them 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 137 

the heavens are like a single animal and the daily movement which 
is common to all the heavens is like the animal’s general movement in 
space, and the particular movements which the different parts of 
heaven have are like the particular movements of the members of the 
animal. And the philosophers had already proved that there is one 
power in the animal through which it becomes one and through 
which all the potencies which it possesses tend towards one act, that 
is, towards the preservation of the animal," and af! these potencies are 
connected with the potency which emanates from the First Principle; 
and if this were not the case, its parts would disconnect themselves 
and it would not persist for the twinkling of an eye. If, however, it is 
necessary that for a single animal there should be a single spiritual 
potency, permeating all its parts, chrough which the plurality of 
potencics and bodies in it becomes unified, so that it can be said of its 
bodies and potencies that they are one, and if, further, the relations of 
individual beings to the universe in its totality are like the relation of 
the parts of an animal to the animal itself, it needs must be the case 
that all the potencies in the particular parts of this unique animal and 
in the psychological and intellectual motive powers of these parts 
should be such that there is in them one single spiritual force which 
connects all the spiritual and bodily potencies and which permeates 
the universe in one and the same penetration.‘ If this were not the 
case, no order and no proportion would exist. And in this way it is true 
that God is the creator, supporter, and preserver of everything, and 
to this the Divine Words apply: ‘Verily, God supports the heavens and 
the earth lest they should decline.’s And it in no way follows from 
the fact that this one potency permeates many things that there 
should be a plurality in it, as those thought who said that from the 
First Principle there can im the first place emanate only one from 
which plurality can then emanate; for this statement can only be 
regarded as valid if the immaterial agent is compared to the material 
agent. Therefore the term ‘agent’ can only be applied equivacally to 
both the immaterial agent and the material. And this will explain to 
you the possibility of the procession of plurality from the Monad. 
Again, the existence of all other separate principles consists only 
in the forms in which they conceive the First Principle, and it is 
not impossible that this should be one identical thing, notwithstand- 
ing the difference of the forms in which they conceive it, in the same 
way as it is not impossible that a plurality should be conceived 
through one and the same form.® And we find, indeed, that ail the 

230 

231 

10 

232 

233 

138 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

heavenly bodies in their daily movement, and the sphere of the fixed 
stars, conceive one identical form? and that they ali, moving in this 
daily movement, are moved by one and the same mover, who is the 
mover of the sphere of the fixed stars; and we find, too, that they have 
also different particular movements. Therefore it needs must be that 
their movements proceed partly from different movers, partly— 
namely through the connexion of their movements with the first 
sphere—irom one unique mover.? And just as the removal of an 
organ or a potency vital to the whole animal would invalidate all 
the organs and potencies of this animal, so the same applies to heaven 
with respect to its parts and its moving potencies, and in general 
with respect to the principles of the world and their parts in rela- 
tion to the First Principle and in their mutual relations. According 
to the philosophers the world is closely similar to a single state: a 
state is upheld through one ruler and many deputies subordinate to 
him; all the deputies in the state are connected with the first ruler, 
because the authority of each of them is based on him alone, with 
respect to the ends and the order of the acts which lead to these ends for 
the sake of which these deputics exist; and so is the relation of the 
First Ruler in the world to His deputies. And it is evident to the 
philosophers that he who bestows on the immaterial existents their 
end is identical with him who bestows on them! their existence, for 
according to them form and end are identical in this kind of existent* 
and he who bestows on these existents both form and end is their 
agent. And therefore it is clear that the First Principle is the principle 
of all these principles, and that He is an agent, a form, and an end.5 
And as to His relation to the sensible existents, He is—since He 
bestows on them the unity which causes their plurality and the uni- 
fication of their plurality—the cause of all of them, being their agent, 
form, and end, and all the existents seek their end by their movement 
towards Him, and this movement by which they seck their end is the 
movement for the sake of which they are created, and in so far as this 
concerns all existents, this movement exists by nature, and in so far 
as this concerns man, it is voluntary. And therefore man is of all 
beings the one charged with duty and obligation. And this is the 
meaning of the Divine Words: ‘Verily, we offered the trust to the 
heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it 
and shrank from it; but man bore it: verily he is ever unjust and 
ignorant.’? 

And the philosophers only assert that, although ail these ruling 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 139 

principles proceed from the First Principle, it is only some of them 
that doso directly, whereas others, ascending graduaily from the lower 
world to the higher, proceed mediately. For they discovered that cer- 
tain parts of heaven exist for the sake of the movements of other parts, 
and they related them in each instance to a first principle, till they 
finally arrived at the absolutely First Principle; and so it was evident 
to them that there was one unique* order and one unique act in which 
they all participate. But to ascertain the order, which he who con- 
templates reality and aspires to the knowledge of the First Principle 
perceives, is difficult, and what human understanding can grasp of it 
is only its general principle," What led the philosophers to believe in 
a gradation of these principles, in conformity with the spatial order of 
their spheres, is that they saw that the highest sphere seems in its 
action superior to what is under it, and that all the other spheres 
follow its movement.? And therefore they believed that what was said 
about their order was based on their spatial order. But one might per- 
haps object that the order in the spheres is perhaps only based on their 
activity, not on their spatial order; for since it seemed that the activi- 
ties and movements of the plancts exist because of the movement of 
the sun, perhaps their movers in setting them in motion follow the 
sun, and the movement of the sun derives perhaps directly from the 
First. For this reason there are in this question no indubitable 
assertions, but only assertions more or less plausible and likely to be 
true. And since this is established, let us now return to our subject. 

Ghazali says: 

The second answer is: people say of the First Principle that it knows 
only itself, because they want to avoid the implication of plurality in it, 
for the statement that it knows another would imply a duality: its knowing 
itself and its knowing another. However, the same applies to the first 
effect: it must necessarily know only itself. If it knew another and not 
itself alone, there would have to be a different cause for its knowing 
another than that for its knowing itself, but there is no other cause than 
that for its knowing ilself, namely the First Principle. So it can only know 
itself, and the plurality which arose in this way disappears, 

If it is said that it follows from its existence and from its knowing itself 
that it must know its principle, we answer: Does this necessity arise from 
a cause or without a cause? If the former is the case, there is no other cause 
than the one first cause from which only one effect can proceed, and indeed 
has proceeded, namely this fiest effect itself; how, therefore, could this 
second effect proceed from it? In the latter case, then, let the existence of 
the First Principle imply a plurality of existents without a cause, and let 
the plurality follow from them! But if such a thing cannot be imagined, 

Oo 

234 

ms 
o 

235 

10 

236 

140 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

because the necessary existent can be only one, and anything added to 
it must be a possible, and the possible needs a cause, then the following 
conclusion must be drawn concerning the effect: if it is an existent neces- 
sary by itself, then what the philosophers say is untrue, that there is only 
one necessary existent; if it ts a possible,’ then it needs a cause; but it 
has no cause,? and therefore tt cannot know the existence of its cause. 

There is no special necessity for the first effect to have a possible exist- 
ence; this is necessary for any effect. However, that the effect should know 
its cause is not necessary for its existence, just as the knowledge of its 
effect is not necessary for the existence of the cause; still, it seems more 
plausible that the cause should know its effect than that the effect should 
know its cause,? Therefore the plurality which would arise from its knowing 
its principle is impossibje; there is no principle for this knowledge and it 
is not a necessary consequence of an effect that it should know its principle; 
and out of this there is no issue. 

I say: 

This is a proof of one who affirms that the First Principle must, 
besides knowing itself, know its effect; for, if not, its knowing itself 
would be imperfect.* 

The meaning of Ghazali’s objection is that the knowledge the 
effect has of its principle must either be based on a cause or be with- 
out a cause, In the former case, there must be a cause in the First 
Principie, but there is none; in the latter case, a plurality must follow 
from the First Principle, even if it does not know it; if, however, a 
plurality follows from it, it cannot be a necessary existent, for there can 
be only one necessary existent, and that from which there proceeds 
more than one is only a possible existent; but the possible existent 
needs a cause, and therefore their assertion that the First Principle is 
a necessary existent is false, even if it does not know* its effect. He 
says also that if it is not a necessity of its existence that the effect 
should have knowledge of its cause, it even seems more fieting that 
itis not a necessity of its existence that the cause should know its effect. 

My answer to this is that all this is sophistical. If we assume that 
the cause is an intellect and knows its effect, it does not follow that this 
is an addition to the essence of the cause ; on the contrary, it belongs 
to the essence itself, since the emergence of the effect is the conse- 
quence of its essence.S And it is not true that if the effect proceeds 
from the First Principle not because of a cause, but because of the 
essence of this principle, a plurality proceeds from it, for according 
to the thesis of the philosophers the emergence of the effect depends 
on the essence of the First Principle: if its essence isone, onc proceeds 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 141 

from it; if many, many proceed from it. What he assumes in this dis- 
cussion, namely, that every effect is a possible existent, is only true 
for the composite effect, for there cannot be a compound that is 
eternal, and everything that is of a possible existence is generated, 
according to the philosophers, as Aristotle has shown in different 
passages of his works;' and we shal] prove this more fully later in our 
discussion of the necessary being. What Avicenna calls the possible 
existent has only its name in common with what is in reality the 
possible existent; it is, therefore, by no means clear that it needs an 
agent in the way it is clear that the possible existent needs an agent.* 

Ghazali says: 

The third objection is: Is the self-knowledge of the first effect identical 
with its essence or not? If the former", this is impossible, for knower and 
known cannot be identical; if the latter, let the same apply to the First 
Principle, so that plurality will follow* from the First Principle. And if the 
self-knowledge of the effect is not identical* with the essence of the effect, 
there will not only be a triplicity in the effect, as they affirm, but a quad- 
ruplicity, to wit: its essence, its knowledge of itself, its knowledge of its 
principle, and its being a possible existent by itself, and to this it should 
perhaps be added that it is an existent necessary through another—and 
then it would be fivefold, From this you can see and measure the depth of 
their ignorance. 

T say: 

In this discussion of the intellects there are two points: first the 
question about what these intellects know or do nat know (this ques- 
tion was fully treated by the ancients) ; secondly, the question of what 
proceeds from these intellects, What Ghazali mentions here as the 
theory of the philosophers is in fact the individual opinion of Ayi- 
cenna on this latter problem. Ghazali exerts himself especially to 
refute him and his followers, in order to create the impression that 
he has refuted them al!; and this is acting like one who is, as he puts 
it, in the depths of ignorance. But this theory is not found in the 
works of any of the ancients; and there is no proof of it except the 
supposition that from the one there can proceed only one. But this 
proposition does not apply in the same way to the agents which are 
forms in matter as to the agents which are forms separate from matter, 
and according to the philusophers an intellect which is an effect must 
necessarily know its principle, und there are here not two entities, i.e. 
the intellect and something additional to its essence, for, if so, it would 
be a compound, and the intellect, which is simple, cannot be com- 
posite, And the difference in the separate forms between cause and 

3 

237 

5 

o 

238 

239 

142 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

effect is that the First Cause exists by itself and the second cause exists 
through its relation with the First Cause, for the fact of its being an 
effect lies in its substance and is not an additional entity, in contrast 
with material effects; e.g. colour is an entity which exists by itself in a 
body, but it is the cause of sight, in so far as it is related, and sight 
has no existence except in this relation;! and in the same way* sub- 
stances which are separate from matter are substances which are of 
the nature of relation, For this reason the cause and the effect are 
unified in the forms separated from matter,? and in the same way* 
sensible forms are of the nature of relation, as has been proved in the 
book on psychology.+ 
Ghazali says: 

The fourth objection is that it can be said: Triplicity is not sufficient in 
the first eflect, for the body cof heaven which, according to the philo- 
sophers, proceeds from one entity out of the essence of its principle is 
compusite, and this in three ways. 

The first way is that it is composed of form and matter, as is body 
generally, according to the philosophers, and both must have a principle, 
since matter diflers from form and they are, according to the philosophers, 
interdependent causes, so that the one cannot come into being by means of 
the other without the intervention of another cause,* 

I say: 

What he says here is that according to the philosophers the body 
of the heavens is composed of matter, form, and soul, and that there- 
fore there must be in the second intellect,’ from which the body of 
the heavens proceeds, four entities, namely, one from which the form 
proceeds, one [rom which the fyle proceeds—as both are interdepen- 
dent, for matter is in one way a cause of form and form in one way a 
cause of matter‘—one [rom which the soul proceeds, and one from 
which the mover of the second sphere proceeds.’ But the view that 
the body of the heavens is composed of form and matter like other 
bodies is falsely ascribed by Avicenna to the Peripatctics. On the 
contrary, according to them the body of the heavens is a simple 
body; if it were composite, it would, according to them, suffer cor- 
ruption, and therefore they say that it neither comes into being nor 
perishes, and does not possess the potency for contrarics.® If it were 
as Avicenna says, it would be composite ike a living being,® and if 
this were true, quadruplicity would be a necessary consequence for 
the man who asserted that from the one only one can proceed. And 
we have already stated that the way these forms are causes for each 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 143 

other, for the heavenly bodies, and for the sublunary world, and the 
way the First Cause is a cause for all of them, is quite different from 
all this. 

Ghazali says: 

The second way is that the highest sphere has a definite measure of 
size, and its determination by this special measure taken from among all 
other measures is an addition to the existence of its essence, since its 
essence might be smaller or bigger than it is; therefore, ic must have a 
determinant for this measure, added to the simple entity which causes its 
existence. The same necessity does not exist for the existence of the intellect, 
which is pure existence and not specified by any measure taken from among 
other measures, and therefore may be said to need only a simple cause. 

I say: 

The meaning of this statement is that when the philosophers say 
that the body of the sphere proceeds as a third entity, which by itself 
is not simple (for it is a body possessing quantity), there are here in 
reality two entities, the one which provides the substantial corpo- 
reality, the other the definite quantity; therefore there must be in the 
intellect from which the body of the sphere proceeds more than one 
entity, and therefore the second cause is not triple but quadruple. 
But this is a false assumption, for the philosophers do not believe that 
body in its entirety' proceeds from the separate principles; if anything 
proceeds from them, according to the philosophers, it is only the 
substantial form, and according to them the measures of the bodily 
parts follow from the forms; this, however, refers only to the forms 
in matter, but the heavenly bodies, since they are simple, are not 
susceptible of measure.* Therefore, to assume that form and matter 
proceed from an abstract principle is by no means in conformity with 
philosophical principles, and is quite absurd. In reality, the agent in 
transitory things,’ according to the philosophers, produces neither 
the form nor the matter; it only makes a compound out of matter and 
form. If the agent produced the form in matter, it would produce the 
form in something, not from something.* This is not philosophical 
theory, and there is no sense in refuting it, as if it were. 

Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

It might be said: If the sphere were bigger than it is, this greater size 
would be superfluous for the order of the universe; if smafler, it would not 
suffice for the intended order. 

T say: 
He means by this statement that the philosophers do not believe 

240 

fa} 

241 

242 

243 

144 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that, for example, the body of the sphere could be bigger or smaller 
than it is, for in either case the order intended in the universe would 
not be realized, and the sphere would not set the world in motion 
according to its natural power, but either too strongly or too weakly, 
both of which would involve the corruption of the world. A greater 
size of the world would not be a superfluity, as Ghazali says; no, out 
of both, bigness and smallness, the corruption of the world would 
result.' 

Ghazali says, to refute the philosophers: 

We answer: Does the determination of the manner of this order suffice 
in itself for the existence of what possesses this order, or does it need a 
cause to effect it? If yau believe i¢ suffices, then you regard it as super- 
fluous to assume causes at all, and you may well judge that from the order 
of these existents the existents themselves result without any additional 
cause; if, however, you believe it does not suffice, but a cause is necessary, 
this new cause will not suffice either for the specification of these measures, 
but will itseif need a cause for its specifying*? 

I say: 

The summary of this is that he makes the objection against them 
that in the body there are many things which cannot proceed from 
one agent, unless they admit that many acts can procced out of one 
agent, or unless they believe that many accidents of the body result 
from the form of the body and that the form of the body results from 
the agent. For, according to such an opinion, the accidents resulting 
from the body which comes into being through the agent do not 
proceed from the agent dircetly but through the mediation of the 
form.s This is a conception permissible to the doctrines of the philo- 
sophers, but not to those of the theologians. However, I believe that 
the Mu'tazilites think as the philosophers do that there are things 
which do not directly proceed from the agent.* We have already ex- 
plained how the Monad is the cause of the order, and of the existence 
of all things which support this order, and there is no sense in repeat- 
ing ourselves. 

Ghazali says: 

The third way is that in the highest heavens there are marked out two 
points, the pules, which are immovable and do not leave their position, 
whereas the parts of the equator change their position. Now either alt the 
parts of the highese sphere are similar (and then there will not be a special 
determination of two points amongst all the points to be poles), or the 
parts of the sphere are different and some have a special character which 
others have not. What, then, is the principle of these differences? For the 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 145 

body of the heavens proceeds from only one and the same simple entity 
and the simple can cause only that which is simple of shape, namely the 
sphere, and that which is homogeneous, that is, has no special distinguish- 
able character. And out of this there is no issue. 

T say: 

‘Simple’ has two meanings: first, simplicity can be attributed to 5 
that which is not composed of many parts, although it is composed 
of form and matter, and in this way the four elements are called 
simple;‘ secondly, it can be attributed to that which is not com- 
posed of form and matter capable of changing its form,? namely 
to the heavenly bodies; further, simplicity can be attributed to the 
agglomerate which has the same definition for its whole and its part, 
even when it is composed of the four elements.* The simple character 
which is attributed to the heavenly bodies can very well possess parts 
which are differentiated by nature, as are the right and left sides of 
the sphere and the poles; for the globe, in so far as it is a globe, must 
have definite poles and a definite centre through which globes differ 
individually, and it does not follow from the fact that the globe has 
definite sides that it is not simple, for it is simple in so far as it is not 
composed of form and matter in which there is potency, and it is 
non-homogeneous in so far as the part which receives the place of 
the poles* cannot be any part of the globe, but is a part determined 
by nature in each globe individually. Hf this were not so, globes could 244 
not have centres by nature through which they were differentiated ; 
thus they are heterogeneous—in this special meaning of the word 
‘heterogeneous’—but this docs not imply that they are composed of 
bodies different by nature, nor that their agent is composed of many 
potencies, for every globe is one. Nor do the philosophers regard it as 
true that every point of whatever globe can be a centre and that only 5 
the agent specifies the points, for this is only true in artificial things, 
hot in natural globes.* And from the assumption that every point of 
the globe can be a centre, and that it is the agent which specifies the 
points, it does not follow that the agent is a manifold unless one 
assumes that there is in the empirical world nothing that can proceed 
from a single agent; for in the empirical world things are composed 
of the ten categories and therefore anything whatever in the world 
would need ten agents. But all this, te which the view in question 
leads, which is very much like babbling in metaphysics, is stupid 
and senseless talk. The artificial product in the empirical world is 
produced, indeed, by only one agent, even if it possesses the ten 

- 

° 

245 

246 

to 

146 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

categories. How untrue is this proposition that the one can produce 
only one, ifit is understood in the way Avicenna and Farabi under- 
stand it, and Ghazali himself in his Niche for Lights, where he accepts 
their theory of the First Principle. 

Ghazali says: 

One might say: ‘Perhaps there are in the principle different kinds of 
plurality which do not result from its being a principle,? only three or four 
are manifest to us, and the rest we do not perceive, but our incapacity for 
observation? does not shake our belief that the principle of plurality is 
plurality and that from the one no manifold can proceed.’ 

I say: 

If the philosophers made such a statement, they would have to 
believe that there is in the first effect an infinite plurality, and one 
would necessarily have to ask them whence plurality comes in the 
first effect. And since they say that from the one no manifold pro- 
ceeds, they would have to concede that the manifold cannot proceed 
from the One, but their statement* that from the one only one pro- 
ceeds contradicts their statement* that what proceeds from the First 
Monad possesses plurality, for from the One one must proceed. Of 
course they can say that each term in the plurality of the first effect 
is a first term, but then there must be a plurality of first terms, Jt is 
most astonishing how this could remain hidden from Farabi and 
Avicenna, for they were the first who made these silly statements, 
and many followed them and attributed these theories to the philo- 
sophers. For when Farabi, Avicenna, and their school say that the 
plurality in the second principle arises through its self-knowledge and 
its knowing another, it follows for them that its essence has two 
natures or two forms, and it would be interesting to know which 
form proceeds from the First Principle and which does not. And there 
is a similar difficulty in their statement that the second principle is 
possible by itself, but necessary by another, for its possible nature 
must necessarily be different from its necessary nature, which it 
acquires from the necessary being. But the possibie nature cannot 
become necessary, unless the nature of the possible can become 
necessary. Therefore there is in necessary natures no possibility at 
all, be it a possibility necessary by itself or a possibility necessary by 
another.* All these are senseless statements and assertions, weaker 
than those of the theologians, extrancous to philosophy, and not con- 
gruous with its principles, and none of these affirmations reaches the 
level of rhetorical persuasion, to say nothing of dialectic persuasion. 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 147 

And therefore what Ghazali says in different passages of his books is 
true, that the metaphysics of Farabi and Avicenna are conjectural. 

Ghazali says: 

We answer: If you regard this as possible, say then that ali existing 
things in their multiplicity (and indeed their number reaches thousands) 
derive from the first effect and one need not limit this to the body of the 
extreme sphere! and its soul, but all souls, heavenly and human, and all 
earthly and heavenly bodies can proceed from it, with the many diversities, 
belonging to them, which nobody has ever seen. But then the first effect 
will suffice. 

T say: 

This conclusion is true, especially when they imagine that the first 
act proceeding from the First Principle is the unity through which the 
first effect becomes a unique existent, notwithstanding the plurality 
in it. And indeed, if they allow an undetermined plurality in the 
first effect, it must be Jess or more than the number of existents, or 
equal to it; if less, they must introduce a third principle unless there 
is a thing without cause, if equal or more, the plurality assumed* in it 
will be superfluous.* 

Ghazali says: 

And then it follows that the First Cause by itself will suffice too. For if one 
regards it as possible that a plurality should arise inevitably, although 
without a cause, and although there is no necessity for it in the existence 
of the first effect, this will be permissible also with reference to the First 
Cause, and the existence of alt things will be without a cause, although it is 
said that they follow inevitably and their number is not known. And if 
their existence without a cause can be imagined with reference to the 
First Cause, it can also be imagined with reference to the second cause; 
indeed, there is no sense in speaking of a reference to the first or to the 
second cause, since there is no distinction between them in time and place? 
and neither the first nor the second cause can be characterized by its rela- 
tion to things which do not differ from them in time and place and can 
exist without a cause.* 

T say: 

He says that ifa plurality in the first effect is permissible without a 
cause, because out of the First Cause there does not follow a plurality, 
one may also suppose a plurality within the First Cause, and there is 
no neéd to assume a second cause and a first effect. And if the exis- 
tence of something without cause within the First Cause is impossible, 
then it is also impossible within the second cause; indeed, our expres- 
sion ‘second cause’ has no sense, since in fact they are one and the 

247 

10 

249 

o 

250 

148 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

same thing, and the one is not different from the other either in time 
or in space, and ifit is permissible that something should exist without 
a cause, neither the First Cause nor the second can be specially 
distinguished by this; it suffices that it refers to one of them and there- 
fore it is not necessary to refer it to the second cause. 

Ghazali says by way of an answer in the name of the philosophers: 

It might be said: ‘The entities have become so many that they exceed 
thousands, but it seems absurd that a plurality of that extent exists in the 
first effect and for this reason we have multiplied the intermediates.’ 
Then he says in refutation of this: 

We answer, however: To say ‘it seems absurd’ is pure conjecture, and 
such a judgement should not be applied to intelligibles. But if one saya 
that it is impossible, we ask: ‘Why is it tmpossible, what will refute it, 
and where is the criterion?’ For, once we exceed the one and believe that 
one, two, or three entities can arise in the first effect without a cause, 
what makes it impossible that there should be four, five, indeed, a thousand 
and many thousands*, and whu could fix the limit? No, if unity is once 
exceeded, tiothing can be rejected. This proof again is decisive. 

I say: 

Tf, however, Avicenna and these other philosophers had answered 
that the first effect possesses plurality, and that necessarily any 
plurality becomes one through a unity which requires that plurality 
should depend on unity, and that this unity through which plurality 
becomes one is a simple entity which proceeds from an individual 
simple Monad, then they would have saved themselves from these 
objections of Ghazali, and disengaged themselves from these [alse 
theories.' But since Ghazali secured his point by ascribing a false 
assumption to the philosuphers, and did not find anyone to give him 
a correct answer, he made merry and multiplicd the impossibilities 
which can be deduced from their theory, for anyone who lets his 
horse canter in an empty space can make merry.? But if he had 
known that he did not thereby refute the philosophers, he would not 
have been so delighted about it. The fundamental nitstake of Avi- 
cenna «nd Farabi was that they made the statement that from the one 
only one can proceed, and then assumed a pluratity in the one which 
proceeds. Therefore they were forced to regard this plurality as un- 
caused. And theirassumption that this plurality was adefinite plurality? 
which demanded the introduction of a third and fourth principle 
was a supposition not enforced by any proof. And generally, this 
assumption is not a legitimate assumption for a first and second prin- 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 149 

ciple, for they might be asked, ‘Why has only the second principle 
and sot the first this special character of possessing a plurality?’ All 
this is foolish and senseless talk. The fact is that Avicenna and Farabi 
did not know how the Monad was a cause in the system of Aristorle 
and the Peripatetics. Aristotie, in the twelfth book of his Metaphysics, 
expresses pride in his solution,’ and says that none of his predecessors 
could say anything about this problem.? In the sense in which we 
have expounded the Aristotelian doctrine, this statement that out of 
the one only one can proceed is truc, and the statement that out of 
the one a plurality proceeds is equally true. 

Ghazali says: 

Further, we affirm that the statement that out of the one only one can 
proceed js false in respect of the second effect, for out of it there emanates 
the sphere of the fixed stars, in which there are a thousand and twenty-odd 
stars*,? different in magnitude,‘ shape, position, cotour,’ and influence, be 
it of ill omen or auspicious, some in the shape of a ram, a bull, or a lion, 
others in the shape of a man;® they influence one and the same place 
of the sublunary world differently in conferment of cold and warmth, 
fortune and misfortune,? and their own measures are variable.? On 
account of their differences it cannot be said that they are all of one kind; 
for if this could be said, it might also be said that all the bodies of the 
world were of one and the same kind of corporeal nature, and that one 
caus¢ sufficed for them alf. But just as the differences in qualities, sub- 
stances, and natures of the bodics of the sublunary world show that they 
themselves are different, in the same way the stars, no doubt, are shown 
to differ, and each of them will need a cause for its form, a cause for its 
matter, a cause for the special function in its nature, to bring warmth or 
cold or happiness or calamity, a cause for its being in the definite place 
it occwpies, then again a cause for its special tendency to group itself with 
others in the shapes of different animals. And if this plurality can be 
imagined to be known in the second intellect, i¢ can also be imagined in 
the first intellect; and then this first intellect will suffice. 

I say: 

He had already exhausted this difficulty which is of a type he uses 
abundantly in this book, and if the answer we have given in defence 
of the philosophers is valid, none of these impossibilities necd follow. 
But if by this expression one understands that, from the simple 
numerically one, only one simple one—not something numerically 
one in one way, but plural in another—can proceed, and that its 
unity is the cause of the existence of plurality, then one can never 
escape from these doubts. And again, things only become many, 
according to the philosophers, through substantial differences, and 

10 

251 

252 

no 

lo 

253 

an 

150 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

differences through accidents—be they quantitative, qualitative, or 
in whichsoever of the nine categories of the accident—do not cause, 
according to them, differentiations in the substance,’ and the 
heavenly bodies, as we said, are not composed of matter and form 
and are not specifically different, since they have, according to the 
philosophers, no common genus (for, ifso, they would be composite, 
not simple).? But we have treated of this already, and there is no 
sense in repeating ourselves. 

Ghazali says: 

The fifth objection is to say: If we concede these inept assumptions 
and these erroneous judgements, bow is it then that they are not ashamed 
to say that from the fact that the first effect is of a possible existence, 
there resulis the existence of the highest sphere, and that from its 
knowledge of itself there follows the existence of the soul of the sphere 
and from its knowledge of the First Principle there fotlows the existence 
of an intellect? What is the difference between this and the statement 
that the existence of an unknown man is necessary*, and that he is of a 
possible existence and knows himself and his Creator and then that from 
the fact that he is of a possible existence there fullows the existence of a 
sphere? But it will be objected: What is the refation between his having 
a possible existence and the existence of a sphere following from him? 
And the same holds for the fact that from his knowing himself and his 
Creator there follow two other entities. But it would be ridiculous to say 
such a thing about a man or any other existent whatever, for the possibility 
of existence is a concept which does not change through the changing of 
the possible object, be tt a man or an angel or a sphere.? I do not know how 
any madman could content himself with any of these assertions, let 
alone the Jearned who split hairs in their discussions about intelligibles. 

I say: 

These are all theories of Avicenna and his followers, which are not 
true and are not built on the foundations of the philosophers; stilt 
they are not so inept as this man says they are, nor does he represent 
them in a true light. For the man whom he supposed to be of a pos- 
sible existence through himself and necessary through another, know- 
ing himself and his agent, is only a true representation of the second 
cause, when it is assumed in addition that through his essence and 
through his knowledge he is the agent of the existents, in the way 
this is assumed by Avicenna and his schuol of the second principle, 
and in the way all philosophers must admit it of the First Principle, 
God, glory be to Him. If this is admitted, it follows that from this 
man two things proceed: one in so far as he knows himself, the other, 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 151 

in so far as he knows his Creator, for he is supposed to act only because 
of his knowledge, and it is not absurd, if he is supposed to act because 
of his essence, to say that what proceeds from him, in so far as he has 
a possible existence, is different fron: what proceeds from him in so 
far as he has a necessary existence, since both these attributes exist 
in his nature. This theory, therefore, is not so ignominious as this 
man tries to represent it to be through this comparison, in order to 
cast odium on the theories of the philosophers and to make them 
despicable in the eyes of students." 

There is no difference between Ghazali’s comparison and a person 
who said: If you assume a being living through life, willing through 
will, knowing through knowledge, hearing, seeing, and speaking 
through audition, sight, and speech, and the whole world proceeds 
from him,? it is possible* that from man, living, knowing, hearing, 
seeing, speaking, the whole world proceeds, for if these attributes by 
themselves determine the existence of the world, it cannot make any 
difference in the elect through whichever being possessing these 
attributes they produce it.? If this man Ghazali sought to speak the 
truth in this and erred, he might be forgiven; if, however, he under- 
stood how to deceive in these things and tried that, and if there were 
no necessity for him to do so, there is no excuse for him. And if he 
only wanted to show that he possessed no proof by which he could 
provide an answer to the question whence plurality proceeds, as 
might be inferred from what he says below, he speaks the truth, for 
Ghazali had not reached the degree of knowledge necessary for 
comprehending this problem, as will be seen from what he says later; 
and the reason is that he studied only the books of Avicenna, and 
through this the deficiency in his knowledge arose. 

Ghazali says: 

But if one should say to us: ‘Certainly, you have refuted their theory, 
but what do you say yourself? Do you affirm that from one thing two 
different things can in any way proceed? In that case you offend reason. 
Or will you say that in the First Principle there is plurality? In that case 
you abandon the doctrine of God's unity. Or will you say that there is no 
plurality in the world? In that case you contradict the evidence of the 
senses. Or will you say that plurality occurs through intermediates? In 
that case you are forced to acknowledge the theory of your opponents,’ 
We answer: ‘We have not made a deep inquiry in this book; our aim— 
which we have attatned—was only to disturb the claims of our opponents.’ 
To this we may add that the claim that the thesis that two proceed from 
one is an affront to reason, and the claim that the attribution of eternal 

254 

3 

255 

0 

256 

152 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

attributes to the First Principle contradicts the doctrine of God's unity~— 
both these claims, we say, are vain and possess no proof. The impossibility 
that two should proceed from one is not known in the way the impossibility 
of one single person’s being in two places is known; in short, itis known 
neither by intuitive necessity nor by deduction. What is the objection 
against saying: ‘The First Principle is provided with knowledge, power, 
will; He acts as He wants, He judges as He wants, He creates the dissimilar 
and the similar as He wants and in the way He wants?” The impossibility of 
this is known neither by immediate necessity nor by deduction. But the 
prophets have brought us this truth, justifying it through their miracles, 
and we must accept it.' To inquire, however, how God's act proceeds 
from Him through His Will is vain and an illusory pursuit. Those who 
have sought to represent and understand this have arrived as a result of 
their inquiry at a first effect from which as a possible existent there pro- 
ceeds a sphere, and from which, so far as it knows itself, there proceeds 
the sou! of the sphere. But this is nonsense and is by no means an appro- 
priate explanation. Let us therefore accept the principles of these things 
from the prophets, and let us believe in this, since the intellect does not 
regard it as impossible. And let us abandon the inquiry about quality, 
quantity, and quiddity,* for the human powers do not suffice for this. 
And therefore the master of the Divine Law has said; Think about God’s 
creation, but do not think about God's essence.’ 

I say: 

His statement is truc, that we have to refer to the Law of God every- 
thing which the human mind is unable to grasp, For the knowledge 
which results from revelation comes only as a perfection of the 
sciences of the intellect; that is, any knowledge which the weakness 
of the human mind is unable to grasp is bestowed upon man by God 
through revelation, This inability to comprehend things the know- 
ledge of which is, however, necessary in the life and existence of man, 
is cither absolute—i.e. it is not in the nature of the intellect, in so far 
as it is intellect, to comprehend such a thing—or it is not in the 
nature of a certain class of men, and this kind of weakness is either 
a fundamental character of his disposition or something accidental 
through a Jack of education. Revelation is‘a mercy bestowed on all 
these classes of men.* 

And as to Ghazati’s words: 

Qur aim—which we have attained—was only to disturb our opponents; 
this aim is not a proper one for him and is censurable in a learned 
man, for the intention of the learned, in so far as they are learned, 
must be to seek the truth, not to sow doubts and perplex minds. 

And as to his words: 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 153 
the impossibility that two should proceed from one is not known in 
the way the impossibility a single person's being in two places is known; 
although these two propositions are not of the same degree of assent, 
still the proposition that from the simple unit there proceeds only one 
single unit keeps its evidence inside the empirical world. Propositions 
which are evident differ in their degree of evidence, as has been shown 
in the Posterior Analytics,' and the reason for this is that when evident 
propositions are supported by imagination they receive a stronger 
degree of assent, and unsupported by imagination their assent is 
weakened; but only the masses rely on imagination, and he who is 
well trained in intellectual thought and renounces imagination 
accepts both propositions with the same degree of assent. 

The strongest degree of evidence pertains to this proposition when 
a man makes an induction from transitory cxistents and sees that 
they only change their names and definitions through their acts and 
that, if any existent whatever could arise from any act and any agent 
whatever, the essences and definitions would become mixed and 
knowledge would be annihilated. The soul, for instance, distin- 
guishes itself from the inorganic only through its special acts which 
proceed from it, and inorganic things are only distinguished from 
one another through the acts that are proper to them; and the same 
applies to souls. And if many acts were to proceed from a single 
potency, in the way that many acts procced from composite poten- 
cies, there would be no difference between the simple and the 
composite essence and they would be indistinguishable for us. And 
again, if many acts could proceed from one single essence, an act 
without an agent would be possible, for an existent comes to be 
through an existent, not through a non-existent, and therefore the 
non-cxistent cannot come to be by itself; and if it is true that the 
mover of the privation and the transposer of its potency into act 
transposes it only through the actuality it possesses itself, of necessity 
the actuality it possesses must be of the same kind as the act it trans- 
poses.* If any effect whatever could proceed from any agent what- 
ever, it would not be impossible that the effects should be actualized 
by themselves without an agent. And if many kinds of potency could 
be actualized through one and the same agent, this agent would itself 
have to possess these kinds or related kinds, for ifit possessed only one 
of these kinds, all the other kinds would have to be actualized by 
themselves without a cause. It is not permissible to say: The only 
condition for the agent is that it exists as acting with an absolute 

257 

258 

wn 

259 

ow 

1¢ 

260 

uw 

154 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

action, not with a specified kind of action; for, in that case, any 
existent whatever would be able to perform any act whatever and 
what exists would be mixed! besides, the absolute, that is the univer- 
sal, existent stands nearer to non-existence than the real individual 
existent.? So those who denied the theory of universals denied the 
belicf in a universal existent and in a universal becoming*,? whereas 
the champions of this theory regarded them as something midway 
hetween being and non-being; but if this were the case, it would 
follow that the universals could be a cause of existents. The proposi- 
tion that from the one only one act can procecd is more evident for 
the empirical than for the divine world. For knowledge multiplies 
through the multiplying of the objects of thought in the world, since 
the intellect knows these objects in the way that they exist in the 
world, and they are the cause of its knowledge.* Et is not passible for 
many objects of thought to be known through one act of thought, 
nor can one ace of thought preduce many effects in the empirical 
world, e.g. the knowledge of the artisan which produces, for example, 
a cupboard is different fram the knowledge which produces a chair. 
But eternal wisdoin and the eternal agent differ in this matter from 
temporal knowledge and the temporal agent. , 

IfI were asked ‘What is your own point of yiew in this question? 
You have denied Avicenna’s theory of the cause of plurality, but 
what do you say yourself? For it bas been pointed out that the differ- 
ent schools of philosophy have three different answers to this question; 
that the plurality comes only through matter; that the plurality 
comes only through instruments; that the plurality comes through 
mediators.$ And it is said of the Peripatetics that they accept the 
theory which makes mediation the canse of plurality’—I cannat give 
in this book an answer to this question supported by a demonstrative 
proof, We find, however, neither in Aristotle nor in any of the known 
Peripatetics this theory which is ascribed to them, with the exception 
of Porphyry, the Tyrian, the author of the Jafroduction to Logic, and 
he is not among the most subtle of philosophers. My opinion is that 
according to the principles of the Peripatetics the cause of plurality 
is a combination of three factors, the intermediates, the dispositions, 
and the instruments; and we have already explained how all these 
depend on the Menad and refer to it, for each of them exists through 
an absolute unity which is the cause of plurality. For it seems that the 
cause of the plurality of the separate intellects is the difference in 
their natures, by which they receive the knowledge they gain of the 

THE THIRD DISCUSSION 155 

First Principle and which acquire from the First Principle a unity 
which by itself is one single act, but which becomes many through 
the plurality of the recipients, just as there are many deputies under 
the power of a king and many arts under one art. This we shall 
examine in another place, and if some part of it becomes clear it 
will suffice; otherwise we must take refuge in revelation. In so far 
as the differences depend on differences between the four causes, the 
question is clear. For the differentiation of the spheres arises from the 
differences of their movers, of their forms, of their matter, supposing 
they have matter,’ and of their acts which serve a special end in the 
world, even if the philosophers did not believe that these spheres 
exist for the sake of these acts.2 As to the differences which arise 
primarily in the sublunary world in the elements, as for instance the 
differences between fire and carth, and in short the opposites, they 
are based on the differentiation of matter and on their varying dis- 
tances from their movers,’ which are the heavenly bodies. As to the 
difference between the two supreme movements,‘ one of which is the 
agent of generation and the other the agent of corruption, they 
depend on the differentiation of the heavenly bodies and their 
motions, as is proved in the hook On Generation and Corruption. For the 
difference which arises from the heavenly bodies resembles the 
difference which arises from the difference in the instruments. To 
sum up: the factors for the origination of plurality from the one Agent 
are three, according to Aristotle, and he refers to the One in the 
sense mentioned above, namely, that the One is the cause of the 
plurality. In the sublunary world the differences arise from the four 
causes, that is to say, the difference of the agents, the matter, the 
instruments, and the intermediartes which transmit the acts of the 
First Agent without its direct interference, and those intermediaries are 
very similar to the instruments. And an example of the differentiation 
which arises through the difference of the recipients, and out of the 
fact that certain differentiated things cause others, is colour, For the 
colour which arises in the air differs from the colour in the body, and 
the colour in the faculty of sight, i-e. in the eye, from the colour in 
the air, and the colour in the common internal sense from the colour 
in the eye, and the colour in the imagination from the colour in the 
common internal sense, and the colour in the memorative and reten- 
tive faculty from the colour in the imagination; and all this has been 
explained in the book of psychology.* 

261 

262 

263 

a 

264 

10 

156 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 

Showing that they are unable to prove the existence of a creator of 
the world © 

Ghazali says: 

We say: Mankind is divided into two categories; one, the men of truth 
who have acknowledged that the world has become and knew by necessity 
that what has become does not become by itself but needs a creator, and 
the reasonableness of their view lies in their affirmation of a creator; the 
other, the materialists, lelieve the world, in the state in which it exists,' 
to be eternal and do not attribute a creator to it, and their doctrine is 
intelligible, although theie proof shows its inanity. But as to the philo- 
sophers, they believe the world to be eternal and stilt aviribute a creator to 
it. ‘This theory is sel(-contradictory and needs no refutation,? 

I say: 

The theory of the pllae phe t is, because of the dicruat evidence,3 
more intelligible than both the other theories together. There are two 
kinds of agent: (1) the agent to which the object which proceeds 
from it is only attached during the process of its becoming; once this 
process is finished, the object is not any more in need of it—for 
instance, the coming into existence of a house through the builder; 
(2) the agent from which nothing proceeds but an act which has 
no other existence than its dependence on it.t The distinctive mark 
of this act is that it is convertible with the cxistence of its object, 
ic. when the act does not exist the object does nat exist, and when 
the act exists the object exists—they are inseparable. This kind of 
agent is superior to the former and is more truly an agent, for this agent 
brings its object to being and conserves it, whereas the other agent 
only brings its objects to being, but requires another agent for its 
further conservation. The mover is such a superior agent in relation 
io the moved and to the things whose existence consists only in their 
movement. The philosophers, believing that movement is the act of 
a mover and that the existence of the world is only perfected through 
motion, say that the agent of motion is the agent of the world, and if 
the agent refrained for only one moment from its action, the world 
would be annihilated.§ They use the following syllogism: The world 
is an act, or a thing whose existence is consequent upon this act. 
Each act by its existence implics the existence of an agent. ‘Therefore 
the world has an agent existing by reason of its existence. The man 
who regards it as necessary that the act which proceeds from the 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 157 

agent of the world should have begun in time says: The world is 
temporal through an eternal agent. But the man for whom the act 
of the Eternal is eternal says: The world has come into being" from an 
eternal agent having an eternal act, i.e, an act without beginning or 
end; which does, however, not mean that the world is eternal by 
itself, as people who call the world eternal imagine it to be. 

Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers might answer: When we affirm that the world has 
a creator, we do not understand thereby a voluntary agent who acts after 
not having acted, as we observe in the various kinds of agents, fike tailors, 
weavers, and builders, but we mean the cause of the world, and we call it 
the First Principle, understanding by this that there is no cause for its 
existence, but that it is a cause of the existence of other things; and if we 
call this principle the Creator, it is in this sense. It is easy to establish by 
a strict proof an existent for the existence of which there is no cause, For 
we say that the world and its existents either have a cause or have not, If it 
has a cause, this cause itself either has or has not a cause, and the same can 
be said about the latter cause, and either we go on ad infinitum in this way, 
and this is absurd, or we arrive at a Jast term, and this end is the First 
Cause, which has no cause for its existence and which we call First Prin- 
ciple. And if the world existed by itself without cause, then it would be clear 
what the First Principle is, for we only mean by it an existent without a 
cause and which is necessarily eternal. However, it ts not possible that 
the First Principle should be the heavens, for there are many of these and 
the proofof unity contradicts this, and its impossibility is shown on examina- 
tion of the attribute of the principle.* Nor can it be said that one single 
heaven, or one single body, the sun or any other body, can be the First 
Principle; for all these are bodies, and body is composed of matter and form, 
and the First Principle cannot be composite, as is clear on a second examina- 
tion. Our intention ts to show that an existent which has no cause is eternal 
by necessity and by universal consent, and only about its qualities is there 
a divergence of opinion. And this is what we mean by a first principle. 

I say: 

This argument carries a certain conviction, but still it is not true. 
For the term ‘cause’ is attributed equivocally to the four causes— 
agent, form, matter, and end. Therefore if this were the answer of 
the philosophers, it would be defective. For if they were asked which 
cause they mean by their statement that the world has a first cause, 
and if they answered, ‘That agent whose act is uncreated and ever- 
lasting, and whose object is identical with its act’, their answer would 
be true according to their doctrine; for against this conception, in 
the way we expounded it, there is no objection. But if they answered 

265 

266 

267 

uw 

268 

158 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

‘The formal cause’, the objection would be raised* whether they sup- 
posed the form of the world to subsist by itself in the world, and if 
they answered, ‘We mean a form separate from matter’, their state- 
ment would be in harmony with their theory; but if they answered, 
‘We mean a form in matter’, this would imply that the First Principle 
was not something incorporeal; and this does not accord with philo- 
sophical doctrine, Further, if they said, ‘It is a cause which acts for 
an end’, this again would agree with the philosophical doctrine. Aa 
you see, this statement is capable of many interpretations, and how 
can it be represented there as an answer of the philosophers? 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

We call it the First Principle, understanding by this that there is no cause 
for its existence, but that it is a cause for the existence of other things. 
this again is a defective statement, for this might be said also of the 
first sphere, or of heaven in its entirety, or generally of any kind of 
existents which could be supposed to exist without a cause; and 
between this and the materialistic theory’ there is no difference. 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

It is easy to establish by a strict proof an existent for the existence of 
which there is no cause. 
this again is a defective statement, for the causes must be specified, 
and it must be shown that each kind has an initial term without 
cause—that is, that the agents lead upwards to a first agent, the 
formal causes to a first form, the material causes to a first matter, and 
the final causes to a first end.? And then ic must still be shown that 
these four ulumate causes Iead to a first cause. This is not clear from 
the statement as he expresses it here. 

And in the same way the staternent in which he brings a proof for 
the existence of a first cause is defective, i.c. his statement: 

For we say that the world and its existents either have a cause or have 
not. ... 

For the term ‘cause’ is used in an equivocal way. And similarly the 
infinite regress of causes is according to philosophical doctrine in 
one way impossible, in another way necessary; impossible when this 
regress is essential and in a straight line and the prior cause is a con- 
dition of the existence of the posterior, not impossible when this re- 
gress ts accidental and circular, when the prior is not a condition 
for the posterior and when there exists an essential first cause—for 
instance, the origin of rain from a cloud, the origin of a cloud from 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 159 

vapour, the origin of vapour from rain. And this is according to the 
philosophers an eternal circular process, which of necessity, however, 
presupposes a first cause.’ And similarly the coming into existence of 5 
one man from another is an eternal process, for in such cases the 
existence of the prior is not a condition for the existence of the 
posterior; indeed, the destruction of some of them is often a necessary 
condition. This kind of cause leads upwards to an eternal first cause 
which acts in each individual member of the series of causes at the . 
moment of the becoming of its final effect; for instance, when Socrates 14° 
engenders Plato, the ultimate mover, according to the philosophers, 
is the highest sphere, or the soul, or the intellect,? or all together, or 
God the Creator. And therefore Aristotle says that a man and the 
sun together engender a man,? and it is clear that the sun leads 
upwards to its mover and its mover to the First Principle. Therefore 
the past man is not a condition for the existence of the future man. 269 
Similarly, when an artisan produces successively a series of products 
of crafismanship with different instruments, and produces these 
instruments through instruments and the latter again through other 
instruments,* the becoming of these instruments one from another is 
something accidental, and none of these instruments is a condition 
for the existence of the product of craftsmanship except the first® 
instrument which is in immediate contact with the work produced.® 
Now the father is necessary for the coming into existence of the son 5 
in the same way as the instrument which comes into immediate con- 
tact with the product of craftsmanship is necessary for its coming into 
existence, And the instrument with which this instrument is produced 
will be necessary for the production of this instrument, but will not 
be necessary for the production of the product of craftsmanship unless 
accidentally. Therefore sometimes, when the posterior instrument is 
produced from the matter of the anterior, the destruction of the 
anterior is a condition for the existence of the posterior, for instance, 
when a man comes into being from a man who has perished, through 
the latter becoming first a plant, then sperm or menstrual blood.’ And 
we have already discussed this problem. Those, however, who regard 
an infinite series of essential causes as possible are materialists, and he 
who concedes this does not understand the efficient cause. And about 
the efficient cause there is no divergence of opinion among philosophers, 
And as to Ghazali’s words; 

And if the world existed by itself without cause, then it would be clear 
what the First Principle is. 

- 

oO 

270 

271 

160 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

he means that the materialists as well as others acknowledge a first 
cause which has no cause, and their difference of opinion concerns 
only this principle, for the materialists say that it is the highest 
sphere and the others that it is a principle beyond the sphere and 
that the sphere is an effect; but these others are divided into two 
parties, those who say that the sphere is an act that has a beginning 
and those who say that it is an eternal act. And having declared 
that the acknowledgement of a first cause is common to the material- 
ists as well as to others, Ghazali says: 

However, it is not possible that the First Principle should be the heavens, 
for there are many of these and the proof of unity contradicts this; 

meaning that from the order of the universe it is evident that its 
directing principle is one, just as it appears from the order in an 
army that its leader is one, namely, the commander of the army. And 
all this is true. 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

Nor can it be said that one single heaven or one single body, the sun 
or any other body, can be the First Principle; for all these are bodies, and 
body is composed of matter and form, and the first body cannot be 
composite. 

I say: 

The statement that each body is composed of matter and form 
does not accord with the theory of the philosophers (with the excep- 
tion of Avicenna) about the heavenly body, unless one uses ‘matter’ 
here equivocally.! For according to the philosophers everything com- 
posed of matter and form has a beginning, like the coming into 
existence of a house and a cupboard; and the heavens, according to 
them, have not come into existence in this sense, and so they called 
them cternal, because their existence is coeternal with the First 
Principle. For since according to them the cause of corruption is 
matter, that which is incorruptible could not possess matter, but 
must be a simple entity. If generation and corruption were not 
found in sublunary bodies, we should not draw the conclusion that 
they were composed of matter and form, for the fundamental prin- 
ciple is that body is a single essence not less in its existence than in 
perception,? and if there were no corruption of sublunary bodies, 
we should judge that they were simple and that matter was body. But 
the fact that the body of the heavens does not suffer corruption shows 
that its matter is actual corporeality. And the soul which exists in this 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 16t 

body does not exist in it because this body requires, as the bodies of 
animals do, the soul for its continuance, nor because it is necessary 
for the existence of this body to be animated, but only because the 
superior must of necessity exist in the condition of the superior and 
the animate is superior to the inanimate.’ According to the philoso- 
phers there is no change* in the heavenly bodies, for they do not 
possess a potency in their substance. They therefore need not have 
matter in the way the generable bodies need this, but they are 
either, as Themistius affirms, forms,* or possess matter in an equi- 
vocal sense of the word. And I say that either the matters of the 
heavenly bodies are identical with their souls, or these matters are 
essentially alive, not alive through a life bestowed on them.’ 

Ghazali says: 

To this there are two answers. The first is that it can be said: Since it 
follows from the tenets of your school that the bodies of the world are 
eternal, it must follow too that they have no cause, and your statement that 
on a second examination such a conclusion must be rejected will itself 
be rejected when we discuss God’s unity and afterwards the denial of 
attributes to God. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that since they cannot prove the unity of the First 
Principle, and since they cannot prove either that the One cannot be 
body—for since they cannot deny the attributes, the First Principle 
raust, according to them, be an essence endowed with attributes, and 
such an essence must be a body or a potency in a body*—it follows 
that the First Principle which has no cause is the celestial bodies, And 
this conclusion is valid against those who might argue in the way 
he says the philosophers argue. The philosophers, however, do not 
argue thus, and do not say that they are unable to prove the unity 
and incorporeality of the First Principle. But this question will be 
discussed later. 

Ghazali says: 

The second answer, and it is the answer proper to this question, is to 
say: it is established as a possibility that these existents can have a cause, 
but perhaps for this cause there is another cause, and so on ad infinitum. 
And you have no right to assert* that to admit an infinite series of causes is 
impossible, for we ask you, ‘Do you know this by immediate necessary 
intuition or through a middle term?’ Any claim to intuition is excluded, 
and any method of deductive proof is forbidden to you, since you admit 
celestial revolutions without an initial term ; and ifyou permit a coming into 
existence for what is without end,§ it is not impossible that the series should 

272 

o 

273 

. 

10 

274 

162 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

consist of causal relations and have as a final term an effect which has no 
further effect, although in the other direction the series does not end in 
a caus¢ which has no anterior cause,' just as the past has a final term, 
namely the everchanging present, but no first term. If you protest that 
the past occurrences do not exist together at one moment or at certain 
moments, and that what does not exist cannot be described as finite or in- 
finite, you are forced to admit this simultaneous existence for human souls 
in abstraction from their bodies; for they do not perish, according to you, 
and the number of souls in abstraction from their bodies is infinite, since the 
series of becoming from sperma to man and from man to sperma is infinite, 
and every man dies, but his soul remains and is numerically different from 
thesoul ofany man whe dies before, simultaneously, or afterwards, although 
all these souls are one in species. Therefore at any moment there is an 
infinite number of souls in existence. 

Tf you object that souls are not joined to cach other, and that they have 
no order, either by nature or by position, and that you regard only those 
infinite existents as impossible which have order in space, like bodies 
which have a spatial order of higher and lower, or have a natural order 
like cause and effect, and that this is not the case with souls; we answer: 
‘This theory about position does not follow any more than its contrary ;? 
you cannot regard one of the two cases as impossible without involving 
the other, for where is your proof for the distinction? And you cannot 
deny that this infinite number of souls must have an order, as some are 
prior to others and the past days and mights are infinite. If we suppose 
the birth of only one soul every day and night, the sum of souls, born in 
sequence one alter the other, amounts at the present moment to in- 
finity. 

The utmost you can say about the cause is that its priority to the effect 
exists by nature, in the way that its superiority to the effect is a matter of 
essence and not of space. But if you do not regard an infinite sequence as 
impossible for real temporal priority, it cannot be impossible for natural 
essential priority either. But what can the philosophers mean when they 
deny the possibility of an infinite spatiat superposition of bodies, but 
affirm the possibility of an infinite temporal sequence? Is this theory not 
really an inept theory without any foundation? 

I say: As to Ghazali’s words: 
But perhaps for this cause there is another cause and so on ad infinitum 

... and any method of deductive proofis forbidden to you, since you admit 
celestial revolutions without an initial term: 

To this difficulty an answer was given above, when we said that 
the philosophers do not allow an infinite causal series, because this 
would lead to an effect without a cause, but assert that there is such 
a series accidentally from an eternal cause—not, however, in a 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 163 

straight line, nor simultaneously, nor in infinite matters, but only as 
a circular process. 

What he says here about Avicenna, that he regarded an infinite 
number of souls as possible and that infinity is only impossible in 
what has a position, is not true’ and no philosopher has said it; 
indeed, its impossibility is apparent from their general proof which 
we mentioned, and no conclusion can be drawn against them from 
this assumption of an actual infinity of souls. Indeed, those who 
believed that the souls are of a certain number through the number 
of bodies and that they are individually immortal profess to avoid 
this assumption through the doctrine of the transmigration of souls.* 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

But what can the philosophers mean when they deny the possibility of 
an infinite spatial superposition of bodies, but affirm the possibility of 
an infinite temporal sequence? 

E say: 

The difference between these two cases is very clear to the philoso- 
phers, for from the assumption of infinite bodies existing simulta- 
neously there follows an infinite totality and an actual infinite, and 
this is impossible. But time has no position, and from the existence of 
an infinite temporal series of bodies no actual infinite follows. 

Ghazali says on behalf of the philosophers: 

The philosophers might say: The strict proof of the impossibility of an 
infinite causal series is as follows: each single cause of a series is either 
possible in itself or necessary; if it is necessary, it needs no cause, and if it 
is possible, then the whole series needs a cause additional to its essence, 
a cause standing outside the series.? 

I say: 

The first man to bring into philosophy the proof which Ghazali 
gives here as a philosophical onc, was Avicenna, who regarded this 
proof as superior to those given by the ancients, since he claimed it 
to be based on the essence of the existent, whereas the older proofs 
are based on accidents consequent on the First Principle.4 This proof 
Avicenna took from the theologians, who regarded the dichotomy of 
existence into possible and necessary as self-evident, and assumed 
that the possible needs an agent and that the world in its totality, as 
being possible, needs an agent of a necessary existence. This was 2 
theory of the Mu'tazilites before the Ash‘arites,‘ and it is excellent, 
and the only flaw in it is their assumption that the world in its totality 

275 

$ 

276 

§ 

10 

277 

19 

278 

164 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

is possible, for this is not self-evident. Avicenna wanted to give a 
general sense to this statement, and he gave to the ‘possible’ the 
meaning of ‘what has a cause’,? as Ghazali relates.? And even if this 
designation can be conceded, it does not effect the division which 
he had in view. For a primary division of existence into what has a 
cause and what has no cause is by no means self-evident. Further, 
what has a cause can be divided into what is possible and what is 
necessary. If we understand by ‘possible’ the truly possiblet we 
arrive at the necessary-possible’ and not at the necessary which has 
no cause; and if we understand by ‘possible’ that which has a cause 
and is also necessary, there only follows from this that what has a 
cause has a cause and we may assume that this cause has @ cause and 
so ad infinitum.6 We do not therefore arrive at an existent without 
cause—for this is the meaning of the expression ‘entity of a necessary 
existence’—unless by the possible which Avicenna assumes as the 
opposite of what has no cause we understand the truly possible, for 
in these possibles there cannot exist an infinite series of causes.” But 
if by ‘possible’ is meant those necessary things which have a cause, 
it has not yet been proved that their infinite number is impossible, 
in the way it is evident of the truly possible existents, and it is not yet 
proved that there is a necessary existent which needs a cause, so that 
from this assumption one can arrive at a necessary entity existing 
without a cause. Indeed, one has to prove that what applies to the 
total causal series of possible entities applics also to the total causal 
series of necessary existents.® 

Ghazali says: 

The terms ‘possible’ and ‘necessary’ are obscure, unless one under- 
stands by ‘necessary’ that which has no cause for its existence and by 
‘possible’ that which has a cause for its existence ;* then, by applying the 
terms as defined to the statement, we say: Each member of a causal series 
is possible in this sense of ‘possible’, namely, that it has a cause additional 
to its essence, but the s¢ries as a whole is not possible in this sense of 
‘possible’.?° And if anything else is meant by ‘possible’, it is obscure. If it is 
objected that this makes the necessary existent consist uf possible existents 
and this is impossible, we answer: By defining ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’ as 
we have done, you have all that is needed and we do not concede that 
it is impossible. To say that it is impossible would be like saying that it is 
impossible that what is eternal should be made up of what is temporal, for 
time according to you philosophers is eternal, but the individual circular 
movements are temporal and have initial terms, though collectively they 
have no initial term; therefore, that which has no initial term consists 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 165, 

of entities having initial terms, and it is true of the single units that they 
have a beginning, but not true of them collectively. In the same way it 
can be said of each term of the causal series that it has a cause, but not of 
the series as a whole. And so not everything that is true of single units is 
true of their collectivity, for it is true of each single unit that it is one and 
a portion and a part, but not true of their collectivity; and any place on 
the earth which we choose is illuminated by the sun by day and is dark 
by night, and according to the philosophers each unit has begun, but not 
the whole. Through this it is proved that the man who admits temporal 
entities without a beginning, namely, the forms of the four elements,' 
cannot at the same time deny an infinity of causes, and we conclude from 
this that because of this difficulty there is no way in which they can prove 
the First Principle, and their dichotomy is purely arbitrary.? 

I say: 

The assumption of infinite possible causes implies the assumption te 
of a possible without an agent, but the assumption of infinite neces- 
sary entities having causes implies only that what was assumed to 
have a cause has none, and this argument is true with the restriction 
that the impossibility of infinite entities which are of a possible 
nature does not involve the impossibility of infinite necessary entities> 
If one wanted to give a demonstrative form to the argument used by 
Avicenna one should say: Possible existents must of necessity have 
causes which precede them, and if these causes again are possible it 
follows that they have causes and that there is an infinite regress; and 
if there ts an infinite regress there is no cause, and the possible will 279 
exist without a cause, and this is impossible. Therefore the series 
must end in a necessary cause, and in this case this necessary cause 
must be necessary through a cause or without a cause, and if thraugh 
a cause, this cause must have a cause and so on infinitely; and if we 5 
have an infinite regress here, it follows that what was assumed to have 
a cause has no cause, and this is impossible. Therefore the series must 
end in a cause necessary without a cause, i.e. necessary by itself, and 
this necessarily is the necessary existent. And when these distinctions 
are indicated, the proof becomes valid.* But if this argument is given 
in the form in which Avicenna gives it, it is invalid for many rcasons, 
one of which is that the term ‘possible’ used in it is an equivocal one 
and that in this argument the primary dichotomy of all existents into 
what is possible and what is not possible, i.e. this division comprising 
the existent gua existent, is not true. 

And as to Ghazali’s words in his refutation of the philosophers: 

We say: Each member of a causal series is possible in this sense of 

eo 

280 

281 

166 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
‘possible’, namely, that it has a cause additional to its essence, but the 
whole series is not possible in this sense of ‘possible’. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that when the philosophers concede that they 
understand by ‘possible existent’ that which has a cause and by 
‘necessary existent’ that which has no cause, it can be said to them: 
‘According to your own principles the existence of an infinite causal 
series is not impossible, and the series in its totality will be a necessary 
existent,’ for according to their own principles the philosophers admit 
that different judeements apply to the part and to the whole collec- 
tively. This statement is erroneous for many reasons, one of which is 
that the philosophers, as was mentioned before, do not allow an 
infinite serics of essential causes, whether causes and effects of a 
possibte! or of a necessary nature, as we have shown. The objection 
which can be directed against Avicenna is that when you divide 
existence into possible and necessary and identify the possible existent 
with that which has a cause and the necessary existent with that 
which has none, you can no longer prove the impossibility of the 
existence of an infinite causal series, for from its infinite character it 
follows that it is to be classed with existents which have no cause and 
it must therefore be of the nature of the necessary existent, especially 
ag, according to him and his* school, eternity can consist ofan infinite 
series of causes cach of which is temporal.? The fault in Avicenna’s 
argument arises only from his division of the existent into chat which 
has a cause and that which has none. If he had made his division in 
the way we have done, none of these objections could be directed 
against him. And Ghazali's statement that the ancients, since they 
admit an infinite number of circulur movements, make the eternal 
consist of an infinite number of entities, is false. For the term ‘eternal’, 
when it is attributed both to this infinite series and to the one eternal 
being, is used equivocally.3 

And as to the words of Ghazali: 

If it is objected that this makes the necessary existent consist of possible 
existents, and this is impossible, we answer: By defining ‘necessary’ and 
‘possible’ as we have done you have ali that is needed, and we do not 
concede that it is impossille. 

J say: 

Ghazali means that the philosophers understand by ‘necess:: - 
that which has no cause and by ‘possible’ that which has a cause, 
and that he, Ghazali, does not regard it as impossible that what has 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 167 

no cause should consist of an infinite number of causes, because, if 
he conceded that this was impossible, he would be denying the 
possibility of an infinity of causes, whereas he only wants to show that 
the philosophers’ deduction of a necessary being is a petilio principii.' 

Then Ghazali says: 

To say that it is impossible would be like saying that it is impossible 1 
that what is eterna! should be made up of what is temporal, for time, 
according to you philosophers, is eternal, but the individual circular 
movements are temporal and have initial terms; therefore that which has 
no initial term consists of entities having initial terms, and it is true of the 
single units that they have a beginning, but not true of them collectively. 
In the same way it can be said of each term of the causal series that it has 
a cause, but not of the series as a whole. And so not everything that is true 
of single units is true of their collectivity, for it is true of each single unit 
that it is one and a portion and a part, but not true of their collectivity. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that it is not impossible that what has no cause 292 
should consist of infinite effects in the way the eternal, according to 
the philosophers, consists of temporal entities, which are infinite in 
number. For time, according to the philosophers, is eternal, and 
consists of limited temporal parts, and likewise the movement of 
heaven is eternal according to the philosophers, and the circular 
movements of which it consists are infinite. And the answer is that 
the existence of an eternal consisting of temporal parts, in so far as § 
they are infinite in number, is not a philosophical principle; on the 
contrary they deny it most strongly, and only the materialists affirm 
it. For the sum must consist either of a finite number of transitory 
members or of an infinite number. If the former is the case, it is 
generally admitted that the members must also be gencrically transi- 
tory. For the latter case there are two theories, The materialists 
believe that the totality is of a possible nature and that the collectivity 
must be eternal and without a cause.’ The philosophers admit this 
infinity and believe that such genera, because they consist of possible 
transitory constituents, must necessarily have an external cause, last- 
ing and eternal, from which they acquire their eternity.* It is not 
true either, as Ghazali seems to imply, that the philosophers believe 
that the impossibility of an infinite serics of causes depends on the 
impossibility that the eternal should consist of an infinity of consti- 
tuents,s They affirm that the eternity of these generically different 
movements must lead to one single movement, and that the reason 

oe 

o 

283 

10 

284 

On 

168 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

why there exist genera* which are transitory in their individuals, but 
eternal as a whole, is that there is an existent, eternal partly and 
totally, and this is the body of the heavens. The infinite movements 
are generically infinite only because of the one single continuous 
eternal movement of the body of the heavens, And only for the mind 
does the movement of heaven seem composed of many circular move- 
ments.! And the movement of the body of the heavens acquires its 
eternity—even if its particular movements are transitory—through 
a mover which must always move and through a body which also 
must always be moved and cannot stop in its motion, as happens 
with things which are moved in the sublunary world. 

About genera there are three theories, that of those who say 
that all genera are transitory, because the individuals in them are 
finite, and that of those who say that there are genera which are 
eternal and have no first or last term, because they appear by their 
nature to have infinite individuals; the latter are divided into two 
groups: those, namely the philosophers, who say that such genera can 
only be truly said to be everlasting, because of one and the same 
necessary cause, without which they would perish on innumerable 
occasions in infinite time; and those, namely the materialists, who 
believe that the existence of the individuals of these genera is sufficient 
to make them eternal, It is important to take note of these three 
theories, for the whole controversy about the eternity or non-eternity 
of the world, and whether the world has an agent or not, is based on 
these fundamental propositions. The theologians and those who 
believe in a temporal creation of the world are at one extreme, the 
materialists at the other, while the philosophers hold an intermediate 
position. 

If all this is once established, you will see that the proposition that 
the man who allows the existence of an infinite series of causes cannot 
admit a first cause is false, and that on the contrary the opposite is 
evident, namely, that the man who does not acknowledge infinite 
causes cannot prove the existence of an eternal first cause, since it is 
the existence of infinite effects which demands the necessity of an 
eternal cause from which the infinite causes acquire their existence; 
for if not, the genera, all of whose individuals are temporal, would be 
necessarily finite? And in this and no other way can the eternal 
become the cause of temporal existents, and the existence of infinite 
temporal existents renders the existence of a single eternal first 
principle necessary, and there is no God but He. 

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION 169 

Ghazali, answering this objection in the name of the philosophers, 
Says: 

‘The philosophers might say: The circular movements ard the forms of 
the clenients do not exist at the present moment; there actually exists only 
one single form of them, and what does not exist can be called neither 
finite nor infinite, unless one supposes them to exist in the imagination, 
and things which are only suppositions in the mind cannot be regarded 
as impossible, even if certain of these suppositions are supposed to be 
causes of other suppositions ;! for man assumes this only in his imagination, 
and the discussion refers only to things in reality, not to things in the mind.* 
The only difliculty concerns the souls of the dead and, indeed, some 
philosophers! have arrived at the theory that there is only one eternal soul 
before it is united with bodies, and that after its separation from the bodies 
it becomes one again, so that it has no numerical quantity and can cer- 
tainly not be called infinite. Other philosophers have thought that the soul 
follows from the constitution of the body, that death is nothing but the 
annihilation of the soul, and that the soul cannot subsist by itself without 
the body. In that case souls have no existence except tn respect of the 
living, and the living are beings limited in number, and their finitude is 
not denied, und those that have ceased to exist cannot be qualified at all, 
either by finitude or by infinity, except when they are supposed to exist 
in imagination. 

Then Ghazali says: 

We answer: This ditculty about the souls has come to us from 
Avicenna and Farahi and the most acknowledged philosophers, since they 
concludect that the soul was a substance subsistent by itself; and this is also 
the view taken by Aristotle and by the commentators on the ancient philo- 
sophers. And to those philosophers who turn aside trom this dactrinet we 
say: Can you imagine that at each moment something comes into being 
which will last for ever? A negative answer is impossible, and if chey admit 
this possibility, we say: If you imagine that every day some new thing 
comes inio being and continues to exist, then up to the present moment 
there will have been an infinite collection of existents and, even if the 
circular movement itself comes to an end, the lasting and etidless existence 
of what has come into being during its revolution is not impossible. In 
this way this difficulty is firmly established, and it is quite irrelevant whether 
this survival concerns the soul ofa man or a Jinni, the soul of a devil or an 
angel, or of any being whatever. And this is a necessary consequence of 
every philosophical theory which admits an infinity of circular movements, 

I say: 
The answer which he gives in the name of the philosophers, that 

the past revolutions andi the past forms of the clements which have 
come from each other’ are non-existent, and that the non-existent 

285 

to 

286 

ao 

170 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

can be called neither finite nor infinite, is not a true one. And as to 
the difficulty he raises against them as to their theory about souls, 
no such theory is held by any philosophers, and the transference of 
one problem to another is a sophistical artifice. 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 

To show their incapacity to prove God’s unity and the impossibility 
of two necessary existents both without a cause 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers have two proofs of this. The first is to say, ‘If there 
were two necessary existents, the species of necessary existence would be 
attributed to them both,’ But what is said to be a necessary existent must 
either be so through itself, and cannot he imagined to be so through 
another, or it must be so through a cause, and the essence of the necessary 
existent will be an effect; and its cause then determines its necessity of 
existence,” ‘But’, say the philosephers, “we understand by “necessary 
existent” only an entity whose cxistence has no connexion with a cause.”* 
And the philosophers affirm that the species ‘man’ is asserted of Zaid and 
of Amr and that Zaid is not a man through himself-—for in that case Amr 
would not be a man—but through a cause which makes both him and 
Amr a man; and the plurality of men arises from the plurality of matter in 
which humanity inheres, and its inherence in matter is an effect which 
does not lie in the essence of humanity The same is the case with neces- 
sary existence in respect to the necessary existent: if it is through itself 
a necessary existent, it must possess this qualification exclusively, and if it 
exists because of a cause, it is an effect and cannot be a necessary existent. 
And from this tt is clear that the necessary existent must needs he one. 

To this Ghazali objects and says: 

We say: Your statement that the species of necessary existence must 
belong to the necessary existent cither through the necessary existent 
itself or through a cause is a self-contradictory disjunction, for we have 
already shown that the expression ‘necessary existence’ js obscure, wn- 
less we mean by it the denial of a cause, and so let us rather use* the 
term which is really meant by it and say: To admit two existents without 
a cause, and without the one’s being a cause of the other, is not impos- 
sible. And your statement that what has no cause has none, either because 
of its own essence or through some cause, is a faulty disjunction, for one 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION tI 

does not ask for the cause of a thing which is said to have no cause and to 
need no cause for its existence, And what sense is there in the statement 
that what has no cause has no cause either because of its own essence or 
through a cause? For to say ‘no cause’ is an absolute negation, and an 
absolute non-entity has no cause, and cannot be said to exist either by 
its own essence or not by its own essence. But if you mean by ‘necessary 
existence’ a positive qualification of the necessary existent, besides its being 
an existent without a cause for its existence, it is quite obscure what this 
meaning is. But the genuine meaning of this word is the negation of a 
cause for its existence, and this is an absolute negation about which it can- 
not be said that it is due to its essence or to a cause, such that the intended 
proof might be based on the supposition of this disjunction. To regard 
this as a proof is senseless and has no foundation whatever. On the con- 
trary, we say that the meaning of its necessity is that it has no cause for its 
existence and no cause for its coming into existence, without there being 
any cause whatever for this; its being without a cause is, again, not caused 
by its essence; no, the fact that there is no cause for its existence and no 
canse for its being, bas itself no cause whatsoever. This disjunction cannot 
be applied even to positive qualities, not to speak of that which is really 
equivalent to a negation. For suppose one were to say: ‘Black is a colour 
because of its essence or through a cause, and ifit is a colour because of its 
essence, then red cannot be a colour, and then the species of colouredness 
can exist only because of the essence of black; if, however, black is a 
colour because of a cause which has made it a colour, then black can be 
thought afas being without a colour, i.c. as not having been made a colour 
by a cause, for a determination added to an essence through a cause* can 
be represented in the imagination as absent, even if it exists in reality.”! 
‘Bue’, it will be objected, ‘this disjunction is false in itself, for one cannot 
say of black that it is a colour because of its essence, meaning by this 
that it cannot be through anything but its essence, and in the same way 
one cannot say that this existent is necessary because of its essence, i.¢, 
that it has no cause because of its own essence, meaning by this that it 
cannot exist through anything but its essence.’ 

T say: 

This method of proving the unity of God is peculiar to Avicenna, 
and is not found in any of the ancient philosophers; its premuisses are 
common-sense premisses, and the terms are usec in a more or less 
equivocal way. For this reason many objections can be urged against 
it. Sull, when those terms and the aim they intend are properly 
analysed, this statement comes near to being a proof. 

That this primary disjunction is faulty, as Ghazali asserts, is not 
true. He says that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is ‘that which 
has no cause’, and that the statement ‘that what has no cause, has 

289 

290 

om 

to 

29 

172 TANHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

no cause, either because of its own essence or through another cause’, 
and similarly the statement ‘that the necessary existent is a necessary 
existent, either because of its own essence or through another cause’ 
are meaningless statements, But this is by no means the case. For 
the meaning of this disjunction is only whether the necessary existent 
is such, becwuse of a nature which characterizes it, in so far as it is 
nuinericaity one,’ or because of a nature which it has in common 
with others—for instance, when we say that Amr is a man because 
he is Amr, or because of a nature he has in common with Khalid. If 
he is a man because he is Amr, then humanity does not exist in any- 
one else, and if he is a man because of a general nature, then he is 
composed of two natures, a general one and a special one and the 
compound is an effect; but the necessary existent has no cause, and 
therefore the necessary existent is unique. And when Avicenna’s 
statement is given in this form it is (rue. 
And Ghazali’s words: 

and an absolute non-entity has ne cause and it cannot be said to exist 
either by its own essence or nut by its own essence 

form a statement which is not true cither. For there are two kinds of 
negation, He negation of a particular quality, proper to something 
(and this kind of negation must be understood in respect of the words 
‘by ils own essence’ used in this statement), and the negation of a 
quality, not particular to something (and this kind of negation must 
he understood here in respect of the term ‘cause’).* Ghazatt allirms 
that this disjunction is not even true of positive qualities wud there- 
fore certainty not of negative and he objects to this «isjunction by 
giving as ae example black and colouredness. And he means that 
when we sav of black that it is a colour, either because of its essence 
or throwed a cause, neither alternative can be true, and dedi: are 
lalse. For if bback were a cause, because of its essence, red could not 
he a colour, just as if Amr were a man because of his essence, Khalid 
could not be a man; on the other hand, if black were a colour through 
a cause, colour would have to be an addition to its essence, and an 
essence which receives an addition can be represented without this 
addition, and iherefore this assnmption would imply that black could 
be represented without colourcdness, and this is absurd. But this 
argement ol Ghazali is erroncous and sophistical, because of the 
equivocation in the terms ‘essence’ and ‘cause’. For if by ‘by its 
essence js understood the opposite of *by accident’, our statement 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 173 

that black is a colour because of its essence is true, and at the same 
time it is not impossible that other things, red for instance, should be 
colours. And if by ‘cause’, in the expression that black is a colour 
through a cause, is understood something additional to its essence, 
ie. that it is a colour through a cause external to black, it does not 
follow that black can be represented without colouredness. For the 
genus is an addition to the specific quality and the species, and 
the species or the specific quality cannot be represented without the 
genus, and only an accidental additional quality—not the essential 
additional quality—can be represented without the genus. And 
therefore our statement that black is a colour either because of its 
essence or through a cause is a disjunction of which, indeed, one of 
the alternatives must be true, i.e. black must be a colour either by 
black itself or through an entity additional to black. And this is what 
Avicenna meant by his assertion that the necessary existent must be 
a necessary existent, either through its own special character or 
through an addition which is not peculiar to it; if through the former, 
there cannot be two existents which are both necessary existents; if 
through the latter, both existents must be composed of a universal 
and of a peculiar entity, and the compound is not a necessary existent 
through itself. And if this is true, the words of Ghazali: ‘What prevents 
us from representing two existents which should both be of a neces- 
sary existence?’ are absurd. 

And if it is objected, ‘You have said that this statement comes near 
being a proof, but it seems to be a proper proof’, we answer: We said 
this only because this proof seems to imply that the difference between 
those two assumed necessary existents must lie either in their particu- 
jarity, and then they participate in their specific quality, or in their 
species, and then they participate in theie generic quality, and both 
these differences are found only in compounds, and the insufficiency 
of this proof lies in this, that it has been demonstrated that there 
are existents which are differentiated, although they are simple and 
differ neither in species nor individually, namely, the separate intet- 
lects.' However, it appears from their nature that there must be 
in their existence a priority and posteriority of rank, for no other 
differentiation can be imagined in them. Avicenna's proof about the 
necessary existent must be therefore completed in this way: If there 
were two necessary existents, the difference between them must con- 
sist either in a numerical difference, or in a specific difference, or in 
rank. In the first case they would agree in species; in the second case 

° 

292 

293 

/ 10 

294 

uw 

to 

174 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

in genus, and in both cases the necessary existent would have to be 
composite. In the third case, however, the necessary existent will 
have to be one, and will be the cause of all the separate existents. 
And this is the truth, and the necessary existent is therefore one. For 
there is only this tripartite disjunction, two members of which are 
false, and therefore the third case, which necessitates the absolute 
uniqueness of the necessary existent, is the true one. 
Ghazali says: 

The second proof of the philosophers? is that they say: If we assumed 
two necessary existents, they would have to be similar in every way or 
different. If they were similar in every way, they could not be thought to 
be a plurality or a duality, since two blacks can have only a duality, when 
they are in two places, or in one place at different times, for black and ; 
movement can only exist in one place and be two at the same time, because 
they differ essentially. When the two essences, like the two blacks, do 
not differ and at the same time are simultaneous and in one place, they 
cannot be thought to be a plurality; if one could speak of two simultaneous 
blacks as being in the same place, any individual could be said to be two, 
although not the slightest difference could he perceived between the two. 
Since they cannot be absolutely similar, they must* be different, but they 
cannot differ in time or in place, and they can therefore only differ in 
essence, But two things which differ in something must either participate 
in something or not participate in anything. The latter is impossible, for 
it would mean that they would participate neither in existence,? nor in 
the necessity of existence, nor in being subsistent in themselves and not 
inhering in a substratum. But if they agree in something and differ in 
something, that in which they agree must be different from that through 
which they differ; there will therefore be composition in them, and it will 
be possible to analyse them in thought. Buse there is no composition in the 
necessary existent, and just as it cannot be divided quantitatively, so 
it cannot be analysed by thought either, for its essence is not composed 
of elements which intellectual analysis could enumerate.! The words 
‘animal’ and ‘rational’, for instance, mean that which constitutes the 
essence of man, namély, animal and rational, and what is meant by the 
word ‘animal’ when one speaks of a man is different from what is meant 
by ‘rational’, and therefore man is composed of parts which are ordered 
in the definition by words which indicate these parts, and the term ‘man’ 
is applied to the whole of them*.’ This composition, however, cannot be 
imagined in the necessary existent, while duality cannot be imagined 
except in this way. 

The answer is that we concede that duality can only be imagined 
where there is a differentiation, and that in two things, similar in every 
way, no difference can be imagined. But your statement that this kind of 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 195 
composition is impossible in the First Principle is a mere presumption, and 
where is your proof of it? 

Let us now treat this problem in detail. It belongs to their well-known 
theories that the First Principle can as little be analysed inteflectually as 
divided quantitatively, and on this fundamental truth, according to the 
philosophers, the uniqueness of God must be based. 

I say: 

Ghazali does not know the mistake which is in this second proof, 
and he begins to discuss with the philosophers the question to which 
they give a negative answer, namely, if one may introduce a plurality 
into the definition of the necessary existent. He wants* to consider 
this problem in detail, since the Ash‘arites allow a plurality in God, 
regarding Him as an essence with attributes! The mistake in this 
second proof is that two different things can be essentially different 
and have nothing in common but their name, in the case where they 
have no common genus, either proximate or remote, for instance, 
the term ‘body’, attributed by the philosophers to both the body of 
the heavens and the transitory body, and the term ‘intellect’ attri- 
buted to the intellect of man and the separate intellects, and the 
term ‘existent’ attributed to transitory things and to eternal. Such 
terms must be regarded as equivocal rather than as univocal, and 
therefore it does not follow that things which are differentiated must 
be composite.? And since Ghazali, in his answer to this proof of the 
philosophers, limits himself in the way he has indicated, he begins 
first by stating their theory of God’s unity and then tries to refute the 
philosophers. 

Ghazali, expounding the philosophical theory, says: 

For the philosophers assert that God's unity can only be perfected by 
establishing the singleness of God’s essence in every way, and by the 
denial of any possible plurality in Him. Now plurality can belong to things 
in five ways. 

First, to what can undergo division actually or in imagination, and 
therefore the single body is not absolutely one—it is one through the con- 
tinuity which exists in it, which can suffer a decrease and can be quanti- 
tatively divided in imagination. This is impossible in the First Principle. 

Secondly: a thing may be divided by thought, not quantitatively, into 
two different concepts, as for instance the division of body into matter and 
form, for although neither matter nor form can subsist separately, they 
are two different things in definition and in reality, and it is by their 
composition that a unity results, namely body. This also must be denied of 
God, for God cannot be a form or a matter*® in a body, or be the com- 
pound of both. There are two reasons why God cannot be their compound, 

295 

wo 

296 

Oo 

297 

10 

176 "ss TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

first because this compound can be divided into quantitative parts, actually 
or in imagination, secondly, because this compound can be divided con- 
ceptually into form and matter, and God cannot be matter, because matter 
needs a form, and the necessary existent is self-sufficient in every respect 
and its existence cannot be conjoined with the condition of something else 
besides it, and God cannot be form, because form needs matter, 

Thirdly: the plurality through attributes implied in knowledge, power, 
and will;' if these attributes had a necessary existence, the essence and 
these attributes would participate in necessary existence and the necessary 
existent must be a plurality, and its uniqueness would be denied. 

Fourthly: the rational plurality which results from the composition of 
genus and species. For black is black and colour, and blackness is not 
colouredness for the intellect, but colouredness is a genus, and blackness 
a specific difference, and therefore black is composed of genus and species; 
and animality is for the mind something different from humanity, for 
man is a rational animal, animal is a genus and rational a specific difler- 
ence, and man is composed of genus and species, and this is a kind of 
plurality, and the philosophers affirmed that this kind also must be denied 
of the First Principle, 

Fifthly : the plurality which results from the duality of a quiddity and the 
existence of this quiddity; for man before his existence has a quiddity, 
and existence occurs to it and enters into relation with it, and in this 
way the triangle has a quiddity, namely, itis a figure surrounded by three 
sides, and existence is not a component of this quiddity, and therelore 
the intellect can perceive the quiddity of man and the quiddity of a triangle 
without knowing whether they exist in the external world or not.* If cxist- 
ence were a component of the quiddity to which it is added, the fixation 
of this quiddity in the mind before its existence could not be imagined. 
Existence stands inarelation to quiddity, whether in a necessary inseparable 
relation, for instance, heaven, or in an accidental relation occurring after 
a thing’s non-existence, like the quiddity of man in respect of Zaid or Amr 
and the quiddity of accidents and forims which occur.? And the philo- 
sophers affirm that this kind of pturality also must be denied of the First 
Principle. They say that the First Principle has no quiddity to which 
existence is joined, but existence is necessary to it, as is quiddity to the 
other entities.* Therefore necessary existence is at once a quiddity, a 
universal reatity and a real nature, in the same way as a mani, a tree, and 
heaven are quiddities.’ For if the necessary existent needed a quiddity 
for its existence, it would be consequent on this essence and would not 
constitute it, and the consequent is something secondary and an effect, 
so that the necessary existent would be an effect, and that would be in 
opposition to its being necessary. 

I say: 
These are the theories of the philusophers which Ghazali_ men- 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 77 

tions on the subject of their denial of plurality in the Monad. Then 
he begins to show how they contradict themselves on this question. 
We must now first examine these statements which he ascribes to 
them, and explain the degree of consent they reach; we shall then 
investigate* the contradictions of the philosophers which he men- 
tions, and his methods of opposing them on this problem. 

The first kind of division which, according to Ghazali, che philoso- 
phers deny of the First Principle, is the quantitative division, either in 
supposition or in reality. Everyone who believes that the First Prin- 
ciple is not a body, whether he believes that a body is composed of 
atoms or not, agrees about this. The proof of this is that the First 
Principle is not a body, and its discussion will follow. 

The second kind is the qualitative division, like the division of body 
into matter and form, and this according to the doctrinc of those, 
namely, the philosophers, who believe that body is composed of 
matter and form and this is not the place to discuss the truth of either 
of these theories. This division also is denicd of the First Principle by 
everyone who believes that the First Principle is not body. As to the 
denial of the corporeality of the First Principle in so far as it is essen- 
tially a necessary existent, the discussion of this will tollow later, 
when we give a complete account of the whole argument used in this 
matter. For as to Ghazali’s words that the necessary existent docs not 
need another, i.e. it docs not consist of anything else, but that body 
consists of form and matter and neither of them are necessary cxist- 
ents, for form cannot dispense with matter and matter cannot dis- 
pense with form—there is here a problem; for according to the 
philosophers the body of the heavens is not composed of matter and 
form, but is simple, and it has sometimes been thought that it is a 
necessary cxistent by its own essence; but this problem will be treated 
fater, and I do not kuow of any philosopher who has belicved that 
the body of the heavens is composed of matter and form, with the sole 
exception of Avicenna, We have already spoken on this question in 
another place,' and shall discuss it stil later on. 

The third kind is the denial of the plurality of attributes in the 
necessary existent, for if these attributes were of a necessary existence, 
the necessary existent would be more than one, since the essence also 
is a necessary existent. And if the attributes were caused by the 

essence, they could not be necessary existents, and attributes of 

ihe necessary existent would not be necessary exisicuts, otherwise the 
term ‘necessary cxistent’ would comprise the necessary existent and 
B 2076 N 

298 

5 

“ 

° 

299 

ow 

S 

‘+ 300 

$01 

178 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that which is not a necessary existent, and this is impossible and 
absurd. And this is a proof which comes very near to being an absolute 
truth, when it is conceded that the ‘necessary existent? must indicate 
an immaterial existent, and in such existents, which subsist by them- 
selyes without being bodies, there cannot be imagined essential attri- 
butes of which their essence is constituted, not to speak of attributes 
which are additional to their essence, that is, the so-called accidents, 
for when accidents are imagined to be removed, the essence remains, 
which is not the case with the essential attributes. And therefore it is 
right to attribute essential attributes to their subject, since they con- 
stitute its identity, but it is not right to attribute non-essential attri- 
butes to it, except thraugh derivative words,? for we do not say of a 
man that he is knowledge, but we only say that he is an animal! and 
that he is knowing ;’ however, the existence of such attributes in what 
is incorporeal is impossible, since the nature of these attributes is 
extraneous to their subject, and for this reason they are called acci- 
dents and are distinct from what is attributed essentially to the 
subject, be it a subject in the soul or in the external world. If it is 
objected that the philosophers believe that there are such attributes 
in the soul, since they believe that the soul can perceive, will, and 
move, although at the same time they hold that the soul is incorporeal, 
we answer that they do not mean that these attributes are additional 
to the essence, but that they are essential attributes, and it is of the 
nature of essential attributes not to multiply the substratum which 
actually supports them, they are a plurality only in the sense that 
the thing defined becomes a plurality through the parts of the 
definitions, that is, they are only a subjective plurality in the mind 
according to the philosophers, not an actual plurality outside the 
soul. For instance, the definition of man is ‘rational animal’, but 
reason and life are not actually distinguishable from each other out- 
side the soul in the way colour and shape are. And therefore he who 
concedes that matter is not a condition for the existence of the soul 
must concede that in the separate existences there is a real oneness 
existing outside the soul, although this oneness becomes a plurality 
through definition.4 This is the doctrine of the Christians concerning 
the three hypostases in the divine Nature. They do not believe that 
they are attributes additional to the essence, but according to them 
they are only a plurality in the definition—they are a potential, not 
an actual, plurality. Therefore they say that the three are one, i.e. 
one in act and three in potency.5 We shall enumerate later the repre- 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 179 

hensible consequences and absurdities which arise from the doctrine 
that the First Principle possesses attributes additional to His essence. 

The fourth kind of plurality is that which occurs to a thing because 
of its genus and specific difference; this plurality comes very near to 
that which belongs to a thing because of its matter and form, for 
there are only definitions for that which is composed of matter and 
form, and not for simple, non-compound things, and nobody need 
disagree about denying a plurality through definition to the First 
Principte. 

The fitth kind of plurality is the plurality of essence and existence. 
Existence in the nature of things is a logical concept which affirms 
the conformity of a thing outside the soul with what is inside the 
soul.’ Its meaning is synonymous with the true, and it is this that is 
meant by the cupula in categorical propositions.? The teri ‘existence’ 
is used in two senses; the first synonymous with the true, when we ask, 
for instance, if something exists or not, or whether a certain thing has 
such and such a quality or not.? The second sense stands in relation 
to the existing things as their genus, in the way the existent is divided 
into the ten categories, and into substance and accident.* When by 
existent is understood the true, there is no plurality outside the soul :5 
when by existent is understood what is understood by entity and 
thing,® the term ‘existent’ is attributed essentially to God and analo- 
gically to ail other things in the way warmth is attributed to fire and 
to all warm things.? This is the theory of the philosophers, 

But Ghazali based his discussion on the doctrine of Avicenna, and 
this is a false doctrine, for Avicenna believed that existence is some- 
thing additional to the essence outside the soul and is like an accident 
of the essence, And if existence were a condition for the being of 
the essence and a condition for the essence of the necessary existent, 
the necessary existent would be composed of the conditioning and the 
conditioned and it would be of a possible existence. Avicenna affirms 
also that what exists as an addition to its essence has a cause. Now, 
existence for Avicenna is an accident which supervenes on the 
essence,® and to this Ghazali refers when he says: 

For man before his existence has a quiddity and existence occurs to it 
and enters into relation with it, and in this way the triangle has a quiddity, 
namely, it is a figure surrounded by three sides, and existence is not a 
component of this quiddity, and therefore the intellect can perceive the 
quiddity of man and the quiddity of a triangle without knowing whether 
they exist in the exterior world or not. 

302 

° 

303 

180 ' -TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

This shows that the term ‘existence’ which he uses here is not the 
term which signifies the most universal genus of all entities, nor the 

- term which indicates that a thing exists outside the soul. For the term 

304 

10 

305 

‘existence’ is used in two meanings, the former signifies the true and 
the latter the opposite of non-existence, and in this latter sense it 
is that which is divided into the ten categories and is like their genus. 
This essential sense which refers to the things which exist in the real 
world outside the soul is prior to the sense it has in the existents of 
second intention,' and it is this sense which is predicated of the ten 
categories analogically, and it is in this sense that we say of the 
substance that it exists by itself and of the accident that it exists 
through its existing in the existent which subsists by itself. As to 
the existent which has the meaning of the ‘true’, all the categories 
participate in it in the same way,? and the existent which has the 
meaning of the ‘true’ is something in the mind, namely that a thing 
is outside the soul in conformity with what it is inside the soul,> and 
the knowledge of this is prior to the knowtedge of its quiddity; that 
is, knowledge of the quiddity of a thing cannot be asked for, unless 
it is known that it exists. And as to those quiddities which precede 
in our minds the knowledge of their existence, they are not really 
quidditics, but only nominal definitions, and only when it is known 
that their meaning exists outside the soul does it become known that 
they are quiddities and definitions. And in this sense it is said in the 
book of the Categories that the intelligible universals of things become 
existent through their particulars, and that the particulars become 
intelligible through their universals.S And it is said in the De Anima 
that the faculty by which it is perceived that a thing is a definite 
particular and exists is another faculty than the faculty by which 
the quiddity of the definite particular is perccived,® and it is in this 
way that it is said that particulars exist in the external world and 
universals in the mind? And there is no difference in the meaning 
of the ‘true’, whether it concerns material existents or separate 
existents, The theory that existence is an addition to the quiddity 
and that the existent in its essence does not subsist by it*—and this is 
the theory of Avicenna-~is a most erroneous theory, for this would 
imply that the term ‘existence’ signified an accident outside the soul 
common to the ten categories. And then it can be asked about this 
accident when it is said to exist, if ‘exist’ is taken here in the meaning 
of the ‘true’ or whether it is meant that an accident exists in this 
accident, and so on ad infinitum, which is absurd, as we have shown 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 81 

elsewhere," L believe that it is this meaning of ‘existence’ which 
Ghazali tried to deny of the Firse Principle, and indecd in this sense 
it must be denied of all existents and @ fortiori of the First Principle, 
since it is a false theory, 

Having mentioned this sense of unity in the statements of the 
philosophers, Ghazali now proceeds to describe the ways in which 
they contradict themselves in his opinion, and he says: 

Now notwithstanding all this, the philosophers afl of God that He is 
the First and a principle, an existent, a substance, a monad, that He is 
eternal, everlasting, knowledge and knower and known, an agent and a 
creator, that He is endowed with will and power and life, that He is the 
lover and the beloved, the enjoyer and the enjoyed, that He is generous, and 
the absolute gond, ane they believe that all chis is meant by the teem ‘one’, 
and docs not imply any phuality, And this indeed is someting very 
wonderful. 

Now we must first state their theory clearly in order te understand it 
well, and then we shall occupy ourselves with its refutirtion, for it is an 
absurd undertaking to refute a theory before it is welt understond. Now 
the central point for the tderstanding of Uieir doctrine is that they say 
that the essenre of the Principle is one, and the plorality of terns arises 
only through bringing something tn relacion to itor through britying it in 
relation to something, of through denying something of it; for the negation 
of something docs not catse a pluratity in tha¢ of which it is denied, ner 
does the establishment of a reladion produce a pherality.* Pherelore they 
do not deny the plucality of the negations and the relations, and i is thus 
their task to refer all the qualities inentioned to negation and relation. 

They say that when God is sail to be the First Uhis means a retiatian to 
all the existents afier Him. When He is said to be a principle, it signifies 
that the existence of everything else depends on Him and is caused by 
Flin; it means therefore a relation to an eect, And when He is said ta 
exist, it means that He is apprehended? aml when He is said te he a 
substance it means that Ve is ahe betpg of which itis denied that tt inheres 
ina substratum and this is a negation. When He is said to be cteraal, it 
means that Hix non-existence in the past is denied; and when Ic is said 
to be everlasting, it means that His non-existence. in the future is denied, 
and the terms ‘eternal’ and ‘everlasting’ are reduced to an existence not 
preceded nor followed by a non-existence. When He is said to be a neres« 
sary existent, it means that there is no cause for His existence and that He 
is the cause af everything else, and this is a combination of negation and 
relation: the denial ofa cause for His existence is a negition, and making 
Hirn the cause of everything else is a relation. 

When He is said to be intellect, this means dhat Ie is free from matter 
and everything free hom matter is intellect, Le. thinks ils own substance, 
is self-conscions, and knows everything clse, and the essence of God is such: 

nw 

306 

i 

10 

as 

20 

307 

182 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

He is free from matter and therefore—for these two expressions have the 
same meaning—He is an intellect.! When He is said to be knowing, it 
means that His essence which is intellect has an object of thought, namely 
His essence, for He is self-conscious and knows His own self, and His 
essence is the known and the knower for all that is one, since He is the 
known in so far as He is a quiddity, abstract from matter, not hidden from 
His essence which is intellect in the sense that it is a quiddity abstract 
from matter, from which nothing is hidden; and because He thinks His 
own self, He is knowing, and because He is His own object of thought, 
He is an object known, and since He thinks through* His own essence, not 
through something additional to His own essence, He is intellect, and it is 
not impossible that the knower and the thing known should be one, for 
the knower, when he knows that he knows, knows it because he is a 
knower,? so that knower and known are in a way the same; although our 
intellect is in this respect different from the intellect of the First Principle, 
for the intellect of the First Principle is eternally in act, whereas our 
intellect is sometimes in potency, sometimes in act.? And when He is said 
to Ise a creator, an agent and an originator and to have the other attributes 
of action, it means that His existence is eminent, from which the existence 
of the universe emanates ina necessary emanation, and that the existence of 
everything derives from Him and is consequent on His existence in the 
way that light is consequent on ihe sun and heat consequent on fire. But 
the relation of the world to God resembles the relation of light to the sun 
only in this, that both are effects, and not in any other way, for. the 
sun is not aware of the emanation of light frorn it, nor fire of the emana- 
tion of heat from it; for this is mere nature.* But the First is conscious 
of Himself and is aware that His essence is the principle of everything 
else, and the emanation of everything which emanates from Him is known 
to Him, and He is not inattentive to anything thac proceeds from Him. 
Nor can He Le compared to one of us who puts himself between a sick 
man and the sun, for then it is the case that because of him, but not 
through his choice (although he does it consciously and not unwillingly 
either}, the sick man is protected against the sun’s heat, and it is his body 
which causes the shadow, but it is his soul, not his body, which knows that 
the shadow is falling and is pleased about it. But this does not apply to the 
First: in Him the agent is at the same time the knower and the one that js 
pleased; that is, He is not unwilling, and He is conscious that His perfec- 
tion consists in the emanation proceeding from Him.$ Yes, even if it were 
possible to assume that the man's budy causing the shadow were identical 
with the knower of the shadow, who is pleased with it, even then he would 
not be similar to the First, For the First is both knower and agent, and 
His knowledge is the principle of His act; and His consciousness of Him- 
self as the principle of the universe is the cause of the emanation of the 
universe and the existing order; and the existing order is the consequence 
of the order thought of, in the sense that it occurs through Him and that 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 183 

He is the agent of the universe without there being an addition to His 
knowledge of the universe, since His knowledge of the universe is the cause 
of the emanation of the universe from Him, and His knowledve of the 
universe does not add anything to His setf-consciausness, for He could not 
be self-conscious if He did not know that He is the principle of the universe, 
the object of His knowledge is in first intention His own essence, and the 
universe is the object of His knowledge in second intention,' and this is the 
meaning of His being an agent. And when it is said that He has power, 
nothing is meant but that He is an agent in the way we have stated, namely, 
that His existence is the existence from which the powers emanate through 
the emanation of which the arrangement of the world is ordered in the 
most perfect way possible in accomplishment and beauty.* And when it is 
said that He is willing, nothing is meant but that He is not inattentive to 
what emanates from Him and that He is not opposed to it; no, He knows 
that in the emanation of the universe His own perfection is attained, and it 
is permissible to say in this sense that He is satisfied, and it is permissible to 
say of the satisfied that He is willing; and His will is nothing but His very 
power and His power is nothing but His very knowledge and His know- 
ledge nothing but His very essence, so that everything is reduced to His 
very essence. For His knowledge of things is not derived from things, 
for otherwise He would acquire His quality and perfection through 
another, and this is impossible in the necessary existent, But our knowledge 
is twofold: partly knowledge of a thing which results from us form like 
our knowledge of the form of heaven and earth, partly knowledge of our 
own invention, when we represent in ourselves the form of a thing we do 
not sce and then produce it; in this case the existence of the form is derived 
from the knowledge and not the knowledge from the existence.? Now 
the knowledge the First has is of the second category, for the representation 
of the order in Himself is the cause of the emanation of the order from 
Him. Indeed, if the mere presence of the form of a pjcture or of writin 
in our souls were sufficient for the occurrence of this form, then our know- 
ledge would be identical with our power and our will;5 but through our 
deficiency our representation does net sullice to produce the fon, but 
we need hesides a new ace of will which results from our appetitive Lacalky, 
so that through Wiese Gvo the power which moves eur muscles and our 
neryes in our organs can enter into motion, and through the movement 
of our muscles and nerves our hand or any other member can move, 
and through its movement the pen or any other external instrument can 
come into motion and through the movement of the pen the matter, e.g. 
the ink, can move, and so the form is realized which we represented in 
our souls. Therefore the very existence of this form in our souls is not a 
power and an act of will; no, in us power lies in the principle which 
moves our muscles and this form moves the mover which is the principle 
of the power.® But this is not the case with the necessary existent, for 
He is not composed of bodies from which the powers in His extremities 

Io 

15 

20 

308 

. to 

5 

20 

309 

184 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

originate, and so His power, His will, His knowledge, and His essence are 
all one. 

When it is said that He is living,’ nothing is meant but that He is 
conscious of the knowledge through which the existent which ts called His 
act emanates from Him, For the living is the doer, the perceiver, and the 
meaning of the terrn is His essence in relation to His acts in the way we 
have described, not at all tike our life, which can be only perfected through 
two different faculties from which perception and action result. But Flis 
life again is His very essence. 

And when it is said that He is generous, what is meant is that the universe 
emanates from Flim, but not for an end which refers te Himself,? for 
Benerosily is perfected by tvo conditions: first that the receiver of the 
benefit has profit of what is given to him, for* the giving of something to 
one who is not in need of it is not called generosity; secondly, that the 
benefactor is not himself in need of generosity, so that he himself becomes 
a benefactor through a need he experiences himself, and anyone who is 
generous out of a desire for praise and approbation or to avoid blame 
seeks a reward and is not generous.? But true generosity belongs to God 
alone, for He does not seek to avoid blame, nor does He desire a perfection 
acquired through praise, and the term ‘generosity’ indicates His existence 
in relation to His act and with the denial of an end, and this does not 
imply a plurality in His essence, 

When He is said to be the absolute good, it means that ITis existence is 
free from any imperfection and fram any possibility of non-existence, for 
badness has no essence, but refers ta the non-existence of an essence or to 
the absence of the goodness of the essence.* For existence itself, in so far 
as it is existence, is good, and therelore this term refers* to the negation of 
the possibility of non-cxistence and of badness. Sometimes ‘good’ means 
that which is the cause of the order in things, and the First is the principle 
of the order of everything and therefore He is good; and in this case the 
term signifies existence in a certain kind of relation. 

When He is said to he a necessary existent, this existence is meant with 
the denial of a cause for His existence and the impossibility of a cause for 
His non-existence, in the beginning and at the end, 

When it is said that He is the lover and the beloved,® the enjoyer 
and the enjoyed,’ i¢ means that He is every beauty and splendour and 
perfection, and that He is beloved and desired by the possessor of this per- 
fection and the only meaning of ‘enjoyment’ is the perception of appro- 
priate perfection. Uf it could he imagined of a single man that he knew his 
own perfection in comprehending all intelligibles, if he could comprehend 
them, that he knew the beauty of his own form, the perfection of his power, 
the strength of his limbs, in short if he perceived in himself the presence 
of all perfection of which he was capable, he woukl love his perfection and 
enjoy it, and his enjoyment would only be incomplete through the pos- 
sibility of its loss and its diminution, for the joy which refers to the 

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION 185 

transitory, or to what is feared to be transitory, is not perfect.’ But the 
First possesses the most perfect splendour and the most complete beauty, 
since ail perfection is possible to Him and present in Him, and He per- 
ceives this beauty, secure against the possibility of its diminution and 
loss, and the perfection He possesses is superior to all perfection, and His 
love and His enjoyment of this perfection are superior to all love and to all 
enjoyment, and His enjoyment cannot be compared in any way to our 
enjoyment and is too glorious to be called enjoyment, joy, and delight, 
for we have no expressions for such concepts, and using these terms 
metaphorically for Him, we must be conscious of the great difference, just 
as when we apply to Him metaphorically our terms, ‘willing’, choosing’, 
‘acting’, we are convinced of the great distance between His will, power, 
and knowledge, from our will, power, and knowledge, and it is not 
impossible that this term ‘enjoyment’ should be regarded as improper 
and that another term should be used.2 What we want to express is that His 
state is more glorious than the conditions of the angels, and more desirable, 
and the condition of the angels is more glorious than our condition; and if 
there were no other joy than in bodily desire and sex, the condition of the 
ass and the pig would be superior to the state of the angels, but the angels, 
who are separate from matter, have no other joy than the joy arising from 
the knowledge of their share in perfection and beauty, the cessation of 
which js not to be feared, But the joy of the First is superior to the joy of the 
angels, and the existence of the angels which are intellects separate from 
matter is possible in its essence and necessary of existence through another, 
and the possibility of non-existence is a kind of badness and imperfection, 
and nothing is absolutely free from badness except the First, and He is the 
absolute good and He possesses the utmost splendour and beauty ; further, 
He is the beloved, whether anyone else loves Him or not, as He is the 
knower and the known, whether anyone else knows Him or not. And all 
these concepts refer to His essence and to His perception and to His 
knowledge of His essence, and the knowledge of His essence is His very 
essence, for He is pure intellect, and all this leads back to one single 
notion. 

This is the way to set forth their doctrine, and these things can be 
divided into that which may be believed (but we shall show that according 
to their own principles they must regard it as untrue) and into that which 
may not be believed (and we shall show its fatsehood). We shali now 
return to the five classes of plurality and to their claim to deny them, and 
shall show their inability to establish their proof, and shall treat each 
question separately. 

I say: 

The greater part of what he mentions in his description of the 
philosophical theories about God as being one, notwithstanding the 
plurality of attributes ascribed to Him, he has stated accurately, and 

a 

0 

3 

20 

310 

nw 

311 

$12 

186 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

we shall not argue with him about it, with the exception of his state- 
ment that to Him the designation of ‘intellect’ is a negation; for this 
is not true—on the contrary it is the most special appellation for His 
essence according to the Peripatetics, in contrast to Plato’s opinion 
thac the intellect is not the First Principle and that intellect cannot be 
attributed to the First Principle.? Nor is his statement that in the 
separate intellects there is potency, non-existence, and badness a 
philosophical theory. But we shall now return to his refutations in 
these five questions. 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 
To refute their dental of attributes 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers agree—exactly as do the Mu'tazilites—that it is 
impossible to ascribe to the First Principle knowledge, power, and will, 
and they aflirm that we have received these terms throngh the Divine 
Law, and that they may be used as verbal expressions, but that they refer 
to one essence as we have explained previously, and that it is not permis- 
sible to accept an attribute additional to its essence in the way we may 
consider, as regards ourselves, our knowledge, power, and will, as attributes 
of ourselves, additional to our essence. And they affirm that this causes 
a plurality, because if these attributes are supposed to occur to us in the 
course of our development, we know that they are additional to our 
essence, because they constitute new facts* ; on the other hand, if they are 
supposed to be simultaneous with our existence withoue any time-lag, 
their simultaneity does nat prevent them from being an addition to our 
essence.? For when one thing is added to another and it is known that 
they are not identical, ie is thought, even if they are simultaneous, that 
they are two. Therefore the fact that these qualities would be simultaneous 
with the essence of the First does not prevent them from being extraneous 
to its essence, and this causes a plurality in the necessary existent, 
and this is impossible; and therefore they all agree in the denial of the 
attributes. 

T say: 

The difficulty for the man who denies a plurality of attributes 
consists in this: chat different attributes are reduced to one essence, 
so that for instance knowledge, will, and power would mean one and 
the same thing andi signify one single essence, and that also know- 
ledge and knower, power and possessing power, will and willer 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 187 

would have one and the same meaning. The difficulty for the man, 
however, who affirms that there exist both an essence and attributes 
additional to the essence, consists in this: that the essence becomes 
a condition for the existence of the attributes and the attributes a 
condition for the perfection of the essence, and that their combina- 
tion would be a necessary existent, that is, one single existent in 
which there is neither cause nor effect. And this latter difficulty can- 
not be really solved when it is assumed that there exists an essentially 
necessary existent, for this implies that it must be one in every way 
and can in no way be composed of the condition and the conditioned 
and of cause and effect, for such a composition would have to be 
either necessary or possible; (1) if necessary, it would be necessary 
through another, not through itself, since it is difficult to assume an 
eternal compound as existing through itself, i.e. as not having a cause 
for its composition, and this is especially difficult for the man who 
believes that every accident is temporal,’ since the fact of being a 
compound would be an eternal accident; (2) if possible, a cause 
would be needed to join together the effect and the cause. Now, 
according to philosophical principles it is quite impossible that there 
should be a compound existing by itself, having eternal attributes, 
since the composition would be a condition of its existence; and its 
parts could not be agents for the composition, for the composition 
would have to be a condition for their existence. Therefore, when the 
parts of any natural compound are disjoined, their original name can 
be only applied to them equivocally, e.g. the term ‘hand’, used of the 
hand which is a part of the living man and the hand which has been 
cut off; and every compound is for Aristotle transitory and @_fortiori 
cannot be without a cause.? 

But as to the system of Avicenna, with its division of the necessary 
existent from the possible existent, it does not lead to the denial of an 
eternal compound; for when we assume that the possible ends in a 
necessary cause and that the necessary cause must either have a cause 
or not, and in the former case must end in a necessary existent which 
has no cause, this reasoning leads through the impossibility of an 
infinite regress to a necessary existence which has no efficient cause— 
not, however, to an existent which has no cause at all, for this existent 
might have a formal or a material cause, unless it is assumed that 
everything which has matter and form, or in short every compound, 
must have an external cause; but this needs a proof which the demon- 
stration based on the principle of the necessary existent does not 

313 

9 

314 

“ 

10 

188 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

contain, even if we do not consider the mistake in it we have already 
mentioned, And for exactly the same reason the proof ofthe Ash‘arites 
that every temporal occurrence needs a cause does not [ead to an 
eternal First Principle which is not composite, but only to a First 
Principle which is not temporal. 

As to the fact that knower and knowledge are one, it is not im- 
possible, but necessary, that such pairs of things lead up to the unity — 
of their concepts; ¢.g. if the knower knows through knowledge, that 
through which he becomes a knower is more apt to be a knower, for 
the quality which any thing acquires from another is in itself more 
apt to possess the concept which is acquired, ¢.g. if the living bodies 
in our sublunary world are not alive by themselves, but through a 
life which inheres in them, then necessarily this life through which 
the non-living acquires life is alive by itself, or there would be an 

: jnfinite regress; and the same is the case with knowledge and the 

315 

ow 

other attributes.’ 

Now, it cannot be denied that one essence can have many attri- 
butes related, negative, or imaginary, in different ways without this 
implying a plurality in the essence, e.g. that a thing is an existent 
and one and possible or* necessary,¢ for when the one identical entity 
is viewed in so far as something else proceeds from it, it is called 
capable and acting, and in so far as it is viewed as differentiating 
between two opposite acts, it is called willing, and in so far as it is 
viewed as perceiving its object, knowing, and in so far as it* is viewed 
as perceiving and as a cause of motion, it is callcd living, since the 
living is the perceiving and the self-moving.* What is impossible is 
only a single simple existence with a plurality of attributes, existing 
by themselves, and especially if these attributes should be essential and 
exist inact, and as to these attributes existing in potency, it is not impos- 
sible, according to the philosophers, that something should be one in 
act and a pluratity in potency, and this is the case according to them, 
with the parts of the definition in their relation to the thing defined.* 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

And they affirm that this causes a plurality ... that they are two. 

he means by them that the fact that these attributes are simultancous 
with the essence docs not prevent them from being necessarily a 
plurality by themselves, just as, if their existence were posterior to 
the essence, or if some of them were posterior to others, mind would 
not conceive them as being one. 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 189 

After stating the view of the philosophers, Ghazali says: 

But it must be said to the philosophers: How do you know the impos- 
sibility of plurality of this kind? for you are in opposition to all the 
Muslims, the Mu'tazilites excepted, and what is your proof of it? If 
someone says: ‘Plurality is impossible, since the fact that the essence is 
regarded as one is equivalent to the impossibility of its having a plurality 
of attributes’ this is just the point under discussion, and the impossibility is 
not self-evident, and a proof is needed, They have indeed two proofs. The 
first is that they say that, when subject and attribute are not identical, 
either both, subject and attribute, can exist independently of the other, or 
each will need the other, or only one of them will depend on the other. 
In the first case they will both be necessary existents, and this implies an 
absolute dualtty and is impossible. In the second case neither of them will 
be a necessary existent, because the meaning of a necessary existent is chat it 
exists by itself and does not depend in any way on anything else, and 
when a thing requires something else, that other is its cause, since, if this 
other were annulled, its existence would be impossible and it would there- 
fore exist not by itself but through another. In the third case the one which 
was dependent would be an effect and the necessary existent would be the 
other, on which it would be dependent, and that which was an effect 
would need a cause, and therefore this would necessarily involve connect- 
ing the essence of the necessary existent with a cause.' 

T say: 

When their opponents concede to the philosophers that there is an 
existent necessary by itself and that the meaning of the necessary 
existent is that it has no cause at all, neither in its essence through 
which it subsists, or through something external, they cannot escape 
the conclusion which the philosophers forced upon them: that if the 
attributes existed through the essence, the essence would be an exis- 
tent necessary through itself, and the attributes would be necessary 
through something different from themselves, and the essence of the 
necessary existent would exist by itself, but the attributes would be 
necessary through something different from themselves, and essence 
and attributes together would form a compound.” But the Ash‘arites 
do not concede to the philosophers that the existence of a necessary 
existent, subsisting by itself, implies that it has no cause whatsoever, 
for their argument leads only to the denial of an efficient cause 
additional to the essence.* 

Ghazali says: 

‘The objection against this is to say: The case to be accepted is the last, 
but we have shown in the fifth discussion that you have no proof for your 
deniat of the first case, that of absolute duality; what is affirmed by you 

316 

= 
o 

317 

318 

to 

190 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

in the fifth discussion can only be justified by basing it upon your denial 
of plurality in this and the following discussions: how can you therefore 
base this discussion upon what* is itself the upshot of this discussion?! 
But the correct sofution is to say; ‘The essence does not need the attributes 
for its subsistence, whereas the attributes need a subject, as is the case 
with us ourselves.” There remains their statement that what is in need of 
something else is not a necessary existent. 

One may ask them; Why do you make such a statement, if you under- 
stand by ‘necessary existent’ only that which has no efficient cause, and why 
is it impossible to say that, just as there is no agent for the essence of 
the necessary existent, which is eternal, there is no agent for its attributes, 
which are equally eternal? If, however, you understand by ‘necessary 
existent’ that which has no receptive cause, we answer that that is not 
implied in this conception of the necessary existent, which, according to 
this conception is all the same eternal and has no agent; and what is 
wrong with this conception? 

If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is that which has no 
efficient cause and no receptive cause,? for if a receptive cause for it were 
conceded, it would be conceded that it was an effect—we say: To call the 
receptive essence a receptive cause? is one of your technical terms, and 
there is no proof of the real existence of a necessary existent corresponding 
to your terminology; all that is proved is that there must be a final term 
to the series of causes and effects, and no more, and this series can end in 
a unit with eternal attributes which have no more an agent than the essence 
itself, and are supposed to be in the essence itself. But tet us put aside this 
term ‘necessary existent’, which is full of possible confusion, The proof in- 
deed only demonstrates the end of the series and nothing more, and your 
further claims are pure presumption. 

If it is said: In the same way as the series of efficient causes must have 
an end, the series of receptive causes must have an end, since if every 
existent needed a substratum toe inhere in it and this substratum again 
needed a substratum, this would imply an infinite series, just as this would 
be the case if every existent needed a cause and this cause again another 
cause—we answer: You are perfectly right and for this very reason we say 
that the series has an end and that the attribute exists in its essence and 
that this essence docs not exist in something else, just as our knowledge 
exists in our essence and our essence is its substratum, but does not exist 
itseif in a substratum. The series of efficient causes comes to an end for the 
attribute at the same time as for the essence, since the attribute has an 
agent no more than the essence has, still the essence provided with thisattri- 
bute does not cease to exist, although neither itself nor its attribute has a 
cause. As to the receptive causes, its series can only end in the essence, for 
how could the negation of a cause imply the negation of a substratum ?* 
The proof does not demonstrate anything but the termination of the series, 
and every method by which this termination can be explained is sufficient 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 191 

to establish the proof which demands the existence of the necessary existent. 
But if by ‘necessary existent’ is understood something besides the existent 
which has no efficient cause and which brings the causal series to an end, 
we do not by any means concede that this is necessary. And whenever the 
mind regards it as possible to acknowledge an eternal existent which has 
no cause for its existence, it regards it as possible to acknowledge an 
eternal subject for which there is no cause, either for its essence or for its 
attribute. 

As to Ghazali’s words: 

We have shown in the fifth discussion that you have no proof for your 
denial of the first case, that of absolute duality; what is affirmed by you 
in the fifth discussion can only be justified by basing it upon your denial of 
plurality. 

I say: 

Ghazali means the philosophers’ denial that subject and attribute 
are both subsistent by themselves, for from this it follows that they 
are independent of each other and that both are independent gods, 
which is a dualistic theory, since there is no connexion through which 
attribute and subject could become a unity. And since the philoso- 
phers used as an argument for the denial of this kind of plurality the 
fact that it has duatism as its consequence,’ and a demonstration 
ought to proceed in the opposite sense, namely, that dualism would 
have to be denied, because of the impossibility of plurality, he says 
that their proof is circular and that they proved the principle by the 
conclusion. 

Their objection, however, was not based upon the facts themselves, 
but on the theory of their opponents who deny dualism, And you 
have learned in another place that there are two kinds of refutation, 
one based on the objective facts, the other based on the statement of 
the opponent, and although the former is the true kind of refutation, 
the second type may also be used.* 

As to Ghazali’s words: 

But the correct solution is to say: “The essence does not need the attri- 
butes for its subsistence, whereas the attributes need a subject, as is the 
case with us ourselves,’ There remains their statement that what is in 
need of another is not a necessary existent. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that, when this tripartite division which they use to 
deny plurality is submitted to them, the facts lead them to establish 
that (1) the necessary existent cannot be a compound of attribute 

319 

320 

to 

331 

322 

192 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and subject; (2) the essence cannot be a plurality of attributes, for 
they cannot accept these things according to their principles. Then 
he starts to show that the impossibility which they strive to deduce 
from this division is not strict. 

As to Ghazali’s words: 

One may ask them; Why do you make such a statement, if you under- 
stand by ‘necessary existent’ only that which has no efficient cause, and 
why is it impossible to say that, just as there is no agent for the essence of 
the necessary existent, which is eternal, there is no agent for its attributes, 
which are equally eternal? 

T say: 

All this is an objection to Avicenna’s method of denying the attri- 
butes by establishing the necessary existent which exists by itself, but 
in this question the most convincing method of showing the necessity 
of unity and forcing it as a consequence upon the Ash‘arites is the 
method of the Mu'tazilites. For the latter understand by ‘possible 
existence’ the truly possibile,’ and they believe that everything below 
the First Principle is such. Their opponents, the Ash‘arites, accept 
this, and believe also that every possible has an agent, and that the 
series comes to an end through what is not possible in itself. The 
Mu‘tazilites concede this to them, but they believe that from this 
concession it follows that the First, which is the final term of the 
series of possibility, is not a possible, and that this implies its absolute 
simplicity. The Ash‘arites, however, say that the denial of true pos- 
sibility does not imply simplicity, but only eternity and the absence 
of an efficient cause, and therefore there is among the Ash‘arites no 
proof of the simplicity of the First through the proof based on the 
necessary existent,? 

And Ghazali says: 

If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is that which has 
no efficient cause and no receptive cause, for if a receptive cause for it 
were conceded, it would be conceded that it was an effect. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that, if the philosophers say that the proof has led 
to a necessary existent which has no efficient cause, it has, according 
to them, no receptive Cause either, and that according to the philoso- 
phers the assumption of essence and attributes implies the assumption 
of a receptive cause. 

Then Ghazali, answering this, says: , 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 193 

We say: To call the receptive essence a receptive cause is one of your 
technical terms, and there is no proof for the real existence of a necessary 
existent corresponding to your terminology; all that is proved is that there 
raust be a final term to the series of causes and effects. 

I say: 

Ghazali means that the Ash‘arites do not concede that this essence 5 
in which the attributes inhere is a receptive cause,’ so as to be forced 
to admit an efficient cause for it, He says that the proof of the 
philosophers does not lead to an existent which has no receptive 
cause, let alone proving the existence of what has no essence and no 
attributes. [t only proves that it has no efficient cause. This objection 
is a necessary consequence of their own proof. Even if the Ash‘arites 
had accepted the philosophical theory that what has no efficient 
cause has no receptive cause, their own statement would not have 
been overthrown, for the essence which they assume only receives 
attributes which do not belong to the First, since they assume that 
the attributes are additional to the essence of the First, and they do 
not admit essential attributes in the way the Christians do.* 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 323 

° 

Ifit is said: In the same way as the series of efficient causes must have an 
end, the series of receptive causes must have an end, since ifevery existent 
needed a substratum to inhere in it and this substratum again needed a 
substratum, this would imply an infinite series, just as this would be the 
case if every existent needed a cause and this cause again another cause— 
we answer: You are perfectly right and for chis very reason we say chat 5 
the series has an end and that che attribute exists in its essence and that 
this essence does not exist in something else, just as our knowledge exists in 
our essence and our essence is its substratum, but does not exist itself in a 
substratum. 

T say: 

This statement has no connexion with this discussion either with 
respect to the philosophical theories he mentions or with respect to 
the answers he gives, and it is a kind of sophism, for there exists no 
relation between the question, whether the receptive causes must or 
must not have an end, and the problem which is under discussion, 
namely whether it isa condition of the First Agent that it should have 
a receptive cause.’ For the inquiry about the finiteness of receptive 
causes differs from the inquiry about the finiteness of efficient causes, 
since he who admits the existence of receptive causes admits neces~ 
sarily that their series must end in a primary receptive cause which is 

oO 

324 

10 

325 

19 

194 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

necessarily external to the First Agent, just as he admits the existence 
of a First Agent external to the receptive matter. For if the First Agent 
possessed matter, this matter would not exist numerically and indivi- 
duaily either in the first recipient or in the inferior recipients of other 
things; no, if the First Agent possessed matter, this matter would have 
to be a matter peculiar to it, and in short it would belong to it; that 
is, either it would be its primary matter or we should arrive at a first 
recipient, and this recipient would not be of the genus which is the 
condition for the existence of all the other existents proceeding from 
the First Agent.* But if matter were the condition for the existence of 
the First Agent, it would be a condition for the existence of all agents 
in their actions, and matter would not only be a condition for the 
existence of the agent’s act—since every agent acts only on a recipient 
—but it would be a condition for the existence of the agent itself, and 
therefore every agent would be a body.? 

Ail this the Ash‘arites neither admit nor deny. But when the 
philosophers tell them that an essence to which such an attribute is 
ascribed must be a body, they answer: ‘Such an attribute is ascribed 
by you to the soul and yet, according to you, the soul is net a body.’+ 
This is the limit to which dialectical arguments in this question can 
be carried. But the demonstrations are in the works of the ancients 
which they wrote about this science, and especially in:the books of 
Aristotle, not in the statements of Avicenna about this problem and 
of other thinkers belonging to Islam, if anything is to be found in 
them on this question. For their metaphysical theories are pure 
presumptions, since they proceed from common, not particular, 
notions, i.e. notions which are extraneous to the nature of the inquiry. 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

The series of efficient causes comes to an end for the attribute at the 
same time as for the essence, since the attribute has an agent no more than 
the essence has, still the essence provided with this attribute does not cease 
to exist, although neither itself nor its attribute has a cause. 

Tsay: 

This is a statement which is not accepted by their opponents, the 
philosophers; on the contrary, they affirm that it is a condition of the 
First Agent that it should not receive an attribute, because reception 
indicates matter and it is therefore not possible to assume as the final 
term of the causal series an agent of any description whatsoever, but 
only an agent which has absolutely no agent, and to which no attri- 
bute—from which it would follow that ie had an agent—can be 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 195 

ascribed. For the assumption of the existence of an attribute of the 
First Agent cxisting in a receptive cause which would be a condition 
for its existence is thought by the philosophers to be impossible. 
Indeed, anything for the existence of which there is a condition can 
only be connected with this condition through an external cause, for 
a thing cannot itself be the cause of its connexion with the condition 
of its existence, just as it cannot be the cause of its own existence. For 
the conditioned, if it were not connected with its condition, would 
have to exist by itself, and it needs an efficient cause to connect the 
condition with it, since a thing cannot be the cause of the existence 
of the condition of its own existence; but all these are common 
notions. And in general one cannot imagine that it is possible to 
arrive by this method, as applied to this problem, at something near 
evidence, because of the equivocation in the term ‘existent necessary 
by itself’, and in the term ‘possible by itself, necessary through 
another’, and the other preliminary notions which are added to them. 

Ghazali says: 

The second proof of the philosophers is that they say that the knowledge 
and the power in us do not enter the quiddity of our essence, but are 
accidental, and when these attributes are asserted of the First, they too do 
net enter the quiddity of its essence, but are accidental in their relation to it, 
even if they are lasting; for frequently an accident does not separate itself’ 
from its quiddity and is a necessary attribute of it, but still it does not 
therefore become a constituent of its essence. And if it is an accident, it is 
consequent on the essence and the essence is its cause, and it becomes an 
effect, and how can it then be a necessary existent?! 

Then Ghazali says, refuting this: 

This proof is identical with the first, notwithstanding the change of ex- 
pression, For we say: If you mean by its being consequent on the essence, 
and by the essence’s being its cause, that the essence is its efficient cause, 
and that it is the effect of the essence, this is not true, for this is not valid of 
our knowledge in relation to our essence, since our essence is not an efficient 
cause of our knowledge. If you mean that the essence is a substratum and 
that the attribute does not subsist by itself without being in a substratum, 
this is conceded, and why should it be impossible? For if you call this 
‘consequent’ or ‘accident’ or ‘effect’ or whatever name you want to give it, 
its meaning does not change, since its meaning is nothing but ‘existing in 
the essence in the way atcributes exist in their subjects’. And it is by no 
means impossible that it should exist in the essence, and be all the same 
eternal and without an agent. All the proofs of the philosophers amount to 
nothing but the production of a shock by the use of a depreciating expres- 
sion; ‘possible’, ‘permissible’, ‘consequent’, ‘connected’, ‘eflect’—but all 

326 

° 

327 

10 

196 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
this may be ignored. For it must be answered: If by this you mean that it 

_ has an agent, it is not true, and if only it is meant that it has no agent, but 

328 

that it has a substratum in which it exists, then let this meaning be in- 
dicated by any expression you want, and still it will not become impossible. 

I say: 

This is using many words for one idea, But in this question the dif- 
ference between the opponents consists in one point, namely: ‘Can 
a thing which has a receptive cause be without an agent or not?’ 
Now it belongs to the principles of the theologians that the con- 
nexion of condition and conditioned appertains to the domain of the 
permissible’ and that whatever is permissible needs for its realization 
and actualization an agent which actualizes it and connects the 

_ condition with the conditioned, and that* the connexion is a con- 

329 

dition for the existence of the conditioned and that it is possible 
neither that a thing should be the cause of the condition of its exis- 
tence, nor that the condition should be the efficient cause of the 
existence of the conditioned, for our essence is not the efficient cause 
of the existence of the knowledge which exists in it, but our essence is 
a condition for the existence of the knowledge existing in it. And 
because of all these principles it is absolutely necessary that there 
should exist an efficient cause which brings about the connexion of 
condition and conditioned, and this is the case with every conjunc~- 
tion of a condition and a conditioned, But all these principles are 
annulled? by the philosophical theory that heaven is eternal, although 
it possesses essence and attributes, for the philosophers do not give it 
an agent of the kind which exists in the empirical world, as would be 
the consequence of these principles; they only assume that there is a 
proof which leads to an eternal connexion through an eternal con- 
necting principle, and this is another kind of connexion, differing 
from that which exists in transitory things.? But all these are pro- 
blems which need a serious examination. And the assumption of the 
philosophers* that these attributes do not constitute the essence is not 
true, for every essence is perfected by attributes through which it 
becomes more complete and illustrious, and, indeed, it is constituted 
by these attributes, since through knowledge, power, and will we 
become superior to those existents which do not possess knowledge, 
and the essence in which these attributes exist is common to us and to 
inorganic things. How therefore could such attributes be accidents 
consequent on our essence? All these are statements of people who 
have not studied well the psychological and accidental attributes. 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 197 

Ghazali says: 

And often they shock by the use of a depreciating expression in another 
way, and they say: This leads to ascribing to the First a need for these 
attributes, so that it would not be self-sufficient absolutely, since the 
absolutely self-sufficient is not jn need of anything else. 

Then Ghazali says, refuting this: 

This is an extremely weak verbal* argument, for the attributes of per- 
fection do not differ from the essence of the perfect being in such a way 
that he should be in need of anything else. And if he is eternally perfect 
through knowledge, power, and life, how could he be in need of anything, 
or how could his being attached to perfection be described as his being in 
need? It would be like saying that the perfect needs no perfection and that 
he who is in need of the attributes of perfection for his essence is imperfect; 
the answer is that perfection cannot mean anything but the existence of 
perfection in his essence, and likewise being self-sufficient does not mean 
anything but the existence of attributes that exclude every need in his 
essence. How therefore can the attributes of perfection through which 
divinity is perfected be denied through such purely verbal arguments? 

I say: 

There are two kinds of perfection: perfection through a thing’s 
own self and perfection through attributes which give their subject 
its perfection, and these attributes must be in themselves perfect, for 
if they were perfect through perfect attributes, we should have to ask 
whether these attributes were perfect through themselves or through 
attributes, and we should have therefore to arrive at that which is 
perfect by itself as a final term. Now the perfect through another will 
necessarily need, according to the above principles if they are 
accepted, a bestower of the attributes of perfection; otherwise it 
would be imperfect. But that which is perfect by itself is like that 
which is existent by itself, and how truc it is that the existent by itself 
is perfect by itself? If therefore there exists an existent by itself, it 
must be perfect by itself and sclf-sufficient by itself; otherwise it 
would be composed of an imperfect essence and attributes perfecting 
this essence. If this is true, the attribute and its subject are one and 
the same, and the acts which are ascribed to this subject as proceed- 
ing necessarily from different attributes exist only in a relative way. 

Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 

And if it is said by the philosophers: When you admit an essence and 
an attribute and the inherence of an attribute in the essence, yout admit 
a composition, and every compound needs a principle which composes it, 
and just because a body is composed, God cannot be a body—we answer: 

o 

330 

5 

$31 

332 

wn 

198 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Saying that every compound needs a composing principle is like saying 
that every existent needs a cause for its existence, and it may be answered: 
The First is eternal and exists without a cause and without a principle for 
its existence, and so it may be said that it is a subject, eternal, without a 
cause for its essence, for its attribute and for the existence of its attribute in 
its essence; indeed all this is eternal without a cause. But the First cannot 
be a body, because body is a temporal thing which cannot be free from 
what is temporal": however, he who does not allow that body has a begin- 
ning must be forced to admit that ehe first cause can be a body, and we 
shall try later to force this consequence on the philosophers. 

I say: 

Composition is not like existence, because composition is like being 
set in motion*, namely, a passive quality, additional to the essence of 
things which receive the composition,? but existence is a quality 
which is the essence itself, and whoever says otherwise is mistaken 
indeed. Further, the compound cannot be divided into that which is 
compound by itself and that which is compound through another, so 
that one would finally come to an eternal compound in the way one 
arrives, where existents are concerned, at an eternal existent, and we 
have treated this problem in another place.? And again: If it is true, 
as we have said, that composition is something additional to exis- 
tence, then one may say, if there exists a compound by itself, then 
there must exist also something moved by itself, and if there exists 
something moved by itself, then also a privation will come into 
existence by itself, for the existence of a privation is the actualization 
of a potency,* and the same applies to motion and the thing moved. 
But this is not the case with existence, for existence is not an attribute 
additional to the essence, and every existent which does not exist 
sometimes in potency and sometimes in act is an existent by itself, 
whereas the existence of a thing as moved occurs only when there is 
a moving power, and every moved thing therefore needs a mover.’ 

The distinctive point in this problem is that the two parts* in any 
compound must be either {1} mutually a condition for each other's 
existence, as is, according to the Peripatetics, the case with those 
which are composed of matters and forms,® or (2) neither of them a 
condition for the existence of the other, or (3) exclusively one the 
condition for the other. 

In the first case the compound cannot be eternal, because the com- 
pound itself is a condition for the existence of the parts and the parts 
cannot be the cause of the compound, nor the compound its own 
cause, for otherwise a thing might be its own cause, and this kind of 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 199 

compound, therefore, is transitory and needs an agent for its actua- 
lization.* 

In the second case—and for these compounds it is not in the nature 
of either of their parts that it implies the other—there is no compo- 
sition possible without a composing factor, external to the parts, 
since the composition js not of their own nature so that their essence 
might exist through their nature or be a consequence of their nature; 
and if their nature determined the composition and they were both 
in themselves eterna!, their composition would be eternal, but would 
need a cause which wouid give it unity, since no eternal thing can 
possess unity accidentally. 

In the third case, and this is the case of the non-essential attribute 
and its subject, if the subject were eternal and were such as never to 
be without this attribute, the compound would be eternal. But if 
this were so, and if an eternal compound were admitted, the Ash‘arite 
proof that all accidents are temporal would not be true, since if there 
were an eternal compound there would be eterna! accidents, one of 
which would be the composition, whereas the principle on which the 
Ash‘arites base their proof of the temporality of accidents is the fact 
that the parts of which a body, according to them, is composed must 
exist first separately; if, therefore, they allowed an eternal compound, 
it would be possible that there should be a composition not preceded 
by a separation, and a movement, not preceded by a rest, and if this 
were permissible, it would be possible that a body possessing eternal 
accidents should exist, and it would no longer be truc for them that 
what cannot exist without the temporal is temporal. And further, it 
has already been said that every compound is only one because of a 
oneness existing in it, and this oneness exists only in it through some- 
thing which is one through itself. And if this is so, then the one, in so 
far as it is one, precedes every compound, and the act of this one 
agent—if this agent is eternal—through which it gives all single 
existents which exist through it their oneness, is everlasting and 
without a beginning, not intermittent; for the agent whose act is 
attached to its object at the time of its actualization is temporal and 
its object is necessarily temporal, but the attackiment of the First Agent 
to its object is everlasting and its power is everlastingly mixed with 
its object. And it is in this way that one must understand the relation 
of the First, God, praise be to Him, to all existents. But since it is not 
possible to prove these things here, let us turn away from them, since 
our sole aim was to show that this book of Ghazali does not contain 

338 

5 

334 

335 

200 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

any proofs, but mostly sophisms and at best dialectical arguments. 
But proofs are very rare, and they stand in relation to other argu- 
ments as unalloyed gold to the other minerals and the pure pearl to 
the other jewels. And now let us revert to our subject. 

Ghazali says: 

All their proofs where this problem is concerned are imaginary. Further, 
they are not able to reduce all the qualities which they admit to the 
essence itself, for they assert, that it is knowing, and so they are forced 
to admit that this is something additional to its mere existence, and 
then one can ask them: ‘Do you concede that the First knows something 
besides its essence?’ Some of them concede this, whereas others affirm that 
it only knows its own self. The former position is that taken by Avicenna, 
for he affirms that the First knows all things in a universal timeless way, 
but that it does not know tndividuals, because to comprehend their con- 
tinual becoming would imply a change in the essence of the knower.? But, 
we ask, is the knowledge which the Firse has of all the infinite number of 
species and genera identical with its self-knowledge or not? If you answer 
in the negative, you have affirmed a plurality and have contradicted your 
own principle; if you answer in the affirmative, you are like a man claim- 
ing that man’s knowledge of other things is identical with his self-know- 
ledge and with his own essence, and such a statement is mere stupidity. 
And it may be argued: ‘The definition of an identical! thiny is that its 
negation and affirmation cannot be imagined at the same time, and the 
knowledge of an identical thing, when it is an identical thing, cannot at the 
same time be imagined as existing and not existing. And since it is not im- 
possible to imagine a man’s self-knowledge without imagining his know- 
ledge of something else, it may be said that his knowledge of something else 
is different from his self-knowledge, since, if they were the same, the affir- 
mation or negation of the one would imply the aflirmation or negation of 
the other, For it is impossible that Zaid should be at one and the same time 
both existing and not existing, but the existence of self-knowledge simul- 
taneously with the non-existence of the knowledge of something else is not 
impossible, nor is this impossible with the setf-knowledge of the First 
and its knowledge of something else, for the existence of the one can be 
imagined without the other and they are therefore two things, whereas the 
existence ofits essence without the existence of its essence cannot be 
imagined, and if the knowledge of ail things formed a unity, it would be 
impossible to imagine this duality. Therefore* all those philosophers who 
acknowledge that the First knows something besides its own essence have 
undoubtedly at the same time acknowledged a plurality. 

I say: 
The summary of this objection to the proposition that the First 
knows both itself and something else is that knowing one’s self is 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 201 

different from knowing something else. But Ghazali falls here into 
confusion, For this can be understood in two ways: first, that Zaid’s 
knowledge of his own individuality is identical with his knowledge of 
other things, and this is not true; secondly, that man’s knowledge 
of other things, namely of existents, is identical with the knowledge of 
his own essence, and this is true.’ And the proof is that his essence is 
nothing but his knowledge of the existents.* For if man like all other 
beings knows only the quiddity which characterizes him, and if his 

336 

quiddity is the knowledge of things, then man’s self-knowledge is -: 

necessarily the knowledge of all other things, for if they were different 
his essence would be different from his knowledge of things. This is 
clear in the case of the artisan, for his essence, through which he is 
called an artisan, is nothing but his knowledge of the products of art.? 
And as to Ghazali’s words, that if his self-knowledge were identical 
with his knowledge of other things, then the negation of the one 
would be the negation of the other and the affirmation of the one the 
affirmation of the other, he means that if the self-consciousness of man 
were identical with his knowledge of other things, he could not know 
his own self without knowing the other things; that is, if he were 
ignorant of other things, he would not know his own self, and this 
proposition is in part true, in part false. For the quiddity of man is 
knowledge, and knowledge is the thing known in one respect and is 
something different in another. And if be is ignorant of a certain 
object of knowledge, he is ignorant of a part of his essence, and if he is 
ignorant of all knowables, he is ignorant of his essence; and to deny 
man this knowledge is absolutely the same as to deny man’s self 
consciousness, for if the thing known is denied to the knower in so far 
as the thing known and knowledge are one, man’s self-consciousness 
itself is denied. But in so far as the thing known is not knowledge, it is 
not man, and to deny man this knowledge does not imply the demal 
of man’s self-consciousness. And the same applics to individual men. 
For Zaid’s knowledge of Amr is not Zaid himself, and therefore 
Zaid can know his own self, while being ignorant of Amr. 
Ghazali says: 

If ic is said: ‘The First does not know other things in first intention, No, 
it knows its own essence as the principle of the universe, and from this its 
knowledge of the universe [allows in second intention,‘ since it cannot know 
its essence except as a principle, for this is the true sense of its essence, and 
it cannot know its essence as a principle for other things, without the other 
things entering into its knowledge by way of implication and consequence; 

337 

338 

a] 

10 

202 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

it is not impossible that from its essence consequences should follow, and 
this does not imply a plurality in its essence, and only a plurality in its 
essence is impossible’—there are different ways of answering this. First 
your assertion that it knows its essence to be a principle is a presumption; 
it suffices that it knows the existence of its essence, and the knowledge that 
it is a principle is an addition to its knowledge of its essence, since being a 
principle is a relation to the essence and it is possible that it should know 
its essence and not this relation, and if this being-a-principle were not a 
relation, its essence would be manifold and it would have existence and be 
a principle, and this forms a duality. And just as a man can know his 
essence without knowing that he is an effect, for his being an effect is a 
relation to his cause, so the fact that the First is a cause is a relation be- 
tween itself and its object. This consequence is implied in the mere state- 
ment of the philosophers that i¢ knows that it is a principle, since this 
comprises the knowledge of its essence and of its being a principle, and this 
is a relation, and the relation is not the essence, and the knowledge of the 
relation is not the knowledge of the essence and we have already given the 
proof of this, namely that we can imagine knowledge of the essence, with- 
out the knowledge of its being a principle, but knowledge of the essence 
without the knowledge of the essence cannot be imagined, since the essence 
is an identical unity. 

I say: 

The proposition which the phitesophers defend against Ghazali in 
this question is based on philosophical principles which must be 
discussed first. For if the principles they have assumed and the deduc- 
tions to which, ‘according to them, their demonstration leads, are 
conceded, none of the consequences which Ghazali holds against 
them follows. The philosophers hold, namely, that the incorporeal 
existent is in its essence nothing but knowledge, for they believe that 
the forms! have no knowledge for the sole reason that they are in 
maticr; but if a thing does not exist in matter, it is known to be 
knowing, and this is known because they found that when forms 
which are in matter are abstracted in the soul from matter they 
become knowledge and intellect, for intellect is nothing but the forms 
abstracted from matter,? and if this is true for things which by the 
principle of their nature are not abstracted, then it is still more 
appropriate for things which by the principle of their nature are 
abstracted to be knowledge and intellect. And since what is intelli- 
gible in things is their innermost reality, and since intellect is nothing 
but the perception of the intelligibles, our own intellect is the intelli- 
gible by itself, in so far as it is an intelligible, and so there is no 
difference between the intellect and the intelligible, except in so far 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 205 

as the intelligibles are intelligibles of things in the nature of which 
there is no intellect and which only become intellect because the 
intellect abstracts their forms from their matters, and through this 

our intellect is not the intelligible in every respect. But if there is a 
thing which does not exist in matter, then to conceive it by intellect 

is identical with its intelligible in every respect, and this is the case 
with the intellectual conception of the intelligibles. And no doubt* the 338 
intellect is nothing but the perception of the order and arrangement 

of existing things, but it is necessary for the separate intellect that it 
shoufd not depend on the existing things in its intellectual conception 

of the existing things and of their order, and that its intelligible 
should not be posterior to them, lor every other intellect is such that 

it follows the order which exists in the existents and perfects itself 
through it, and necessarily falls short in its intellectual conception of 5 
the things, and our intellect, therefore, cannot adequately fulfil the 
demands of the natures of existing things in respect of their order 
and arrangement. But if the natures of existing things follow the law 
of the intellect and our intellect ts inadequate to perceive the natures 
of existent things, there must necessarily exist a knowledge of the 
arrangement and order which is the cause of the arrangement, order 
and wisdom which exist in every single being, and it is necessary that 
this intellect should be the harmony which is the cause of the har- 
mony which exists in the existents, and that it should be impossible 
to ascribe to its perception knowledge of universals, let alone know- 
ledge of individuals,’ because universals are intelligibles which are 
consequent on and posterior to existents,2 whereas on the contrary 
the existents are consequent on this intellect. And this intellect neces- 
sarily conceives existents by conceiving the harmony and order which 
exist in the existents through its essence, not by conceiving anything 
outside its essence, for in that case it would be the effect, not the 340 
cause, of the existent it conceives, and it would be inadequate. 

And if you have understood this philosophical theory, you will 
have understood that the knowledge of things through a universal 
knowledge is inadequate, for it knows them in potency,’ and that the 
separate intellect only conceives its own essence, and that by con- 
ceiving its own essence it conceives all existents, since its intellect is 5 
nothing but the harmony and order which exist in all beings, and 
this order and harmony is received by the active powers which 
possess order and harmony and exist in all beings and are called 
natires by the philosophers. For it seems that in every being there 

a 

im 

341 

10 

342 

204 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

are acts which follow the arrangement and order of the intellect, and 
this cannot happen by accident, nor can it happen through an intel- 
lect which resembles our intellect; no, this can only occur through an 
intellect more exalted than all beings, and this intellect is neither a 
universal nor an individual. And if you have understood this philo- 
sophical theory, all the difficulties which Ghazali raises here against 
the philosophers are solved; but if you assume that yonder intellect 
resembles our own, the difficulties mentioned follow. For the intellect 
which is in us is numerable and possesses plurality, but this is not the 
case with yonder intellect, for it is free from the plurality which 
belongs to our intelligibles and one cannot imagine a difference in it 
between the perceiver and the perceived, whereas to the intellect 
which is in us the perception of a thing is different from the percep- 
tion that it is a principle of a thing, and likewise its perception of 
another is different in a certain way from the perception of itself. 
Still, our intellect has a resemblance to yonder intellect, and it is 
yonder intellect which gives our intellect this resemblance, for the 
intelligibles which are in yonder intellect are free from the imperfec- 
tions which are in our intellect: for instance, our intellect only 
becomes the intelligible in so far as it is an intelligible, because there 
exists an intellect which is the intelligible in every respect. The reason 
for this is that everything which possesses an imperfect attribute 
possesses this attribute necessarily through a being which possesses it 
in a perfect way. For instance, that which possesses an insufficient 
warmth possesses this through a thing which possesses a perfect 
warmth, and likewise that which possesses an insufficient life or an 
imperfect intellect possesses this through a thing which possesses a 
perfect life or a perfect intellect.' And in the same way a thing which 
possesses a perfect rational act receives this act from a perfect intellect, 
and if the acts of all beings, although they do not possess intellects, 
are perfect rational acts, then there exists an intellect through which 
the acts of all beings become rational acts. 

It is weak thinkers who, not having understood this, ask whether 
the First Principle thinks its own essence or if it chinks something out- 
side its essence. But to assume that it thinks something outside its 
essence would imply that it is perfected by another thing, and to 
assume that it does not think something outside its essence would 
imply that it is ignorant of existents. One can only wonder at these 
people who remove from the attributes which are common to the 
Creator and the created, all the imperfections which they possess in 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 205 

the created, and who still make our intellect like His intellect, where- 
as nothing is more truly free from all imperfection than His intellect, 
This suffices for the present chapter, but now let us relate the other 
arguments of Ghazali in this chapter and call attention to the mis- 
takes in them. 

Ghazali says: 

The second way to answer this assertion is to say that their expression 
that everything is known to it in second intention is without sense, for as 
scon as its knowledge comprehends a thing different from itself, in the 
way it comprehends its own essence, this First Principle will have two 
different objects of knowledge and it will know them both, for the 
plurality and the difference of the object known imply a pturality in the 
knowledge, since each of the two objects known receives in the imagination 
the discrimination which distinguishes it from the other. And therefore 
the knowledge of the one cannot be identical with the knowledge of the 
other, for in that case it would be impossible to suppose the existence of the 
one without the other, and indeed there could not be an other at all, since 
they would both form an identical whole, and using for it the expression 
‘second intention’ does not make any difference. Further, I should be 
pleased to know how he who says that not even the weight of an atom, 
either in heaven or earth, escapes God's knowledge,' intends to deny the 
plurality, unless by saying that God knows the universe in a universal way. 
However, the universals which form the objects of His knowledge would be 
infinite,? and stil! His knowledge which is attached to them would remain 
one in every respect, notwithstanding their plurality and their dilferentia- 
tion. 

I say: 

The summary of this is found in two questions. The first is, ‘How 
can its knowledge of its own self be identical with its knowledge of 
another?’ The answer to this has already been given, namely that 
there is something analogeus in the human mind which has led us to 
believe in the necessity of its being in the First Intclicct. 

The second question is whether its knowledge is multiplied through 
the plurality of its objects known and whether it comprehends all 
finite and infinite knowables in a way which makes it possible that 
its knowledge should comprehend the infinite. The answer to this 
question is that it is not impossible that there should exist in the First 
Knowledge, notwithstanding its unity, a clistinclion between the 
objects known, and it is not impossible, according to the philosophers, 
that it should know a thing, different from itself, and its own essence, 
through a knowledge which differs in such a way that there should 

343 

10 

345 

206 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

exist a plurality of knowledge. The only thing which is absolutely 
impossible according to them is that the First Intellect should be 
perfected through the intelligible and caused by it, and if the First 
Intellect thought things different from itself in the way we do, it 
would be an effect of the existent known, not its cause, and it has 
been definitely proved that it is the cause of the existent. The plural- 
ity which the philosophers deny does not consist in its knowing 
through its own essence, but in its knowing through a knowledge 
which is additional to its essence; the denial, however, of this plural- 
ity in God does not imply the denial of a plurality of things known, 
except through dialectics, and Ghazali’s transference of the problem 
of the plurality which is in the knowledge, according to the philoso- 
phers, to the problem of plurality which is in the things known them- 
selves, is an act of sophistry, because tt supposes that the philosophers 
deny the plurality which is in the knowledge through the things 
known, in the way they deny the plurality which arises through the 
duality of substratum and inherent. 

But the truth in this question is that there is not a plurality of 
things known in the Eternal Knowledge like theirnumerical plurality 
in human knowledge. For dic numerical plurality of things known in 
human knowledge arises from two sources: first the representations, 
and this resembles spatial plurality ;' secondly the plurality of what 
is known in our intellect, namely the plurality which occurs in the 
first genus—which we may call being*—through its division into all 
the specics which are subsumed under it, for our intellect is one? with 
respect to the universal genus which comprises all species existing in 
the world, whereas it becomes manifold through the plurality of the 
species. And itis clear that when we withhold the idea of the universal 
from the Eternal Knowledge, this plurality is in fact abandoned and 
there only remains in the Divine a plurality the perception of which 
is denied to our intellect, for otherwise our knowledge would be 
identical with this eternal knowledge, and this is impossible. And 
therefore what the philosophers say is true, that for the human under- 
standing there is a limit, where it comes to a stand, and beyond which 
it cannot trespass, and this is our inability to understand the nature 
of this knowledge. And again, our intellect is knowledge of the 
existents in potency, not knowledge in act, and knowledge in potency 
is less perfect than knowledge in act; and the more our knowledge is 
universal, the more it comes under the heading of potential know- 
ledge and the more its knowledge becomes imperfect.4 But it is not 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 207 

true of the Eternal Knowledge that it is imperfect in any way, and in 
it there is no knowledge in potency, for knowledge in potency is 
knowledge in matter. Therefore the philosophers believe that the 
First Knowledge requires that there should be a knowledge in act 
and that there should be in the divine world no universal at all and 
no plurality which arises out of potency, like the plurality of the 
species which results from the genus. And for this reason alone we are 
unable to perceive the actually infinite, that the things known to us 
are separated from each other, and if there cxists a knowledge in 
which the things known are unified, then with respect to it the finite 
and the infinite are equivalent. 

The philosophers assert that there are definite proofs for all these 
statements, and if we understand by ‘plurality in knowledge’ only 
this plurality and this plurality is denied of the Divine, then the know- 
ledge of God is a unity in act, but the nature of this unity and the 
representation of its reality are impossible for the human understand- 
ing, for if man could perceive the unity, his intellect would be iden- 
tical with the intellect of the Creator, and this is impossible. And 
since knowledge of the individual is for us knowledge in act, we know 
that Gad’s knowledge is more like knowledge of the individual than 
knowledge of the universal, although it is neither the one nor the 
other, And he who has understood this understands the Divine 
Words: ‘Nor shalt there escape from it the weight of an atom, either 
in the heavens or in the earth’, and other similar verses which refer to 
this idea. 

Ghazali says: 

Avicenna, however, has put himself in opposition to all the other 
philosophers who, in order not to commit themselves to the consequence 
of plurality, took the view that the First only knows itself; how, then, can 
he share with them the denial of pluratity? Still he distinguished himself 
from them by admitting its knowledge of other things, since he was 
ashamed to say that God is absolutely ignorance of this world and the 
next and knows only His own seJi/—whereas all others know Him, and 
know also their own selves and other things, and are therefore superior to 
Him in knowledge—and he abandoned that blasphemous philosophical 
theory, refusing to accept it. Still he was not ashamed of persisting in the 
denial of this plurality in every respect, and he affirmed that God’s 
knowledge of Flimself and of other things, yes, of the totality of things, is 
identical with His essence without this implying any contradiction, and 
this is the very contradiction which the other philosophers were ashauned 
to accept, because of its obviousness. And thus no party among the 

346 

5 

208 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

philosophers could rid itself of a blasphemous doctrine, and it is in this 

. Manner that God acts towards the man who strays from His path and whe 

believes that he has the power through his speculation and imagination to 
fathom the innermost nature of the Divine. 

I say: 

The answer to all this is clear from what we have said already, 

_ namely that the philosophers only deny that the First Principle knows 

other things than its own self in so far as these other things are of an 

. inferior existence, so that the effect should not become a cause, nor 

347 

the superior existence the inferior; for knowledge is identicat with the 
thing known. They do not, however, deny it, in so far as it knows 
these other things by a knowledge, superior in being to the knowledge 
by which we know other things; on the contrary, it Is necessary that 
it should know them in this way, because it is in this way that the 
other things proceed from the First Agent. As to the inquiry about the 
possibility of a plurality of things known in the Eternal Knowledge, 
that is a second question, and we have mentioned it, and it is not 
because of this that the philosophers sought refuge in the theory that 
the First knows only its own self, as Ghazali wrongly supposes; no, 
only because in short-—as we have declared already—its knowledge 
should not be like our knowledge which differs from it in the extreme. 
And Avicenna wanted only to combine these two statements, that it 
knows only its own essence and that it knows other things by a know- 
ledge superior to man’s knowledge of them, since this knowledge 
constitutes its essence, and this is clear from Avicenna’s words that it 
knows its own self and other things besides itself, and indced all 
things which constitute its essence, although Avicenna does not ex- 
plain this, as we have done. And, therefore, these words of his are not 
a real contradiction, nor are the other philosophers ashamed of them; 
no, this is a statement about which, explicitly or implicitly, they all 
agree. And if you have grasped this well, you will have understood 
Ghazali’s bad faith in his attack on the philosophers, although he 
agrees with them in the greater pari of their opinions. 

Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

It may be said that if it is asserted that the First knows its own self as a 
principle by way of relation, the knowledge of ewo correlatives is one and 
the same, fer the man who knows the son knuws him through one single 
knowledge in which the knowledge of the father, of fatherhood, and son- 
hood are comprised, so that the objects of knowledge are manifold, but 
the knowledge is one.! And in the same way the First knows its essence as 4 
principle for the other things besides itself and so the knowledge is one, 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 209 

although what is known is manifold. Further, if the First thinks this rela- 
tion in reference to one single effect and its own relation towards it, and 
this does not imply a plurality, then a plurality is not implied by an addi- 348 
tion of things which generically do not imply a plurality.) And likewise he 
who knows a thing and knows his knowing this thing, knows this thing 
through this knowledge, and therefore all knowledge is self-knowledge 
connected with the knowledge of the thing known,? and the known is mani- 
fold, but knowledge forms a unity.? An indication of this is also that you 
theologians believe that the things known to God are infinite, but His 
knowledge is one, and you de not attribute to God an infinite number of 
cognitions; if, indeed, the manifoldness of the known implied a plurality in 
the knowledge itself, well, let there then be an infinite number of cog- 5 
nitions in the essence of God. But this is absurd. 

Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers: 

We say: Whenever knowledge is one in every respect, it cannot be 
imagined that it should be attached to two things known; on the contrary, 
this determines a certain plurality, according to the assumption and tenet 
of the philosophers themselves about the meaning of ‘plurality’, so that 
they even make the excessive claim that if the First had a quiddity te 
which existence were attributed, this would imply a plurality. And they 
do not think that to a single unity possessing reality existence also can be 19 
attributed; no, they assert that the existence is brought in relation to the 
reality and differs from it and determines a plurality, and on this assump- 
tion it is not possible that knowledge should attach itself to two objects of 
knowledge without this implying a greater and more important kind of 
plurality than that which is intended in the assumption of an existence, 
brought in relation to a quiddity. And as to the knowledge of a son and 
similarly of other relative concepts, there is in it a plurality, since there must 
necessarily be knowledge of the son himself and the father himself, and 
this is a dual knowledge, and there must be a third knowledge, and this is 
the relation; indeed, this third knowledge is implied in the dual knowledge 
which precedes it, as they are its necessary condition, for as long as the 
terms of relation are not known previously, the relation itself cannot be 
known, and there is thus a plurality of knowledge of which one part is 
conditioned through another. Likewise when the First knows itself as 
related to the other genera and species by being their principle, it needs 
the knowledge of its own essence and of the single genera and it must 
further know that there exists between itself and those genera and species 
the relation of being a principle, for otherwise the existence of this 
relation could not be supposed 10 be known to it. And as to their statement 
that he who knows something knows that he is knowing through this 
knowledge itself, so that the thing known can be manifold, but the 
knowledge remains one, this is not true; on the contrary, he knows that 
he knows through another knowledge, and this ends in a knowledge to 

$ 

349 

210 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

which he does not pay attention and of which he is no longer conscious, 
and we do not say that there is an infinite regress, but there is a final 
term of knowledge attached to the thing known, and he is unconscious of 
the existence of the knowledge, but not of the existence of the known, like 
a man who knows the colour black and whose soul at the moment of his 
knowing it is plunged in the object of his knowledge, the colour black, and 
who is unconscious of his knowing this colour black and whose attention 
is not centred on it, for if it were, he would need another knowledge till his 
attention came to a stand.' And as to the affirmation of the philosophers 

- that this can be turned against the theologians concerning the things 
- known by God, for they are infinite, whereas God's knowledge according 

i] 

_ ro 

§ 

to the theologians is one, we answer, ‘We have not plunged ourselves into 
this book to set right, but to destroy and to refute, and for this reason we 
have called this book “‘The Incoherence of the Philosophers”, not ‘The 
Establishment of the Truth”, and this argument against us is not con- 
clusive.” 

And if the philosophers say: “We do not draw this conclusion against 
you theologians in so far as you hold the doctrine of a definite sect, but in 
so far as this problem is applied to the totality of mankind, and the diffi- 
culty for all human understanding is the same, and you have no right to 
claim it against us jn particular, for it can be turned against you also, and 
there is no way out of it for any party’—we answer: ‘No, but our ain is to 
make you desist from your claim to possess knowledge of the essential 
realities through strict proofs, and to make you doubt. And wher your 
impotence becomes evident, we say that there are men who hold that the 
divine realities cannot be attained through rational inquiry, for it is not in 
human power to apprehend them and it was for this reason that Mu- 
hammed, the Lord of the Law, said *“‘Ponder over God’s creation, but do 
not ponder over God's essence’’.? Why then do you oppose this group of men 
who believe in the truth of the prophet through the proof of his miracles, 
who confine the judgement of the intellect to a belief in God, the Sender 
of the Prophets, who guard themselves against any rational speculation 
about the attributes, who follow the Lord of the Law in his revelations 
about God’s atiributes, who accept his authority for the use of the terms 
“the knowing”, ‘the willer”, “the powerful”, “the living’, who refuse to 
acknowledge those meanings which are forbidden and who recognize our 
impotence to reach the Divine Intellect? You only refute these men in so 
far as they are ignorant of the methods of demonstration and of the 
arrangement of premisses according to the figures of the syllogisms, and 
you claim that you know these things by rational methods; but now your 
impotence, the breakdown of your methods, the shamelessness of your 
claim to knowledge, have come to light, and this is the intention of our 
criticism. And where is the man who would dare to claim that theological 
proofs have the strictness of geometrical prools?’* 

[ say: 

. 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION aur 

All this prolix talk has only a rhetorical and dialectical value. And 
the arguments which he gives in favour of the philosophers about the 350 
doctrine of the unity of God’s knowledge are two, the conclusion of 
which is that in our conecpts there are conditions which do not 
through their plurality bring plurality into the concepts themselves, 
just as there appear in the existents conditions which do not bring 
plurality into their essences, for instance that a thing should be one -. 
and exist and be necessary or possible. And all this, if it is true, is a $ 
proof of a unique knowledge comprising 4 multitude, indeed an 
infinite number, of sciences, 

The first argument which he uses in this section refers to those 
mental processes which occur to the concept in the soul and which 
resemble the conditions in the existents with respect to the relations 
and negations? which exist in them; for it appears from the nature of 
the relation which occurs in the concepts that it is a condition through 
which no plurality arises m the concepts,’ and it is now argued that 
the relation which presents itself in the related things belongs to this 
class of conditions. Ghazati objects to this that the relation and the 
terms of the relation form a plurality of knowledge, and that for in- 
stance our knowledge of fatherhood is diffvrent from our knowledge 
of the father and the son. Now the truth is that the relation is an 
attribute additional to the terms of the relation outside the soul in the 
existents, but as to the relation which exists in the concepts, it is 351 
better suited to be a condition than an attribute additional to the terms 
of the relation ;3 however, all this is a comparison of man’s knowledge 
with the Eternal Knowledge, and this is the very cause of the mistake. 
Everyone who concerns himself with doubt about the Eternal Know- 
ledge and trics to solve it by what occurs in human knowledge does 
indecd transfer the knowledge from the empirical to the Divine con- 
cerning two existents which diller in an extreme degree, not existents 
which participate in theirspecicsor genus, but which are totally unlike. 

The second proof is that we know a thing through a single know- 
ledge and that we know that we know by a knowledge which is a 
condition in the first knowledge, not an attribute additional to it, 
and the proof of this is that otherwise there would arise an infinite 
serics.# Now Ghazali’s answer, that this knowledge is a second 
knowledge and that there is no infinite series liere, is devoid of sense, 
for it is self-evident that this implies such a series, and it does not 
follow from the fact that when a man knows a thing but is not con- 
scious that he knows the fact that he knows, that in the case when he 

~ 

“ 

o 

3 

212 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

knows that he knows, this second knowledge is an additional know- 
ledge to the first; no, the second knowledge is one of the conditions 
of the first knowledge and its infinite regress is therefore not impos- 
sible; if, however, it were a knowledge existing by itself and addi- 
tional to the first knowledge, an infinite series could not occur.' 

As to the conclusion which the philosophers force upon the theo- 
logians, that all the theologians recognize that God’s knowledge is 

* infinite and that at the same time it is one, this is an ergumentum ad 

53 

ww 

fominem, not an objective argument based on the facts themselves. 

And from this there is no escape for the theologians, unless they 

assume that the knowledge of the Creator differs in this respect from 
the knowledge of the creature, and indeed there is no one more 
ignorant than the man who believes that the knowledge of God 
differs only quantitatively from the knowledge of the creature, that 
is that He only possesses more knowledge. All these are dialectical 
arguments, but one may be convinced of the fact that God’s know- 
ledge is one and that it is not an effect of the things known; no, it is 
their cause,? and 2 thing that has numerous causes is indeed manifold 
itself, whereas a thing that has numerous effects need not be mani- 
fold in the way that the effects form @ plurality. And there is no 
doubt that the plurality which exists in the knowledge of the creature 
must be denied of God’s knowledge, just as any change through the 
change of the objects known must be denied of Him, and the thco- 
logians assume this by one of their lundamental principles.+ But the 
arguments which have been given here are all dialectical arguments. 

And as to his statement that his aim here is not to reach knowledge 
of the truth but only to refute the theories of the philosophers and to 
reveal the inanity of their claims, this is not worthy of him—but rather 
of very bac men. And how could it be otherwise? For the greater 
part of the subtlety this man acquired—and he surpassed ordinary 
people through the subtlety he put in the books he composed—he 
only acquircl from the books of the philosophers and from their 
teaching. And even supposing they erred in something, he ought not 
to have denied their merit in speculative thought and in those ideas 
through which they trained our understanding. Nay more, if they 
had only inveuted logic, he and anyone else who understands the 
importance of this science ought to thank them for it, and he himself 
was conscious of the value of logic and urged its study and wrote 
treatises about it,4 and he says that there is no other way to Jearn the 
truth than through this science, and he had even such an exaggerated 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 213 

view of logic that he extracted it from the book of God, the holy 
Koran.? And is it allowed to one who is indebted to their books and 
to their teaching to such an extent that he excelled his contemporaries 
and that his fame in Islam became immense, is it really allowed to 
such a man to speak in this way of them, and to censure them so 
openly, so absolutely, and condemn their sciences? And suppose they 
erred in certain theological questions, we can only argue against 
their mistakes by the rules they have taught us in the logical sctences, 
and we are convinced that they will not blame us when we show 
them a mistake which might be found in their opinions, And indeed 
their aim was only the acquisition of truth, and if their only merit 
consisted in this, it would suffice for their praise, although nabody 
has said anything about theological problems that can be absolutely 
relied upon and nobody is guaranteed against mistakes but those 
whom God protects in a divine, superhuman way, namely the 
prophets, and I do not know what led this man to this attack against 
such statements; may God protect me against failings in word and 
in deed and forgive me if I fail! 

And what he says of the belief held by those who follow the Divine 
Law in these things is in agreement with what is said by the renowned 
philosophers, for when it is said that God’s knowledge and attributes 
cannot be described by, or compared to, the attributes of the creature, 
so that it cannot even be asserted that they are essence or an addition 
to the essence, this expresses the thought of genuine philosophers and 
other true thinkers, and God is the Saviour, the Leader, 

Ghazali says: 

It may be said, ‘This difficulty applies only to Avicenna in so far as he 
says that the First knows other things, but the acknowledged philosophers 
are in agreement that it does not know anything besides itself, and this 
difficulty is therefore set aside.’ 

But we answer, ‘What a terrible blasphemy is this doctrine! Verily, had 
it not had this extreme weakness, tater philosophers would not have scorned 
it, but we shall draw attention to its reprehensible character, for this 
theory rates God's effects higher than Himself, since angel and man and 

354 

every rational being knows himself and his principle and knows also of 15 

other beings, but the First knows only its own self and is therefore inferior 
to individual men, not to speak of the angels; indeed, the animals hesides 
their awareness of themselves know other things, and without doubt know- 
ledge is something noble and the lack of it is an imperfection, And what 
becomes of their statement that God, because He is the most perfect splen- 
dour and the utmost beauty, is the lover and the beloved? But what beauty 

50 

45 

356 

at4 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

can there be in mere existence which has no quiddity, no essence, which 
observes neither what occurs in the world nor what is a consequence or 
proceeds from its own essence? And what deficiency in God’s whole world 
could be greater? And an intelligent man may well marvel at a group of 
men who according to their statement speculate deeply about the intel- 
ligibles, but whose inquiry culminates in a Lord of Lords and Cause of 
causes who does not possess any knowledge about anything that happens 
in the world. What difference is there then between Him and the dead, 
except that He has self-consciousness? And what perfection is there in His 
self-knowledge, if He is ignorant of everything else? And the blasphemy 
of this doctrine releases us from the use of many words and explanations. 

Further, there may be said to them: ‘Although you plunge yourselves in 
these shameful doctrines, you cannot free yourselves from pturality, for we 
ask; ‘Is the knowledge He has of His essence identical with His essence or 
not?” If you say, “No”, you introduce plurality, and if you say they are 
identical, what then is the difference between you and a man whe said 
that a man’s knowledge of his essence was identical with his essence, 
which is pure foolishness? For the existence of this man’s essence can be 
conceived, while he gives no attention to his essence,’ whereas when after- 
wards his attention returns, he becomes aware of his essence. Therefore 
his awareness of his essence differs from his essence.” 

If it is argued : ‘Certainly a mancan be without knowledge of his essence, 
but when this knowledge occurs to him, he becomes a different being’, we 
answer: ‘Non-identity cannot be understood through an accident and 
conjunction, for the identical thing cannot through an accident become 
another thing? and that other thing, conjoined with this, does not become 
identical with it, but keeps its individual otherness. And the fact that God 
is eternally self-conscious does not prove that His knowledge of His essence 
is identical with His essence, for His essence can be imagined separately 
and the occurrence of His awareness afterwards, and if they were identical 
this could not be imagined.’4 

And if it be said: ‘His essence is inteliect and knowledge, and He has 
not an essence in which afterwards knowledge exists’, we answer; ‘The 
foolishness of this is evident, for knowledge is an attribute and an accident 
which demands a subject, and to say, “He is in His essence intellect and 
knowledge” is like saying, “He is power and will, and power and will 
exist by themselves”, and this again is like saying of black and white, 
quantity, fourness and threeness and all other accidents that they exist by 
themselves. And in exactly the same way as it is impossible that the 
attributes of bodies should exist by themselves without a body which 
itseif is different from the attributes, it is known to be impossible that 
attributes like the knowledge, fife, power, and will of living beings should 
exist by themselves, for they exist only in an essence. For life exists in an 
essence which receives life through it, and the same is the case with the 
other attributes. And therefore they do not simply content themselves 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 215 
with denying to the First all qualities (and not merely its real essence and 
quiddity}; no, they deny to it also its very existence by itself! and reduce it 
to the entities of accidents and attributes which have no existence by them- 
selves; and besides we shall show later in a special chapter their incapacity 
to prove that it is conscious either of itself or of other things.’ 

I say: 

The problem concerning the knowledge of the Creator of Himself 
and of other things is one of those questions which it is forbidden 
to discuss in a dialectical way, let alone put them down in a 
book, for the understanding of the masses does not suffice to under- 
stand such subtleties, and when one embarks on such problems 
with them the meaning of divinity becomes void for them and there- 
fore it is forbidden to them to occupy themselves with this knowledge, 
since it suffices for their blessedness to understand what is within 
their grasp, The Holy Law, the first intention of which is the instruc- 
tion of the masses,? does not confine itself to the explanation of these 
things in the Creator by making them understood through their 
existence in human beings, for instance by the Divine Words: ‘Why 
dost thou worship what can neither hear nor see nor avail thee 
aught?’,3 but enforces the real understanding of these entities in the 
Creator by comparing them even to the human limbs, for instance in 
the Divine Words: ‘Or have they not seen that we have created for 
them of what our hands have made for them, cattle and they are 
owners thereof?’* and the Divine Words, ‘I have created with my 
two hands’.S This problem indeed is reserved for the men versed in 
profound knowledge to whom God has permitted the sight of the 
true realities, and therefore it must not be mentioned in any books 
except those that are composed according to a strictly rational pat- 
tern, that is, such books as must be read in a rational order and after 
the acquisition of other sciences the study of which according to a 
demonstrative method is too difficult for most men, even for those 
w. 0 possess by nature a sound understanding, although such men are 
very scarce. But to discuss these questions with the masses is like 
bringing poisons to the bodies of many animals, for which they are 
' real poisons. Poisons, however, are relative, and what is poison for 
one animal is nourishment for another, The same applies to ideas 
in relation to men; that is, there are ideas which are poison for one 
type of men, but which are nourishment for another type. And the 
man who regards all ideas as fit for all types of men is like one who 
gives all things as nourishment for all people; the man, however, who 

a 

o 

357 

to 

359 

16 

216 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

forbids free inquiry to the mature is like one who regards all nourish- 
ment as poison for everyone. But this is not correct, for there are 
things which are poison for one type of man and nourishment for 
another type.! And the man who brings poison to him for whom 
it is really poison merits punishment, although it may be nourish- 
ment for another, and similarly the man who forbids poison to a 
man for whom it is really nourishment so that this man may die 
without it, he too must be punished. And it is in this way that the 
question must be understood. But when the wicked and ignorant 
transgress and bring poison to the man for whom it is really poison, 
as if it were nourishment, then there is need of a physician? who 
through his science wilt exert himself to heal that man, and for this 
reason we have allowed ourselves to discuss this problem in such a 
book as this, and in any other case we should not regard this as per- 
missible to us; on the contrary, it would be one of the greatest crimes, 
or a deed of the greatest wickedness on earth, and the punishment of 
the wicked is a fact well known tm the Holy Law. And since it is 
impossible to avoid the discussion of this problem, let us treat it in 
such a way as is possible in this place for those who do not possess the 
preparation and mental training needed before entering upon specu- 
iation about it. 

So we say that the philosophers, when they observed all percep- 
tible things, found that they fell into two classes, the one a class 
perceptible by the senses, namely the individual bodies existing by 
themselves and the individual accidents in these bodies, and the 
other a class perceptible by the mind, namely, the quiddities and 
natures of these substances and accidents. And they found that in 
these bodies there are quiddities which exist essentially in them, and 
T understand by the ‘quiddities’ of bodies attributes existing in them, 
through which these bodies become existent in act and specified by 
the act which proceeds from them;? and according to the philo- 
sophers these quiddities differ from the accidental attributes, because 
they found that the accidents were additions to the individual sub- 
stance which exists by itself and that these accidents were in need of 
the substances for their existence*, whereas the substances do not need 
the accidents for their own existence. And they found also that those 
attributes which were not accidents were not additional to the 
essence, but that they were the genuine essence of the individual 
which exists by itself, so that if one imagined these attributes annulled, 
the essence itself would be annulled. Now, they discovered these 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 2I7 

qualities in individual bodies through the acts which characterize 
each of them; for instance they perceived the attributes through 
which plants by their particular action become plants' and the 
attributes through which animals by their particular actions become 
animals,? and in the same way they found in the minerals forms 
of this kind which are proper to them, through the particular 
actions of minerals. Then, when they had investigated these 
attributes, they learned that they were in a substratum ef this essence 
and this substratum became differentiated for them, because of the 
changing of the individual existents from one species into another 
species and from one genus into another genus through the change 
and alteration of these attributes;4 for instance the change of the 
nature of fire into air by the cessation of the attribute from which 
the actuality of fire, through which fire is called fire, proceeds, and 
its change into the attribute from which the actuality peculiar to air, 
through which air is called air, proceeds. They also proved the exis- 
tence of this substratum through the capacity of the individual 
essence to receive an actuality from another, just as they proved by 
the actuality the existence of form, for it could not be imagined 
that action and passivity proceed from one and the same nature.5 
They believed therefore that all active and passive bodies are com- 
posed of twu natures, one active and the other passive, and they 
called the active nature form, quiddity, and substance, and the 
passive part subject, ultimate basis of existence’ and matter. And 
from this i¢ became clear to them that the perceptible bodies are not 

360 

simple bodies as they appear to be to the senses, nor compounded of to 

simple bodies, since they are compounded of action and passivity; 
and they found that what the senses perceive are these individual 
bodies, which are compounded of these two things which they called 
form and matter and that what the mind perceives of these bodies 
are these forms which only become concepts and intellect when the 
intellect abstracts them from the things existing by themselves, i.e. 
what the philosophers call substratum and matter.? And they found 
that the accidents also are divided in the intellect in a way similar to 
those two natures,’ although their substratum in which they exist in 
reality is the bodies compounded of these two natures. And when 
they had distinguished the intelligibles from the sensibles and it had 
become clear to them that in sensible things there are two natures, 
potency and act, they inquired which of these two natures was prior 
to the other and found that the act was prior to the potency, because 

361 

oo" 

May, 

362 

363 

218 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the agent was prior to its object,’ and they investigated also causes 
and effects, which led them to a primary cause which by its act is the 
first cause of all causes, and it followed that this cause is pure act and 
that in it there is no potency at all, since if there were potency in it, 
it would be in part an effect, in part a cause, and could not be a 
primary cause. And since in everything composed of attribute and 
subject there is potency and act, it was a necessary implication for 
them that the First could not be composed of attribute and subject, 
and since everything free from matter was according to them intel- 
lect, it was necessary for them that the First should be intellect. 

This in summary és the method of the philosophers, and if you are 
one of those whose mind is sufficiently trained to receive the sciences, 
and you are steadfast and have teisure, it is your duty* to Jook into 
the books and the sciences of the philosophers, so that you may dis- 
cover in their works certain truths {or perhaps the reverse); but if 
you lack one of these three qualities, it is your duty* to keep yourself 
to the words of the Divine Law, and you should not look for these new 
conceptions in Istam; for if you do so, you will be neither a rationalist 
nor a traditionalist.’ 

Such was the philosophers’ reason for their belief that the essence 
which they found to be the principle of the world was simple and 
that it was knowledge and intellect. And finding that the order 
which reigns in the world and its parts proceeds from a knowledge 
prior to it, they judged that this intellect and this knowledge was the 
principle of the warld, which gave the world existence and made it 
intelligible. ‘This is a theory very remote from the primitive ideas of 
mankind and from commen notions, so that it is not permitted to 
divulge it to the masses or even to many people; indeed, the man 
who has proved its evidence is forbidden to reveal it to the man who 
has no power to discover its truth, for he would be like his murderer. 
And as to the term ‘substance’ which the philosophers give to that 
which is separate from matter, the First has the highest claim on the 
term ‘substance’, the terms ‘existent’, ‘knowing’, ‘living’,? and alt the 
terms for the qualities it bestows on the existents and especially those 
attributes which belong to perfection, for the philosophers found that 
the proper definition of substance was what existed by itself and the 
First was the cause of everything that existed by itself. 

To all the other reproofs which he levels against this doctrine no 
attention need be paid, except in front of che masses and the ordinary 
man, to whom, however, this discussion is forbidden. 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 219 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

What beauty can there be in mere existence which has no quiddity, 
no essence, which observes neither what occurs in the world nor what is a 
consequence or proceeds from its own essence? . . . 

—this whole statement is worthless, for if the philosophers assume a 5 
quiddity free from a substratum it is also void of attributes, and it 
cannot be a substratum for attributes except by being itself in a sub- 
stratum and being composed of the nature of potency and the nature 
of act, The First possesses a quiddity that exists absolutely, and all 
other existents receive their quiddity only from it, and this First 
Principle is the existent which knows existents absolutely, because 
existents become existent and intelligible only through the knowledge 
this principle has of itself; for since this First Principle is the cause of to 
the existence and intelligibility of existents, of their existence through 
its quiddity and of their intelligibility through its knowledge, it is the 
cause of the existence and intelligibility of their quiddities. The philo- 
sophers only denied that its knowledge of existents could take place 
in the same way as human knowledge which is their effect, whereas 
for God’s knowledge the reverse is the case. For they had established 
this superhuman knowledge by proof. According to the Ash‘arites, 364 
however, God possesses neither quiddity nor essence at all but* the 
existence of an entity neither possessing nor being a quiddity cannot 
be understood,! although some Ash‘arites believed that God has a 
special quiddity by which He differs from all other existents,? and 
according to the Sufis it is this quiddity which is meant by the highest 5 
name of God.? 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

Further, there may be said to them: ‘Although you plunge yourself in 
these shameful doctrines, you cannot free yourselves from plurality, for we 
ask: “Is the knowledge He has of His essence identical with His essence or 
not?” If you say, “No”, you introduce plurality, and if you say, “they are 
identical”, what then is the difference between you and a man who said 
that a man’s knowledge of his essence was identical with his essence?’ 

T say: 

This is an extremely weak statement, and a man who speaks like 
this deserves best to be put to shame and dishonoured. For the conse- 
quence he draws amounts to saying that the perfect one, who is free 
from the attributes of becoming and change and imperfection, might 
have the attribute of a being possessing imperfection and change. 
For a man indeed it is necessary, in so far as he is composed of a 

~ 

oO 

220 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

substratum and knowledge, which exists in this substratum, that 

’ his knowledge should differ from his essence in such a way as has 

365 

366 

a 

been described before, since the substratum is the cause of change in 
the knowledge and the essence. And since man is man and the most 
noble of all sentient beings only through the intellect which is con- 
joined to his essence, but not by being essentially intellect, it is neces- 
sary that that which is intellect by its essence should be the most 
noble of all existents and that it should be free from the imperfections 
which exist in the human intellect. 
And as to Ghazali’s words: 

And if it be said: His essence is intellect and knowledge and He has not 
an essence in which afterwards knowledge exists, we answer: ‘The 
foolishness of this is evident, for knowledge is an attribute and an accident 
which demands a subject, and to say “He is in His essence intellect and 
knowledge” is like saying “‘He is power and will, and power and will exist 
by themselves”, and this again is like saying of black and white, fourness 
and threeness, and all other accidents that they exist by themselves,’ 

I say: 

The error and confusion in his statement is very evident, for it has 
been proved that there is among attributes one that hasa greater claim 
to the term ‘substantiality’ than the substance existing by itself, and 
this is the attribute through which the substance existing by itself 
becomes existing by itself. For it has been proved that the substratum 
for this attribute is something neither existing by itself nor existing in 
actuality; no, its existing by itself and its actual existence derive from 
this attribute, and this attribute in its existence is like that which 
receives the accidents, although certain of these attributes, as is 
evident from their nature, need a substratum in the changeable 
things, since it is the fundamental law of the accidents, that they exist 
in something else, whereas the fundamental Jaw of the quiddities is 
that they exist by themselves, except when, in the sublunary world, 
these quiddities need a substratum through being in transitory 
things. But this attribute is at the greatest distance from the nature 
of an accident, and to compare this transcendent knowledge to sub- 
lunary accidents is extremely foolish, indeed more foolish than to 
consider the soul an accident like threeness and fourness. 

And this suffices to show the incoherence and the foolishness of this 
whole argument, and let us rather call this book simply ‘The In- 
coherence’, not “The Incoherence of the Philosophers’. And what is 
further from the nature of an accident than the nature of knowledge, 

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION 228 

and especially the knowledge of the First? And since it is at the 
greatest distance from the nature of an accident, it is at the greatest 
distance from having a necessity for a substratum, 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 367 

To refute their claim that nothing can share with the First its 

genus, and be differentiated from it through a specific difference, 

and that with respect to its intellect the diviston inte genus and 
specific difference cannot be applied to tt! 

Ghazali says: 

Indeed, they are all of this opinion, and they deduce from this that, 
since nothing can share its genus, it cannot be differentiated through 5 
a specific difference and cannot have a definition, since a definition is 
constructed out of genus and specific difference and what has no com- 
position cannot have a definition, for a definition is a kind of composition.* 
And they affirm that, since the First is said to resemble the first effect in 
being an existent and a substance and a cause for other things, and to 
differ from it in other respects, this certainly does not imply sharing in its 
genus; no, it is nothing but a sharing in a common necessary attribute. 
The difference between genus and necessary attribute consists in their 
content, not in universality, according to logical theory, for the genus, 
namely, the essential universal, is the answer to the question what the 
thing is, and is subsumed under the quiddity of the thing defined, and 
constitutes its essence: a man’s being alive is subsumed under the quiddity 
of man, i.e. his animality, and is his genus, but his being born and created 
are his necessary attributes, and, although they are universals which can 
never be separated from him, are not subsumed under his quiddity, accord- 
ing to logical theory, about which there can be no misgiving.? And the 
philosophers affirm that existence is never subsumed under the quiddity of 
things, but stands in a relation to the quiddity, either necessarily and 
inseparably, like its relation to heaven, or subsequently, after their non- 
existence, like its relation to temporary things, and that the sharing of 368 
existence does not imply a sharing in genus.* And as to its sharing in ‘being 
a cause to other things’ with all the other causes, this is a necessary relation 
which likewise cannot be subsumed under the quiddity,® for neither the 
fact of being a principle nor existence constitutes the essence, but they are 
necessary attributes of the essence, consequent upon the constitution of the 
essence out of the parts of its quiddity, and this community is only the 
sharing of a necessary common attribute consecutive to the essence, not a 

oO 

to 

15 

369 

a 

222 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

community of genus. Things therefore are only defined by their constitu- 
ents, and if they are defined by the necessary attributes this is only a de- 
scription? to differentiate them, not to define their essential forms; for the 
triangle is not defined by the fact that its angles are equal to two right 
angles, although this is a necessary and common attribute of all triangles, 
but it is defined as a figure bounded by three sides. And the same applies to 
its being a substance, and the meaning of its being a substance is that it is 
an existent which does not exist in a substeatum,? And the existent is not 
a genus, since, as it is related to a negation, namely not being in a 
substratum, it cannot become a constituent genus; indeed, even if it 
could be brought into a relation to something positive and it could be said 
that it existed in a substratum, it could not become a genus in the 
accident. And the reason is that the man who knows substance by its 
definition, which is rather its description, namely that it is an existent 
which does not exist in a substratum, does not know whether it exists, and 
a fortiors does not know whether it exists in a substratum or not; no, the 
meaning of the description of substance is that itis the existent which does 
not exist in a substratum, ie. that it isa certain reality which, when it 
does exist, does not exist in a substratum, but we do not mean that it 
actually exists at the time of the definition,* and its community is not 
the community of the genus, for only the constituents of the quiddity 
form the community of the genus which needs also a specific difference? 
But the First has no other quiddity, except necessary existence, and 
necessary existence is its rcal nature and its own quiddity*, exclusively. 
confined to it, and since necessary existence is exclusively confined to the 
First, it cannot be shared by others, it cannot have a specific difference, and 
it cannot have a definition.® 

I say: 

Here ends what Ghazali says of the philosophical views about this 
question, and it is partly true, partly false, As to his statement that 
no other thing can share with the First its genus and be distinguished 
from it through a specific difference, if he means by this the genus 
and the difference that are predicated univocally, it is true, for any- 
thing of this description is composed of a common form and a specific 
form, and such things possess a definition. But if by ‘genus’ is meant 
what is predicated analogically, I mean per prius et posterius,? then it 
can have a genus, e.g. existent, or thing, or identity, or essence, and 
it can have a kind of definition, and this kind of definition is used in 
the sciences—for instance, when it is said of the soul that it is the 
entelechy of the natural organic body,* and when it is said of the 
substance that it is the existent which does not exist in a substratum 
—but these definitions do not suffice for knowledge of the thing, and 
they are only given to indicate through it the different individuals 

. 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 223 

which fall under such definitions and to represent their peculiarities, 
But as to his statement that according to the philosophers the term 
‘existence’ only indicates a necessary attribute of the essences of 
things, this is not true, and we have already explained this in another 
place and none of the philosophers has said this but Avicenna. 379 
Having denied that existence is a genus, predicted either univocally 

or equivocally, Avicenna affirmed that it was a term which signified a 
common necessary attribute of things. But the difficulty he found in 
regarding existence as an essence can be held up against him when 

it is regarded as a necessary attribute, for if it were a necessary attri- 
bute, this necessary attribute could not be given as an answer to the 
question what a thing is.’ And further, if ‘existence’ really signifies a 
necessary attribute in things, does it signify this necessary attribute 5 
univocally, or equivocally, ar m some other mode of attribution? 
And if it has a univocal meaning, how can there be an accident 
univocally predicated of things essentially different (I believe that 
Avicenna regarded this as possible)? It is, however, impossible, 
because from different things the congruous and identical can only 
derive, when these different things agree in one nature, since neces- 
sarily a single necessary attribute must come from one nature, just 
as a single act* can proceed only from one nature. And since this is 
impossible, the term ‘existence’ indicates essences which have azia- 
logical meanings, essences some of which are more perfect than 
others; and therefore there exists in the things which have such an 
existence a principle which is the cause of that which exists in all 
the other things of this genus, just as our term ‘warm’ is a term which 
is predicated per prius et posterius of fire and all other warm things, 
and that of which it is asserted first, t.e. fire, is the cause of the exis- 
tence of warmth in all other things, and the same is the case with 371 
substance, intellect, and principle and such terms (most metaphysical 
terms are of this kind), and such terms can indicate both substances 

and accidents. 

And what he says of the description of substance is devoid of sense, 5 
but existence is the genus of substance and is included in its definition 
in the way the genera of the sublunary things are included in their 
definitions, and Farabi proved this in his book about demonstration, 
and this is the commonest view amongst philosophers. Avicenna 
erred in this only because, since he thought that the ‘existent’ 
means the ‘true’ in the Arabic language, and that what indicates the 
true indicates an accident*—-the true, however, really indicates* one 

o 

2 

372 

to 

373 

w 

224 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

of the second predicates, i.e. a predicable'—he believed that when 
the translator used the word ‘existent’ it meant only the ‘true’. This, 
however, is not so, for the translators meant only to indicate what is 
also meant by ‘entity’ and ‘thing’. Farabi explains this in his Book of 
the Leiters* and he shows that one of the reasons for the occurrence of 
this mistake is that the term ‘existent’ in Arabic is a derivative in 
form and that a derivative signifies an accident, and in fact an acci- 
dent is linguistically a derivative? But since the translators did not 
find in Arabic a term which signified that concept which the ancient 
philosophers subdivided into substance and accident, potency and 
act, a term namely which should be a primitive symbol,* some 
translators signified that concept by the term ‘existent’, not to be 
understood as having a derivative meaning and signifying therefore 
an accident, but as having the same meaning as ‘essence’. It is thus a 
technical term, not an idiomatic word, Some translators, because of 
the difficulty attached to it, decided to use for the concept, which the 
Greek language tried to express by deriving it from the pronoun 
which joins the predicate and the subject, the term which expresses 
this, because they thought that this word comes nearer to expressing 
this meaning, and they used instead of the term ‘existent’ the term 
‘haeceitas’, but the fact that its grammatical form is not found in 
Arabic hindered its use, and the other party therefore preferred the 
term ‘existent’.S And the term ‘existent’ which signifies the true does 
not signify the quiddity, and therefore one may often know the quiddity 
without knowing the existence,® and this meaning of ‘existent’ of 
necessity does not signify the quiddity in the compound substance, 
but is in the simple substance identical with the quiddity;? and this 
meaning is not what the translators intended by ‘existence’, for they 
meant the quiddity itself, and when we say of the existent that it is in 
part substance, in part accident, the sense meant by the translators 
must be understood, and this is the sense which is predicated ana- 
logically of different essences of things. When we say, however, that 
substance exists, it must be understood in the sense of the true. And 
therefore* if we have understood the well-known discussion of the 
ancient philosophers, whether the existent is one or more than one, 
which is found in the first book of Aristotle’s PAystcs where he con- 
ducts a discussion with the ancient philosophers Parmenides and 
Melissus,’ we need only understand by ‘existent’ that which signifies 
the essence. And if the ‘existent’ meant an accident in a substratum, 
then the statement that the existent was one would be self-contradic- 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 225 

tory.’ And all this is clear for the man who is well grounded in the 
books of the philosophers. 

And having stated the views of the philosophers, Ghazali begins to 10 
refute them, and says: 

This is the sense of the doctrine of the philosophers. And the discussion 
with them consists of two parts: a question and a refutation. The question 
is: This is the simple narration of your doctrine, but how do you know the 
impossibility of this with respect to God, so as to build on it the refutation 
of dualism, since you say that a second God would have to participate in 
something and differ from the first in something, and that which partly © 
possesses something in common with another, partly is different from it, is 
compound, whereas that He should be compound is absurd? 

T say: 374 

I have already said that this is only valid for something which 
possesses a common feature through a genus which is predicated 
univocally, not analogically. For if, by the assumption of a second 
God, a God were assumed of the same rank of divinity as the first, 
then the name of Ged would be predicated univocally, and He would 
be a genus, and the twe Gods would have to be separated by a specific 
distinction and both would be compounded of a genus and a specific § 
distinction, and the philosophers do not allow a genus to an eternal 
being;? but if the term ‘existence’ is predicated per prius ef posterius, 
the prior will be the cause of the posterior. 

Ghazali says, refuting the philosophers: 

But we say: How do you know the impossibility of this kind of com- 
position? For there is no proof except your denial of the attributes, which 
has been mentioned, namely that the compound of genus and species is 
an aggregate of parts; thus if it is possible for one or for a collection of the 
parts to exist without the others, this single one will be the necessary 
existent and the others will not be necessary ; and if it is possible neither for 
the parts to exist without the totality, nor for the totality to exist without 
the parts, then the whole is an effect necding something else as its cause. 
We have already discussed this in the case of the attributes, and have 
shown that their plurality is not impossible, since an end of the causal 
series is admitted and al] that is proved is that there is an end of the causal 
series. For those enormous difficulties which the philosophers have invented 
concerning the inherence of attributes in the mecessary existent there 
is no proof whatever. If the necessary existent is what the philosophers 
describe it to be, namely to possess no plurality and not to need any- 
thing else for its existence, then there is no proof of the existence of this 375 
necessary existent; the only thing proved is that there is an end of the 
causal series, and we have exhausted this subject in our discussion of 

° 

to 

376 

wn 

to 

226 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

attributes, And for this kind of plurality it is still more abvious, for the 
division of a thing inte genus and specific difference is not like the division 
of the subject into essence and attribute, since, indeed, the attribute ts not 
the essence and the essence is not the attribute, but the species is not in 
every way different from the genus, for whenever we mention the species, 
we mention the genus with an addition, and when we speak of a man we 
only mention animal with the addition of reason.? And to ask whether 
humanity can be free from anjmality is like asking whether humanity can 
be without itself, when something is added to it. And indeed genus and 
species are more distant from plurality than attribute and subject. And 
why should it be impossible thae the causal series should end in two causes, 
one the cause of the heavens and the other the cause of the elements, or 
one the cause of the intellects and the other the cause of all bodies, and 
that there should be between those two causes a conceptual difference and 
separation as between redness and warmth when they exist in one and the 
same place? For they differ in content without our being obliged to 
assume in the redness a compound of genus and specific difference through 
which this difference is established; indeed, if it possesses a plurality, this 
kind of plurality does not impair the singleness of its essence, and why 
should this be impossible with respect to the causes? Through this there is 
shown the weakness of their refutation of the existence of two Gods. 

Tsay: 

Composition out of genus and specific difference is exactly the 
same as the composition of a thing in potency and a thing in act, for 
the nature which is indicated by the genus does not actually exist at 
any time without the presence of the nature which is called specific 
difference and form.? And everything which is composed of these 
two natures is, according to the philosophers, transitory, and possesses 
an agent, for the specific difference is one of the conditions for the 
existence of the genus in so far as the genus is in potency and does not 
exist without the specific difference. And the conjunction of cither 
with its partner is in a certain way a condition for the existence of 
the other. And as a thing cannot itself be a cause of the condition of 
its existence, it necessarily possesses a cause which provides it with 
existence by conjoining the condition and the conditioned. Also, 
according to the philosophers the recipient is in reality something 
which possesses only potency, and if it is actually, then only acciden- 
tally; and what is received is actuality, and if it is potency, then only 
accidentally; for the recipient and the thing it receives are only 
distinguished by the fact that one of them is potentially something 
else, whereas actually it is the thing received* and whatever is poten- 
tially another thing must necessarily receive this other thing and lose 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 227 

the thing it actually is.’ Therefore, if there should exist a recipient in 
actuality and a thing reccived in actuality, both would exist by them- 
selves, but the recipient is necessarily body, for only body, or what is 
in a body, possesses receptivity primarily, and receptivity cannot be 
attributed to accidents and forms,’ nor to the plane, the line, and the 
point,’ nor in general to what cannot be divided. As regards an in- 
corporeal agent, this has been already proved,’ and as to an in- 
corporeal recipient, or a recipient not embedded in matter, such a 
recipient is impossible, although there is a problem for the philoso- 377 
phers about the potential intellect.’ And indeed, if the compound has 
a subject and an attribute* which is not additional to its essence,® it 
is transitory and necessarily a body, and if it has a subject and an 
attribute additional to its essence, without its having any potency in 
its substance even in respect of this attribute, as is the case according 
to the ancients with the body of the heavens,’ it possesses quantity of 5 
necessity and is a body. For, if from such an essence, supporting the 
attribute, bodiliness were taken away, it would no longer be a per- 
ceptible recipient, and equally the sensory perception of its attribute 
would be annulled and its attribute and subject would both become 
intellect, and they would be reduced to one single simple entity, for 
from the nature of the intellect and the intelligible it is evident that 
they are both one and the same thing, since plurality exists in them 10 
accidentally, namely through the substratum.’ And in short, when 
the philosophers assume an essence and attributes additional to the 
essence, this amounts to their assuming an eternal body with acci- 
dents inherent jn it, and they do not doubt that* if they took away 
the quantity which is corporcity, the perceptible element in it would 
be annulled, and ucither substratum nor inherent would exist any 
more; but if, on the other hand, they regarded the substratum and 
the inherent as abstracted from matter and body, the substratum and 
inherent would of necessity be both intellect and intelligible; but this 

is the Unique, the Uncompounded, God, the Truth. 

As to bis statement that the whole mistake of the philosophers con- 378 
sists in their calling the First the ‘necessary existent’, and that if 
instead they called it ‘the causcless”, the conclusion which they draw 
about the First, concerning the necessary attributes of the necessary 
existent, would not follow—this statement is not true. For since they 
assume an existent which has no cause, it follows necessarily that it 
is in itself a necessary existent, just as, when a necessary existent 
existing by itselfis assumed, it follows necessarily that it has no cause, § 

228 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and if it has no cause it is more appropriate that it should not be 
divided into two things, cause and effect. The assumption of the 
theologians that the First is composed of an attribute and a subject 
impties that it has an effictent cause,’ and that therefore it is neither 
a first cause nor a necessary existent, and this is in contradiction to 
their assumption that it is one of those existents of which the attribute 
and the subject are reduced to one single simple entity; but there is 
No sense in repeating this and expatiating on it. 

And as to his statement that it is not impossible of God, the First, 

. that He should be composed of a substratum and an attribute addi- 

379 

380 

tional ta the substratum, and that therefore @ fortiort it is not impos- 
sible that He should be composed of a substratum and an attribute 
which is identical with its substratum, we have already explained 
the way in which this is not impossible, namely when both are 
abstract from matter. 

And as to his statement that their refutation of dualism does not 
prevent the possibility of the existence of two Gods, one of whom 
would be, for instance, the cause of heaven and the other the cause 
of the earth, or one the cause of the intelligible and the other the 
cause of the sensible in the bodies, and that their differentiation and 
distinction need not determine a contradiction, as there is no contra- 
diction in redness and warmth which exist in one place—this state- 
ment is not true. For if the production and creation of the existent 
is assumed to be the effect of one nature and of one essence, not of 
two different natures, it would necessarily follow that if a second 
thing of this nature were assumed, similar in nature and intellect to 
the first, they would share in one attribute and differ in another. And 
their difference would come about either through the kind of 
differentiation which exists between individuals or through the kind 
of differentiation which exists between species. In the latter case the 
term ‘God’ would be predicated of them equivocally, and this is in 
contradiction with their assumption, for the species which participate 
in the genus are either contraries or stand between contraries, and 
this is wholly impossible? And if they were individually differen- 
tiated, they would both be in matter, and this is in opposition to what 
is agreed about them. But if it is assumed that one of these natures is 
superior to the other and that this nature is predicated of them fer 
prius et postertus, then the first nature will be superior to the second 
and the second will be necessarily its effect, so that for instance the 
creator of heaven will be the creator of the cause which creates the 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 229 

elements; and this is the theory of the phifosophers. And both theories 
lead to the acceptance of a first cause; that of those who believe that 
the First acts through the mediation of many causes, and that of those 
who believe that the First is directly the cause of all other things 
without mediation. But accerding to the philosophers this latter 
theory cannot be true. For it is evident that the worlds exist through 
cause and effect, and it is inquiry concerning these causes which 
leads us to a first cause for everything. And if some of these different 
principles were wholly independent of others—that is, if some were 
not the cause of others—then the world could not be a single well- 
connected whole, and to the impossibility of this the Divine Words 
refer, ‘Were there in both heaven and earth Gods beside God, both 
surely would have been corrupted’.’ 
Ghazali says: 

It may be said: This is impossible so far as the difference which exists 
between these two essences is either a condition for their necessary 
existence (and in that case it will exist in both the necessary existents, and 
then they wil? not differ anyhow), or neither the one nor the other specific 
difference is a condition (and since the necessary existence is able to 
exist without the things that are not a condition for it, the necessary 
existence will be perfected by something else).* 

But we reply: This is exactly the same answer as you gave concerning 
the attributes and we have already discussed it,’ and the source of con- 
fusion throughout this probiem is the expression ‘necessary existent’; let us 
therefore get rid of this term; and indeed, we do not accept that deron- 
stration proves a necessary existent, if anything else is meant by it but an 
eternal existent which has no cause, and if this is meant by it, let us aban- 
don the term ‘necessary existent’ and let it be proved that an existent which 
has ne cause and no agents cannot have a plurality and a distinctive mark, 
but indeed there is no proof of it. There remains therefore your question 
whether this specific difference is a condition of the causeless character of 
this causeless existent, and this is nonsense. For we have shown that there 
is no cause for its being without a cause, so as to make it possible to ask for 
its condition. It would be like asking whether blackness is a condition for 
the colour’s becoming a colour, and if it is a condition, why redness js then 
a colour. And the answer is: as to the essentiaj nature of colour, ie. in se 
far as the essence of colouredness is asserted jn the intellect, neither of them 
is a condition,* and as to its existence, each of them is a condition for its 
existence, but not individually, since* a genus cannot exist in reality without 
a specific difference.’ And likewise the man who accepts two causes 
as starting-points of the series must say that they are differentiated through 
a specific difference, and both differences are a condition for their 
existence, no doubt, though not through their individuality. 

$ 

381 

382 

383 

5 

230 5 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

I say: 

The summary of what he says here of the proof of the philosophers 
is that they say that the specific difference through which the duality 
in the necessary existent occurs is either a condition or not a condition 
for necessary existence. If the specific difference through which they 
are distinguished is a condition for both the necessary existents, they 
will no longer be separated in their necessary existence and the 
necessary existent will be of necessity one and the same, just as, if 
black were to be a condition for the necessity of colour and white a 
condition for colouredness, they could not differ in colouredness, If, 
on the other hand, the specific difference does not enter into the 
essence of necessary existence, then both these necessary existents 
will have necessary existence only by accident, and their duality will 
not be based on their both being necessary existents. This, however, 
is not true, for the species are a condition for the existence of the 
genus, and both colours are a condition for the existence of the genus, 
though not individually (for in this case they could not exist together 
in the existence of the colour).' 

Ghazali opposes this statement with two arguments. The first is 
that this can only happen in so far as ‘necessary existent’ means 
a special nature; accarding to the theologians, however, this is not 
the case, for they understand by ‘necessary existent’ only something 
negative, namely something which has no cause, and since negative 
things are not caused, how can, for the denial of the causeless, an 
argument like the following be used: ‘That which distinguishes one 
causeless entity from another causeless entity is either a condition of 
its being causeless or not; if it is a condition, there cannot be any 
plurality or differentiation; and if it is not a condition, it cannot 
occasion a plurality in the causeless, which therefore will be one.’ 
However, the erroneous part in Ghazali’s reasoning is that he regards 
the causeless as a mere negation, and, as a negation has no cause, he 
asks how it could possess a condition which ts the cause of its exis- 
tence. But this is a fallacy, for particular negations, which are like 
infinite terms and which are used for distinguishing between exis- 
tents,? have causes and conditions which determine this negation in 
them, just as they have causes and conditions which determine their 
positive qualities; and in this sense there is no difference between 
positive and negative attributes, and the necessity of the necessary 
existent is a necessary attribute of the causeless and there is no 
difference between saying ‘the necessary existent’ or ‘the causeless’. 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 231 

And the nonsense comes from those who talk like Ghazali, not from 
his opponents. 

And the summary of Ghazali’s second objection is that to say, as 
the philosophers do, that the specific difference through which the 
necessary existent is distinguished is either a condition or not, that 
in the former case the one necessary existent cannot be distinguished 
from the other in so far as they are necessarily existent and that 
therefore the necessary existent Js one, and that in the jatter case the 
necessary existent has no specific difference through which it can be 
divided: that to speak like this is like saying that if there exist more 
colours than one of the genus colour, the difference through which 
one colour is distinguished from another is either a condition for the 
existence of colour or not; that in the former case the one cannot be 
distinguished from the other in so far as they are colour, and colour 
is therefore one single nature; that in the latter case, if neither of 
them is a condition for the existence of colouredness, one colour has 
no specific difference through which it can be distinguished from 
another, and this is not true.‘ 

Ghazali says, answering this problem on behalfof the philosophers: 

It may be said perhaps: This is possible in the case of colour, for it has 
an existence related to the quiddity and additional te the quiddity, but 
it is not possible for the necessary existent, for it possesses only necessary 
existence, and there is therefore no quiddity to which its existence might 
be related, and just as the specific differences of black and red are not 
conditions for colouredness being colouredness, but only a condition for 
the actual realization of colour through a cause,? in the same way the 
specific difference cannot be a condition for necessary existence, for 
necessary existence is in relation to the First what colouredness is in 
relation to the colour, and not like the existence brought in relation to 
colouredness.3 

But we reply, we do not accept this; on the contrary, the necessary 
existent has a real essence to which existence is attributed, as we shall 
show in the next discussion, and their statement that the Firs¢ is an 
existence without quiddity is incomprehensible. The trend of their argu- 
ment is, in short, that they base their denial of dualism on the denial that 
the First is composed of the generic and the specific, then they base the 
denial of this on their denial that there is a quiddity behind the existence. 
Therefore as soon as we have refuted this last proposition, which is 
their fundamental principle, their whole structure (which is a very shaky 
fabrication, just like a spider’s web) tumbles dowa. 

I say: 
Ghazali builds the answer he gives here in the name of the philo- 

Qo 

384 

3 

385 

oO 

10 

386 

232 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

sophers on their statement that existence is an accident in the exis- 
tent, i.e. the quiddity, and he objects against them that the existence 
in everything is something different from the essence, and he affirms 
that their whole argument is built only on this.‘ But the distinction 
which the philosophers make here does not save them from the 
implication held against them about colouredness and its specific 
differences, in whatever way they may turn the question. Indeed, 
nobody doubts that the specific differences of the genus are the cause 
of the genus, whether it is assumed that the existence of the genus is 
different [rom its essence, or that the essence and existence of the 
genus are identical; for if the specific differences were differences in 
the existence, and the existence of the colour were different from the 
quiddity of the colour, it would follow that the specific differences by 
which the colour is divided are not differences in the quiddity of the 
colour, but differences in one of its accidents,? and this is an absurd 
assumption.? Therefore the truth is to say, ‘When we divide colour 
by its specific differences, the existence of the colour in so far as it is 
colour is only actual, cither because it is white, or because it is black 
or any other colour. ‘Thus we do not divide an accident of the colour, 
but we divicle only the essence of the colour.* Through this solution 
the statement that existence is an accident in the existent is seen to 
be false, and the argument and his answer are wasound. 

As to Ghazali’s words: 

They base their denial of dualism on the denial that the First is com- 
posed of the generic and the specific, then they base the denial of this on 
the denial thac there is a quiddity behind the existence, ‘herefure as soon 

as we have refuted this last proposition, which is their fundamental 
principle, their whole structure turnbles down. 

I say: 

This argument is not sound, for their structure, the denial of in- 
dividual duality attributed to simple things univocally, is self-evident, 
for if we assume a duality and two simple things possessing a com- 
mon trait, the simple becomes a compound.> And the summary of the 
philosophical proof for this is that the nature called ‘necessary exis- 
tent’, i.e. the cause which has no cause and which is a cause for other 
things, must be either numerically one or many; if many, it must be 
many through its form, one through the genus predicated univocally 
of it, or one through a relation, or one through the term only.® If it 
is ike Zaid and Amr individually differentiated and specifically one, 
then it necessarily possesses Aye, and this is impossible. {fit is differen- 

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION 233 

tiated through its form, but one through the genus predicated uni- 

vocally of it, then it is necessarily composite. If it is one in its genus, 

predicated by analogy to one thing, there is no objection, and one 5 
part of it will be the cause of another and the series will end in a first 
cause, and this is what happens with the forms abstracted from 
matter, according to the philosophers. Ifit is only common through the 
term, then there is no objection to its being more than one, and this is 
the case with the four primary causes, i.e. the first agent, the ultimate 
form, the ultimate end, the ultimate matter.’ Therefore, no strict 
proofis attained through this method, and one does not arrive at the 
First Principle as Avicenna thought, nor to its being necessarily one. 

Ghazali says: 

The second way is the drawing of the consequence, and we say: If 
existence, substantiality and being a principle are not a genus, because 
they do not give an answer to the question ‘What is it?’, then according 
to you the First is pure intellect just like the other intellects which are the 
principles of existence, called angels,? according to the philosophers, and 
which are the effects of the First, are intellects separate from matter. 
And this abstract reality comprises the First and the first effect. This 387 
First, further, is according to the philosophers simple, and there is no 
compound in its essence except through its necessary attributes, and both 
the First Cause and the first effect participate in being intellect without 
matter. ‘This, however, is a generic reality. Nor is intellectuality, separate 
from matter, a necessary attribute, for it is indeed a quiddity, and this 
quiddity is common to the First and all the other intellects. Therefore, if 
they do not diller in anything else, you have necessarily conceived a duality 
without a further diflerence; and if they do differ, what then is this distinc- 
tion apart from their intellectuality, which they have in common?* For 
what they have in common is participation in this abstract reality. For in- 
deed the First is conscious of its own self and of others, according to those 
who believe that it is in its essence intellect separate from matter; and also 
the first effect, which is the first intellect which God has created without a 
Mediator, participates in this characteristic. This proves that the intellects 
which are effects are different species, that they only participate in 
intellectuality and are besides this distinguished by specific differences, 
and that likewise the First participates with ail the other intellects in this 
intellectuatity. ‘The philosophers, therefore, are either in plain contradic- 
tion to their own fundamental thesis, or* have to aftirm that intellectuality 
does not constitute God's essence. And both positions are absurd according 
to them. 

wv 

a 

I say: 
If you have understood what we have said before this, that there 

389 

234 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

are things which have a term in common not univocally or equi- 
vocally, but by the universality of terms analogically related to one 
thing, and that the characteristic of these things is that they lead 
upwards to a first term in this genus which is the first cause of every- 
thing te which this word refers, like warmth, which is predicated 
of fire and alt other warm things, and like the term ‘existent’ which 
is predicated of the substance and all other accidents, and like the 
term ‘movement’ predicated of motion in space* and all the other 
movements, you wii! not have to occupy yourself with the mistakes 
in this reasoning. For the term ‘intellect’ is predicated analogically 
of the separate intellects according to the philosophers, and there is 
among them a first intellect which is the cause of all the other intel- 
Jects, and the same thing is true of substance. And the proof that they 
have not one nature in common is that some of them are the causes 
of others and the cause of a thing is prior to the effect, and the nature 
of cause and effect cannot be one in genus except in the individual 
causes, and this kind of community is contradictory to genuine 
generic community, for things which participate in genus have no first 
principle which is the cause of all the others—-they are all of the same 
rank, and there is no simple principle in them—whereas the things 
which participate in something predicated of them analogicalty must 
have a simple first principle. And in this First no duality can be 
imagined, for if a second were assumed, it must be of the same level 
of existence and of the same nature as the First, and they would have 
one nature in common im which they would participate by generic 
participation and would have to be distinguished through specific 
differences, additional to the genus, and both would be composed of 
genus and specific difference, and everything which is of this descrip- 
tion is temporal; and lastly that which is of the extreme perfection 
of existence must be unique, for if it were not unique, it could not be 
of the extreme perfection of existence, for that which is in the extreme 
degree cannot participate with anything else, for in the same way as 
one single line cannot have two extreme points at the same end, 
things extended in existence and differentiated through increase 
and decrease have not two extremes at the same side. And since 
Avicenna was not aware of this nature, which stands midway between 
the nature of that which is univocally predicated and those natures 
which participate only through the equivocation of the term or in a 
distant, accidental way, this objection was valid against him. 

BPs 245 
THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their theory that the existence of the First is simple, 

namely that it is pure existence and that its existence stands in 

relation to no quiddity and to no essence, but stands to necessary 
existence as do other beings to their quiddity 

Ghazali says: 

There are two ways of attacking this theory. The first is to demand 
a proof and to ask how you know this, through the necessity of the 
intellect, or through speculation and not by immediate necessity; and in 
any case you must tell us your method of reasoning. 

Tfit is said that, if the First had a quiddity, its existence would be related 
to it, and would be consequent! on this quiddity and would be its necessary 
attribute, and the consequent is an effect and therefore necessary existence 
would be an eflect, and this is a contradiction, we answer: This is to revert 
to the source of the confusion in the application of the term ‘necessary 
existence’, for we call this entity ‘reality’ or ‘quiddity’ and this reality 
exists, ie. it is not non-existent and is not denied, but its existence is 
brought into a relation with it, and if you like to call this ‘consequent’ 
and ‘necessary attribute’, we shall not quibble about words, if you have 
once acknowledged that it has no agent for its existence and that this 
existence has not ceased to he eternal and to have no efficient cause; if, 
however, you understand by ‘consequent’ and ‘effect’ that it has an 
efficient cause, this is not true. But if you mean something else, this is 
conceded, for it is not impossible,? since the demonstration proves only 
the end of a causal scries and its ending in an existent reality; a positive 
quiddity, therefore, is possible, and there is no need to deny the quiddity. 

Ifit is said: Then the quiddity becomes a cause for the existence which 
is consequent on it, and the existence becomes an effect and an object of 
the act, we answer: The quiddity in temporal things is not a cause of 
their existence, and why should it therefore be the case in the eternal, if 
you mean by ‘cause’ the agent? But if you mean something else by it, 
namely that without which it could not be, let that be accepted, for there 
is nothing impossible in it; the impossibility lies only in the infinite causal 
series, and if this series only comes to a final term, then the impossibility 
is cancelled; impossibility can Ie understood only on this point, therefore 
you must give a proof of its impossibility.? 

All the proofs of the philosophers are nothing but presumptions that the 
term has a sense from which certain consequences follow, and nothing but 
the supposition that demonstration has in fact proved a necessary existent 
with the meaning the philosophers ascribed to it, We have, however, shown 
previously that this is nat true. In short, this proof of the philosophers 

390 

$91 

bal 

392 

236 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

comes down io the proof of the denial of attributes and of the division into 
genus and specific difference; only this proof is still more ambiguous and 
weak, for this plurality is purely verbal, for the intellect does allow the 
acceptance of one single existent quiddity. The philosophers, however, say 
that every existent quiddity is a plurality, for it contains quiddity and 
existence, and this is an extreme confusion; for the meaning of a single 
existent is perfectly understandable—nothing exists which has no essence, 
and the existence of an essence does not annul its singleness. 

I say: 

Ghazali does not relate Avicenna’s doctrine literally as he did in 
his book The Atms of the Philosophers.* For since Avicenna believed 
that the existence of a thing indicated an attribute additional to its 
essence, he could no longer admit that its essence was the agent of its 
existence out of the possibles, for then the thing would be the cause 
of its own existence and it would not have an agent. It follows from 
this, according to Avicenna, that everything which has an existence 
additional to its essence has an efficient cause, and since according 
to Avicenna the First has no agent, it follows necessarily that its 
existence is jdentical with its essence. And therefore Ghazali’s objec- 
tion that Avicenna assimilates existence to a necessary attribute of 
the essence is not true, because the essence of a thing is the cause of 
its necessary attribute and it is not possible that a thing should be 
the cause of its own existence, because the existence of a thing is 
prior to its quiddity.? To identify the quiddity and the existence of a 
thing is not to do away with its quiddity, as Ghazali asserts, but is 
only the affirmation of the unity of quiddity and existence. If we 
regard existence as an accidental attribute of the existent, and it is 
the agent which gives possible things their existence, necessarily that 
which has no agent either cannot have an existence (and this is 
absurd), or its existence must be identical with its essence. 

But the whole of this discussion is built on the mistake that 
the existence of a thing is one of its attributes. For the existence 
which in our knowledge is prior to the quiddity of a thing is that 
which signifies the true.t Therefore the question whether a thing 
exists, either (1) refers to that which has a cause that deter- 
mines its existence, and in that case its potential meaning is to ask 
whether this thing has a cause or not, according to Aristotle at the 
beginning of the second chapter of the Posterior Analytics ;5 or (2) it 
refers to that which has no cause, and then its meaning is to ask 
whether a thing possesses a necessary attribute which determines its 

THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 237 

existence.! And when by ‘existent’ is meant what is understood by 
‘thing’ and ‘entity’,? it follows the rule of the genus which is predi- 
cated analogically,? and whatever it is in this sense is attributed in 
the same way to that which has a cause and to that which has none, 
and it does not signify anything but the concept of the existent, and 393 
by this is meant ‘the true’, and if i¢ means something additional to 
the essence, it is only in a subjective sense which does not exist outside 
the soul except potentially, as is also the case with the universal.4 And 
this is the way in which the ancient philosophers considered the First 
Principle, and they regarded ie as a simple existent. As to the later 
philosophers in Islam, they stated that, in their speculation about the 
nature of the existent qu¢ existent, they were led to accept a simple 5 
existent of this description. 

The best method to follow, in my opinion, and the nearest to strict 
proof, is to say that the actualization of existents which have in their 
substance a possible existence necessarily occurs only through an 
actualizer which is in act, i.e. acting, and moves them and draws 
them out of potency into act. And if this actualizer itself is also of the 
nature of the possible, i.e. possible in its substance, there will have to 
be another actualizer for it, necessary in its substance and not pos- 
sible, so that this sublunary world may be conserved, and the nature 
of the possible causes may remain everlastingly, proceeding without 
end. And if these causes exist without end, as appears from their 
nature, and each of them is possible, necessarily their cause, i.e. that 
which determines their permanence, must be something necessary 394 
in its substance, and if there were a moment in which nothing was 
moved at all, there would be no possibility of an origination of move- 
ment.5 The nexus between temporal existence and eternal can only 
take place without a change affecting the First through that move- 5 
ment which is partly eternal, partly temporal.® And the thing moved 
by this movement is what Avicenna calls ‘the existence necessary 
through another’, and this ‘necessary through another’ must be a 
body everlastingly moved, and in this way it is possible that the 
essentially temporal and corruptible should exist in dependence on 
the eternal, and this through approach to something and through 
recession from it, as you observe it happen to transitory cxistents in 
relation to the heavenly bodies.” And since this moved body is neces- 
sary in its substance, possible in its local movement, it is necessary 
that the process should terminate in an absolutely necessary existent 
in which there is no potency at all, either in its substance, or locally 

° 

o 

395 

wow 

lo 

396 

- 

238 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

or in any of the other forms of movement; and that which is 
of this description is necessarily simple, because if it were a com- 
pound, it would be possible, not necessary, and it would require a 
necessary existent. And this method of proving it is in my opinion 
sufficient, and it is true. 

However, what Avicenna adds to this proof by saying that the 
possible existent must terminate either in an existent necessary 
through another or in an existent necessary through itself, and in 
the former case that the necessary through another should be a 
consequence of the existent necessary through itself, for he affirms 
that the existent necessary through another is in itself a possible 
existent and what is possible needs something necessary—this addi- 
tion, is to my mind superfluous and erroneous, for in the necessary, 
in whatever way you suppose it, there is no possibility whatsoever 
and there exists nothing of a single nature of which it can be said 
that it is in one way possible and in another way necessary in its 
existence.' For the philosophers have proved that there is no possible 
whatsoever in the necessary; for the possible is the opposite of the 
necessary, and the only thing that can happen is that a thing should 
be in one way necessary, in another way possible, as they believed for 
instance to be the case with the heavenly body or what is above the 
body of the heavens, namely that it was necessary through its sub- 
stance and possible in its movement and in space. What led Avicenna 
to this division was that he believed that the body of the heavens was 
essentially necessary through another, possible by itsctf, and we haye 
shown in another place that this is not true. And the proof which 
Avicenna uses in dealing with the necessary existent, when this dis- 
tinction and this indication are not made, is of the type of common 
dialectical notions; when, however, the distinction is made, it is of 
the type of demonstrative proof. 

You must know further that the becoming of which the Holy Law 
speaks is of the kind of empirical becoming in this world, and this 
occurs in the forms of the existents which the Ash‘arites call mental 
qualities? and the philosophers call forms, and this becoming occurs 
only through another thing and in time, and the Holy Words: ‘Have 
not those who have disbelieved considered that the heavens and the 
earth were coherent, and we have rent them .. 3 and the Divine 
Words ‘then he straightened himself up to the sky which was 
smoke. . .’,4 refer to this. But as to the relation which exists between 
the nature of the possible existent and the necessary existent, about 

' THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 239 

this the Holy Law is silent, because it is too much above the under- 
standing of the common man and knowledge of it is not necessary for 
his blessedness. When the Ash‘arites affirm that the nature of the 
possible’ is created and has come into existence in time out of nothing 
{a notion which all the philosophers oppose, whether they believe in 
the temporal beginning of the world or not), they do not say this, if 
you consider the question rightly, on the authority of the law of Islam, 
and there is no proof for it. What appears from the Holy Law is the 
commandment to abstain from investigating that about which the 
Holy Law is silent, and therefore it is said in the Traditions: “The 
people did not cease thinking till they said: God has created this, 
but who has created God? And the Prophet said: When one of 
you finds this, this is an act of pure faith’, and in another version: 
‘When one of you finds this, let him read the verse of the Koran: 
Say, He, God is one. And know that for the masses to turn to 
such 2 question comes from the whisperings of Satan and therefore 
the prophet said: This is an act of pure faith”? 
Ghazali says: 

The second way is to say that an existence without quiddity or essence 
cannot be conceived, and just as mere non-existence, without 2 relation 
to an existent the non-existence of which can be supposed,’ cannot be 
conceived, in the same way existence can be only conceived in relation 
to a definite essence, especially when it is defined as a single essence; for 
how could it be defined as single, conceptually differentiated [rom others, 
if it had not a real essence? For to deny the «uiddity is to deny the real 
essence, and when you deny the real essence of the existent, the existent 
can no longer be understood. It is aa if the philosophers affirmed at the 
same lime existence and a non-existent, which is contradictory.4 This is 
shown by the fact that, if it were conceivable, it would be also possible 
in the effects that there should be an existence without an essence, par- 
ticipating with the First in not having a real essence and a quiddity, 
differing from it in having a cause, whereas the First is causeless. And why 
should such an effect not be imagined? And is there any other reason for 
this than that it is inconceivable in itself? But what is inconceivable in itself 
does not become conceivable by the denial of its cause, nor dors what is 
conceivable become inconceivable because it is supposed to have a cause, 
Suck an extreme negation is the most obscure of their theories, although 
they believe indeed thatthey have proved what they say. Theirdoctrine ends 
in absolute negation, and indeed the denial of the quiddity is the denial 
of the real essence, and through the denial of this reality nothing remains 
but the word ‘existence’, which has no object at all when it is not related 
to a quiddicy.s 

397 

3 

398 

ad 

10 

399 

a 

240 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

And if it is said; ‘Its reat essence is that it ts the necessary, and the 
necessary is its quiddity’, we answer: ‘The only sense of ‘‘necessary” is 
“causeless’’, and this is a negation which does not constitute a real essence; 
and the denial of a cause for the rea! essence presupposes the real essence, 
and therefore let the essence be conceivable, so that it can be described as 
being causeless; but the essence cannot be represented as non-existent, 
since ‘‘necessity”’ has no other meaning than “being causeless”’.! Besides, if 
the necessity were added to the existence, this would form a plurality; and 
if itis not added, haw then could it be the quiddity? For the existence is not 
the quiddity, and thus what is not added to the existence cannot be the 
quiddity either.’ 

J say: 

This whole paragraph is sophistry. For the philosophers do not 
assume that the First has an existence without a quiddity and a quid- 
dity without an existence. They believe only that the existence in the 
compound is an additional attribute to its essence and it only acquires 
this attribute through the agent, and they believe that in that which 
is simple and causeless this attribute is not additional to the quiddity 
and that it has no quiddity differentiated from its existence; but they 
do not say that it has absolutely no quiddity, as he assumes in his 
objection against them.? 

Having assumed that they deny the quiddity—which is false-— 
Ghazali begins now to charge them with reprehensible theories and 
says: 

If this were conceivable it would also be possible in the effects that there 
should be an existence without an essence, participating with the First in 
not having a real essence. 

I say; 

But the philosophers do not assume an existent absolutcly without 
a quiddity: they only assume that it has not a quiddity like the quid- 
dities of the other existents; and this is one of the sophistical fallacies, 
for the term ‘quiddity’ is ambiguous, and this assumption, and every- 
thing built upon it, is a sophistical argument, for the non-existent 
cannot be described either by denying or by affirming something of 
it. And Ghazali, by fallacies of the kind perpetrated in this book, is 
not exempt from wickedness or from ignorance, and he seems nearer 
to wickedness than to ignorance—or should we say that there is a 
necessity which obliged him to do this? 

And as to his remark, that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is 
‘causcless’, this is not true, but our expression that it is a necessary 

THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION 241 

existent has a positive meaning, consequent on a nature which has 
absolutely no cause, no exterior agent, and no agent which is part 
of it, 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

If the necessity were added to the existence, this would form a plucality; 
and if it is not added, how then could it be the quiddity? For existence is 
not the quiddity, and thus what is not added to the existence cannot be the 
quiddity either. 

I say: 

According to the philosophers necessity is not an attribute added to 
the essence, and it is predicated of the essence in the same way as we 
say of it that it is inevitable and eternal.' And likewise if we under- 
stand by ‘existence’ a mental attribute, it is not an addition to the 
essence, but if we understand it as being an accident, in the way 
Avicenna regards it in the composite existent, then it becomes diffi- 
cult to explain how the uncompounded can be the quiddity itself, 
although one might say perhaps: ‘In the way the knowledge in the 
uncompounded becomes the knower himself.’ If, however, one re- 
gards the existent as the true, all these doubts lose their meaning, and 
likewise, if one understands ‘existent’ as having the same sense as 
‘entity’, and according io this it is truc that the existence in the un- 
compounded is the quiddity itself. 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 
To refute their proof that the First is incorporeal 

» Ghazali says: 

There is a proof only for him who believes that body is only temporal, 
because it cannot be exempt from what is temporal and everything that 
is ternporal needs a creator.t But you, when you admit an eternal body 
which has no beginning for its existence, although it is not exempt from 
temporal occurrences, why do you regard it as impossible that the First 
should be a body, cither the sun, or the extreme heaven, or something 
else? 

If the answer is made ‘Because body must be composite and divisible 
into parts quantitatively, and into matter and form conceptually, and into 
qualities which characterize it necessarily so that it can be differentiated 
from other bodies (for otherwise all bodies in being body would be similar) 

400 

401 

10 

402 

o 

To 

403 

242 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and the necessary existent is one and cannot be divided in any of these ways? 
we answer: ‘We have already refuted you in this, and have shown that you 
have no proof for it except that a collection is an effect, since some of its 
parts require others, and we have argued against it and have shown that 
when it is not impossible to suppose an existent without a creator, it is not 
impossible to suppose a compound without a composing principle and to 
suppose many existents without a creator, since you have based your denial 
of plurality and duality on the denial of composition and your denial of 
composition on the denial of a quiddity distinct from existence, and with 
Tespect to the Jast principle we have asked for its foundation and we have 
shown that it js a mere presuinption,’ 

And if it is said: ‘Ifa body has no soul, it cannot be an agent, and when 
it has a soul, well, then its soul is its cause, and then body cannot be the 
First’, we answer: ‘Our soul is not the cause of the existence of our body, 
nor is the sou! of the sphere in itself a cause of its body, according to you, 
but they are two, having a distinct cause; and if they can be eternal, it is 
possible that they have no cause.’ 

And if the question is asked, ‘How can the conjunction of soul and body 
come about?’, we answer, ‘One might as well ask how the existence of the 
First comes about; the answer is that such a question may he asked about 
what is temporal, but about what is eternally existent one cannot ask how 
it has come about, and therefore* since body and its soul are both eternally 
existent, it is not impossible that their compound should be a creator." 

I say: 

When a man has no other proof that the First is not body than 
that he believes that all bodics are temporal, how weak is his proof, 
and how far distant from the nature of what has to be proved !—since 
it has been shown previously that the proofs on which the theologians 
build their statement that all bodies are temporal are conflicting; 
and what is more appropriate than to regard an eternal composite as 
possibte, as I said in this book when speaking of the Ash‘arites, i.e. in 
saying that according to them an eternal body is possible, since in the 
accidents there is some eternal clement, according to their own 
theory, for instance, the characteristic of forming a compound; and 
therefore their proof that all bodies are temporal is not valid, because 
they base it exclusively on the temporal becoming of the accidents,? 
The ancient philosuphers do not allow for the existence of a body 
eternal through itself, but only of one eternal through another, and 
therefore according to them there must be an existent eternal through 
itself through which the eternal body becomes eternal. But if we 
expound their theories here, they have only a dialectical value, and 
you should therefore instead ask for their proofs in their proper place. 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 243 

And as to Ghazali’s refutation of this, and his words: 

We answer: ‘We have already refuted you in this, and we have shown 
that you have no proof for this except that a collection is an effect, since 
some of its parts require others. 

I say: 

He means that he has discussed this already previously, and he 
says that the philosophers cannot prove that the existent necessary 
through itself is not a body, since the meaning of ‘existent necessary 
through itself’ is ‘that which has no efficient cause’, and why should 
they regard an eternal body which has no efficient cause as impos- 
sible—and especially when it should be supposed to be a simple 
body, indivisible quantitatively or qualitatively, and in short an 
eternal composite! without a composing principle? This is a sound 
argument from which they cannot escape except through dialectical 
arguments? But all the arguments which Ghazali gives in this book 
either against or on behalf of the philosophers or against Avicenna 
are dialectical through the cquivocation of the terms used, and 
therefore it is not necessary to expatiate on this. 

And as to his answer on behalf of the Ash‘arites that what is 
eternal through itself does not need a cause for its eternity, and that 
when the theologians assume something eternal through itself and 
assume its essence as the cause of its attributes,? this essence does not 
become eternal because of something else, 

fT say: 

It is a necessary consequence to be held up against Ghazali that 
the Eterna! will be composed of a cause and an effect, and chat the 
attributes will be eternal through their cause, i.e. the essence. And 
since the effect is not a condition for its own existence, the Eternal is 
the cause. And let us say that the essence which exists by itself is God 
and that the attributes are effects; then it can be argued against the 
theologians that they assume one thing eterna! by itselfand a plurality 
of things eternal through another, and that the combination of all 
these is God. But this is exactly their objection against those who say 
that God is eternal through Himself and the world eternal through 
another, namcly God. Besides, they say that the Eternal is one, and 
all this is extremely contradictory. 

And as to Ghazali’s statement that to assume a compound without 
the factor which composes it, is not different from assuming an exis- 
tent without a creator, and that the assumption cither of a simgle 

404 

405 

to 

406 

244 ' ‘TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

existent of this description or of a plurality is not an impossible sup- 
position for the mind, all this is erroneous. For composition does not 
demand a composing factor which again itself is composed, but there 
must be a series leading up to a composing factor composing by itsetf, 
just as, when che cause is an effect, there must finally be a cause 
which is not an effect. Nor is it possible, by means of an argument 
which leads to an existent without a creator, to prove the oneness of 
this existent.! 

And as to his assertion that the denial of the quiddity implies the 
denial of the composition, and that this implies the assertion of com- 
position in the First,? this is not true. And indeed the philosophers 
do not deny the quiddity of the First, but only deny that it has the 
kind of quiddity which is in the effects, and all this is a dialectical 
and doubtful argument. And already previously in this book we have 
given convincing arguments, according to the principles of the philo- 
sophers, to prove that the First is incorporeal, namely that the possible 
leads to a necessary existent and that the possible does not proceed 
from the necessary except through the mediation of an existent which 
is partly necessary, partly possible, and that this is the body of the 
heavens and its circular motion; and the most satisfactory way of 
expressing this according to the principles of the philosophers is to 
say that all bodies are finite in power, and that they only acquire 
their power of infinite movement through an incorporeal being.? 

Ghazali answering the objectidén which infers that according to 
the philosophers the agent is nothing but the sphere, composed of 
soul and body, says: 

If it is answered: ‘This cannot be so, because body in so far as it is body 
does not create anything else and the soul which is attached to the body 
does not act except through the mediation of the body, but the body is not 
a means for the soul in the latter's creating bodies or in causing the exist- 
ence of souls and of things which are not related to bodies’, we answer: 
‘And why is it not possible that there should be amongst the souls a soul 
which has the characteristic of being so disposed that both hadies and 
incorporeals are produced through it? The impossibility of this is not a 
thing known necessarily, nor is there a proof for it, except that we da not 
experience this in the bedies we obserye; but the absence of experience 
does not demonstrate its impossibility, and indeed the philosophers often 
ascribe things to the First Existent which are not generally ascribed to 
existents, and are not experienced in any other existent, and the absence of 
its being observed in other things is not a proof ofits impossibility in reference 
to the First Existent, and the same holds concerning the body and its soul,’ 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 245 

I say: 

As to his assertion that bodies de not create bodies, if by ‘creating’ 
is understood producing, the reverse is true, for a body in the empiri- 
cal world can only come into being through a body,’ and an ani- 
mated body only through an animated body,” but the absolute body 
does not come into being at all, for, if it did, it would come into being 
Jjrom non-existence, not after non-existence.? Individual bodies only 
come into being out of individual bodies and through individual 
badies,* and this through the body’s being transferred from ane name 
to another and from one definition to another, so that for instance the 
body of water changes into the body of fire, because out of the body 
of water is transformed the attribute through the transformation of 
which the name and definition of water is transferred to the name 
and definition of fire, and this happens necessarily through a body 
which is the agent, participating with the becoming body specifically 
or generically in either a univocal or an analogical way;5 and 
whether the individual special corporeality in the water is trans- 
formed into the individual special corporeality of the fire is a problem 
to be studied.* 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

But the body is not a means for the soul in the latter’s creating bodies or 
in causing the existence of souls, 

I say: 

This is an argument which he builds on an opinion some of the 
philosophers hold, that the bestower of forms on inanimate bodies 
and of souls is a separate substance, either intellect or a separate 
soul, and that it is not possible that either an animated body or an 
inanimate body should supply this. And if this opinion is held and at 
the same time it is assumed that heaven is an animated body, it is no 
longer possible for heaven to supply any of the transitory forms, 
either the sou! or any other of these forms. For the soul which is in 
the body only acts through the mediation of the body, and that which 
acts through the mediation of the body can produce neither form nor 
soul, since it is not of the nature of the body to produce a substantial 
form, either a soul or any other substantial form. And this theory 
resembles that of Plato about forms separate from matter, and is the 
theory of Avicenna and others among the Muslim philosophers; 
their proof is that the body produces in the body only warmth or 
cold or moisture or dryness,? and only these are acts of the heavenly 

we 

407 

to 

409 

o 

246 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

bodies according to them. But that which produces the substantial 
forms, and especially those which are animated, is a separate sub- 
stance which they call the giver of forms.’ But there are philosophers* 
who believe the contrary and affirm that what produces the forms 
in the bodies is bodies possessing forms similar to them either speci- 
fically or generically, those similar specifically being the living bodies 
which produce the living bodies of the empirical world, like the 
animals which are generated from other animals, whereas those 
forms produced by forms generically similar, and which are not 
produced from a male or a female, receive their lives according to 
the philosophers from the heavenly bodies, since these are alive. And 
these philosophers have non-empirical proofs which, however, need 
not be mentioned here,? 

And therefore Ghazali argues against them in this way: 

And why is it not possible that there should be among the souls a soul 
which has the characteristic of being so disposed that both bodies and 
incorporeals are produced through it? 

I say; 

He means: ‘Why should it not be possible that there should be 
among the souls in bodies souls which have the characteristic of 
generating other animate and inanimate forms?’ And how strange 
it is that Ghazali assumes that the production of body out of body 
does not happen in the empirical world, whereas nothing else is 
ever observed. 

But you must understand that when the statements of the philo- 
sophers are abstracted from the demonstrative sciences they certainly 
become dialectical, whether they are generally acknowledged, or, if 
not, denied and regarded as strange. The reason is that demonstra- 
tive statements are only distinguished from statements which are not 
demonstrative, by being considered in the genus of science which is 
under investigation.4 Those statements which can be subsumed under 
the definition of this genus of science, or which comprise in their 
definition this genus of science, are demonstrative, and those state- 
ments which do not seem to fulfil these conditions are not demonstra- 
tive. Demonstration is only possible when the nature of this genus of 
science under investigation is defined, and the sense in which its 
essential predicates exist is distinguished from the sense in which they 
do not, and when this is retained in mind by keeping to that sense in 
every statement adopted in this science, and by having the identical 
meaning always present in the mind. And when the sou! is convinced 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 247 

that the statement is essential to this genus or a necessary conse- 
quence of its essence, the statement is true; but when this relation 
does not enter into the mind, or when it is only weakly established, 
the statement is only an opinion, and is not evident. And therefore 
the difference between proof and convincing opinion is more delicate 
than the appearance of a hair and more completely hidden than the 
exact limit between darkness and light, especially in theologicai* 
questions which are laid before the common people, because of the 
confusion between what is essential and what is accidental. Therefore 
we see that Ghazali, by relating the theories of the philosophers in 
this and others of his books and by showing them to people who have 
not studied their works with the necessary preparation the philo- 
sophers demand, changes the nature of the truth which exists in their 
theories or drives most people away from all their views. And by so 
doing he does more harm than good to the cause of truth. And God 
knows that I should not have related a single one of their views, or 
regarded this as permissible, but for the harm which results from 
Ghazali’s doings to the cause of wisdom; and I understand by 
‘wisdom’ speculation about things according to the rules of the nature 
of proof. 
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

If it is said that the highest sphere, or the sun, or whatever body you 
may imagine, possesses a special size which may be increased or decreased, 
and this possible size needs for its differentiation a differentiating principle 
and can therefore not be the First,! we answer: By what argument will 
you refute the man who says that this body must have the size it possesses* 
for the sake of the order of the universe, and this order could not exist 
if this body were smaller or Jarger—since you philosophers yourselves 
affiem that the first effect? determines the size of the highest sphere because 
all sizes are equivalent in relation to the essence of the first effect, but 
certain sizes are deterinined for the sake of the order which depends on 
them and therefore the actual size is necessary and no other is possible; 
and alt this holda just as well when no effect is assumed.> Indeed, if the 
philosophers had established in the first effect, which is according to the 
Philosophers the cause of the highest sphere, a specifying principle, as for 
instance the will, a further question might be put, since it might be asked 
why this principle willed this actual size rather than another, in the way 
the philosophers argued against the Muslims about their theory of the 
relation between the temporal world and the Eternal Will, an argument 
which we turned against them with respect to the problems of the deter- 
mination of the direction of the heavenly movement and of the determina- 
tion of the points of the poles. And if it is clear that they are forced to admit 

410 © 

411 

412 

248 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that a thing is differentiated from a similar one and that this happens 
through a cause, itis unessential whether this differentiation be regarded as 
possible without a cause or through a cause, for it is indifferent whether 
one puts the question about the thing itself and asks why it has such-and- 
such a size, or whether one puts the question about the cause, and asks 
why it gave this thing this special size; and if the question about the cause 
may be answered by saying that this special measure is not like any other, 
because the order depends on it exclusively, the same answer may be 
made about the thing itself, and it will not need a cause. And there is no 
escape from this. For if the actual size which has been determined and has 
tbeen realized were equivalent to the size which has not been realized, 
“one might ask how one thing comes to be differentiated from a similar one, 
especially according to the principle of the philosophers who do not 
admit a differentiating will. If, however, there is no similar size, no pos- 
sibility exists, and one must answer? ‘This has been so from all eternity, 
and in the same way therefore as, according to the philosophers, the 
eternal cause exists.’? And let the man who studies this question seek help 
from what we said about their asking about the eternal will, a question 
which we turned against them with respect to the points of the poles and 
the direction of the movement of the sphere. It is therefore clear that the 
man who does not believe jn the temporal creation of the bodies cannot 
establish a proof that the First is incorporeal. 

I say: 

This indeed is a very strange argument of Ghazali’s, For he argues 
that they cannot prove another creator than the heavenly body, 
since they would have to give an answer by a principle in which they 
do not believe. For only the theologians accept this principle, since 
they say that heaven receives the determinate size it has, to the exclu- 
sion of other sizes it might have, from a differentiating cause, and 
that the differentiating principle must be eternal. He either attempted 
to deceive in this matter or was himself deceived. For the differentia- 
tion which the philosophers infer is different from that which the 
Ash‘arites intend, for the Ash‘arites understand by ‘differentiation’ 
the distinguishing of one thing either from a similar one or from an 
opposite one without this being determined by any wisdom in the 
thing itself which makes it necessary to differentiate one of the two 
opposite things. The philosophers, on the other hand, understand 
here by the differentiating principle only that which is determined by 
the wisdom in the product itself, namely the final cause, for according 
to them there is no quantity or quality in any being that has not an 
end based on wisdom, an end which must either be a necessity in the 
nature of the act of this being or exist in it, based on the principle of 

THE NINTH DISCUSSION 249 

superiority.’ For if, so the philosophers believe, there were in created 
things a quantity or quality not determined by wisdom, they would 20 
have attributed to the First Maker and Creator an attitude in relation 

to His work which may be only attributed to the artisans among His 
creatures, with the intention of blaming them.* For when one has 
observed a work with respect to its quantity and quality, and asked 
why the maker of this work chose this quantity or this quality to the 
exclusion of all other possible quantities and qualities, there is no 
worse mistake than to answer ‘Not because of the intrinsic wisdom 
and thoughtfulness in the product itself, but because he willed it,’ 
since according to this view all quantities and qualities are similar 
with respect to the end of this product, which in fact the maker 
produced for its own sake, namely for the sake of the act for whose 
purpose it exists. For indeed every product is produced in view of $13 
something in it which would not proceed from it, if this product had 

no definite quantity, quality and nature*, although in some products 

an equivalent is possible. If any product whatever could determine 
any act whatever, there would exist no wisdom at all in any product, 5 
and there would be no art at all, and the quantities and qualities of 
the products would depend on the whim of the artisan and every 
man would be an artisan.? Or should we rather say that wisdom exists 
only in the product of the creature, not in the act of the Creator? But 
God forbid that we should believe such a thing of the First Creator; 
on the contrary, we believe that everything in the world is wisdom, 
although in many things our understanding of it is very imperfect 
and although we understand the wisdem of the Creator only through 
the wisdom of nature, And if the world is one single product of ex- 
treme wisdom, there is one wise principle whose existence the heavens 
and the carth and everything* in them need.* Indeed, nobody can 
regard the product of such wonderful wisdom as caused by itself, 
and the theologians in their wish to elevate the Creator have denied 
Him wisdom and withheld from Him the noblest of His qualities. 

250 

414 THE TENTH DISCUSSION 

To prove their incapacity to demonstrate that the world has a 
creator and a cause, and that in fact they are forced to admit 
atheism 

Ghazali says: 

Their statement that body needs a creator and a cause can be understood 
8 from the theory of those! who argue that all bodies are temporal, because 
they cannot exist without what is temporal. But what keeps you philoso- 
phers from the doctrine of the materialists, namely that the world is eternal 
in the condition in which it actually ts, and that it has no cause and 
no creator, that there is only a cause for temporal events and that no body 
comes into existence and no body is annihilated, and that only forms and 
accidents come into existence, for the bodies are the heavens (which are 
eternal) and the four elements, which are the stuff of the sublunary world, 
and their bodies and matters are eternal too, and there is only a change 
of forms in them through mixtures and alterations ;? and that the souls of 
men and animals and plants come into existence, that all the causes of 
to these temporal events terminate in the circular movement, and that the 
circular movement is ¢lernal and its source the eternal soul of the sphere. 
Therefore there is no cause for the world and no creator for its bodies, but 
since the world, as it js, is eternal, there is no cause for it, i.e. no cause for 
its bodies, For indeed, what sense is there in the doctrine of the philoso- 
phers that these bodies exist through a cause, although they are eternal? 

415 I say: 

The philosophers assert that the man who says that all bodies have 
been produced (and by ‘produced’ must be understood creation ex 
nifilo) gives a meaning to the term ‘produced’ which is never found 
in the empirical world, and his statement surely stands in need of a 
proof. As to his attacks on the philosophers in this passage, so that he 
even forces on them the implication of atheism, we have already 

§ answered them previously and there is no sense in repeating our- 
selves, but, in short, the philosophers hold that body, be it temporal or 
eternal, cannot be independent in existence through itself; and this 
principle is, according to the philosophers, binding for the eternal 
body in the same way as for the temporal, although imagination 
does not help to explain how this is the case with the cternal body 
in the way it is with the temporal body.’ Aristotle therefore, in the 
second book of De caelo ef mundo,4 when he wanted to explain the fact 

xo that the earth was circular by nature*, first assumed it to have come 

THE TENTH DISCUSSION 251 

into being in time so that the intellect might imagine its cause, and 
then transferred its existence to eternity. 

Having forced on the philosophers these reprehensible deductions, 
Ghazali now gives an answer in defence of them and objects then to 
their answer. 

Ghazali says: 

And if the philosophers say : ‘Everything that has no cause is of a neces- 
sary existence, and we philosophers have already mentioned the qualities 
of the necessary existent through which it is proved that body cannot be 
the necessary existent,’ we answer: We have shown the mistake in your 
claim about the attributes of the necessary existent, and that your proof 
does not demonstrate anything but the termination of a causal series, and 
this termination also exists for the materialists at the beginning of things," 
for they say that there is no cause for the bodies, and the forms and 
accidents are causes for each other and terminate in the circular movement 
part of which is the cause of another part in the same way as it takes place 
according to the doctrine of the philosophers, and this causal series* ends 
in this circular movement. 

And the man whe observes what we have related will understand the 
inability of those who believe in the eternity of bodies to claim at the 
same time that they have a cause, and the consequence of their theory 
is atheism and apostasy, which one party has clearly admitted, those 
namely who rely solely on the determinations of the intellect. 

I say: 

All this has been already answered, and its degree of truth has 
been stated, and there is no reason to repeat ourselves. And as to the 
materialists, they rely only on the senses, and when according to 
them the movements had terminated in the heavenly body and 
through this the causal series was ended, they thought that where 
sensation had come to a limit, the intellect also had come to a limit; 
but this is not true. But the philosophers considered the causes till 
they ended in the heavenly body, then they considered the intelligible 
causes and arrived at an existent which cannot be perceived and 
which is the principle of perceptible being, and this is the meaning 
of the words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the Kingdom of Heaven 
and of the earth. . . .”3 The Ash‘arites, however, rejected sensible 
causes; that is, chey denied that certain sensible things are the causes of 
other sensible things, and they made the cause of sensible being a non- 
sensible being by a way of becoming which is neither experienced nor 
perceived, and they denied causes and effects; and this is a kind of view 
which is inconsistent with the nature of man in so far as he is man.* 

416 

°o 

417 

w 

418 

419 

252 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Ghazali says, objecting to the argument of the philosophers: 

If it is said that the proof that body is not a necessary existent ia that, 
if it were a necessary existent, it would have neither an external nor an 
internal cause, but ifit has a cause for its being composed, it will be possible 
in respect of its essence, and every possible needs a necessary existent, 
we answer: The terms ‘necessary existent’ and ‘possible existent’ are 
devoid of sense, and your whole confusion lies in these terms; but let us 
revert to their plain sense, which is the denial and the affirmation of a 
cause, for then your words amount to nothing else but saying that bodies 
either have a cause or not, and the materialists affirm the latter,, and why 
should you deny it? And when this is understood by ‘possibility’ and ‘neces- 
sity’, we say body is necessary and not possible, and your statement that 
body cannot be necessary is pure presumption without any foundation. 

I say: 

We have already said that if by ‘necessary existent’ is understood 
the causcless and by ‘possible existent’ is understood that which has a 
cause, the division of being into these two sections is not acknow- 
ledged, and opponents might say that this divisionis not true, but that, 
indecd, all existents are causeless. But when by ‘necessary existent’ is 
understood absolute necessary being and by ‘possible’ the genuinely 
possible, then we must arrive at a being which has no cause, for we 
can say that every being is either possible or necessary; if possible, it 
has a cause, and if this cause is of the nature of the possible, we have a 
series which ends in a necessary cause. Then, concerning this neces- 
sary cause it may be asked again whether some necessary beings 
might have a cause and other necessary beings none, and if a cause 
is ascribed to the nature of the necessary being which can have a 
cause, there will follow a series which ends in a necessary being which 
has no cause. Avicenna wanted by this division only to conform to the 
opinion of the philosophers concerning existents, for all philosophers 
agree that the body of the heavens is necessary through something 
else; whether, however, this thing necessary through ancther is pos- 
sible by itself is a problem which has to be studied.? And this argu- 
ment is therefore faulty when this method is followed, and this 
method is of necessity faulty, because being is not primarily divided 
into the genuinely possible and the necessary, for this is a division 
which is only known through the nature of existing things.* 

Then Ghazali answers the philosophers’ statement that body can- 
not be a necessary existent by itself, because it has parts which are its 
cause. 

THE TENTH DISCUSSION 253 

If it is said: ‘It cannot be denied that body has parts, and that the whole 
is only constituted through the parts, and that the parts in a thing are 
prior to the whole,” we answer: ‘Let it be so; certainly, the whole is 
constituted by the parts and their aggregation, but there is no cause for 
the parts nor for their aggregation, which on the contrary are eternally 
in the condition in which they are without an efficient cause.’ And the 
philosophers cannot refute this, except by the argument of theirs which 
we have mentioned, which is based on the denial of plurality in the First; 
we have shown its futility, and apart from it there is no other method. 
It is therefore clear that for the man who does not believe in the temporal 
creation of bodies there is no foundation for believing in a creator at all. 

I say: 

This argument is, without doubt, binding for the man who follows 
the method of a necessary existent to prove the existence of an 
incorporeal being, but this is not the method followed by the ancient 
philosophers, and the first, so far as we know, who used it was Avi- 
cenna. He said that it was superior to the proof of the ancients, 
because the ancients arriv7d only at an immaterial being, the prin- 
ciple of the universe, through derivative things, namely motion and 
time; whereas this proof, according to Avicenna, arrives at the asser- 
tion of such a principle as the ancients established, through the in- 
vestigation of the nature of the existent in so far as it is an existent. 
If indeed it did arrive at such an affirmation, what Avicenna says 
would be true; however, it does not.' For the most that could be 
affirmed of the existent necessarily existing by itself would be that it 
is not composed of matter and form, and generally speaking that it 
has no definition. But if it is supposed to exist as composed of eternal 
parts which are continuous by nature, as is the case with the world 
and its parts, it may indeed be said of the world with its parts chat 
it is a necessary existent,? it being of course understood that there 
is a necessary existent. And we have already said that the method 
Avicenna followed to establish an existent of this description is not 
demonstrative and does not by nature lead to it, except in the way 
we have stated. The utmost consequence of this argument—and this 
constitutes its weakness—is the theory of those, namely the Peripa- 
tetics, who assume that there exists a simple body not composed of 
matter and form. For the man who assumes an eternal compound of 
actual parts must necessarily acknowledge that it is essentiatly one, 
and every oneness in a compound is one through an essential unity, 
namely a simple, and through this unity the world becomes one, and 
therefore Alexander of Aphrodisias says that there must exist a 

w 

Oo 

421 

10 

422 

254 TAHAFUT AL -TAHAFUT 

spiritual force which is diffused in all the parts of the universe in the 
same way as there is a force in all the parts of a single animal which 
binds them together, and the difference between the two forces is 
that the binding force in the world is eternal, because the conjoining 
principle is eternal, whereas the conjunction between the parts of the 
sublunary animal is individually transitory—although, through the 
eternal conjunction, not specifically wansitory'’—since it cannot be 
individually imperishable like the world.? And through this theory the 
Creator will be deprived of that very kind of perfection which nothing 
else can equal, as Aristotle says in his book De animalibus.s And we see 
nowadays that many of Avicenna’s followers because of this aporia 
ascribe this opinion to him, and they say that he does not believe 
that there exisis a separate existence, and they assert that this can 
be seen from what he says about the necessary existent in many pas- 
sages, and that this is the view which he has laid down in his Oriental 
Philosophy, and they say that he only called this book Grientat 
Philosephy* because it is the doctrine of the Orientals; for they believed 
that according to the Orientals divinity is located in the heavenly 
bodies, as Avicenna himself had come to believe. However, notwith- 
standing this they accept* Aristotle’s argument to prove the First 
Principle through movement. 

And as for ourselves, we have discussed this argument at other 
times and have shown in what sense it can be regarded as evident, 
and we have solved all the doubts concerning it; we have also dis- 
cussed Alexander’s argument on this question, namely the one he 
uses in his book called On the principles.s For Alexander imagined that 
he was turning from Aristotle’s argument to another; his argument, 
however, is taken from the principles which Aristotle proved, and 
both arguments are sound, though the more usual* is Aristotle’s, 

And when the argument for a necessary existent is verified, it is 
true according to me in the way I shall describe it, although it is used 
too generally and its different senses muse be distinguished. Ic must, 
namely, be preceded by knowledge of the different kinds of possible 
existents in substance and the different kinds of necessary existents in 
substance, And then this argument takes this form: The possible 
existent in bodily substance must be preceded by the necessary 
existent in bodily substance, and the necessary existent in bodily 
substance must be preceded by the absolute necessary existent which 
does not possess any potency whatsoever, either in its substance or in 
any other of the different kinds of movements, and such an entity is 

THE TENTH DISCUSSION 255 

not a body. For instance, it appears from the nature of the body of 
the heavens that it is a necessary existent in its bodily substance,! for 10 
otherwise there would have to be a body prior to it, and it appears 
also from its nature that it is a possible existent in its local movement; 

it is therefore necessary that its mover should be a necessary existent 

in its substance, and that there should be in it no potency whatsoever, 
either as regards movement or in any other respect, and that neither 423 
movement nor rest could be ascribed to it nor any other kind of 
change, and such an entity is absolutely without body and without 
any potency in a body. But the eternal parts of the world are only 
necessary existents in their substance, either universally like the four 
elements, or individually like the heavenly bodies.? 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 424 

To show the incapacity of those philosophers who believe that the 
First knows other things beside its own self and that it knows the 
genera and the species in a universal way, to prove that this 1s so 

Ghazali says: 

Since for the Muslims existence is confined to the temporal and the 
eternal, and there is for them nothing eternal except God and His attri- 5 
butes, and everything besides Him is temporally created by Him through 
His will, according to them the existent of necessity exists previously in 
His knowledge, for the object willed must be known by the willer. They 
deduced from this that the universe is known to Him, for the universe was 
willed by Him and produced by Him, and nothing comes into existence 
but what is produced through His will, and nothing is everlasting but 
His essence alone. And when once it was established that God wills and 
knows what He wills, He must be necessarily living? and every living 
being is conscious of its own self,t and He is the most capable of knowing 
Himself. Therefore the whole universe is known to God, and they under- 
stood this through this argument, since they had found that He wiiled 
everything that happens in the world. 10 

I say: 
He says this only as an introduction and preparation for the com- 
parison between his theory and that of the philosophers about eternal 

425 

ao 

to 

426, 

256 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

knowledge, because his theory seems at first sight more satisfactory 
than that of the phifosophers. But when the theory of the theologians 
is tested, and shown up to him for whom such an exposure is neces- 
sary, it becomes clear that they only made God an eternal man," 
for they compared the world with the products of art wrought by the 
will and knowledge and power of man. And when it was objected 
against them that He must then have a body, they answered that He 
is eternal and that all bodies are temporal. They were therefore 
forced to admit an immaterial man who produces all existents, But 
this theory is nothing but a metaphor and a poetical expression; and 
metaphorical expressions are certainly very convincing, till they are 
explored, but then their deficiency becomes evident. For indeed there 
is no nature more distant from that of the transitory than that of the 
eternal. And if this is true, it cannot be that there should exist one 
single species which is differentiated by eternity and non-eternity? as 
one single genus is differentiated through the various differences into 
which it is divided. For the distance between the eternal and the 
temporal is far greater than that between the different species which 
participate in temporality. And if the distance between eternity and 
non-eternity is greater than that between the various species, how 
then is it possible to apply a judgement about the empirical world to 
the invisible: for those two are opposite extremes? And when you 
have understood the sense of the attributes which exist in the visible 
world and those which exist in the invisible world, it will be clear 
to you that through the ambiguity of the terms they are so equivocal 
that they do not permit a transference from the visible to the invisible. 

Life, for instance, added to the intellect of man only applies to the 
potentiality of motion in space through will and sense-perception,? 
but senses are impossible for the Creator and still more impossible for 
Him is motion in space. But the theologians ascribe to the Creator the 
faculty ofsense-perception* without sense-organs, and deny His move- 
ment absolutely. Therefore either they do not ascribe life to the 
Creator in the sense it has in the animal and which is a condition for 
the existence of knowledge in mun, or they identify it with perception 
in the way the philosophers say that perception and knowledge in 
the First are identical with life. Further, the meaning of ‘will’* in man 
and in animal is a desire which rouses movement and which 
happens in animal and man to perfect a deficiency in their essence, 
and it is impossible that there should be in the Creator a desire 
because of an imperfection in His essence, which could be a cause of 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 257 

movement and action either in Himself or in something different 
from Himself. And how could an eternal will be imagined which 
should be the cause of an act occurring without an increase of the 
desire at the time of the act,! or how could a will and a desire be 
imagined which would be before, during, and after the act in the 
same state without any change occurring to them? And again, desire 
(in so far as it is the cause of movement) and movement are only 
found in body, and desire is only found in the animate body. There- 
fore according to the philosophers the meaning of ‘will’ in God is 
nothing but that every act proceeds from Him through knowledge, 
and knowledge in so far as it is knowledge is the knowledge of oppo- 
sites, either of which can proceed from Him. And the Knower is 
called excellent by the fact that there always proceeds from Him the 
better of the opposites to the exclusion of the worse, Therefore 
the philosophers say that three attributes are most appropriate to the 
Creator, namely that He has knowledge, excellence, and power. And 
they say that His power is not inferior to His will, as is the case with 
man. 

All this is the theory of the philosophers on this problem and in 
the way we have stated it here with its proofs, it is a persuasive not 
a demonstrative statement. It is for you to inquire about these ques- 
tions in the places where they are treated in the books of demonstra- 
tion, if you are one of the people of perfect eudaemonia, and if you 
are one of those who learn the arts the function of which is proof. For 
the demonstrative arts are very much like the practical; for just as 
aman who is not a craftsman cannot perform the function of crafts~ 
manship, in the same way it is not possible for him who has not learned 
the arts of demonstration to perform the function of demonstration 
which is demonstration itself: indeed this is sll more necessary for 
this art than for any other—and this is not generally acknowledged 
in the case of this practice only because it is a mere act*—and there- 
fore such a demonstration can proceed only from one who has learned 
the art. The kinds of statement, however, are many, some demonstra- 
tive, others not, and since non-demonstrative statements can be 
adduced without knowledge of the art, it was thought that this might 
be also the case with demonstrative statements; but this is a great 
error. And therefore in the spheres of the demonstrative arts, no other 
statement is possible but a technical statement which only the student 
of this art can bring, just as is the case with the art of geometry. 
Nothing therefore of what we have said in this book is a technical 

427 

428 

258 : TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

demonstrative proof; they are all non-technical statements, some of 
them having greater persuasion than others, and it is in this spirit 
that what we have written here must be understood. So this book of 
Ghazali might be best given the name of the ‘Incoherence of both 
parties together’. 

All this in my opinion is in excess of the Holy Law, and an inquiry 
into something not ordered by a religious law because human power 
does not suffice for it. For not all knowledge about which the Holy 

. Law is silent needs to be explored and explained to the masses as 

429 

430 

being, according to speculative thought, part of the dogmas of reli- 
gion; for from this the greatest confusion arises. One must not speak 
about those things concerning which the Holy Law is silent; the 
masses must learn that human understanding is not sufficient to 
treat these problems, and must not go beyond what the teaching of 
the Holy Law explains in its texts, since this is teaching in which all 
can participate and which suffices for the attainment of their happi- 
ness. And just as the physician investigates the measure of health 
which agrees most with the healthy for the preservation of their 
health, and with the sick for the curing of their illness, so the Lord 
of the Holy Law instructs the masses only in so far as is needed for 
their acquisition of happiness, And the same thing holds in respect 
of the facts of human behaviour, only the investigation of these facts 
in so far as the Holy Law is silent about them is more legitimate, 
especially when they are of the same genus as those about which the 
Law pronounces judgement. For this reason the lawyers disagrce 
about this kind of facts; some of them, the Zahirites, deny the use 
of analogy, whereas others, the analogists, admit it,' and this is abso- 
lutely the same thing as happens in the sphere of knowledge, only 
perhaps the Zahirites are happier in the purely intellectual sphere 
than in the practical. 

And anyone amongst the two opposing parties who inquires after 
these questions must either belong to the followers of proof, i.e. the 
rationalists, or not; in the former case he will speak about them and 
base his statements on demonstration, he will know that this way of 
discussion is limited to the followers of proof, and he will know the 
places in which the Holy Law gives to the people who possess this 
kind of knowledge a hint about the conclusions to which demonstra- 
tion Jeads; in the latter case he wil! be either a believer or an un- 
believer: ifhe is a believer he will know that to discuss those questions 
is forbidden by the Hely Law, and if he is an unbeliever, it is not 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 259 

difficult for the followers of proof to refute him with the stringent 
proofs they possess, The rationalist must act in this way in every 
religion, but especially in our Divine Revelation, which although it is 
silent on certain intellectual problems nevertheless hints at the con- 
clusions about them to which demonstration leads, without, however, 
mentioning these problems in its instruction of the masses. 

Since this is established, we shall revert now to our subject, which 
is forced upon us by necessity—for otherwise, by God, the Knower, 
the Witness, the Revealer, we should not think it permissible to dis- 
cuss such questions in this way. And Ghazali, having described the 
arguments through which the theologians prove the attribute of 
knowledge and other attributes, and shown that they are very evident 
because they are generally admitted and extremely easy to accept, 
begins to compare these arguments with those of the philosophers 
about these attributes, and this is an act of rhetoric.‘ 

Ghazali says, addressing the philosophers: 

And you, philosophers, when you affirm that the world is eternal and 
not produced by God’s will, how do you know that He knows something 
beside His essence, for you require a proof of this? 

Then Ghazali says: 

And the summary of what Avicenna says to prove this in the course of 
his argument can be reduced to two heads: First, that the First does not 
exist in matter, and everything which docs not existe in matter is pure 
intellect and all the intelligibles are revealed to it, for the obstacle to 
perceiving all things is attachment to matter and being occupied with 
matter, and the human soul is occupied by directing matter, i.e. its body, 
and when this occupation is terminated and it is not any longer defiled 
by the bodily passions and the despicable conditions which affect it 
through the things of nature, all the realities of the intelligibles are reyeated 
to it? and therefore is it asserted that all the angels know all the intelligibles 
without exception, for they too are pure immaterial intellects. 

And having related their theory, Ghazali argues against them: 

But we say: If by your assertion that the First does not exist in matter, 
you mean that it is not a body, nor impressed on a body, but exists by 
itself not comprised by space ner locally specified by a direction, this is 
admitted by us. There remains then your answer to the question what its 
attribute is, namely that it is pure intellect—and what do you understand 
by ‘intellect’? If you mean by it that which thinks all the other things, 
this is just what we are trying to find out and the point under discussion, 
and how, therefore, can you take it as the premiss of a syllogism which 
must prove it? And if' you mean by it something else, namely that it thinks 

ind 

431 

433 

260 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

its own self—and some of your fellow-philosophers may concede this to 
you, but this amounts again to your saying that what thinks its own self 
thinks other things also—the answer to be made is ‘Why do you claim 
this? For this is not known by necessity, and only Avicenna of all the 
philosophers affirmed it; and how can you claim this as necessary 
knowledge, or, if you know it by deduction, what is your proof?’ 

And if the assertion is made: ‘Because what prevents the perception of 
things is matter, and the First is not matter’, we answer: We concede that 
matter is an impediment, but we do not admit that it is the only impedi- 
ment; and let them arrange their syllogism im the figure of the hypothetical 
syllogism and say: ‘If this First is in matter it cannot think things, but it is 
not in matter, therefore it thinks things’.' And this is the assumption as a 
minor premiss of the opposite of the antecedent, but such an assumption 
does not lead to a conclusion in all cases, for it is like saying: ‘If this is a 
man, it is an animal, but it is not a man, therefore it is not an animal’? 
But this is not a necessary conclusion, for although not a man, it might be 
a horse, and therefore an animal. The assumption as a minor premiss of 
the opposite of the antecedent is valid only conditionally, as we have 
shown in our logic—namely, when the consequent is universally con- 
vertible with the antecedent, as when the logicians say: ‘If the sun has 
risén, it is day, but the sun has not risen, therefore it is not day’, for the 
only cause of its being day is the fact that the sun has risen—an example 
in which antecedent and consequent are convertible with each other—and 
the explanation of these theories and terms can be understood from our 
book ‘The Touchstone of Knowledge’*, which we have written as an 
appendix to this book. If, however, they say ‘We claim that antecedent 
and consequent are here convertible, and that the one and only obstacle 
to thinking is being in matter’, we answer: ‘This is a pure presumption; 
where is your proof?? 

I say: 

The first mistake he makes here is that, in relating the theory and 
the proof, he regards the premisses he mentions as first principles, 
whereas for the philosophers they are conclusions from many pre- 
misses. For the philosophers had seen that every sensible existent is 
composed of matter and form, and that the form is the entity through 
which the existent becomes existent* and that it is the form which is 
designated by the name and the definition,’ and that the specific act 
proceeds from the form in every existent, and it is this act which 
shows the existence of the forms in the existent. For they had found 
that im substances there are active potencies, particular to every 
single existent, and passive potencies, either particular or common,? 
and that a thing cannot be passive by reason of the same thing as 
it is active; for activity is the opposite of passivity, and opposites do 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 261 

not admit each other, and it is only their substratum which admits 
them successively, e.g. hotness does not accept coldness, it is simply 
the hot body that accepts coldness by divesting itself of hotness and 
accepting coldness, and vice versa. Now when the philosophers found 
that this was the case with activity and passivity, they understood 
that all existents of this description were composed of two substances, 
a substance which is the ace and a substance which is the potency, 
and they realized that the substance in ace is the perfection of the 
substance in potency and that the substance in act stands in relation 
to the substance in potency as if tt were the end of its actualization, 
for there is no actual difference between them.’ Then, when they 
looked through all the different forms of existents, they found that 
alt these substances must necessarily lead up to a substance in act 
which is absolutely devoid of matter, and this substance must neces- 
sarily be active and cannot have any passivity and cannot be subject 
to exhaustion, weariness, and decay; for such things occur to the 
substance in act only because it is the perfection of the substance in 
potency, not because it is pure act. For since the substance in potency 
only goes forth into act through a swbstance in act, the series of 434 
substances which are at the same time both active and passive must 
terminate in a substance which is pure act, and the series must 
terminate in that substance. And the proof of the existence of this 
substance, in so far as it is a mover and agent, through essential 
particular premisses, can be found in the eighth book of Aristotle’s 
Physics. 

Having established the existence of this substance by special and 5 
genera] arguments according to what is known in their books, the 
philosophers now vestigated the nature of the forms in matter 
which produce motion, and they found some of them nearer to actu-" 
ality and farther from potency because they are less than others 
involved in passivity, which is the special sign of the matter which 
exists in them, And they realized that that which among these forms 
is most destitute of matter is the sou!, and especially the intellect, so 
that they started to doubt whether the intellect belongs to the forms 
which are in matter or not? But when they investigated the perceiv- 
ing forms amongst the forms of the soul and found that they were 
free from matter, they understood that the cause of perception con- 
sists in freedom from matter,’ and since they discovered that the 
intellect is without passivity they understood that the reason why 
one form is inorganic and another perceptive consists in the fact that 

3 

o 

435 

436 

to 

262 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

when it is the perfection of a potency it is inorganic or not percipient,! 
and when it is pure perfection with which no potency is mixed it is 
intellect? All this they proved in a demonstrative order and by 
natural deductions which cannot be reproduced here in this demon- 
strative sequence, for this would involve collecting in one place what 
by its nature is treated in many different books, and anyone who has 
the slightest experience of the science of logic will acknowledge that 
this is an impossibility. Through arguments of this kind they came 
to realize that what has no passivity whalever is intellect and not 
body, for what is passive is body which exists in matter according to 
them. 

An objection against the philosophers in these questions ought to 
be made only against the first principles they use in the proof of these 
conclusions, not against those conclusions themselves, as it is made by 
Ghazali. Through this they came to understand that there exists here 
an existent which is pure intellect, and when they saw further that 
the order which reigns in nature and in the act of nature follows an 
intellectual plan very much like the plan of the craftsman, they 
realjzed that there must exist ar intellect which causes these natural 
potencies to act in an intellectual way, and through these two points 
they received the conviction that this existent which is pure intellect 
is that which bestows on the cxistents the order and arrangement in 
their acts, And they understood from all this that its thinking its own 
self is identical with its thinking all existents, and that this existent 
is not such that its thinking its own self is something different from 
the thought by which it thinks other things, as is the case with the 
human inteilect. And about this intellect the disjunction assumed as 
a premiss, that every intellect either thinks its own self or thinks 
something else or thinks both together, is not valid. For when this 
disjunction is admitted, what is said is: ‘If it thinks other things, it is 
self-evident that it must think its own self; however, if it thinks its 
own ‘self, it is not at all necessary that it should think other things.’ 
And we have discussed this previously. 

And all the things which he says about the hypothetical syllogism 
which he formed in the figure he explained are not truc. For the 
hypothetical syllogism is only valid when the minor and the legiti- 
macy of the inference? are proved through one or more categorical 
syllogisms. For correct hypothetical inference in this question is: ‘If 
what does not think is in matter, then what is not in matter thinks.’ 
But, of course, first the truth of this conjunction and disjunction must 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 263 

be proved.’ And these are the premisses of which we said that they 
are according to the philosophers conclusions, whereas Ghazali 
pretends they are first principles for them, or nearly so. And when it 
is explained as we have done, it is a syllogism of a legitimate figure 
and of true premisses. As to its legitimate form, the minor is the 
opposite of the consequent and the conclusion is the opposite of 
the antecedent, not as Ghazali believed, the minor the apposite of the 
antecedent and the conclusion the opposite of the consequent.? But 
since they are not first principles, nor generally acknowledged, nor 
evident at first sight, they are regarded, no doubt, by those who have 
never heard anything of these things as very much open to objection. 
But indeed Ghazali confused the sciences in a most terrible way, and 
he uprooted science from its foundation and its method. 
Ghazali says: 

The second argument is that the philosophers say: ‘Although we assert 
neither that the First wills temporal production nor that it produces the 
world in time by secondary” intention, we nevertheless affirm that the 
First has made the world and that indeed the world has its existence 
through the First only, the First never losing its character as an agent 
and never ceasing to act; our theory only distinguishes itself from others in 
this point, in no way however with respect to the principle of the act. And 
since the agent must have knowledge in conformity with its act, the uni- 
verse, according to us, exists through its act.’ 

But there are two ways to answer this, of which the first is: ‘There are 
two kinds of action: voluntary, like the action of animal and man; and 
involuntary, like the action of the sun in producing light, of fire in pro- 
ducing heat, of water in producing cold. Now knowledge of the act is 
only necessary in voluntary acts, as in the human products of art, not in 
the acts of nature. But according to you philosophers, God has made the 
world consequent on His essence by nature and by necessity, not through 
will and choice; indeed, the universe is consequent on His essence, as fight 
is on the sun, and just as the sun has no power to check its light, nor fire to 
repress its producing heat, so the First cannot check its acts. Now this 
kind of occurrence, although it may be called an act, does not imply 
knowledge at all,” And if it is answered that there is a difference between 
the two things, in that the procession of the universe from God’s essence 
occurs through His knowledge of the universe and His representing the 
universal order in the course of the emamation of the universe, and 
He has no other cause than His knowledge of the universe, and His 
knowledge of the universe is identical with His essence, and if He had 
not this knowledge of the universe, the universe would not exist through 
Him, which is not the case with light in relation to the sun, we answer; 
‘In this you are in contradiction to your fellow-philosophers, for they say 

437 

438 

439 

w 

264 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that His essence is the essence from which the existence of the universe 
in its order follows naturally and necessarily, and it is not because He 
knows this.' And what is wrong with this conception, once you agree with 
them in denying His will? And since the sun’s knowledge of its light is no 
condition for its light, but its light is necessarily consequent on the sun, so 
let us accept this also in the case of the First; and nothing prevents this.” 

I say: 

Tn this section Ghazali begins by saying something reprehensible 
about the philosophers, namely that the Creator possesses a will 
neither with respect to the things produced nor with respect to the 
universe as a whole, because His act proceeds [rom His essence neces- 
sarily like the procession of light from the sun. Then he says of them 
that they say that through His acting He must have knowledge. The 
philosophers, however, do not deny the will of God, nor do they 
admit that He has a human will, for the human will implies a 
deficiency in the willer and a being affected by the object willed, and 
when the object is attained, the deficiency is completed and the 
passivity, which is called will, ceases. The philosophers only attribute 
a will to God in the sense that the acts which proceed from Him 
proceed through knowledge, and everything which proceeds through 
knowledge and wisdom proceeds through the will of the agent, not, 
however, necessarily and naturally, since the nature of knowlcdge 
does not imply (as he falsely affirms of the philosophers) the procecd- 
ing of the act. For if the nature of knowledge did imply this, then, 
when we say that God knows the opposites, it would be necessary 
that the opposites should proceed from Him together, and this is 
absurd. The fact that only one of the opposites proceeds from Him 
shows that there is another attribute present beside knowledge, 
namely will, and it is in this way that the affirmation of will in the 
First must be understood according to the philosophers.? For God, 
according to the philosophers, necessarily knows and wills through 
His knowledge. As to Ghazali’s assertion that the act can be subdivi- 
ded into two, into a natural act and a voluntary act, this is false. 
God's act according to the philosophers is in a certain way not 
natural, nor is it absolutely voluntary; it is voluntary without having 
the deficiency which is attached to the human will. Therefore the 
term ‘wilP is attributed to the Divine Will and the human in an 
equivocal way, just as the term ‘knowledge ’is attributed equivocally 
to eternal knowledge and to temporal. For the will in animals and 
man is a passivity which occurs to them through the object of desire 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 265 

and is caused by it. This is the meaning of ‘will’ in the case of the 
human will, but the Creator is too exalted to possess an attribute 
which should be an effect. Therefore by ‘will’ in Gad only the pro- 
cession of the act joined to knowledge can be understood, And 
‘knowledge’, as we said, refers to the two opposites, and in the know- 
ledge of God there is knowledge of the opposites in a certain way, and 
His performing only the one shows that there exists in Him another 
attribute which is called ‘will’. 

Ghazali says: 

The second way of answering is to concede that the procession of 2 
thing from the agent implies knowledge of the thing which proceeds, 
Now, according to them, the act of God is one, namely the effect which is 
pure intellect, and God can only know this effect. The first effect again 
will only know what proceeds from it. For the universe does not proceed 
from God immediately, but through mediators and derivation and a series 
of consequences. For that which proceeds from what proceeds from Him 
need not be known to Him, and from Him Himself only one thing pro- 
ceeds. And how should He know everything that proceeds mediately 
from Him? For this is not even necessary in voluntary acts, and how could 
it be necessary in natural acts? For the movement of a stone from the top 
of a mountain can occur through a voluntary propulsion which implies 
knowledge of the principle of motion, but does not imply knowledge of all 
the consequences which may occur through its knocking and breaking 
something.’ And to this again the philusophers have no answer. 

T answer: 

The answer to this is that the Agent whose knowledge is of the 
highest perfection knows everything which proceeds from Him and 
which proceeds from that which proceeds from Him, and so from the 
first term to the last. And if the knowledge of the First is of the highest 
perfection, the First must know everything that proceeds from it 
either mediately or immediately, and its knowledge need not be of 
the same kind as our knowledge, for our knowledge is imperfect and 
posterior to the thing known. 

Then Ghazali says, answering the objection he brought forward 
against the philosophers: 

Tf, however, the philosophers should say: ‘If we declared that the First 
only knows its own self, this would be a very reprehensible doctrine, for al] 
other beings know themselves and know the First, and would therefore be 
superior to it; and how can the effect be superior to the cause? 

I say: 

This is an insufficient answer, for it opposes a rational argument 
with a moral one. 

440 

ow 

a 

441 

to 

442 

266 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
Then Ghazali answers this and says: 

We should answer: ‘This reprehensible doctrine is a necessary con- 
sequence for those who follow* the philosophers in denying the Divine Wilt 
and the production of the world, and one must either adhere to it as the 
other philosophers do, or abandon the philosophers and acknowledge that 
the world is produced through will.’ 

T say: 

Ghazali means that if they belong to those who affirm that God 
knows His work, only to avoid the reprehensible doctrine that He 
does not know anything but His own self, they are forced to acknow- 
ledge this reprehensible doctrine just as well, since they affirmed 
another reprehensible doctrine, namely the eternity of the world and 
the denial of the Will. However, the philosophers do not deny the 
Will, and only deny that part of it which implies a deficiency. 

Then Ghazali says: 

How will you refute those philosophers who say that this knowledge 
does not add to Gad’s dignity, since other beings need knowledge only in 
order to acquire perfection (for in their essence there is a deficiency) and 
man receives dignity through the intelligibles either that he may see 
his advantage in the coming events of this world and the next, or that his 
obscure and insufficient essence may be perfected, and likewise ail the 
other creatures, but that the essence of God does not stand in need of per- 
fection: nay, if a knowledge could be imagined through which He would 
be perfected, His essence, in so far as it is His essence, would be imperfect? 

This is just the same kind of remark as your assertions, Avicenna, con- 
cerning His hearing and seeing and His knowing the particular beings 
which fall under the concept of Cime, for you agree with all the other philo- 
sophers in saying that God is too exalted for that, and that the changes 
which fail under the concept of time and which are divided into past and 
future events are not known to the First, since this would imply a change 
in its essence and a being influenced, and the denial of this does not imply 
an imperfection, but rather a perfection, and there is only an imperfection 
in the senses and the need for them.? If there were not this human imper- 
fection, man would not be in need of the senses to guard himself against 
any change which might affect him. And in the same way you affirm that 
the knowledge of particular events is an imperfection. And if it is true that 
we can know all particular events and perceive all sensible things, whereas 
the First cannot know anything of the particulars nor perceive anything of 
sensible things without this implying any imperfection in the First, it may 
alse be permitted to ascribe to others knowledge of the intelligible uni- 
versals but to deny it of the First without this implying any imperfection in 
the First. There is no way out of this. 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 267 

I say: 

This is the proof of those who say that the First knows only itself, 
and we have already spoken of the theory of those who combine the 
doctrine that the First knows only itself with the theory that it knows 
all existents; and for this reason some of the best known philosophers 
affirm that God the Creator is Himself all existents and that He grants 
them in His benevotence, and there is no sense in repeating ourselves. 
The premisses used in this section are common dialectical proposi- 
tions, since they ali belong to those which compare the Divine to the 
empirical, although no common genus unites these two spheres and 
they do not possess any common factor at all. In general his discus- 
sion in this section, when he argues with Avicenna, who adduces the 
argument of those philosophers who believe that God in knowing 
Himself must know other things, since He must necessarily know 
what proceeds from Himself, and alt the other assertions of Avicenna 
to prove this, which he relates, and which he uses himself again to 
refute Avicenna, are all taken from human conditions which he tries 
to refer to the Creator; and this is false, since the terms of these two 
types of knowledge are predicated equivocally. 

Avicenna’s assertion that any intelligent being from whom an act 
proceeds knows this act is a true proposition; not, however, in the 
sense in which the word ‘knowledge’ 1s used of the human intellect, 
when it understands a thing, for the human intellect is perfected by 
what it perceives and knows, and is affected by it, and the cause of 
action in man is the representation he forms in his intellect. And 
Ghazali argues against this kind of proposition by saying that when 
a man acts and there follows from his act another act and from the 
second act a third and from the third a fourth, it is not necessary that 
the conscious agent should know all the consequences which follow 
from his first act; and Ghazali says to his opponent this is a fact which 
concerns voluntary acts, but how is it when one assumes an agent 
whose acts are not voluntary? And he only says this because he 
means that the affirmation of God’s knowledge implies the affirma- 
tion of God’s will,? 

And therefore Ghazali says: 

To this again the philosophers have no answer*. 

I say: 
Ghazali means that it does not follow that the First according to 
Avicenna thinks anything but the act which proceeds from it 

o 

445 

268 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

primarily, and this act is the second cause and the first effect. Neither 
is there an answer to the other difficulty which he states that if the 
First thinks only itself and nothing else, man would be more noble 
than it. And the reason why Ghazali’s words carry a certain con- 
viction is that if one imagines two men, one of whom thinks only his 
own self, whereas the other thinks his own self and other things 
besides, the latter intellect is regarded as superior to the former. 
However, as the term ‘intellect’ is applied to the human intellect 
and to this Divine Intellect in a purely equivocal way, since the latter 
is an agent and not a patient and the former a patient and not an 
agent, this analogy does not hold any Jonger, 

Having given as Avicenna’s argument the maxim which Avicenna 
applies to every intelligent being,’ that the more knowledge an intel- 
lect possesses the nobler it is, and having affirmed that, according to 
him (Ghazali), it is just the philosophers’ denia! of God’s will and of 
temporal creation which forces them to deny to God a knowledge 
of anything but Himself, since the conscious agent knows his effect 
only in so far as it differs from himself by being an object of his will, he 
says that this reprehensible assertion, ic. the assertion that the effect 
which is man must be nobler than the cause which is the Creator, 
is a consequence for the philosophers only, since as the philoso- 
phers deny the coming into being of the world, they deny the Divine 
Will, as he affirms, and as they deny the Divine Will, they deny 
that God knows what proceeds from Him. But all this, namely the 
denial of God’s will, has been shown previously not to be true; for 
they deny only His temporal will. And having repeated Avicenna’s 
arguments, which he regarded as being applicable both to the know- 
iedge of the temporal and the knowledge of the eternal,’ he begins to 
arguc against him, showing the distinction which the philosophers 
established on this point between these two sciences, and indeed this 
consequence is incumbent on Avicenna, 

And Ghazali says: 

How will you refute those philosophers who say that this knowledge 
does not add to God’s dignity, for only other beings need knowledge. . .? 

I say; : 

The summary of this is that, if all these perceptions exist only 
because of man’s imperfection, then God is too exalted for them; and 
therefore Ghazali says to Avicenna: ‘Just as you acknowledge with 
your fellow-philosophers that God’s not perceiving individual things 
is not a consequence of an imperfection in Him, for you have proved 
. 

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION 269 

that the perception of individuals rests on an imperfection in the 
perceiver, in the same way the perception of other things than 
Himself need not derive from an imperfection in Him, since the 
perception of these other things depends on the imperfection of the 
perceiver,’ 

The answer to all this is that God’s knowledge cannot he divided 
into the opposites of true and false in which human knowledge is 
divided; for instance, it may be said of a man that either he knows 
or he docs not know other things, because these two propositions are 
contradictory, and when the onc js true the other is false; but in the 
case of God both propositions, that He knows what He knows and 
that He does not know it*, are true, for He does not know it through a 
knowledge which determines an imperfection, namely human know- 
ledge, but knows it through a knowledge which does not carry with 
it any imperfection, and this is a knowledge the quality of which 
nobody but God Himself can understand. And concerning both 
universals and individuals it is true of Him that He knows them and 
does not know them. This is the conclusion to which the principles 
of the ancient philosophers led; but those who make a distinction, 
and say that God knows universals but does not know particulars 
have not fully grasped their theary, and this is not a consequence of 
their principles. For all human sciences are passivitics and impres- 
sions from the existents, and the existents operate on them. But the 
knowledge of the Creator operates on existents, and the existents 
receive the activities of His knowledge. 

Once this is established, the whole quarrel between Ghazali and 
the philosophers comes to an end in regard to this chapter as well 
asthe next two, We shall, however*, give an account of these chapters 
and mention in them both what is particular to them and those 
arguments which have been already discussed above. 

THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION 

About the impotence of the philosophers to prove that God knows 
Himself 

Ghazali says: 

We say that when ithe Muslims understood that the world was created 
through the will of God, they proved His knowledge from His will, then 

° 

446 

5 

fay 

447 

10 

270 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

His life from His will and His knowledge together,’ then from His life, 
according to the principle that every living being knows itself,? they proved 
that He too must know His own essence, since He is alive. And this is 
a rational procedure of extreme force, For you philosophers, however, 
since you deny the divine will and the world’s coming into existence, and 
since you affirm that what proceeds from Him proceeds in a necessary 
and natural sequence, why should it be impossible that His essence should 
be of such a nature that only the first effect proceeded from it, and that 
then the second effect followed the first till the whole order of existents 
was completed, but, notwithstanding this, the First would not know 
itself, just as neither fire from which heat proceeds, nor the sun from which 
light proceeds, know themselves or anything else? For only that which 
knows itself knows what proceeds from itself, and therefore knows other 
things besides itself. And we have already shown that, according to the 
theory of the philosophers the First does not know other things, and we 
have forced those who do not agree with them on this point to acknowledge 
this consequence which follows from their assumption. And if it does not 
know others, it is not absurd to suppose that it docs not know its own 
self. 
If they say: ‘Everyone who does not know himself is dead, and how 
could the First be dead ?’—we answer: ‘This is indeed a conclusion which 
follows from your theory, since there is no difference between you and 
those who say that every one who does not act through will, power and 
choice, who neither hears nor sees, is dead, and he who does not know 
other things is dead. And if it is possible that the First is destitute of alt 
these attributes, what need has it of knowing itself?’ And if they return to 
the doctrine that everything which is free from matter is intellect by itself 
and therefore thinks itself, we have shown that this is an arbitrary judge- 
ment without any proof, 

And if they say: ‘The proof is that what is existent is divided into what 
is alive and what is dead, and what is alive is prior and superior to what 
is dead, and the First is prior and superior: therefore let it be alive; and 
every living being knows itself, since it is impossible that the living should 

‘be amongst its effects and should not itself be alive’,? we answer: ‘All this 

is pure presumption, for we affirm that it is not impossible that that which 
knows itseif should follow from that which does not, either through many 
intermediaries or without mediation, And if the reason for its impossibility 
is that in that case the effect would be superior to the cause, well, it is not 
impossible that the effect should be superior to the cause, for the superior- 
ity of the cause to the effect is not a fundamental principle. Further, 
how can you refute the view that its superiority might consist not in its 
knowledge but in the fact that the existence of the universe* is a conse- 
quence of its essence? For the proof is that, whereas the First neither sees 
nor hears, there are many other beings who know other things than them- 
selves and who do see and hear,’ 

THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION 27! 

And if it were said, ‘Existents are divided into the seeing and the blind, 
the knowing and the ignorant’, we answer: ‘Well, fet the seeing then be 
superior and let the First see and have knowledge of things!"! But the 
philosophers deny this, and say that its excellence does not consist in 
seeing and knowing things, but in not being in need of sight and know- 
ledge and being the essence from which there proceeds the universe in 
which the knowing and the seeing beings exist. And in the same way it 
may be said that this essence does not possess excellence because it has 
knowledge itself, but because it is the principle of essences which possess 
knowledge, and this is an excellence which is peculiar to it. 

The philosophers are therefore forced to deny also that the First knows 
itself, for nothing proves such a knowledge but will, and nothing proves 
will except the temporal beginning of the world, and if this principle is 
destroyed, all these things are destroyed which are accepted through the 
speculation of the mind alone. For. they do not possess a proof for any 
thing they affirm or deny concerning the attributes of the First, but they 
make only such guesses and conjectures as lawyers would despise in their 
suppositions. However, no wonder that the intellect should be perplexed 
about the divine attributes; one should wonder only at the wonderful 
self-complacency of the philosophers, at their satisfaction with their proofs 
and their belief that they know those things through evident proofs, not- 
withstanding the mistakes and the errors in them. 

I say: 

The most wonderful thing is the claim of the theologians that the 
temporal becoming of the world implies that it has been willed by a 
will, for we find that temporal things occur through nature, through 
will, and by chance.* Those that accur through will are the products 
of art, and those that occur through nature are natural things, and 
if temporal things occurred only through will, will would have to be 
included in the definition of the temporal, whereas it is well known 
that the definition of temporal becoming is ‘existence succeeding 
non-existence’. Hf indeed the world had come into being temporally, 
it would be more appropriate that it should have come into being, in 
so far as it was a natural existent, from principles appropriate to 
natural things, rather than from principles appropriate to artificial 
things, i.e. the will. Since, however, it is established that the world 
exists through a First Agent which preferred its existence to its non- 
existence, it is necessary that this agent should be a willer, and if this 
First Agent does not cease to prefer the world’s existence to its non- 
existence, and the willer—-as Ghazali says—must have knowledge, 
the philosophers are in complete agreement with the theologians 
about this fundamental point. The whole theological argument, 

449 

450 

J 

1a 

451 

272 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

however, which he gives has only persuasive power, because it com- 
pares natural things to artificial. 

As to what he says of the philosophers, that they believe that what 
proceeds from the Creator proceeds in a natural way, this is a wrong 
imputation, What they really believe is that existents proceed from 
Him in a way superior to nature and to the human will, for both these 
ways are subject to an imperfection, but they are nat the only possible 
ways, since it has been proved that the act of God can proceed from 
Him neither in a natural way nor in a voluntary, in the sense in which 
this is understood in the sublunary wortd. For will in an animal is 
the principle of movement, and if the Creator is devoid of movement, 
He is devoid of the principle of movement in the way a voluntary 
agent in the empirical world moves.? What proceeds from God pro- 
ceeds in a nobler way than the voluntary, a way which nobody can 
understand but God Himself. And the proof that He wills is that 
He knows the opposites, and if He were an agent in absolutely the 
same way as He is a knower, He would carry out the two contrary 
acts together, and this is impossible; and therefore it is necessary 
that He should perform one of the two contraries through choice,? 

The error of the theologians with regard to this question is that 
they say that every act is either natura] or voluntary, but do not 
understand the meaning of either of these words. For nature, accord- 
ing to the philosophers, has diflcrent meanings, the primary being 
the ascending of fire and the descending of earth, and an existent 
only has this movement when something has prevented it from being* 
in its natural place, and there was therefore something that con- 
strained it; but the Creator is too high for this kind of nature. The 
philosophers also apply the term ‘nature’ to every potency from 
which an intellectual act proceeds, in the same way as the ucts which 
proceed from the arts,* and some of the philosophers ascribe intellect 
to this nature, and some say that this nature does not possess intellect 
but acts only by nature.’ And they say that this nature proceeds from 
an intellect, because they compare it to artificial things which move 
themselvcs and from which orderly well-arranged acts proceed.® And 
therefore their master Aristotle asserts that it is manifest that the 
nature of intellect rules che universe.?7 And how far is this belief 
from what Ghazali ascribes to them! 

Who, however, assumes as a universa! maxim that he who knows 
himself must know other things which proceed from him, must con- 
clude that he who does not know other things cannot know himself. 

t 

THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION 273 

And having refuted Avicenna’s theory that God knows other things, 
by the arguments of the philosophers on this point which he adduces 
against him,' he concludes against him that the First does not know 
itself; and this conclusion is valid,? 

And as to what he relates of the argument of the philosophers on 
this point, namely that they say that he who does not know himself 
is dead and the First cannot be dead, this is a persuasive argument 
composed of common propositions, for he who is not alive is not dead 
unless it is in his nature to reccive life}—or one must mean by ‘dead’ 
what is meant by ‘inanimate’ and ‘inorganic’, and then this is a true 
dichotomy, for every existent is cither alive or inorganic, provided 
we understand by ‘life’ a term which is equivocally used of the eternal 
and the corruptible. 

And as to Ghazali’s words: 

And if they return to the doctrine that everything which is free from 
Tatter is inteflect by itself and therefore thinks itself, we have shown that 
this is an arbitrary judgement without any proof. 

I say: 

We have already shown the manner in which this proof of the 
philosophers must be taken, in so [ar as this proof preserves its power 
by being given in this book—I mean its power is diminished, as is 
necessary when a thing is removed from ils natural context. And as to 
what he says of their arguing on this point against the philosophers 
that the existent is either alive or dead, and that which is alive is more 
noble than that which is dead, and that the principle is nobler than 
that which is alive and that it is therefore necessarily alive, if by ‘dead’ 
is understood tlic inanimate, these propositions are common and truce. 

His assertion, however, that life can proceed from the lifeless and 
knowledge from what docs not possess knowledge, and that the dig- 
nity of the First consists only in its being the principle of the universe, 
is false. For if fife could proceed from the lifeless, then the existent 
might proceed from the non-existent, and then anything whatever 
might proceed from anything whatever, and there would be no 
congruity between causes and effects, either in the genus predicated 
analogically or in the species.4 

As to his assertion that, when the philosophers say that what is 
nobler than life must be ative, it is like saying that that which is 
nobler than what has hearing and sceing must have hearing and 
secing: the philosophers do nat say so, for they deny that the First 
Principle can hear and see. And Ghazali’s argument that, since, 

to 

452 

be] 

453 

- 

19 

454 

uw 

274 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

according to the philosophers, that which is superior to what hears 
and sees need not hear and see, then also what is superior to the 
living and the knowing need not itself be alive and possessed of 
knowledge and that, just as according to the philosophers that which 
possesses sight can proceed from what has no sight, so it is possible 
that knowledge should proceed from what has no knowledge: this is 
a very sophistical and false argument. 

For according to the philosophers that which has no hearing or 
Secing is not absolutely superior to that which has hearing and seeing, 
but only because it has a perception superior to seeing and hearing, 
namely knowledge.! But, since there is nothing superior to know- 
ledge, it is not possible that that which does not possess knowledge 
should be superior to that which does, be it a principle or not. For 
since some of the principles possess knowledge, others not, it is not 
permissible that those which do not know should be superior to those 
that do, just as little as this is possible in regard to effects which do 
and do not possess knowledge. And the nobility of being a principle 
cannot surpass the nobility of knowledge, unless the nobility of a 
Principle that does not possess knowledge could surpass the nobility 
of a principle that does, And the excellence of being a principle can- 
not surpass the excellence of knowledge. And therefore it is necessary 
that the principle which has the utmost nobility should possess the 
utmost excellence, which is knowledge. The philosophers only avoid 
ascribing to the First hearing and seeing, because this would imply 
its possessing a soul. The Holy Law ascribes hearing and seeing to 
God to remind us that Gad is not deprived of any kind of knowledge 
and understanding, and the masses cannot be made to grasp this 
meaning except by the use of the terms ‘hearing’ and ‘secing’, and 
for this reason this exegesis is limited to the learned, and therefore 
cannot be taken as one of the dogmas of the Holy Law common to 
the masses. And the same is the case with many questions the solu- 
tions of which the Holy Law leaves to science. 

Everything this chapter contains is the confusion and the inco- 
herence of Ghazali himself. But, we appeal to God on account of the 
mistakes the learned have made, and that He may pardon them 
because of their wish to glorify His name in ail such questions, and we 
pray God that He may not place us among those who are excluded 
from the next world through their faults in this, or from the highest 
through their desire for the lowest, and that He may bestow on us 
final blessedness! 

275 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute those who affirm that God is ignorant of the individual 
things which are divided in time into present, past, and future 

Ghazali says: 

About this theory they all agree; for as to those who believe that God only 
knows Himself, this is implied in their belief; and as to those who believe 
that He knows things besides Himself (and this is the theory which 
Avicenna has chosen) they believe that God knows other things in a 
universal knowledge which does not fall under the concept of time and 
which is not differentiated through past, future, and present although, 
nevertheless, Avicenna affirms that not the weight of a grain escapes God’s 
knowledge either on earth or in the heavens, since He knows individual 
things in 4 universal way." 

Now we must first understand this theory, and then occupy ourselves 
with refuting it. We shall explain this through an example, namely that 
the sun, for example, suffers an eclipse,? after not having been eclipsed, and 
afterwards recovers its light, There are therefore in an eclipse three 
moments: the moment when there was not yet an ectipse but the eclipse was 
expected in the future, the time when the eclipse was actually there, its being, 
and thirdly, the moment the eclipse had ceased but had been. Now we have 
in regard to these three conditions” a threefold knowledge: we know first 
that there is not yet an eclipse, lut that there will be one, secondly that it 
is now there, and thirdly, that it has been present but is no longer present, 
This threefold knowledge is numericafly distinguishable and differentiated 
and its sequence implies a change in the knowing essence, for if this know- 
ing essence thought after the cessation of the eclipse that the eclipse was 
present as before, this would be ignorance, not knowledge, and ifit thought 
during its presence that i¢ was absent, this again would be ignorance, and 
the one knowledge cannot take the place of the other. 

The philosophers affirm now that the condition of God is not diflerenti- 
ated by means of these three moments, for this would inpty a change, and- 
that He whose condition does not change cannot be imagined to know these 
things, for knowledge follows the object of knowledge, and when the 
object of knowledge changes, the knowledge changes, and when the know- 
ledge changes, without doubt the knower changes too; but change in God™ 
is impossible. However, notwithstanding this, the phitosophers affirm that 
God knows the eclipse and all its attributes and accidents, but through a 
knowledge which is attributed to Him in an eternal attribution and is 
unchangeable: God knows for instance that the sun exists and that the. 
moon exists, and that they have emanated from God Himself through the 
medium of angels whom the philosophers in their technical terminology 

455 

456 

457 

ig 

276 " TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

call ‘separate intellects’, and God knows that the sun and moon move in 
circles and that between their orbits there is an intersection at two points, 
the ascending and the descending node,’ and that at certain times the sun 
and moon are together in these nodes and that then the sun is eclipsed— 
it. the body of the moon comes between the sun and the eyes of the 
observer, and the sun is concealed from his eyes, and that when the sun 
has passed a certain distance beyond this node, say a year, it is eclipsed 
again, and that this eclipse is either total or for a third or for a half, and 
that it wilt last an hour or two hours, and God knows equally all other 
time determinations and all other accidents of the eclipse; and nothing of 
this escapes God’s knowledge. However, God’s knowledge before, curing, 
and after the eclipse is all of one kind without any differentiation and 
without any implication of a change in His essence. And such is His 
knowledge of all temporal occurrences which take place through causes 
which have other causes terminating finally in the circular movement of 
the heavens, and the cause of this movement is the soul of the heavens, 
and the cause of the soul’s movement is its desire to assimilate itself to God 
and to the angels near Him.? And the whole universe is known to Him, 
that is, it is manifested to Him in one single congruous manifestation which 
is not influenced by ume, Still, ac the time of the cclipse it cannot be 
said that He knows that the eclipse is taking place now, nor does He know 
when it has passed that it has passed now, for He cannot be imagined to 
know anything which for its definition needs a relation to time, since this 
implies a change. ‘This is their solution in so far as it concerns a division 
in time.* 

And as concerns their theory about what is divided in matter and space, 
like individual men and animals, they say that God does not know the 
accidents of Zaid, Amr, and Khalid and that He knows only man in 
general, through a uttiversal knowledge, and that He knows the accidents 
and properties of man in general, namely that he must have a body 
composed of limbs, sume to grasp with, some to walk with, some to perceive 
with, some of which form a pair while some are single, and that the bodily 
faculties must Le dispersed in all parts of the budy, And the same applies 
to all the qualities which are inside and outside man's body aud all its 
accidents, aitributes, and consequences, so that there is nothing that is 
hidden from Ged in His knowledge of the universal. But the individual 
Zaid can only be distinguished from Amr through the senses, not through 
the intellect, and this distinction is based on pointing to a special clirection, 
whereas the intellect can only understand direction and space absolutely 
as universals. And when we say ‘this’ and ‘that’*, this is a case of potnting 
to a special relation of a sensible thing to the observer as being near to 
him or far from him, or in a definite place, and this is impossible where 
God is concerned.* 

This then is the principle in which they believe, and through it they 
uproot the Divine Laws absolutely, for this principle implies that God 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 297 

cannot know whether Zaid obeys or disobeys Him, since God cannot know 
any new occurrences that happen to Zaid, as He does not know the indi- 
vidual Zaid; for the individual and his acts come into existence after non- 
existence, and as God does not know the individual, He cannot know his 
conditions and his acts—indeed, He cannot know that Zaid becomes a 
heretic or a true believer, for He can know only the unbelief and the belief 
of man in general, not as it is specified in individuals. Yes, God cannot 
know Muhammed's proclaiming himself a prophet at the time he did, nor 
can God know this of any definite prophet; He can only know that some 
people proclaim themselves prophets and that they have such-and-such 
qualities, but any individual prophet He cannot know, for he can only 
be known by sense-perception. Nor can He know the acts which proceed 
from the prophets, since they are divided as acts of a definite man through 
the division of time, and their perception with their diversity implies a 
change in the observer. 

This is what we wanted to do first, namely to expound their view, then 
to render it intelligible, thirdly to show the perversities implied in it. 

We shall now pass on to relate the artfulness* of their theory and the 
point where it fails, Their artfiiness lies in the fact that they say: ‘There 
are here three different moments, and a sequence of different things in 
one single subject ae doubt implies a change in it. For if at the moment 
of the eclipse God thought that what was happening* was like what had 
heen before, He would be ignorant; if, on the other hand, He knew that 
it was happening and knew previously that it was not happening, but 
would happen, His knowledge and His condition would have hecome 
different, and this would imply a change, for “change”? means only a 
difference in the knowledge and a difference in the knowledge implies a 
difference in the knower, for he who did not know a thing and then 
knows it, has changed; previously he had no knowledge that it was 
happening, and then his knowledge was realized: therefore he changed.” 

And they have ¢laborated this by saying that there are three kinds of 
conditions;' first a condition which is a mere relation*, as when we say 
right and left, for this cloes not refer to an essential attribute, but is a mere 
relation; for if you change a thing from your right to your lelt, your 
relation to it changes, lhut the condition of your essence does not change, 
for the relation changes with respect to the essence, but the essence does 
not change. The second kind of condition is of the same type, Le. when 
you have the capacity to move bodies in front of you, and those bodies or 
part of them disappear, your innate power and your capacity does not 
change, for your capacity is first the capacity to move body in general 
and secondly to move a definite body in so far as it is a body; and the rela- 
tien of the capacity to the definite body is not an essential attribute, but 
a mere relation, and the disappearance of the body determines the cessa- 
tion of the relation, but not a change in the condition of the one wha 
possesses this capacity. The third* kind of condition, however, is a 

-_ 

5 

458 

ow 

Bo 

a 

459 

15 

20 

278 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

change in the essence, for when one who had no knowledge acquires 
knowledge and one who had no power becomes powerful there is indeed 
a change.! 

And the change in the object known causes a change in the knowledge, 
for the relation to the definite object known enters into the essence of the 
knowledge itself, since the essence of the definite knowledge is attached to 
the definite object known as it exists in reality, and when the knowledge 
attaches itself to it in another relation, it becomes necessarily another 
knowledge and this succession implies a differentiation in the essence* of 
the knowledge. And it cannot be said that God has one single knowledge 
which, having been knowledge of the future event, could become know- 
ledge of the present event, and having been knowledge of the present 
event, could become knowledge of the past event, for although the know- 
ledge would be one anc the same and have similar conditions, there would 
be a change of relation to Him and the change of relation would enter into 
the essence of the knowledge; and this change would imply a change in the 
essence of the knowledge, and from this there would result a change (which 
is impossible) in God, 

The objection to this is twofold. 

First one can say: How will you refute one who says that God has one 
single knowledge of the eclipse, for instance, at a definite time, and that 
this knowledge before the orcurrence of the eclipse is the knowledge that 
the eclipse will occur, and during the eclipse is identical with the knowledge 
that itis occurring, and after the eclipse identical with the knowledge that 
it has ceased, and that these diflerences refer to relations which imply 
neither a change in the essence of the knowledge nor a change in the 
essence of the knower, and that this is exactly like a mere relation?? For 
one single person can be at your right and then turn in front of you and go 
to your feft, and there is a succession of relations with respect to you; but 
that which is changing is the person who takes up different positions, and 
God’s knowledge must be understood in this way, for indeed we admit 
that God comprehends things in one single knowledge in everlasting 
eternity, and that His condition does not change; with their intention, 
the denial of His change, we do agree, but their assertion that it is neces- 
sary to regard the knowledge of an actual becoming and its cessation as 
a change, we refuse to accept. For how do you know this? Indeed, suppose 
God had created in us a knowledge that Zaid will arrive tomorrow at day- 
break, and had made this knowledge permanent without creating for us 
another knowledge or the forgetfulness of this knowledge; then, by the 
mere previous knowledge, we should know at daybreak that at present 
Zaid is arriving and afterwards that he had arrived, and this one perma- 
nent knowledge would suffice to comprehend these three moments.? 

There still remains their assertion that the relation to a definite object 
known enters into the essence of the knowledge of this object, and that 
whenever the relation becomes different the thing which has this essential 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 279 

reiation becomes different, and that whenever this differentiation and this 
sequence arise, there is a change.! 

We say: If this is true, then rather follow the path of your fellow-philo- 
sophers when they say that God knows only Himself and that knowing 
Himself is identical with His essence, for if He knew man and animal and 
the inorganic in general (and these are undoubtedly different things), His 
Felation to them would undoubtedly be different too; and one single 460 
knowledge cannot be a knowledge of different things, since the object 
related is differentiated, and the relation is differentiated, and the relation 
to the abject known is essential to the knowledge, and this implies a - 
multiplicity and a differentiation—not a mere multiplicity with a 
similarity, for similar things are things which can be substituted for each 
other, but the knowledge of an animal cannot be substituted for the 
knowledge of the inorganic, nor the knowledge of white for the knowledge 
of black, for they are two different things.* Besides, these species and 
genera and universal accidents are infinite? and they are different, and $ 
how can different sciences fall under one science? Again, this knowledge 
is the essence of the knower without any addition, and [ should like to 
know how an intelligent man can regard the unity of the knowledge of 
one and the same thing, when this knowledge is divided through its 
relations with the past, the future, and the present, as impossible, and 
uphold the unity of the knowledge which is attached to all genera and all 
different species!‘ For the diversity and the distance between the genera 
and the remote species js far greater than the difference which occurs in 
the conditions of one thing which is divided through the division of time; 
and if the former does not imply a plurality and differentiation, why then 10 
does the latter? And as soon as it ts proved that the diversity of times is less 
important than the diversity of genera and species, and that the latter 
does not imply a plurality and a diversity, the former also will not imply 
this, And if this dues nat imply a diversity, then it will be possible that the 
whole universe should be comprehended in one everlasting knowledge in 
everlasting time, and that this should not imply a change in the essence of 
the knower. 

I say: 

This sophistry is based on the assimilation of Divine Knowledge to 
human and the comparison of the one knowledge with the other, 
for man perceives the individual through his senses, and universal 
existents through his intellect, and the cause of his perception is the 
thing perceived itself, and there is no doubt that the perception 
changes through the change in the things perceived and that their 
plurality implies its plurality, 

As to his answer that it is possible that there should exist a know- 461 
ledge the relation of which to the objects known is that kind of 

wv 

Lata 

462 

a 

19 

280 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

relation which does not enter inte the essence of the thing related, like 
the relation of right and left, to that which has a right and a left— 
this is an answer which cannot be understood from the nature of 
human knowledge.’ And his second objection, that those philo- 
sophers whe affirm that God knows universals must, by admitting 
in His knowledge a plurality of species, conclude that a plurality of 
individuals and a plurality of conditions of one and the same indi- 
vidual is permissible for His knowledge, is a sophistical objection. 
For the knowledge of individuals is sensation or imagination, and 
the knowledge of universals is intellect,?, and the new occurrence 
of individuals or conditions of individuals causes two things, a 
change and a plurality in the perception; whereas knowledge of 
species and genera does not imply a change, since the knowledge of 
them is invariable and they are unified in the knowledge which 
comprehends them, and universality and individuality only agree 
in their forming a plurality. 

And his statement that those philosophers who assume one simple 
knowledge, which comprehends genera and species without there 
existing in it a plufality and diversity which the differentiation and 
diversity of the species and gencra would imply, will have also to 
admit one simple knowledge which will comprehend different indi- 
viduals and different conditions of one and the same individual, is 
like saying that if there is an intellect which comprehends species 
and genera, and this intellect is one, there must be one simple genus 
which comprehends different individuals; and this is a sophism, since 
the term ‘knowledge’ is predicated equivocally of divine and human 
knowledge of the universal and the individual.? But his remark that 
the plurality of species and genera causes a plurality in the know- 
ledge is true, and the most competent philosophers therefore do not 
call God's knowledge of existents either universal or individual, for 
knowledge which implies the concepts of universal and individual is 
a passive intellect and an effect,+ whereas the First Intellect is pure 
act and a cause, and His knowledge cannot be compared to human 
knowledge; for in so far as God does not think other things as being 
other than Himself His essence is not passive knowledge, and in so 
far as He thinks them as being identical with His essence, His essence 
is active knowledge.’ 

And the summary of their doctrine is that, since they ascertained 
by proofs that God thinks only Himself, His essence must of necessity 
be intellect. And as intellect, in so far as it is intellect, can only be 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 281 

attached to what exists, not to what does not exist, and it had been | 

proved that there is no existent but those existents which we think, it 
was necessary that His intellect should be attached to them, since it 
was not possible that it should be attached to non-existence and there 
is no other kind of existent to which it might be attached." And since 
it was necessary that it should be attached to the existents, it had to 
be attached either in the way our knowledge is attached to it, or in a 
superior way, and since the former is impossible, this knowledge must 
be attached in a superior way and according to a more perfect exis- 
tence of existents than the existence of the existents to which our 
intellect is attached. For true knowledge is conformity with the exis- 
tent,? and if His knowledge is superior to ours and His knowledge is 
attached to the existent in a way superior to our attachment to the 
existent, then there must be two kinds of existence, a superior and an 
inferior, and the superior existence must be the cause of the inferior. 

And this is the meaning of the ancient philosophers, when they say 
thae God is the totality of the existents which He bestows on us in 
His bounty and of which He is the agent. And therefore the chiefs 
of the Sufis say: there is no reality besides Him.’ But all this is the 
knowledge of those who are steadfast in their knowledge, and this 
must not be written down and it must not be made an obligation of 
faith, and cherefore it is not taught by the Divine Law. And one who 
mentions this truth where it should not be mentioned sins, and one 
who withholds it fram those to whom it should be told sins too. And 
that one single thing can have different degrees of existence can be 
learned from the different degrees of existence of the soul.+ 

Ghazali says: 

The second refutation is: ‘What prevents you, according te your 
doctrine, fron affirming God’s knowledge of individuals, even if this 
implies His chanying, for why do you not believe that this kind of change 
is not impossible in God, just as Jahm, one of the Mu‘tazilites, says that 
His knowledge of temporals is temporal’ and the later Karramites say that 
God is the substratum of the temporals?¢ The true believers refute these 
theories only by arguing that what changes cannot be without change, and 
what cannot be without change and without temporal occurrences is itself 
temporal and not eternal.” For you, however, according to your doctrine 
the world is eternal but not without change, and if you acknowledge an 
eternal which changes, nothing prevents you from accepting this theory.” 

If you replied: We only regard this as impossible, because the temporal 
knowledge in His essence must either derive from Himself or from some- 
thing else; that it should derive from Himself is impossible, for we have 

463 

° 

464 

19 

w 

282 ‘ TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

shown that from the eternal no temporal can proceed and that God can- 
not become active after having been at rest, for this would imply a change, 
and we have established this in treating the question of the temporal 
becoming of the world; and if it were to arise in His essence from something 
else, how could something else influence and change Him so that His 
conditions changed as if under the power and necessity of something 
different from Him?—we answer: Neither of these alternatives is 
impossible, according to your doctrine, As to your assertion that it is 
impossible that from the eternal a temporal being should proceed, we 
refuted this sufficiently when we treated this problem, According to you 
it is impossible that from the eternal there should proceed a temporal 
being which is the first of a series of temporal beings and it is only 
impossible that there should be a first temporal being.' However, these 
temporal beings have no infinite number of temporal causes, but by 
means of the circular movement they terminate in something eternal 
which is the soul and life of the sphere; and the soul of the sphere is 
eternal and the circular movement arises temporally from it and each 
part of this movement begins and ends, and that which follows it is 
surely a new occurrence? Therefore, according to you the temporal 
beings arise from the eternal.? However, since the conditions of the eternal 
are uniform, the emanation of temporal occurrences from Him will be 

‘eternally uniform, just as the conditions of the movement are uniform, 
-since they proceed from an eternal being whose conditions are uniform; 

and all the philosophical sects acknowledge that from an eternal being 
a temporal being can proceed, when this happens in a proportionate way 
and eternally. Therefore let the different types of His knowledge proceed 
from Him in this way.* 

And as to the other alternative, that His knowledge should proceed 
from another, we answer: Why is that impossible according to you? 
There are here only three difficulties, The first is the changing, but we 
have already shown that this is a consequence of your theory, 

The second difficulty, that one thing should be the cause of a change 
in another, is not impossible according to you; for let the occurrence of the 
thing be the cause of the occurrence of its being known, just as you say that 
the appearance of a coloured’ figure in front of the pupil of the eye is the 
cause of the impression of the image of this igure on the vitreous humour 
of the pupil through the medium of the transparent air between the pupil 
and the figure seen;® and if therefore an inanimate object can be the cause 
of the impression of the form on the pupil—and this is the meaning of 
sight—why should it be impossible that the occurrence of temporal beings 
should cause the First to acquire its knowledge of them*? And just as the 
potency of seeing is disposed to perceive, and the appearance of the coloured 
figure, when the obstacles are removed, is the cause of the actuali- 
zation of the perception, so let according to you the essence of the 

to First Principie be disposed to receive knowledge and emerge from potency 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 283 

into act through the existence of this temporal being. And if this implies a 
change in the eternal, a changing eternal is not impossible according to 
you. And if you protest that this is impossible in the necessary existent, you 
have no other proof for establishing the necessary existent than the necessity 
of a termination to the series of causes and effects, as has been shown 
previously, and we have proved that to end this series with an eternal 
being which can change is not impossible. 

The third difficulty in the problem is that if the Eternal could change 
through another, this would be like subjection and the control of another 
over Him. 

But one may say: Why is this impossible according to you? For it only 
means that the Eternal is the cause of the occurrence of the temporal 
beings through intermediaries, and that afterwards the occurrence of these 
temporal beings becomes the cause of the knowledge which the Eternal 
has of them. It is therefore as if He were Himself the cause of this know- 
ledge reaching Him, although it reaches Him through intermediaries. 
And if you say that this is like subjection, let it be so, for this conforms to 
your doctrine, since you say that what proceeds from God proceeds in 
the way of necessity and nature, and that He has no power not to do it, 
and this too resembles a kind of bondage, and indicates that He is as it 
were under necessity as to that which proceeds from Him. And if it is said 
that this is no constraint, since His entelechy consists in the fact that He 
makes everything proceed from Himself, and that this is no subjection, 
then we answer that His entelechy consists in knowing everything, and if 
it js true to say that the knowledge which we receive in conjunction with 
everything that happens is a perfection for us," not an imperfection or 
subjection, let the same be the case with respect to God. 

I say: 

The summary of this first objection against the philosophers, which 
is a refutation of their theories, not of the fact itself, is that ‘according 
to your principles, philosophers, there exists an eternal being in 
which temporal beings inherc, namely the sphere; how can you 
therefore deny that the First Eternal is a subject in which temporal 
beings inhere?’ The Ash‘arites deny this only because of their theory 
that any subject in which temporal beings inhere is itseff a temporal 
being. And this objection is dialectical,? for there are temporal beings 
which do not inhere in the eternal, namely the temporal beings 
which change the substance in which they inhere; and there are 
temporal beings which inhere in the eternal, namely the temporal 
beings which do not change the substance of their substratum, like 
the local movement of the moving body and transparency and 
iflumination ;? and further there is an eternal in which no movements 

466 

in 

284 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and no changes inhere at all, namely the incorporeal eternal; and 
thére is an eternal in which only some movements inhere, namely 
the eternal which is a body like the heavenly bodies, and when this 
distinction, which the philosophers require, is made, this objection 
becomes futile, for the discussion is only concerned with the incor- 
poreal eternal. 

Having made this objection against the philosophers, he gives the 
answer of the philosophers about this question, and the summary is 
that they are only prevented from admitting temporal knowledge in 

. the First, because temporal knowledge must arise through itself or 

467 

oO 

through another; and in the former case there would proceed from 
the eterna] a temporal being, and according to the principles of the 
philosophers no temporal being can proceed from the eternal. Then 
he argues against this assertion that from the eternal no temporal 
being can proceed, by showing that they assume that the sphere is 
eternal and that they assume that temporal beings proceed from it. 

But their justification of this is that the temporal cannot proceed 
from an absolutely eternal being, but only from an eternal being 
which is eternal in its substance, but temporal in its movements, 
namely the celestial body; and therefore the celestial body is accord- 
ing to them like an intermediary between the absolutely eternal and 
the absolutely temporal, for it is in one way eternal, in another way 
temporal, and this intermediary is the celestial circular movement 
according to the philosophers, and this movement is according to 
them ctcrnal in its species, temporal in its parts. And so far as it is 
etemal, it proceeds from an eternal, and in so far as its parts are 
temporal, there proceed from them infinite temporal beings. And 
the only reason that prevented the philosophers from accepting an 
existence of temporal beings in the First was that the First is incor- 
poreal and temporal beings only exist in body, for only in body, 
according to them, there is receptivity, and that which is free from 
matter has no receptivity. 

And Ghazali’s objection to the second part of the argument of the 
phitoséphers, namely that the First Cause cannot be an effect, is that 
it is possible that God’s knowledge should be like the knowledge of 
man, that is that the things known should be the cause of His know- 
ledge and their occurrence the cause of the fact that He knows them, 

468 just as the objects of sight are the cause of visual perception and the 

intelligible the cause of intellectual apprehension; so that in this way 
God’s producing and creating existents would be the cause of His 

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION 285 

apprehending them, and it would not be His knowledge that would 
be the cause of His creating them. 

But it is impossible, according to the philosophers, that God’s 
knowledge should be analogous to ours, for our knowledge is the 
effect of the existents, whereas God’s knowledge is their cause, and 
it is not true that eternal knowledge is of the same form as temporal. 
He who believes this makes God an eternal man’ and man a mortal 
God,? and in short, it has previously been shown that God’s know- 
ledge stands in opposition to man’s, for it is His knowledge which 
produces the existents, and it is not the existents which produce His 
knowledge. 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their proof that heaven is an animal moving in a circle 
in obedtence to God 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers say also that heaven is an animal and possesses a soul 
which has the same relation to the body of heaven as cur souls to our 
bodies, and just as our bodies move by will to their ends through the 
moving power of the soul, heaven acts. And the aim of the heavens in 
their essential movement is to serve the Lord of the world in a way we 
shall relate. 

Their doctrine in this question is something that cannot be refuted, 
and we shall not declare that it is impossible; for God has the power of 
creating life in any body, and neither the size of a body nor its circular 
shape is a hindrance to its being animated, for the condition of the existence 
of life is not limited to a particular shape, since animals, notwithstanding 
their different shapes, all participate in the reception of life.? But we claim 

469 

their incapacity to reach this knowledge by rational proof, even if it is ° 

true, and only the prophets through divine revelation or inspiration could 
apprehend such a knowledge, but rational argument does not prove it; 
indeed, we do not even assert that it is impossible that such a thing should 
be known by proof, if there is a proof and this proof is valid, but we must 
say that what they have given as a proof has only the value of a conjecture, 
but lacks all strictness. 

Their device* is that they say that heaven is moved, and this is a 
premiss given by perception.* And every body moved has a mover, which 

470 

10 

20 

471 

286 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

is a premiss established by reason, since if body were moved merely by 
being body, every body would be in motion." Every mover receives its 
impulse either from the moved itself, like the nature in the stone which 
fails and the will in the movement of the animal conjoined with its power 
to move, or from an external mover which moves through constraint, as 
when a stone is flung upwards. Everything that is moved by something 
existing in itself is either unconscious of its movement (and we call this 
nature), like the falling of the stone, or conscious (and we call this 
voluntary or animated). This disjunction, that a movement is either con- 
strained or natural or voluntary, comprises all the cases completely, so that 
if a movement does not fall under two of these divisions it must be of the 
third type. Now the movement of heaven cannot be constrained, because 
the mover of a movement by constraint is either (1) another body which 
is moved by constraint or by will, and in this case we must finally no doubt 
arrive at a wilf as mover, and when in the heavenly bodies a body moved 
through will is established, then our aim is reached, for what use is it to 
assume movements through constraint when finally we must admit a will ?? 
or (2) God is the mover of its movement by constraint without inter- 
mediary, and this is impossible; for if it moves through Him in so far as it 
is a body ahd in so far as He is its creator, then necessarily every body 
ought to he moved. 

This movement, therefore, must be distinguished by a quality which 
marks this body off from all other bodies; and this quality will be its 
proximate mover, either by will or by nature. And it cannot be said that 
God moves it through His will, because His will has the same relation to 
all bodies, and why should this body be specially disposed so that God 
should move it rather than another? One cannot suppose this; for it is 
impossible, as has been shown in the question about the temporal begin- 
ning of the world, When it is therefore established that this body needs as 
a principle of movement a special qualification, the first division, that of 
che movement through constraint, is ruled out. 

So there remains the possibility that this movement occurs by nature, 
But this is not possible, for nature by itself is not the cause of motion, 
because the meaning of ‘motion’ is the withdrawal from one place to another 

"place; and a body does not move from the place in which it is when that 

place is its proper place. For this reason a bladder full of air on the surface 
of the water does not move, but when it is immersed it moves towards the 
surface of the water, and then it has found its proper place and has come 
to rest and its nature is stabilized; when, however, it is transferred to a 
place which is not its proper one, it withdraws ¢o its proper place, just 
as it withdraws from mid-water to the border of the air.t Now it cannot be 
imagined that the circular movement is natural, since it returns to every 
position and place which it would be supposed to abandon, and it is not 
by nature that a body seeks the place which it abandons, and therefore the 
bladder of air does not seek the interior of the water, nor the stone when 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 287 

it has come to rest on the earth the air. Thus only the third division 
remains, that of movement by will.! 

I say: 

What he Jays down in this section, that every thing moved either 5 
is moved by itself or through a body from outside and that it is this 
which is called constraint, is self-evident. But that for every thing 
which is moved by itself there is no mover but the moved? is not a 
self-evident proposition; it is only a common notion, and the philo- 
sophers indeed try to prove that every thing moved by itself has an 
interior mover different from it, through the use of other premisses 10 
which are sel-evident, and of premisses which are the conclusions of 
other proofs, and this is something which may be ascertained in their 
books. And likewise it is not seif-evident that every thing moved by 
an exterior mover must finally terminate in a thing moved by itself: 
what is posed here as a set of self-evident premisses is, as a matter of 
fact, a mixture of the two kinds of assertions; that is to say they are 
partly conclusions and partly self-evident. Indeed, that what is moved 
by itself and not by an external body is moved either by its substance 
and nature or by an interior principle, and that it cannot be moved 
by something which cannot be seen or touched and which is con- 472 
nected with it from the outside (or in other words by an incorporeal 
entity) is selievident.2 You can claim* to have 2 proof for this, 
namely by saying that if this were not so*, upward movement would 
not be proper to fire rather than to earth; but it is, indeed, evident 
in itself.4 And as to that which* does not move by its own substance 
and nature, this is evident in the things which aresomcetimesin motion § 
and sometimes at rest, since that which is by nature cannot perform 
both of two opposites;5 for those things, however, which are per- 
ceived to move continually, a proof is necessary.® 

Again, as to his assertion that what is moved by itself is moved 
through a principle in itself, either a principle called ‘nature’ or a 
principle called ‘soul’ and ‘choice’, this is (rue, when previously it 
has been proved that nothing exists which is moved by itself As 
concerns his affirmation that the principle called nature does not 
move by itself in space, except when it is not its proper place (for 
then it moves to its proper place and stays there), this is true. And 
his further remark that what moves in a circle has neither an im- 
proper nor a proper place, so that it could move from the one to the 
other either totally or partially, this is nearly self-evident and easy 
to uphold, and he has in this section mentioned something of its 

o 

473 

10 

474 

to 

288 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

explanation and proof; and therefore, when we understand ‘nature’ 
in the sense he has established here, circular movement cannot move 
by nature. 

And as to his further remark that, when it does not move by 
nature, it moves through soul or through a potency which resembles 
the soul, it appears that the term ‘soul’ is predicated only equivocally 
of the soul in the celestial bodies,! and the learned for the most part 
apply the term ‘nature’ to every potency which performs a rational 
act, namely am act which conforms to the order and arrangement 
which exist in rational things;? but they exclude heaven from this 
kind of potency, because according to them it is heaven which pro- 
vides this directing power for all existents.? 

However, the argument of the ancients he relates here has only 
dialectical value, partly because much in it which is in reality a con- 
clusion of a proof is assumed to be self-evident and partly because 
things are opposed in it which are not really in opposition. It is also 
dialectical because its premisses are probable and common notions. 
This was Avicenna’s method of proving that the heavenly body was 
an animated body, but for this the ancients have a more efficient and 
clearer proof, 

Ghazali says: 

The objection is that we can assume* besides your theory three hypo- 
theses which cannot be proved to be untrue. The first is that we assume 
the movement of heaven to take place through constraint by another body 
which desires its movement and makes it turn eternally, and that this 
body which sets it in motion is neither a sphere nor a circumference nor a 
heaven; their assertion is therefore false that the movement of heaven is 
voluntary and that heaven is animated, and what we have said is possible, 
and it cannot be denied except by a presumption of impossibility. 

I say: 

This is false, for the philosophers have proved that outside heaven 
there is no other body, and it cannot be inside heaven; besides, were 
this body to set it in motion, it would necessarily have to be moved 
itself, and we should have an infinite regress.* 

Ghazali says: 

The second hypothesis is to say: ‘The movement occurs by constraint 
and its principle is the will of God, and indeed we say that the downward 
movement of a body also occurs by constraint, through God’s creating 
this movement in this body; and the same can be said of all the other 
movements of those bodies which are not living.’ 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 289 

There still remains the fact that the philosophers regard this as impos- 
sible, because they ask why the will should have distinguished just this 
body, whereas all other bodies participate in bodiliness. But we have 
already explained that it is of the nature of the eternal Will to differentiate 
one thing from a similar one, and that the philosophers are forced to admit 
such a quality for the determination of the direction of the circular move- 
ment and for the determination of the place of the poles and their points, 
and we shall not repeat this; but our argument is, in short, chat when they 
deny that a body can be differentiated for the attachment of the will to it 
without a distinctive attribute, this can be turned against them in regard 
to this distinctive attribute, for we ask them: ‘Why is the body of heaven 
distinguished by this attribute, which sets it apart from all other bodies, 
although all other bodies are also bodies; and how can anything occur 
to it which does not occur to other bodies?’ If this is caused by another 
attribute, we must repeat the same question about this other attribute, and 
in this way we should get an infinite series, and they would be forced in 
the end to acknowledge an arbitrary judgement of the wilt and the fact 
that in the principles there is something that distinguishes one thing from 
a similar one. 

I say: 

That a stone moves downwards through a2 quality which has been 
created in it, and fire upwards, and that these qualities are opposed 
—this is a self-evident fact, and to contradict it is pure folly. But it is 
still more foolish to say that the eternal Will causes the movement in 
these things everlastingly—without any act He deliberately chose'— 
and that this movement is not implanted in the nature of the thing, 
and that this is called constraint; for if this were true, things would 
have no nature, no real essence, no definition at all. For it is self- 
evident that the natures and definitions of things only differ through 
the difference of their acts, just as it is self-evident that every move- 
ment forced on a body comes from a body outside it. And this argu- 
ment has no sense whatever. 

And as to his affirmation ‘that to assume that the act which pro- 
ceeds from an existent requires a special attribute makes it necessary 
to ask about this attribute also why it characterizes this existent 
rather than any other of its kind’, this is like saying that one ought 
to ask a man who asserted that earth and fire, which participate in 
bodiliness, were distinguished only by an attribute added to their 
bodiliness, why the attribute of fire characterizes fire and the attri- 
bute of earth, earth, and not rather the reverse. These, indeed, are 
the words of a man who does not assume for the attributes themselves 

41S 

476 

477 

ow 

290 “* TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

a particular subject, but on the contrary believes that any attribute 
can be in any subject.' He who speaks like this denies also the defini- 
tion and the differentiation of subjects, and their characterization 
through special attributes, which is the first cause of the specification 
of existents through particular attributes, and this assumption belongs 
to the principles of the Ash‘arites who tried thereby to annul both 
religious and rational wisdom and, in short, reason itself.? 
Ghazali says: 

The chird hypothesis is to admit that heaven is differentiated by an 
attribute and that this attribute is the principle of the movement, in the 
way they believe this of the downward movement, although in this case 
it is not known, as it is known in the case of the stone.? 

And their assertion that a thing cannot by its nature abandon the place 
sought dy its nature rests on a confusion.* For according to them there is 
here no numerical difference; on the contrary, the body is one and the 
circular movement is one, and neither the body nor the movement has an 
actual part; they are only divided by imagination, and this movement is 
not there to seek its place or to abandon it—indeed, it may well be that 
God creates a body in the essence of which there is something which deter- 
mines a circular movement. The movement itself will then be determined 
by this attribute, not, however, the aiming at the place, for that would 
imply that arrival at the place would be the aim of the movement. And 
if your assertion that every movement takes place in seeking a place or 
abandoning it is a necessary principle, it is as if you made the seeking of 
the place the goal of nature, not the movement itself which will in this 
case only be a means,’ But we say it is not absurd that the movement, not 
the seeking of a place, should be the goal itself; and why should that be 
impossible? And it is clear that, simply because they regard their hypo- 
thesis as the most plausible, we are not obliged to deny any other hypo- 
thesis absolutely; for to assert absolutely that heaven is a living being is 
pure presumption, for which there is no support. 

I say: 

The assertion of the philosophers that this movement is not a 
natural potency resembling the natural movement in earth and fire 
is true. And this is clear from their saying that this potency desires 
the place suitable to the body which possesses existence through this 
potency, and that the heaventy body, since all spacc is suitable to it, 
is not moved through such a potency, and the leamed do not call 
this potency heavy or light.’ Whether this potency depends on per- 
ception or not, and if so which kind of perception, is shown by other 
arguments? 

And the summary of this is to say: The inanity of the first hypo- 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 2g - 

thesis, namely that the mover of heaven might be another body 
which is not heaven, is self-evident or nearly so. For this body cannot 
set the heavenly body in a circular movement without being moved 

by itself, as if ome were to say that a man or an angel turned the + 

heavens from east to west.! And if this were true, this animated body 
would have to be either outside the world or inside it; and it is 
impossible that it should be outside the world, since outside the 
world there is neither place nor emptiness, as has been shown in 
many passages, and it would also be necessary that when this body 
set it in motion it should rest upon a body supporting it*, and this 
latter body again upon another, and so ad infinitum.? But that it 
should be inside the world is also impossible, for then it ought to be 
perceived by the senses, since any body inside the world can be per- 
ceived,? and this body, besides needing a body which would make it 
turn, would also need a body to carry it* or perhaps the body convey- 
ing it and the body setting it in motion might be identical, and the 
conveying body would need a body to convey it, and the number of 
animated bodies which set things in motion would have to be equal 
to the number of heavenly bodies. And one would also have to ask 
about these bodies whether they were composed of the four elements, 
in which case they would be twransitory,* or whether they might be 
simple; and, if they were simple, what their nature was. All this is 
impossible, especially for one who has ascertained the natures of the 
simple bodies and learned their number and the species of bodies 
composed of them, and there is no sense in occupying ourselves with 
this matter here, for it has been proved in another place that this 
movement does not take place by constraint, since it is the principle 
of all movements, and through its intermediary, not only move- 
ments, but Lifes is distributed to al} beings. 

As to the second hypothesis, that God moves the heavens without 
having created a potency in them through which they move, this 
also is a very reprehensible doctrine, far from man’s understanding. 
It would mean that God touches** and moves everything which is in 
this sublanary world, and that the causes and effects which are per- 
ceived are ail without meaning, and that man might be man through 
another quality than the quality God has created in him and that 
the same would be true for all other things. But such a denial would 
amount to a denial of the intelligibles, for the intellect perceives 
things only through their causes. This theory resembles the theory 
of those ancient philosophers, the Stoics,7 who say that God exists in 

ava 

479 

‘a0 

10 

48] 

292 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

everything; and we shall engage in a discussion with them™ when we 
treat the question of the denial of causes and effects. 

The third objection which assumes a natural movement is to sup- 
pose that the movement of heaven is caused by a natural potency in 
it and through an essential attribute, not through a soul. It says that 
the argument of the philosophers in denying this is false, in so far as 
they build their proof on the following argument. The philosophers, 
that is, say that if the movement of heaven occurred by nature, 
the place sought by its natural movement would be identical with 
the place which it abandoned, because every part of heaven moves 
to places from which it has moved, since its movement is circular. The 
place, however, from which natural local movement retires is differ- 
ent from the place it aims at, for the place from which it moves is an 
accidental place,* while the place to which it moves is its natural 
place, in which it will come to rest. But, says Ghazali, this is a false 
assumption of the philosophers, for although they assume that the 
parts of heaven have many movements through many movers, this 
cannot be correct according to their own principles, for they affirm 
that the circular movement is unique, and that the body moved by 
it is unique, and therefore heaven is not in search of a place through 
its circular movement, and it is thus possible that in heaven there 
should be something through which it aims at the movement itse!f. 

But the justification of the philosophers is that they only say this 
to such people as believe that the stars change their place through 
a natural movement, similar to the change of place found in things 
moved by nature. And the true assumption of the philosophers is that 
through the circular movement the thing moved is not in search of 
a place, but only secks the circular movement itself, and that things 
which behave in this way have of necessity as their mover a soul 
and not nature. Movement, that is to say, has existence only in the 
intellect, since outside the soul there exists only the thing moved and 
in it there is only a particular movement without any lasting exis- 
tence.) But what is moved towards movement in so far as it is 
movement must of necessity desire this movement, and what desires 
movement must of necessity represent it.* 

And this is one of the arguments through which it is evident that 
the heavenly bodies are provided with intellect and desire; and this 
is clear also from various other arguments, one of which is that we 
find that circular bodies move with two contrary movements at the 
same time, towards the east and towards the west; and this cannot 

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION 293 

happen through nature, for that which moves through nature moves 
in one movement alone,” 

And we have already spoken of what caused the philosophers to 
believe that heaven possesses intellect, and their plainest proofis that, 
having understood that the mover of heaven is free from matter, they 
concluded that it can only move through being an object of thought 
and representation, and therefore the thing moved must be capable 
of thought and representation. And this is clear also from the fact 
that the movement of the heavens is a condition of the existence and 
preservation of the existents in the sublunary world, which cannot 
take place by accident. But these things can only be explained here 
in an informative and persuasive fashion. 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 
To refute the theory of the philosophers about the aim which 

moves heaven? 

Ghazali says: 

The philosophers have also affirmed that heaven is an animal which 
oheys God by movement and by drawing near Him; for every voluntary 
movernent arises for the sake of an end, since one cannot imagine that an 
act and a movement can proceed from an animal which does not prefer 
the act to its omission—indeed, if the act and its omission were to be 
equipollent, no act could be imagined. 

Further, approach to God does not mean seeking His grace and guard- 
ing oneself from His wrath, since God is too exalted for wrath and grace; 
sirnilar words can only be applied to Him metaphorically, and they are 
used in a metaphorical way when one speaks of His will to punish or to 
reward, Approach cannot mean the seeking of an approach to Him in 
space, for this is impossible; the only meaning it can have is of an approach 
in qualities, for God's existence is the most perfect and every other exist- 
ence is imperfect in relation to His, and in this imperfection there are 
degrees and distinctions. The angels are nearest to Him in quality, not 
in place; and this is the meaning of the term ‘the angels in His proximity’ 
—namely, the intellectual substances which neither change nor alter nor 
pass away, and which know things as they really are? And the nearer 
man comes to the angels in qualities the nearer he comes to God, and the 
end of man’s nature lies in assimilation to the angels. 

And when it is established that this is the meaning of ‘approach to 

482 

a 

483 

- 

ite) 

3 

484 

294 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

God’, and that jt refers to seeking approach to Him in qualities, then* 
this consists for man in knowledge of the realities of the existents and in 
his remaining eternally in the most perfect condition possible to him; for 
indeed permanence in the utmost perfection is God. 

As to the angels in His proximity, any perfection that is possible for them 
is actual with them in their existence, since there is no potency in them 
which could emerge into act,! and therefore they are in the utmost 
perfection in regard to everything but God. And by ‘heavenly angels’ 
is meant the souls which move the heavens, and in them there is potency, 
and their perfections are divided into what is actual, like their circular 
shape and their appearance, which exists always, and what is potential, 
namely their appearance in a definite position and place; for any definite 
position is possible to them, but they are not actually in all positions, for 
ta be in all of them at once is impossible.? And since they cannot be at all 
times im all particular positions at once, they try to exhaust all these 
puticular positions by heing in them specifically,’ so that they do not 
ceas¢ to aim at on¢ position and one place after another; and this 
potentiality is never ending, nor do these movements ever end. 

But their one aim is to assimilate themselves to the First Principle, in 
the acquisition of the utmost perfection within the bounds of possibility 
with respect to Him, and this is the meaning of the obedience of the 
heavenly angels to God, And their assimilation is acquired in two ways. 
Fiest, in completing every position specifically possible, and this is aimed 
at by first intention; secondly, by ihe order proceeding from their move- 
ment through the diversity of their configuration in trine and quartile, 
in conjuction and opposition, and dirough the diversity in the ascendant 
in relation to the earth, so that the good which is in the sublunary world 
can emanate from it, and all that happens arise from it. And every sou} 
is intellective and tongs for ihe perfection of its essence. 

I say: 

Everything he says here about the philosophers is a philosophical 
doctrine, or its consequence, or can be regarded as a philosophical 
doctrine, with one exception, when he says that heaven seeks by its 
movement the particular positions which are infinite; however, what 
is infinite cannot be sought, since it cannot be attained.* Nobody has 
held this doctrine but Avicenna, and Ghazali’s objection to it, which 
we will mention later, is sufficient, and according to the philosophers 
it is the movement itself in so far as it is movement which is aimed at 
by heaven.’ For the perfection of an animal, in so far as it is an 
animal, is movement; in this stblunary world rest occurs to the 
transitory animal only by accident, that is through the necessity of 
matter, for lassitude and fatigue touch the animal only because it is 
in matter. The whole life and perfection of those animals which are 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 2905 

not affected by tiredness and languor must of necessity lie in their 
movement; and their assimilation to their Creator consists in this, 
that by their movement they impart life to what exists in this sub- 
lunary world. 

This movement, however, does not occur according to the philo- 
sophers in first intention for the sake of this sublunary world; that is, 
the heavenly body is not in first intention created for the sake of this 
sublunary world. For indeed this movement is the special act for the 
sake of which heaven is created, and if this movement occurred in 
first intention for the sake of the sublunary world, the body of the 
heavens would be created only for the sake of this sublunary wortd, 
and it is impossible, according to the philosophers, that the superior 
should be created for the sake of the inferior; on the contrary, out of 
the superior there follows the existence of the inferior, just as the 
perfection of the ruler in relation to his subject does not lie in his 
being a ruler, but his being a ruler is only the consequence of his 
perfection. In the same way the providence which prevails in this 
world is like the care of the ruler for his subjects, who have no salva- 
tion and no existence except in him, and especially ia the ruler who 
for his most perfect and noble existence does not need to be a ruler, 
let alone that he should need his subjects’ existence.’ 

Ghazali says: 

The objection to this ts that in the premisses of this argument there are 
controversial peints. We shall not, however, pay any attention to them, 
but shalt revert at once to the final intention the philosophers had in view 
and refute it from two standpoints. 

‘The first is to say: ‘To seck perfection through being in all possible 
places may be foolishness rather than obedience; is it not in some degree 
like a man, who has no occupation and who has adequate means to satisly 
his wishes and needs, and who gets up and walks round in a country or in 
a house, and declares that by doing so he approaches God and that he 
perfects himself by arriving at alt possible places, and says that it is possible 
for him to be in these places, but not possible for him to unite all the places 
numerically, and that therefore he fulfils this task specifically and that 
in this there is perfection and an approach to God? Indeed, it is his 
foolishness which makes him do such a stupid thing, and it may be said 
that to change positions and pass from place to place is not a perfection 
which has any value or which may be an object of desire.? 

And there is no difference between what they say and this. 

I say: 
It might be thought that the silliness of such an argument either 

9 

485 

486 

487 

10 

296 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

comes from a very ignorant or from a very wicked man. Ghazali, 
however, has neither of these dispositions. But sometimes unwise 
words come by way of exception from a man who is not ignorant, 
and wicked talk from a man who is not wicked, and it shows the 
imperfection of people that such conceits can be addressed to them. 

But if we concede to Avicenna that the sphere aims through its 
movement at a change of positions, that this change of positions is 
what conserves the beings of this subtunary world after giving them 
their existence, and that this action is everlasting, can there then exist 
an obedience more complete than this? For instance, if a man exerted 
himself in guarding a city against the enemy, going round the city 
day and night, should we not regard this as a most important act of 
approach to God? But if we assumed that he moved round the town 
for the end which Ghazali attributes to Avicenna, namely that he 
only sought to perfect himself through trying to be in an infinite 
number of places, he would be declared mad." And this is the meaning 
of the Divine Words: ‘Verily thou canst not cleave the earth, and 
thou shalt not reach the mountains in height.’? 

And his assertion that, since heaven cannot complete the individual 
numerical positions or join them, it has to complete them specifically, 
is a faulty, incomprchensible expression, unless he means that its 
movement has to last in its totality since it cannot be lasting in its 
parts. For there are movements which are lasting neither in their 
Parts nor in their totality, namely the movements of the transitory; 
and there are movements which are lasting in their totality, transi- 
tory in their parts, but notwithstanding this such a movement is said 
to be one in ways which are distinguished in many passages of the 
books of the philosophers. And his assertion that, since heaven can- 
hot complete them numerically, it completes them specifically, is 
erroneous, since the movement of heaven is numerically one, and 
one can ouly apply such an expression to the transitory movements 
in the sublunary world; for these movements, since they cannot be 
numerically one, are specifically one and lasting through the move- 
ment which is numerically one.‘ 

Ghazali says: 

The second is to say: What you assert of the aim can be realized through 
the movement from west to east. Why, then, is the first movement from 
east to west, and why are not ali the movements of the universe in the 
same direction? And if there is an intention in their diversity, why are they 
Not different in an opposite way, so that the movement from the east 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 297 

should become the movement from the west, and the reverse? Everything 
you have mentioned of the occurrence of events like trine and sextile and 
others through the diversity of movements would happen just the same 
through the reverse. Also, what you have mentioned of the completion 
of the positions and places would happen just the sare if the movement 
were in the opposite direction. Why then, since the reverse movement is 
possible for them, do they not move sometimes in one direction, sometimes 
in another, to complete all their possibilities, if it is in the completion of 
all their possibilities that their perfection lies? It is therefore shown that 
all these things are phantasms without any substance; for the secrets of the 
heavenly kingdom cannot be attained through such phantasms, God alone 
tan manifest them to His prophets and saints through revelation, nos 
through proof, and therefore the later philosophers are unable to give 
the reason for the direction of the movement of the heavenly bodies and 
why they have chosen it. 

I say: 

This objection is sophistical, for the transference from one question 
to another is an act of sophistry. Why does there follow, ftom their 
inability to assign the reason of the civersity in the directions of the 
movements of heaven, their inability to give the reason for the move- 
ment of heaven or to say that there is no reason at all for this move- 
ment? But this whole argument is extremely weak and fecble. How- 
ever, how happy the theologians are about this problem! They 
believe that they have refuted the philosophers over it, since they are 
ignorant of the different arguments by which the philosophers have 
arrived at their reasons anc of the many reasons that are required 
and must be assigned to every existent, since the causes differ through 
the varicty in the natures of the existents, For simple existents have 
no other cause for what proceeds from them than their own natures 
and their forms,* but in composite things there are found, beside 
their forms, eflicient causes which produce their composition and the 
conjunction of their parts. The earth, for instance, has no other cause 
for its downward movement than its attribute of earthiness, and fire 
has no other cause for its upward movement than its own nature and 
its form, and through this nature it is said to be the opposite of earth, 
Likewise, for up and down there are no reasons why the one direction 
should be higher and the other lower, but this is determined by their 
nature. And since the differentiation of directions is determined 
through the directions themselves, and the differentiation of the 
movements through the differentiation of the directions, no other 

oe) 

488 

reason can be assigned for the variation in the movements than the 489 

10 

490 

298 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

variation in the directions of the things moved, and the vartation in 
their natures depends on the variation of their natures; i.e. some are 
nobler than others. 

For instance, when a man sees that animals in walking place one 
leg in front of their body before the other and not the reverse, and 
asks why the animal does this, there is no sufficient answer except 
to say that an animal in its movement must have one leg to put 
forward and one to support itself on, and therefore an animal must 
have two sides, right and left, and the right is the one which is 
always* put forward first because of its special potency and the left 
the one which always, or mostly*, follows, because of its special 
potency; and it cannot be the reverse, so that the left side became 
the right, since the natures of the animal determine this, either 
through a determination in a majority of cases, or through a constant 
determination.! 

The same is the case with the heavenly bodies since, if a person 
asks why heaven moves in a particular direction, the answer is that 
it is because it has a right and a left, and especially because it is 
evident from its nature that it is a living being, only it has the pecu- 
liarity that the right side in a part of it is the left side in another part,* 
and that although it has only this one organ of locomotivi} it moves 
in opposite directions like a left foot which can also do the work of 
a right.t And just as the answer to the question whether the animal 
would not be more perfect if its right were its left, and why the right 
has been differentiated to be the right, and the left to be the !eft, 
is that the only reason for this is that the nature of the side called 
right has been determined by its essence to be the right and not the 
left, and that the left side has been determined by its essence to be 
the left and not the right, and the noblest has been attributed to the 
noblest; in the same way, when it is asked why the right side has 
been differentiated for the movernent of the highest sphere to be 
the right and the left side to be the left (for the reverse was also 
possible as the case of the plancts shows), the only answer is that 
the noblest direction has been attributed to che noblest body, as 
upward movement has been attributed to fire, downward move- 
ment to earth. As to the fact that the other heavens move in 
two contrary movements’ besides the diurnal, this happens because 
of the necessity of this opposition of movements for the sublunary 
world, namely the movement of generation and corruption,® and it is 
not of the nature of the human intellect that it should apprehend 

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION 299 

more in such discussions and in this place than what we have men- 
tioned. 

Having made this objection against the philosophers and asserted 
that they have no answer to it, he mentions an answer which some 
of the philosophers give. 

Ghazali says: 

Some philosophers say that since the perfection occurs through move- 
ment, from whatever side it may be, and the order of events on earth 
requires a diversity of movements and a determination of directions, the 
motive concerning them of the principle of movement lies in the approach 
to God! and the motive of the direction of movement in the diffusion of 
good over the sublunary world. But we answer: ‘This is false for two 
reasons. The first is: if one may imagine such a thing, let us declare that 
the nature of heaven demands rest, and must avoid movement and change, 
for this is in truth assimilation to God; for God is too exalted to change, 
and movement is a change, although God chose movement for the diffu- 
sion of His grace. For through it He is useful to others and it does not 
weigh on Him nor tire Him—so what is the objection to such a supposi- 
tion? 

‘The second is that events are based on the diversity of the relations 
which result from the diversity in the directions of the movements. Now 
Jet the first movement be a movement from the west, and let the others 
move from the east, then the same diversity will arise as is needed for 
the diversity of the relations. Why then has one direction been specially 
chosen, since these varieties require only the principle of variety and in 
this sense one direction by itself is not superior to its contrary?” 

I say: 

This theologian wants to indicate the cause of this from the point 
of view of the final cause, not of the efficient, and nonc of the philo- 
sophers doubts that there is here a final cause in second intention, 
which is necessary for the existence of everything in the sublunary 
world. And aithough this cause has not yet been ascertained in detail, 
nobody doubts that every movement, every progression or regression 
of the stars, has an influence on sublunary existence, so that, if these 
movements differed, the sublunary world would become disorganized. 
But many of these causes are either still completely unknown or 
become known after a long time and a long experience,’ as it is said 
that Aristotle asserted in his book On Astrological Theorems 

As to the general questions, it is easier to discover them, and the 
astrologers have indeed come to know many of them and in our own 
time many of these things have been apprehended which ancient 
nations, like the Chaldaeans+ and others, had already discovered. 

491 

492 

493 

494 

wn 

300 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

And for this reason one cannot doubt that there is a wisdom in the 
existents, since it has become clear through induction that every- 
thing which appears in heaven is there through provident wisdom 
and through a final cause. And if there are final causes in animals, 
it is still more appropriate that there should be final causes in the 
heavenly bodies.’ For in the case of man and animal about ten 
thousand signs of providence* have become known in a period of a 
thousand years, and it seems not impossible that in the infinite course 
of years much of the purpose of the heavenly bodies wiil come to 
light.2 And we find that about these things the ancients give some 
mysterious indications which the initiated, that is the most highly 
reputed of the philosophers, know how to interpret.‘ 

As to the two reasons in Ghazali’s argument, the first, that asstmila- 
tion to God would determine heaven to be at rest, since God is too 
exalted for movement, but that God has chosen movement because 
through it His grace can be diffused over transitory things—this is 
a faulty argument, since God is neither at rest nor moving,’ and the 
motion of body is nobler for it than rest, and when an existent 
assimilates itself to God it assimilates itself to Him by being in the 
noblest of its states, which is movement. As to Ghazali’s second point, 
it has been answered previously. 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 

To refute their theory that the souls of the heavens observe all the 
particular events of this world, and that the meaning of ‘the in- 
delible tablet’® is the souls of the heavens, and that the inscrtp- 
tion of the particular events of the world on the tablet resembles 
the delineation of the facts remembered on the faculty of memory 
contained in the brain of man,? and that this is not a broad hard 
body* on which things are written as things are written on a slate 
by children; since the quantity of this writing demands a large 
surface of material on which it is written, and if this writing ts 
infinite, the material on which it is written must be infinite too, 
and one cannot imagine an infinite body, nor infinite lines on a 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION gol 

body, nor can an unlimited number of things be determined by a 
fmite number of lines 

Ghazali says: 

And they assert that the heavenly angels are the souls of the heavens, 10 
and that the cherubim which are in the proximity of God are the separate 
intellects, which are substances subsisting by themselves which do not fill 
space and do not employ bodies, and that from them the individual 
forms emanate in the heavenly souls, and that those separate intellects 
are superior to the heavenly angels, because the former bestow and the 
latter acquire, and bestowing is superior to acquiring, and therefore the 
highest is symbolized by the pen! and it is said that God knows through 
the pen, because He is like the engraver who bestows as does the pen 
and the recipient is compared to the tablet.* And this is their doctrine. 
And the discussion of this question diflers from the preceding one in so far 495 
as that what we mentioned previously is net impossible, because its con- 
clusion was that heaven is an animal moving for a purpose, and this is 
possible; but this doctrine amounts to the assertion that the created can 
know the infinite particulars, which is often regarded as impossible, and 
in any case, has to be proved, since by itsell’ it is a mere presumption, 

I say: 

What he mentions here is, to my knowledge, not said by any 
philosophers except Avicenna, namely that the heavenly bodies have 
representations, not to speak of the fact that these representations 
should be infinite, and Alexander of Aphrodisias explains in his book 
called The Principles of the Universe that these bodies have no repre- 
sentations, because representations exist only in animals because of 
their conservation, and these bodies do not fear corruption, and with 
respect to them representations would be valueless (and likewise 
sensations},3 If they had representations they would also have sensa- 30 
tions, since sensations are the condition for representations and every 
being which has representations necessarily has sensations, although 
the reverse is not true.* Therefore to interpret the indelible tablet in 
the way Ghazali says that they do is not correct, and the only possible 
interpretation of the separate intellects which move the different 
spheres by means of subordination is that they are the angels in the 
proximity of God,’ if one wants to harmonize the conclusions of 
reason with the statements of the Holy Law. 

Ghazali says: 496 

And they prove this by saying that the circular movement is voluntary 
and that the will follows the thing willed,* and that a universal thing 

a 

10 

15 

497 

302 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT a 

willed can only be intended by a universal will, and that from the universal 
wilt nothing proceeds.'! For—so they say—every actual existent is deter- 
mined and individual, and the relation of the universal will to the 
individual units is one and the same, and no individual thing proceeds 
from it. Therefore an individual will is needed for a definite movement. 
For every particular movement from every definite point to another 
definite point the sphere has a will, and this sphere no doubt has a repre- 
sentation of this particular movement through a bodily potency, since 
individuals only perceive through bodily potencies and every will must of 
hecessity represent the thing willed, i-e. must know it, be it an individual 
or a universal, And if the sphere has a representation and a comprehension 
of the particular movements, it must of necessity also comprehend what 
follows from them through the diversity of their relations to the earth, 
because some of the individuals of the sphere are rising, some setling, 
some in the middle of the sky for some people and under the earth for 
others.* 

And likewise i¢ must know the consequences of the diversity of those 
relations which always arise anew through the movement, like trine and 
sextile, opposition aud conjunction, to other such heavenly occurrences; 
and all earthly occurrences depend on heavenly occurrences either directly, 
or through one intermediary, or through many; and in short every event 
has a cause, occurring in a concatenation which terminates jn the eternal 
heavenly movement, some parts of which are the causes of others. 

‘Thus the causes and effects ascend in their concatenation to the parti- 
cular heaventy movements, and the sphere representing the movements 
represents their consequences and the consequences of their consequences, 
so as to reach the end of the series? And therefore the sphere observes 
everything that occurs and everything that will occur, and its occurrence 
is necessary through its cause, and whenever the cause is realized, the 
effect is realized, We only do not know the future events because all their 
causes are not known to us; for if we knew alf the causes, we should know 
all the effects, for when we know, for instance, that. fire will come inte 
contact with cotton at a certain moment, we knew that the cottan will 
burn, and when we know that a man will eat, we know that his appetite 
will be satisfied, and when we know that a man will walk over a certain 
spot Jightly covered where a treasure is buried, and his feet will accident+ 
ally touch the treasure and he will perceive it,s we know that he will be 
rich because of this treasure. Only as a matter of fact we do not know 
these causes. Sumetimes we know part of the causes, and then we guess 
what may happen. and when we know the more important or the greater 
part of them, we have a sound opinion about the occurrence of these 
events; but if we knew all the causes, then we should know all the effects.* 
However, the heavenly occurrences are many and, besides, they are 
mixed up with earthly events and it is not in human power to observe the 
causality of all these. But the souls of the heavens perceive it through 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 393 

their perception of the First Cause and through the observation of their 
consequences and the consequences of their consequences, to the end of 
their concatenation.’ 

And therefore they say that the man who dreams sees in his dream what 
will happen in the future through being in contact with the indelible 
tablet and observing it.2 And when he observes a thing it remains often 
in his memory as it really was, but sometimes his imagination hastens to 
symbolize it, for it is of the nature of this faculty to represent things 
through things which, in some way or another, are related to them, or to 
transfer things to their opposites; and the thing that was perceived is then 
effaced in his memory, but the image belonging to his imagination 
remains there. Then it is necessary to interpret what his imagination 
symbolizes, e.g. a man by means of a tree, a woman by means of a shoe, 
a servant by means of some household vessels, and a man who observes 
the paying of the legal alms and the poor-tax by means of tinseed oil, 
for the linseed in the lamp is the cause of the illumination; it is on this 
principle that the interpretation of dreams is based. 

And they assert that contact with these souls takes place in a state of 
languor*, since then there is no obstacle; for when we are awake we are 
occupied with what the senses and our passions convey to us, and occupa- 
tion with those sensual things keeps us away Irom this contact, but when 
in sleep some of these occupations are obliterated, the disposition lor 
this contact appears. And they assert that the prophet M{uhammed 
perceived the hidden universe in this way; however, the spiritual faculty 
ofa prophet has such power that it cannot he overwhelsned by the external 
senses, and therefore he sees in a waking condition what other people 
perceive in their sleep.* But Ais imagination also pictures to him what he 
sees, and although sometimes the thing he sees remains in his memory 
exactly as it was, sumetiines only its representation retnains, and such an 
inspiration is just as much in need of interpretation as such dreams are, 
And if all events were not eternally inscribed on the indelible tablet, the 
prophets would aot know the hidden world cither awake or asleep; but 
the pen has indelibly fixed what shall he till the day of resurrection, and the 
meaning of this we have explained. And this we wanted to impart to make 
their doctrine understood, 

T say: 

We have already said that we do not know of anyone who holds 
this theory but Avicenna. And the proof which Ghazali relates rests 
on very weak premisses, although it is persuasive and dialectical. For 
it is assumed that every particular effect proceeds from an animate 
being through the particular representation of this effect and of the 
particular movements through which this effect is reatized. ‘To this 
major premiss a minor premiss is joined, that heaven is an animate 

lo 

498 

499 

a 

304 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

being from which particular acts proceed, From these premisses it is 
concluded that the particular effects, and the particular acts which 
proceed from heaven, occur through a particular representation 
which is called imagination; and that this is not only apparent from 
the different sciences, but also from many animals which perform 
particular acts, like the bees and the spider,? 

But the objection to these premisses is that no particular act pro- 
ceeds from beings endowed with intellect, except when this act* is 
represented through a universal representation, and then endless 
individual things proceed from it—for instance the form of a cup- 
board proceeds from a carpenter only through a universal representa- 
tion which does not distinguish one particular cupboard from 
another.? And the same thing happens when the works of animals 
proceed by nature! from them.+ And these representations are an 
intermediary between the universal and the particular perceptions; 
thac is, they are an intermediary between the definition of a thing* 
and its particular representation.® But if the heavenly bodies have 
representations, then they must have representations that are of the 
nature of the universal, not of the nature of the particular representa- 
tion which is acquired through the senses. And it is not possible that 
our acts should proceed from particular representations, and there- 
fore the philosophers believe that the represented forms from which 
the definite acts of animals proceed are like an intermediary between 
the intelligibles and the individual forms represented, e.g. the form 
by reason of which non-carnivorous birds flee from birds of prey, 
and the form by reason of which becs build their cells.7 ‘The only 
artisan who needs an individual sensible image is the one who docs 
not possess this universal representation, which is necessary for the 
origination of the individual things.* 

It is this universal image which is the motive power for the univer- 
sal will which does not aim at a particular individual; and it is the 
individual will which aims at a particular individual of one and the 
same specics—this, however, does not happen in the heavenly 
bodies. 

And that a universal] will should exist for a universal thing in so 
far as it is universal is impossible, since the universal does not exist 
outside the soul and has no transitory existence. And his primary 
division of will into a universal and an individual will is, indeed, not 
correct; otherwise one must say that the heavenly bodies move to- 
wards the definite limits of things without the definite limit being 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 305 

accompanied by the representation of an individual existent, in con- 
trast to what happens with us. And his assertion that no individual 
is realized through the universal will is false, if by ‘universal will’ is 
understood that which does not distinguish one individual from 

another, but represents it universally, as is the case with a king who . 

arranges his armies for battle.' 1f, however, there is understood by 
‘will’ its being attached to a universal entity itself, then it must be 
said that such an attachment is not a will at all, and there does not 
exist such a will except in the way we have explained? 

And if it followed from the nature of the heavenly bodies that they 
think sublunary things by way of imagination, they must do this 

through universal imaginations which are the results of definition, - 
not through particular imaginations which are the results of sense~ 

impressions. And it scems quite clear that they cannot think sub- 
lunary things through individual representations especially when it is 
said that what pracecds from them proceeds from them by second 
intention. However, the doctrine of the philosophers is that the 
heavenly bodies think themselves and think the sublunary world, 
and whether they think the subtunary world as something different 
from themselves is « problem that must be examined in places 
specially reserved tor this problem; and in general, if the heavens 
know, the term ‘knowledge’ is attribuled to our knowledge and 
theirs in aa equivocal way. 

As to the theory he gives here about the cause of revelation and 
dreams, this is the theory of Avicenna alone, and the opinions of the 
ancient philosophers difler from his, For the existence of a knowledge 
of individuals actually infinige, in so far as it is an individual know- 
ledge, ts impossible, and I understand by individual knowledge that 
kind of apprehension which is called representation. But there is no 
reason to introduce here the question of dreams and revelation, for 
this leads to much controversy, and such an act is an act of sophistry, 
not of dialectics. My statement, however, that the imaginations of 
the heavenly bodies are imaginations intermediary between indivi- 
dual and universal representations is a dialectical argument; for 
what results from the principte of the philosophers is that the heavenly 
bodies have no imagination whatever, for Ghese imaginations, as we 
have sail already, whether they are universal or particular, aim only 
at conservation and protection; and they are also a condition for our 
intellectual representation, which therefore is transitory, but the 
intellectual representation of the heavenly bodies, since it is not 

5 

oO 

| 

10 

502 

ow 

to 

15 

300 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

transitory, cannot be accompanied by imagination, for otherwise it 
would depend in one way or another on imagination. Therelore their 
apprehension is neither universal nor individual, but these two kinds 
of knowledge, universal and individual, are here unified, and because 
of this they can only be distinguished by their matters. And in this 
way knowledge of the occult and of drearas and the like can be 
acquired, and this will be explained perfectly in its proper place. 

Ghazali says: 

And the answer is for us to ask; How will you refute those who say that 
the prophet knows the occult through God, who shows it to him by way 
of revelation*, and the same is the case with the man who has visions in 
his sleep, which he only sees because God or an angel inspires them in 
him? We do not need any of the things you have related, and you have 
not the slightest proof for intreducing the Healy Law by mentioning the 
‘Vablet and the Pen; for true believers do not in the least understand by ‘the 
Table? and ‘the Pen’ what you have mentioned, and the way to embrace 
the religious dogmas is not to refuse to admit them in the way they must 
be understood.’ Aad, although the possibility of what you have said is 
ranted, so Jong as you cannot iadicate why you deny the correctness of 
the sense in which these religious (erms are understood, the reality of what 
you say cannot be known or verified. Indeed, the only way tu arrive at 
knowledge of such things is durough the Holy Law, not by reason. The 
rational proof of what you have said is primarily based on many premisses, 
the refutation of which need not detain us, buat we shall limit ourselves to 
the discussion of three propositions, 

‘The first proposition is that you say that the movement of heaven is 
voluntary, and we have already settled this problem and shown the 
futility of your claim. 

If, however, to oblige you we geant you this voluntary movement, the 
second proposition is your saying that heaven needs a particular repre 
sentation for each particwlar movement, and this we de not concede, For 
according to you there are no parts in the sphere, which is one single 
thing and is only divided in imagination; nor are there particular move- 
ments, for there is only one continuows movement, and jn order to com- 
plete all the ptaces possible for it, it is suflicient for the sphere to desire 
this one znovement, as you have indicated yourselves, and it wall only need 
universal representation and a universal will. 

Let us give an example of the universal and the particular will to make 
the intention of the philosophers clear. When, for instance, a man has a 
universal aim to snake the pilgrimage 10 Mecca, from this universal will 
no movement follows,? for the movement occurs as a particular movement, 
tna particular direction, and of a particular extent, and the man does not 
cease, in clirecting Limsell to Mecea, to forin new representations of the 
place one aller another, where he will go and the direction he will take, 

THE SIXTEENTH DiSCUSSION 307 

and every particular representation will be followed by a particular will 
to move from the place which he lias reached by his movement. And this 
is what they understood by a particular movement which follows a par- 
ticular will; and this is granted, for the directions, when he takes the road 
to Mecca, are many, and the distance is undetermined, and he must 
determine place after place and direction after direction, passing from 
one particular wilt to another. 

But the heavenly movement has only one direction, for it is a sphere and 
moves on its axis in its own space, going neither beyond its own space nor 

beyond the movement willed. There is therefore only one direction and . ; 

one impiuse and one aim*, like the downward movement of the stone, 
which tends towards the earth in the shortest way, and the shortest way 
is the straight line, and the straight line is determined,' and therelore 
this movement needs no new cause besides the universal nature which 
tends to the centre of the earth while it changes its distance from the earth, 
and arrives at and departs from one definite place after another. In the 
same way the universal will suflices for this movement, and nothing ¢lse is 
required, and the assumption of this proposition is a mere presumption. 

T say: 

As to Ghazali’s words: 

And the answer is for us to ask: How will you refiite those who say, ... 
We do not need any of the things you have related. 

this answer is based on tradition, not on reason, and there is no 
sense in introducing it in this bouk. The philosophers examine every- 
thing there is in the Holy Law, and, if it is found to agree with 
reason, we arrive al a more perfect knowledge; if, however, reason 
docs uot perceive its truth, it becomes known that human reason 
cannot atlain it, and that only the Holy Law perecives it. Ghazali’s 
argument against the phifosophers about the interpretation of the 
Tablet and the Pen does not belong to the problem under discussion, 
and there is therefore no sense in iatroducing it here, And this interpre- 
tation of knowledge of the occull, according to Avicenna, has no sense. 

The rational objection he adduces against Avicenna over this 
problem is well founded, For there are for heaven no particular 
motions of particular distances that would require imagination, ‘The 
animate being which moves through particular motions in particular 
spaces* imagines, no doubt, these spaces towards which*® it moves, and 
these movements, when it cannot visually perceive these distances; 
the circular, however, as Ghazali says, moves qua circular in one 
single movernent, although from this one movement there follow 
many diilerent particular motions in the existents below it. ‘hese 

u 

io 

308 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
spheres, however, are not concerned with those particular move- 

- ments, but their only intention is to conserve the species of which 

19 

505 

Sal 

‘10 

these particulars are the particulars, not to conserve the existence 
of any of these particulars in so far as they are particulars, for, 
if so, heaven would surely possess imagination. 

The question that still needs to be examined is whether the tem- 
poral particulars which proceed from the heavenly movement are 
intended for their own sake or only for the preservation of the species." 
This question cannot be treated here, but it certainly seems that 
there exists a providence as concerns individuals, as appears from 
true dreams and the like, e.g. the prognostication of the future; how- 
ever, in reality this is a providence concerning the species.* 

Ghazali says: 

The third proposition—and this indeed is a very bold presumption— 
is that they say that, when heaven represents particular movements, it 
also represents their results and consequences. This is pure nonsense, like 
saying that, when a man moves himself and knows his movement, he 
must also know the consequences of his movement vertically and hori- 
zontally (that is, the bodies which are above and under him and at his 
side}, and when he moves in the sun he must know the places upon which 
his shadow fails and does not fall, and what happens through the coolness 
of his shadow because of the interruption of the cays of the sun there, and 
what happens through the compression of the particles of earth under his 
foot, and what happens through the separation of these particles, and 
what happens to the humours inside him by their changing through his 
movement into warmth, and which parts of him are changed into sweat, 
and so on, till he knows all the occurrences inside and outside his body of 
which the movement is the cause or the condition or the disposition or the 
aptitude. And this is nonsense which no intelligent man can believe, and 
by which none but the ignorant can be beguiled. And this is what this 
presumption amounts to. 

Besides, we may ask: ‘Are these different particulars which are known 
to the soul of ithe sphere the events which are occurring at the present 
moment or are future events also brought in relation to ic?’ If you limit 
its knowledge to present events you deny its perception of the occult and 
the apprehension of future events through it, by the prophets in the state 
of wakefulness, by others in their sleep; and then ahe point of this proof 
disappears. For it is indeed presumption to say that he who knows a 
thing knows ils consequences and results, so that if we knew all causes we 
should also know ail future events. For, indeed, the causes of all events 
are to be found ac present in the heavenly movement, but i¢ determines 
the effect either through one intermediary or through many, And if this 
knowledge covers the future also, it will not have an end, and how can the 

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION 309 

distinction between particulars in the infinite future be known, and how 
can many different particular objects of knowledge, of an infinite number 
and without an end to their units, be collected in a created soul, at one 
and the same moment without any sequence?! He whose intellect does 
not perceive the impossibility of this may well despair of his intellect. 

And if they reverse this against us with respect to God’s knowledge, 
God’s knowledge is not attached to its object in its correspondence with 
the things known, in the way this attachment exists in the case of things 
known by created beings, but as soon as the soul of the sphere moves round 
like the soul of man,? it belongs to the same kind as the soul of man, and 
also it participates with the soul of man in the perception of individuals 
through an intermediary.s And although no absolute knowledge can be 
had about this, it is most probable that the soul of the sphere is of the 
same kind as the human soul; and if this is not most probable, it is possible, 
and the possibility destroys the claim to absolute knowledge they put 
forward, 

And if it is said, ‘It is also proper to the human soul in its essence to 
perceive all things, but its preoccupation with the consequences of passion, 
anger, greed, resentment, envy, hunger, pain, and in short the accidents 
of the body and what the sensations convey to the bedy, is so great that, 
when the human soul is occupied with one of these things, it neglects 
everything else; but the souls of the spheres are free from these attributes, 
and nothing occupies them, and neither care nor pain nor perception 
overwhelms them, and therefore they know everything’—we answer: ‘How 
do you know that nothing occupies them? Does not their service of the 
First and their longing for Him submerge them and keep them from the 
representition of particular things? And what makes it impossible to sup- 
pose other impediments than anger and passion? For these are sensual 
hindrances, and how do you know that these hindrances are limited in 
the way we experience them? lor there are occupations for the learned 
through the excellence of theiy interests and the desire for leadership 
which children are unable to imagine, and which they cannot believe to 
be occupations and hindrances.4 And how do you know that analogous 
things ave impossible for the souls of the spheres?” 

This is what we wanied to mention about those sciences to which they 
give the name of metaphysical. 

I say: 

As to his regarding it as impossible that there should exist an 
immaterial intellect which thinks things with their consequences, 
comprising them all, neither the impossibility nor the necessity of its 
existence is a self-evident fact, but the philosophers aflirm that they 
have a proof of its existence. As to the exisience of infinite representa- 
tions, this cannot be imagined in any individual, but ihe philosophers 
affirm that they have a proof of the existence of the infinite in the 

5 

10 

506 

19 

310 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

eternal knowledge and an answer to the question how man can attain 
knawledge of particular events in the futuce through the eternal 

' knowledge, namely that of these things the soul thinks only the 

10 

universal which is in the intellect, not the pacticular*® which is parti- 
cularized in the soul*. For individuals are known* to the soul because 
it is potentially all existents, and what is in potency emerges into act 
either through the sensible things or through the nature of the intel- 
lect, which is prior to sensible things in reality ([ mean the intellect 
through which sensible things become stable intelligibles, not, how- 
ever, in such a way that tn this knowledge there are representations 
of an infinite number of individuals).! In short, the philosophers 
assert that these two kinds of knowledge, the universal and the 
particular, are unificd in the knowledge which is separated from 
matter; and when this knowledge emanates in the sublunary world 
it divides itself into universal and particular, although this knowledge 
itself is neither the one nor the other.* But the proof of this or its 
contrary cannot be given here. And the discussion here about these 
questions is like the assumption of geometrical propositions which are 
not well cnough known to meet with immediate assent and which are 
not convincing at first sight. And Ghazali mixes one part: with 
another, ic. he starts objecting to one part of the theory through 
another, and this is the worst method of discussion, because in this 
way assent neither by proof nor by persuasion can be obtained.? 

Likewise the problems about the differences between the souls of 
the heavenly bodies and the sou! of man are all very obscure, and 
when such things are discussed in a place not proper to them the 
discussion becomes either irrclevant or dialcetical and superficial; 

- that is to say, the conclusions are drawn from possible premisses, like 

508 

their assertion that the irascible and the concupiscible sou! hinder 
the human soul in the perception of what is proper to it.* It appears 
from the nature of these and similar sayings that they are possible 
and are in need of proofs, and that they open the way to many 
conflicting possibilities. 

And this closes what we decided to mention of the different asser- 
tions which this book contains about theological problems; this is 
the most important part of our book. We shall now speak on physical 

_problems. 

gir 

. ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 5 

Ghazali says: 

The so-called natural sciences are many, and we shall enumerate their 5 
parts, in order to make it known that the Holy Law does not ask one to 
contest and refute them, except in certain points we shail mention.' They 
are divided into principal classes and subdivisions.? The principal classes 
are eight. In the first class are treated the divisibilicy, movement, and 
change which affect body in so far as it is body, and the relations and 
consequences of movement* like time, space, and void,} and all this is 
contained in Aristotle's Physics. The second treats of the disposition of the 
parts of the elernents of the world, namely heaven and the four elements 
which are within the sphere of the moon, and their natures and the cause 
of the disposition of each of them in a definite place; and this is contained 
in Aristotle’s De coelo, ‘The third treats of the conditions of generation and 
corruption, of equivecal generation and of sexual generation, of growth 
and decay, of transmutations, and how the species are conserved, whereas 
the individuals perish through the two heavenly movements (westwards 
and eastwards), and this is contained in De generatione et corruptione. The 
fourth treats of the conditions which are found in the four elements 
through their mixture, by which there occur meteorological phenomena 
like clouds and rain and thunder, lightning, the halo round the moon, the 
rainbow, thunderbolts, winds, and earthquakes. The fifth treats of minera- 
logy, the sixth of botany. The seventh treats of zoology, which is con- 
tained in the book Historia animatium. The eighth treats of the soul of 
animals and the perceptive faculties, and says that the soul of man does 510 
not die through the death of his hody but that it is a spiritual substance 
for which annihilation is impossible. 

The subdivisions are seven: The first is medicine, whose end is the 
knowledge of the principles of the human bedy and its conditions of 
health and illness, their causes and symptoms, so that illness may be 
expelled and health preserved.¢ The second, judicial astrology, which 
conjectures from the aspects and configuration of the stars the conditions 
which will be found in the world and in the State and the consequences 
of dates of births and of years. The third is physiognomy, which infers 
character from the external appearance. The fourth is dream-interpreta- 
tion, which infers what the soul has witnessed of the world of the occult 
from dream images, for the imaginative faculty imagines this symbolically. 
The fifth is the telesmatical art, that is the combination of celestial virtues 
with some earthly so as to constitute a power which can perform marvellous 
acts in the earthly world.* The sixth is the art of incantation, which is the 
mixing of the virtues of earthly substances to produce marvellous things 
from them.’ The seventh is alchemy, whose aim is to change the properties 

ao 

511 

aw 

10 

512 

312 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

of minerals so that finally gold and silver are produced by a kind of magic.t 
And there is no need to be opposed to any of these sciences by reason of 
the Divine Law; we dissent from the philosophers in all these sciences in 
regard ¢o four points only. 

T say: 

As to his enumeration of the eight kinds of physical science, this is 
exact according to the doctrine of Aristotle. But his enumeration of 
the subdivisions is not correct. Medicine is not one of the natural 
sciences, but is a practical science which takes its principles from 
physical science; for physical science is theoretical and medicine is 
practical, and when we study a problem common to theoretical 
science and practical we can regard it from two points of view; for 
instance, in our study of health and illness the student of physics 
observes health and nature as kinds of natura! existents, whereas the 
Physician studies them with the intention of preserving the one, 
health, and keeping down the other, illness. Neither does judicial 
astrology belong to physical science; it is only a prognostication of 
future events, and is of the same type as augury and vaticination. 
Physiognomy is also of the same kind, except that its object is occult 
things in the present, not in the future.? The interpretation of dreams 
too 1s a prognosticating science, and this type belongs neither to the 
theoretical nor to the practical sciences, although it is reputed to 
have a practical value. The telesmatical art is vain, for if we assume 
the pasitions of the spheres to exert a power on artificial products, 
this power will remain inside the product and not pass on to things 
outside it. As to conjuring, this is the eype of thing that produces 
wonder, but it is certainly not a theoretical science. Whether alchemy 
really exists is very dubious; if it exists, its artificial product cannot 
be identical with the product of nature; art can at most become 
similar to nature but cannot attain nature itself in reality.) As to the 
question whether it can produce anything which resembles the 
jiatural product generically, we do not possess sufficient data to assert 

‘categorically its impossibility or possibility, but only prolonged ex- 

periments over a lengthy period can procure the necessary evidence. 
We shalt treat the four points Ghazali mentions one after the other. 

Ghazali says: 

The first point is their assertion that this connexion observed between 
causes and effects is of logical necessity, and that the existence of the cause 
without the effect or the effect without the cause is not within the realm 
of the contingent and possible. The second point is their assertion that 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 313 

human souls are substances existing by themselves,? not imprinted on the 
body, and that the meaning of death is the end of their attachment to 
the body and the end of their direction of the body; and that otherwise the 
soul would exist at any time by itself. They affirm that this is known by 
demonstrative proof. The third point is their assertion that these souls 
cannot cease to exist, but that when they exist they are eternal and their 
annihilation cannot be conceived.? ‘The fourth point js their assertion that 
these souls cannot return to their bodies.* 

As to the first point, it is necessary to contest it, for on its negation 
depends the possibility of affirming the existence of miracles which inter- 
rupt the usual course of nature, like the changing of the rod into a serpents 
or the resurrection of the dead or the cleavage of the moon,® and those who 
consider the ordinary course of nature a logical necessity regard all this as 
impossible. They interpret the resurrection of the dead in the Koran by 
saying that the cessation of the death of ignorance is to be understood by 
it, and the rod which conceived the arch-deceiver, the serpent, by saying 
that it means the clear divine proof in the hands of Moses to refute the 
false doctrines of the heretics; and as to the cleavage of the moon they 
often deny that it took place and assert that it does not rest on a sound 
tradition; and the philosophers accept miracles that interrupt the usual 
course of nature only in three cases,? 

First: in respect to the imaginative faculty they say that when this 
faculty becomes predominant and strong, and the senses and perceptions do 
not submerge it, it observes the Jndelitie Tablet, and che forms of particular 
events which will happen in the future become imprinted on it; and that this 
happens to the prophets in a waking condition and to other people in sleep, 
and that this is a peculiar quality of the imaginative faculty in prophecy.4 

Secondly: in respect of a property of the rational speculative facuity 
i.e, intellectual acuteness,® that is rapidity in passing from one known 
thing to another; for often when a problem which has heen proved is 
mentioned to a keen-sighted man he is at once aware of its proof, and 
when the proof is mentioned to him he understands what is proved by 
himself, and in general when the middle term occurs to him he is at once 
aware of the conclusion, and when the two terms* of the conclusion are 
present in his mind the middie term which connects the two terms of the 
conclusion occurs to him. And in this matter people are different; there 
are those who understand by themselves, those who understand when the 
slightest hint is given to them, and those who, being instructed, under- 
stand only after much trouble; and while on the one hand it may be 
assumed that incapacity to understand can reach such a degree that a 
man does not understand anything act all and has, although instructed, 
no disposition whatever to grasp the intelligibles, it may on the other 
hand be assumed that his capacity and proficiency may be so great as to 
arrive at a comprehension of all the intelligibles or the majority of them in the 
shortest and quickest time. And this difference exists quantitatively over 

51g 

514 

o 

314 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

all or certain problems, and qualitatively so that there is an excellence in 
quickness and easiness, and the understanding of a holy and pure soul 
may reach through its acuteness all intelligibles in the shortest time 
possible; and this is the soul of a prophet, who possesses a miraculous 
speculative faculty and so far as the intelligibles are concerned is not in 
need of a teacher*; but it is as if he learned by himself, and he it is who 
is described by the words ‘the oit of which would well-nigh give light though 
no fire were in contact with it, light upon light’. 

Thirdly: in respect to a practical psychological faculty which can reach 
such a pitch as to influence and subject the things of nature: for instance, 
when our soul imagincs something_the Jimbs and the potencies in these 
limbs obey it and move in the required direction which we imagine, so 
that when a man imagines something sweet of taste the corners of his 
mouth begin to water, and the potency which brings forth the saliva from 
the places where it is springs into action, and when coitus is imagined the 
copulative potency springs into action, and the penis extends; indeed, 
when a man walks on a plank between two walls over an empty space, his 
imagination is stirred by the possibility of falling and his body is impressed 
by this imagination and in fact he falls, but when this plank is on the earth, 
he walks over it without falling,> This happens because the body and the 
bodily faculties are created to be subservient and subordinate to the soul, 
and there is a difference here according to the purity and the power of the 
souls. And it is not impossible that the power of the sout should reach such 
adegree that also the natural pawer of things outsidea man’s body obeys it*, 
since the sout of man is not impressed on his body although there is created 
in man’s nature a certain impulse and desire to govern his body.* And if tt is 
possible that the limhs* of his body should obey him, it is not impossible 
that other things besides his body should obey him and that his soul should 
control the blasts of the wind or the downpour of rain, or the striking of 
a thunderbolt or the trembling of the earth, which causes a land to be 
swallewed up* with its inhabitants.s The same is the case with his influcnce 
in praducing cold or warmth or a movement in the air; this warmth or 
cold comes about through his soul,® all these things occur without any 
apparent physical cause, and such a thing will be a miracle brought about 
by a prophet. Bue this only happens in matters disposed * to receive it, and 
cannot attain such a scale that wood cauld be changed into an animal or 
that the moon, which cannot undergo cleavage, could be cloven. This is 
their theory of miracies, and wedo not deny anything they have mentioned, 
and that such things happen to prophets; we are only opposed to their 
limiting themselves to this, and to their denial of the possibility that a 
stick might change into a serpent, and of the resurrection of the dead and 
other things. We must occupy ourselves with this question in order to be 
able to assert the existence of miracles and for stilt another reason, namely 
to give effective support to the doctrine on which the Muslims base their 
belief that God can do anything. And let us now fulfil our intention. 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES — 315 

I say: : ; 

The ancient philosophers did not discuss the problem of miracles, 
since according to them such things must not be examined and ques- 
tioned; for they are the principles of the religions, and the man who 
inquires into them and doubts them merits punishment, like the man 
who examines the other general religious principles, such as whether 
God exists or blessedness or the virtues. For the existence of all these 
cannot be doubted, and the mode of their existence is something 
divine which human apprehension cannot attain. The reason for this 
is that these are the principles of the acts through which man becomes 
virtuous, and that one can only attain knowledge alter the attainment 
of virtuc,? One must not investigate the principles which cause virtue 
before the attainment of virtue, and since the theoretical sciences can 
only be perfected through assumptions and axioms which the learner* 
accepts in the first place, this must be still more the case with the 
practical] sciences. 

As to what Ghazali relates of the causes of this as they are accord- 
ing to the philosophers, I do not know anyone who asserts this but 
Avicenna, And if such facts are verified and it is possible that a body 
could be changed qualitatively* through something which is neither 
a botly nor a bodily potency,? then the reasons he mentions for this 
are possible; but not everything which in its nature is possible? can 
be done by man, for what is possible to man is well known. Most 
things which are possible in themselves are impossible for man, and 
what is true of the prophet, that he can interrupt the ordinary 
course of nature, is impossible for man, but possibfe in itself; and 
because of this one need not assume that things logically impossible 
are possible for the prophets, and if you observe those miracles whose 
existence is confirmed, you will find that they are of this kind.t The 
clearest of miracles is the Vencrable Book of Allah,’ the existence of 
which is not an interruption of the course of nature assumed by 
tradition, like the changing of a rod into a serpent, bet its miraculous 
nature is established by way of perception and consideration for 
every man who has been or who will be till the day of resurrection. 
And so this miracle* is far superior to all others. 

Let this suffice for the man who is not satisfied with passing this 
problem over in silence, and may he understand that the argument 
on which the learned base their belief in the prophets is another, 
to which Ghazali himself has drawn attention in another place,® 
namely the act which proceeds from that quality through which the 

515 

o 

516 

wn 

517 

10 

518 

5 

316 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

prophet is called prophet, that is the act of making known the - 
mysterious and establishing religious laws which are in accordance 
with the truth and which bring about acts that will determine the 
happiness of the totality of mankind. I do not know anyone but 
Avicenna who has held the theory about dreams Ghazali mentions. 
The ancient philosophers assert about revelation and dreams only 
that they proceed from Ged through the intermediation of a spiritual 
incorporeal being which is according to them the bestower of the 
human intellect, and which is called by the best authors* the active 
intellect and in the Holy Law angel. We shall now return to Ghazali’s 
four points. 

THE FIRST DISCUSSION 

Ghazali says: 

According to us the connexion between what is usually believed to be 
a cause and what is believed to be an effect is not a necessary connexion; 
each of ewo things has its own individuality and is not the other,' and 
neither the affirmation nor the negation, neither the existence nor the 
non-existence of the one is implied in the affirmation, negation, existence, 
and non-existence of the other—e.g. the satisfaction of thirst does not 
imply drinking, nor satiety eating, nor burning contact with fire, nor Sight 
sunrist, hor decapitation death, nor recovery the drinking of medicine, 
nor evacuation the taking of a purgative, and so on for all the empirical 
connexions existing in medicine, astronomy, the sciences, and the crafts.? 
For the connexion in these things is based on a prior power of God to 
create them in a successive order, though not because this connexion is 
necessary in itself and cannot be disjoined*—on the contrary, it is in God’s 
power to create satiety without eating, and death without decapitation, 
and to let life persist notwithstanding the decapitation, and so on with 
respect to alt connexions. The philosophers, however, deny this possibility 
and claim that that is impossible. ‘To investigate ali these innumerable 
connexions would take us too long, and so we shall choose one single 
example, namely the burning of cotton through contact with fire; for we 
regard it as possible that the contact might occur without the burning 
taking place, and also that the cotton might be changed into ashes without 
any contact with fire, although the philosophers deny this possibility. The 
discussion of this matter has three points. 

The first js that our opponent claims that the agent of the burning is 
the fire exclusively ;? this is a natural, not a voluntary agent, and cannot 
abstain from what isinits nature when it is broughe into contact with a recep- 
tive substratum. This we deny, saying: The agent of the burning is God, 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 3t7 

through His creating the black in the cotton and the disconnexion of its 
parts, and it js God who made the cotton burn and made it ashes either 
through the intermediation of angels or without intermediation. For fire 
is a dead body which has no action, and what is the proof that it is the 
agent? Indeed, the philosophers have no other proof than the observation 
of the occurrence of the burning, when there is contact with fire, but 
observation proves only a simultaneity,' not 4 causation, and, in reality, 
there is no other cause but God.? For there is unanimity of opinion about 
the fact that the union of the spirit with the perceptive and moving faculties 
ja the sperm of animals does not originate in the natures contained in 
warmth, cold, moistness, and dryness, and that the faiher is neither the 
agent of the embryo through introducing the sperm into the uterus, nor 
the agent of its life, its sight and hearing, and all its other faculties. And 
although it is well known that the same faculties exist in the father, still 
nobody thinks that these faculties existe through him; ao, their existence 
is produced by the First either directly or through the intermediation of 
the angels who are in charge of these events.? Of this fact the philosophers 
who believe in a creator are quite convinced, but it is precisely with them 
that we are in dispute. 

It has been shown that coexistence does not indicate causation. We 
shall make this still nore clear through an example. Suppose that a man 
blind from bieth, whose eyes are veiled by a membrane and who has 
never heard people talk of the difference between night and day, has the 
membrane removed ftom his eyes by day and sees visible things, he will 
surely think then that the actual perception in his eyes of the forms of 
visible things is caused by the opening of his eyelids, and that as long as his 
sight is sound and in function, the hindrance removed and the object in 
front of him visible, he will, without doubt, be able to see, and he wilt 
never think that he will not see, till, at the moment when the sun sets and 
the air darkens, he will understand that it was the light of the sun which 
impressed the visible forms on his sight.* And for what other reason do our 
opponents letieve that in the principles of existence’ there are causes and 
influences from which the events which coincide with them proceed, than 
that they are constant, do not disappear, and are not moving bodies which 
vanish from sight? For if they disappeared or vanished we should observe 
the disjunction and understand then that behind our perceptions there 
exists a cause. And out of this there is no issue, according to the very 
conclusions of the ptilosophers themselves. 

The true philosophers® were therefore unanimously of the opinion that 
these accidents and events which occur when there is a contact of bodies, 
or in general a chanye in their positions, proceed from the bestower of 
forms who is an anget or a plurality of angels, so that they even said that 
the impression of the visible forms on the eye occurs through the bestower 
of forms, and that the rising of the sun, the soundness of the pupil, and 
the existence of the visible object are only the preparations and dispositions 

10 

S 

519 

190 

520 

to 

$21 

318 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

which enable the substratum to receive the forms; and this theory they 
applied to all events. And this refutes the claim of those who profess that 
fire is the agent of burning, bread the agent of satiety, medicine the agent 
of heajth, and so on, 

T say: 

To deny the existence of efficient causes which are observed in 
sensible things is sophistry, and he who defends this doctrine either 
denies with his tongue what is present in his mind or is carried away 
by a sophistical doubt which occurs to him concerning this question. 
For he who denies this can no longer acknowledge that every act 
must have an agent, The question whether these causes by themselves 
are sufficient to perform the acts which proceed from them, or need 
an external cause for the perfection of their act, whether separate or 
not, is nat self-evident and requires much investigation and research, 
And if the theologians had doubts about the efficient causes which 
are perceived to cause each other, because there are also effects 
whose cause is not perceived, this is illogical. Those things whose 
causes are not perceived are stil] unknown and must be investigated, 
precisely because their causes are not perceived; and since every- 
thing whose causes are not perceived is still unknown by nature and 
must be investigated, it follows necessarify that what is not unknown 
has causes which are perceived.' The man who reasons like the 
theologians does not distinguish between what is self-evident and 
what is unknown,? and everything Ghazali says in this passage is 
sophistical. : 

And further, what do the theologians say about the essential 
causes, the understanding of which alone can make a thing. under- 
stood? For it is self-evident that things have essences and attributes 
which determine the special functions of each thing.and through 
which the essences and names of things are differentiated. If a thing 
had not its specific nature, it would not have a special name nor a 
definition, and all things would be one—indeed, not even one;} for 
it might be asked whether this one has one special act or one special 
passivity or not, and if it had a special act, then there would indeed 
exist special acts proceeding from special natures, but if it had no 
single special act, then the onc would not be one.‘ But if the nature 
of oneness is denied, the nature of being is denied, and the conse- 
quence. of the denial of being is nothingness. 

Further, are the acts which proceed from ali things absolutely 
necessary for those in whose nature it lies to perform them, or are 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES gIg 

they only performed in most cases or in half the cases?! This is a 5 
question which must be investigated, since one single action-and- 
passivity between two existent things occurs only through one rela- 
tion out of an infinite number, and it happens often that one relation 
hinders* another. Therefore it is not absolutely certain that fire acts 
when it is brought near a sensitive body, for surely it is not impreb- 
able that there should be something which stands in such a relation 
to the sensitive thing as to hinder the action of the fire, as is asserted 10 
of talc and other things, But one need not therefore deny fire its 
burning power so long as fire keeps its name and definition. 

Further, it is self-evident that all events have four causes, agent, 
form, matter, and end, and that they are necessary for the existence 
of the eflects—especially those causes which form a part of the effect, 
namely that which is called by the philosophers matter, by the 
theologians condition and substratum, and that which is called by 
the philosophers form, by the theologians psychological quality.4 The 
theologians acknowledge that there exist conditions which are neces- 
sary to the conditioned, as when they say that fife is a condition of 
knowledge; and they equally recognize that things have realities 522 
and definitions, and that these are necessary for the existence of the 
existent, and therefore they here judge the visible and the invisible 
» according to one and the same scheme,’ And they adopt the same 
attitude towards the consequences of a thing’s essence, namely what 
they call ‘sign’,® as for instance when they say that the harmony* 5 
in the world indicates that its agent possesses mind and that the 
existence of a world having a design indicales that its agent knows 
this world.? Now intelligence is nothing but the perception* of 
things with their causes, and in this it distinguishes itself from all 
the other faculties of apprehension, and he who denies causes must 
deny the intellect. Logic implies the existence of causes and effects, 
and knowledge of these effects can only be rendered perlect 
through knowledge of their causes. Denial of cause implies the 
denial of knowledge, and denial of knowledge implies that nothing 
in this world can be really known, and that what is supposed to 
be known is nothing but opinion, that neither proof nor definition 
exist, and that the essential attributes which compose definitions 
are void. The man who denies the neccssity of any item of know- 
ledge must admit that even this, his own affirmation, is not 
necessary knowledge.’ 

As to those who admit that there exists, besides necessary know- 

6 

523 

o 

to 

524 

320 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ledge, knowledge which is not necessary, about which the soul forms 
a judgement on slight evidence and imagines it to be necessary, 
whereas it is not necessary, the philosophers do not deny this. And 
if they call such a [act ‘habit’ this may be granted, but otherwise I 
do not know what they understand by the term ‘habit’—whether 
they mean that it is the habit of the agent, the habit of the existing 
things, or our habit to form a judgement about such things?! It is, 
however, impossible that God should have a habit, for a habit is a 
custom which the agent acquires and from which a frequent repeti- 
tion of-his act follows, whereas God says in the Holy Book: ‘Thou 
shalt not find any alteration in the course of God, and they shall not 
find any change in the course of God.’? If they mean a habit in exist- 
ing things, habit can only exist in the animated ;) if it exists in some- 
thing else, it is really a nature, and it is not possible that a thing 
should have a nature which determined it either necessarily or in 
most cases. If they mean our habit of forming judgements about 
things, such a habit is nothing but an act of the soul which is deter- 
mined by its nature and through which the intellect becomes intellect, 
The phitosophers do not deny such a habit; but ‘habit’ is an ambi- 
guous term, and if it is analysed it means only a hypothetical-act; as 
when we say ‘So-and-so has the habit of acting insuch-and-such a way’, 
meaning that he will act in that way most of the time. If this were 
true, everything would be the case only by supposition, and there 
would be no wisdom in the world from which it might be inferred 
that its agent was wise. 

And, as we said, we need not doubt that some of these existents 
cause each other and act through each other, and that in themselves 
they do not suffice for their act, but that they are in need of an 
external agent whose act is a condition of their act, and not only of 
their act but even of their existence. However, about the essence of 
this agent or of these agents the philosophers differ in one way, al- 
though in another they agree. They all agree in this, that the First 
Agent is immaterial and that its act is the condition of the existence 
and acts of existents, and that the act of their agent reaches these 
existents through the intermediation of an effcct* of this agent, 
which is different from these existents and which, according to some 
of them, is exclusively the heavenly sphere, whereas others assume 
besides this sphere another immaterial existent which they call the 
bestower of forms. 

But this is not the place to investigate these theories, and the 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES G2u 

highest part of their inquiry is this; and if you are one of those who 
desire these truths, then follow the right road which leads to them. 
The reason why the philosophers differed about the origin of the 
essential forms and especially of the forms of the soul is that they could 

not relate them to the warm, cold, moist, and dry, which are the causes 525 
of all natural things which come into being and pass away," whereas 
the materialists related everything which does not seem to have an 
apparent cause to the warm, cold, moist, and dry, affirming that these 
things originated through certain mixtures of those elements, just as 
colours and other accidents come into cxistence.* And the philo- 
sophers tried to refute them. 

Ghazali says: 

o 

Our second point is concerned with those who acknowledge that these 
events proceed from their principles, but say that the disposition to receive 
the forms arises from their observed and apparent causes. However, 
according to them also the events proceed Irom: these principles not by 
deliberation and will, but by necessity and nature, as light does from the 
sun, and che substrata difler for their reception only through the differentia- 10 
tions in their disposition. For instance, a potished body receives the rays 
of the sun, reflects them and illuminates another spot with them, whereas 
an vpaque hody docs not receive them; the air does not hinder the pene- 
tration of the sun’s light, but a stone doves; certain things become soft 
through the sun, others hard ;? certain things, like the garments which the 
fuller bleaches, become white through the sun, others like the fuller’s face 
become black :4 the principle is, however, one and the same, although the 
effects difler through the differences of disposition in the substratum. Thus 
there is no hindrance or incapacity in the emanation of what emanates 
from the principles of existence; the insulliciency lies only in the receiving 
substrata, If this is true, and we assume a fire that has the quality it has, 
and twa similar pieces of cotton in the sume contact with it, how can it 
be imagined that only one and not the other will be burned, as there is 
here no voluntary act? And from this point of view they deny that 
Abraham could fall into the fire and not be burned notwithstanding the 
fact that the fire remained fire, and they affirm that this could only be 
possible through abstracting the warmth from the fire (through which it 526 
would, however, cease to be fire} or through changing the essence of 
Abraham and making him a stune or something on which fire has no 
influence, and neither the one nor the other is possible. 

a 

I say: 

Those philosophers whe say that these perceptible existents do not 
act on cach other, and that their agent is exclusively an external 
principle, cannot affirm that their apparent action on cach other is 5 

10 

527 

528 

322 . TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

totally illusory, but would say that this action is limited to preparing 
the disposition to accept the forms from the external principle. How- 
ever, I do not know any philosopher who affirms this absolutely; they 
assert this only of the essential farms, not of the forms of accidents. 
They all agree that warmth causes warmth, and that al] the four 
qualities act likewise, but in such a way that through it the elemental 
fire! and the warmth which proceeds from the heavenly bodies are 
conserved. The theory which Ghazali ascribes to the philosophers, 
that the separate principles act by nature, not by choice, is not held 
by any important philosophers;? on the contrary, the philosophers 
affirm that that which possesses knowledge must act by choice. How- 
ever, accarding to the philosophers, in view of the excellence which 
exists in the world, there can procced out of two contraries only the 
better, and their choice is not made to perfect their essences—since 
there is no imperfection in their essence—but in order that through 
it those existents which have an imperfection in their nature may be 
perfected. ‘ 

As to the objection which Ghazali ascribes to the philosophers over 
the miracle of Abraham, such things are only asserted by heretical 
Muslims. The learned among the philosophers do not permit dis- 
cussion or disputation about the principles of religion, and he who 
does such a thing needs, according to them, a severe lesson. For 
whereas every science has its principles, and every student of this 
science must concede its principles and may not interfere with them 
by denying them, this is still more obligatory in the practical science 
of religion, for to walk on the path of the religious virtues is neces- 
sary for man’s existence, according to them, not in so far as he is a 
man, but in so far as he has knowledge; and therefore it is necessary 
for every man to concede the principles of religion and invest with 
authority the man who lays them down. The denial and discussion 
of these principles denies human existence, and therefore heretics 
must be killed. Of religious principles it must be said that they are 
divine things which surpass human utiderstanding, but must be 
acknowledged although their causes are unknown. 

Therefore we do not find that any of the ancient philosophers 
discusses miracles, although they were known and had appeared all 
over the world, for they are the principles on which religion is based 
and religion is the principle of the virtues; nor did they discuss any 
of the things which are said to happen after death, For if a man 
grows up according to the religious virtues he becomes absolutely 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 323 

virtuous, and if time and felicity are granted to him, so that he be- 
comes one of the deeply learned thinkers and it happens that he can 
explain one of the principles of religion, it is enjoined upon him that 
he should not divulge this explanation and should say ‘all these are 
the terms of religion and the wise’, conforming himself to the 
Divine Words, ‘but those who are deeply versed in knowledge say: 
we believe in it, it is all from our Lord’.! 

Ghazali says: 

There are two answers to this theory. The first is to say: ‘We do not 
accept the assertion that the principles do not act in a voluntary way and 
that God does not act through His will, and we have already refuted their 
claim in treating of the question of the temporal creation of the world. 
If itis established that the Agent creates the burning through His will when 
the piece of cotton is brought in contact with the fire, He can equally well 
omit to create it when the contact takes place. 

I say: 

Ghazali, to confuse his opponent, here regards as established what 
his opponent refuses to admit, and says that his opponent has no 
proof for his refusal. He says that the First Agent causes the burning 
without an intermediary He might have created in order that the 
burning might take place* through the fire. Butsucha claim abolishes 
any perception of the existence of causes and effects. No philosopher 
doubts that, for instance, the fire is the cause of the burning which 
occurs in the cotton through the fire—not, however, absolutely, but 
by an external principle which is the condition of the existence of 
fire, not to speak of its burning. The phifosophers differ only about 
the quiddity of this principte—whether it is a separate principle, 
or an intermediary between the event and the separate principle 
besides the fire. 

Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers: 

But it may be said that such a conception involves reprehensible 
impossibilities. For if you deny the necessary dependence of effects or their 
catses and relate them to the will of their Creator, and do not aliow even 
in the will a particular definite pattern, but regard it as possible that it 
may vary and change in type, then it may happen to any of us that there 
should be in his presence beasts of prey and flaming fires and immovable 
mountains and enemies equipped with arms, without his seeing them, 
because God had not created in him the faculty of secing them. And a 
man who had left a Look at home might find it on his return changed into 
a youth, handsome, intelligent, and efficient, or into an animal; or if he 
left a youth at home, he might find him turned into a dog; or he might 

cd 

o> 

529 

iS 

10 

15 

324 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 4+ 

leave ashes and find them changed into musk; or a stone changed into 
gold, and gold changed into stone. And if he were asked about any of these 
things, he would answer: ‘I do not know what there is at present in my 
house; I only know that I left 2 book in my house, but perhaps by now 
it is a horse which has soiled the library with its urine and excrement, 
and F left in my house a piece of bread which has perhaps changed into 
an apple-tree.’ For God js able to do’ ali these things, and it does not 
belong to the necessity of a horse that it should be created from a sperm, 
nor is it of the necessity of a eree that it should be created from a seed; 
no, there is no necessity that it should be created ont of anything at all. 
And perhaps God creates things which never existed before; indced, 
when one secs a man one never saw before and is asked whether this man 
has been generated, one should answer hesitantly: ‘It may be that he 
was one of the fruits in the market which has heen changed into a man, 
and that this is that man.’ For God can do any possible thing, and this is 
possible, and one cannot avoid being perplexed by it; and to this kind 
of fancy one may yield ad infinitum, but these cxamples will do.’ 

But the answer is to say: If it were true that the existence of the possible 
implied that there could not be created in man any knowledge of the 
non-occurrence of a possible, alt these consequences would follow neces- 
sarily, But we are not at a loss over any of the examples which you have 
brought forward. For God has created in us the knowledge that He will 

not do ali these possible things, and we only profess that these things are 

not necessary, but that they are possible and may or may not happen, and 
protracted habit time after time fixes their occurrence in our minds 
according to the past habit in a fixed impression. Yes, it is possible that 
a prophet should know in such ways as the philosophers have explained 
that a certain man will not come tomorrow from a journey, and although 
his coming is possible the prophet knows that this possibility will not be 
realized.? And often you may observe even ordinary men of whom you 
know that they are not aware of anything occult, and can know the intel- 
ligible only through instruction, and still it cannot be denied that never- 
theless their soul and conjectwing power can acquire suflicient strength 
to apprehend what the prophets apprehend in so far as they know the 
possibility of an event, but know that it will not happen. And if God 
interrupts the habitual course by causing this unusual event to happen 
this knowledge of the habitual is at the time of the interruption removed 
from their hearts and He no longer creates it. There is, therefore, no 
objection to admitting that a thing may be possible for God, but that 
He had the previous knowledge that although Ie might have done so He 
would not carry it out during a certain time, and that He has created in 
us the knowledge that He would not do it during that tine,* 

I say: 
When the theologians admit that the opposite of everything exist- 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 325 

ing is equally possible, and that it is such in regard to the Agent, and 
that only one of these opposites can be differentiated through the 
will of the Agent, there is no fixed standard for His will either con- 
stantly or for most cases, according to which things must happen. 
For this reason the theologians are open to all the scandatous 

- implications with which they are charged. For true knowledge* is the 
knowledge of a thing as it is in reality,t And if in reality there only 
existed, in regard both to the substratum and to the Agent,? the possi- 
bility of the two opposites,? there would no longer, even for the 
twinkling of an eye, be any permanent knowledge of anything, since 
we suppose such an agent to rule existents like a tyrannical prince 
who has the highest power*, for whom nobody in his dominion can 
deputize*, of whom no standard or custom is known to which reference 
might be made.* Indeed, the acts of such a prince will undoubtedly 
be unknown by nature, and if an act of his comes into existence the 
continuance of its existence at any moment will be unknown by 
nature. 

Ghazali’s defence against these difficulties that God created in 
us the knowledge that these possibilities would be realized only at 
special times, such as at the time of the miracle, is not a true one. 
For the knowledge created’ in us is always in conformity with the 
nature of the real thing, since the definition of truth is chat a thing is 
believed to be such as it is in reality. Ef therefore there is knowledge 
of these possibles, there must be in the real possibles a condition to 
which our knowledge refers, either through these possibles themselves 
or through the agent, or for both reasons—a condition which the 
theologians call habit.? And since the existence of this condition 
which is called habit is impossible in the First Agent, this condition 
can only be found in the existents, and this, as we said, is what the 
philosophers cail nature.* 

The same congruity exists between God’s knowledge and the 
existents, although God's knowledge of existents is their cause, and 
these existents are the consequence of God’s knowledge, and there- 
fore reality conforms to God’s knowledge.* If, for instance, know- 
ledge of Zaid’s coming reaches the prophet through a communica- 
tion of God, the reason why the actual happening is congruous with 
the knowledge is nothing but the fact that the nature of the actually 
existent!® is a consequence of the eternal knowledge, for knowledge 
gua knowledge can only refer to something which has an actualized 
nature.'' The knowledge of the Creator is the reason why this nature 

$31 

o 

532 

"326 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

becomes actual in the existent which is attached to it.! Our ignor- 
ance of these possibles js brought about through our ignorance of 
the nature which determines the being or non-being of a thing. If 
‘yo the opposites in existents were in a condition of equilibrium, both in 
themselves) and through their efficient causes, it would follow that 
they neither existed nor did not exist, or that they existed and did 
not exist at the same time, and one of the opposites must therefore 
have a preponderance in existence. And it is the knowledge of the 
existence of this nature which causes the actualization of one of the 
’ opposites. And the knowledge attached to this nature is either a 
ga3 knowledge prior to it, and this is the knowledge of which this nature 
*,' 2 is the effect, namely eternal knowledge, or the knowledge which is 
consequent on this nature, namely non-eternal knowledge. The 
attainment of the occult is nothing but the vision of this nature, and 
our acquisition of this knowledge not preceded by any proof is what is 
cafled jn ordinary human beings a dream, and in prophets inspiration. 
s The eternal will and eternal knowledge are the causes of this nature 
in existents. And this is the meaning of the Divine Words: ‘Say that 
none in the heavens or on the earth know the occult but God alone.’¢ 
This nature is sometimes necessary ancl sometimes what happens in 
most cases. Dreams and inspiration are only, as we said, the 
announcement of this nature in possible things, and the sciences 
1o which claim the prognostication of future events possess only rare 
traces of the influences of this nature or constitution or whatever you 
wish to call it, namely that which is actualized in itelf and to which 
the knowledge attaches itself. 
Ghazali says: 

The second answer—and in it is to be found deliverance from these 
reprehensible consequences’—is to agree that in fire there is created a 
nature which burns two similar pieces of cotton which are brought into 
contact with it and does not differentiate between therm, when they are 
alike in every respect.? But stili we regard it as possible that a prophet 
should be thrown into the fire and not burn, cither through a change 
in the quality of the fire or through a change in the quality of the 

1g prophet, and that either through God or through the angels there should 
arise a quality jn the fire which limited its heat to its own body, so 
that it did not go beyond it, but remained confined to it, keeping, how- 
ever, to the form and reality of the fire, without its heat and influence 
extending beyond it; or that there should arise in the body of the person 

an attribute, which did not stop* the body from being flesh and bone, 

534 but still defended* it against the action of the fire. For we can see a nan 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 327 

rub himself with talc and sit down in a lighted oven and not suffer from 
it; and if one had not seen it, one would deny it, and the denial of our 
opponents that it lies in God’s power to confer on the fire or to the body 
an attribute which prevents it from being burnt is like the denial of one 
who has not seen the talc and its effect.' For strange and marvellous things 
are in the power of God, many of which we have not seen, and why 
should we deny their possibility and regard them as impossible? 

And also the bringing back to life of the dead and the changing of a 
stick into a serpent are possible in the following way: matter can receive 
any form, and therefore earth and the other elements can be changed into 
a plant,? and a plant, when an anima! eats it, can be changed inte blood,* 
then blood can be changed into sperm,‘ and then sperm can be thrown 
into the womb and take the character of an animal.’ This, in the habitual 
course of nature, takes place over a long space of time, but why docs our 
opponent declare it impossible that matter should pass through these 
different phases in a shorter period than is usual, and when once a shorter 
period is allowed there is no limit to its being shorter and shorter, so that 
these potencies can always become quicker in their action and eventually 
arrive at the stage of being a miracle of a prophet.* 

And if it is asked: ‘Does this arse through the soul of the prophet or 
through another principle at the instigation of the prophet?’—we answer; 
‘Does what you acknowledge may happen through the power of the 
prophet’s soul, like the downpour of rain or the falling of a thunderbolt 
or earthquakes—does that occur through him or through another prin- 
ciple? What we say about the facts which we have mentioned is like what 
you say about those facts which you regard as possible. And the hese 
method according to both you and us is to relate these things 10 God, 
either immediately or through the intermediation of the angels. But at 
the time these occurrences become real, the avention of the prophet duris 
to such facts, and the order of the good determines ils appearance to 
ensure the duration of the order of religion, and diis gives a preponderance 
to the side of existence. ‘The fact in itself is possible, and the principle in 
God is His magnanimity; but such a fact only emanates from Him when 
necessity gives a preponderance to its existence and the good determines il, 
and the good only determines it when a prophet needs it to establish his 
prophetic office for the promulgation of the goud.’? 

And all this is in accordance with the theory of the philosophers and 
follows from it for them, since they allow to the prophet a particular 
characteristic which distinguishes him from common people. There is no 
intellectual criterion for the extent of its possibility, hut there is no aced 
to declare it false when it resis on a good tradition and the religious law 
states it to be true, Now, in general, it is only the sperm whieh accepts 
the form of animals—and it receives its animal potencies only {for the 
angels, who according to the philosophers, are the principtes of existents 
—and only a man can be created from the sperm of a man, and only a 

TO 

] 

a 

$35 

328 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

horse from the sperm of a horse, in so far as the actualization of the sperm 
through the horse determines the preponderance of the analogous form 
of a horse over all other forms, and it accepts only the form to which in 
this way the preponderance is given, and therefore barley never grows 
from wheat or an apple from a pear.’ Further, we see that certain kinds 
of animal are only produced by spontaneous generation from earth and 
never are_generated by procreation—e.g. worms, and some which are 
produced both spontaneously and by procreation like the mouse, the 
serpent, and the scorpion, for their generation can come also from earth.? 

_ Their disposition to accept forms varies through causes unknown ¢o us, 

19 

and it is not in human power to ascertain them, since those forms do not, 
according to the philosophers, emanate from the angels by their good 
pleasure or haphazard,’ but in every substratum only in such a way that 
a form arises for whose acceptance it is specially determined through its 
own disposition. These dispositions differ, and their principles are, accord- 
ing to the philosophers, the aspects of the stars and the different relative 
positions of the heavenly bedies in their movements. And through this the 
possibility is open that there may be in the principles of these dispositions 
wonderful and marvellous things, so that those who understand talismans 
through their knowledge of the particular qualities of minerals and of the 
stars succeed in combining the heavenly potencies with those mineral pecu- 
liarities, and make shapes of these earthly substances, and seek a special 
virtue for them and produce marvellous things in the world through them. 
And often they drive serpents and scorpions from a country, and sometimes 
bugs, and they do other things which are known to Lelong to the science 
of talismans. 

And since there is no fixed criterion fur the principles of these disposi- 
tions, and we cannot ascertain their essence or limit them, how can we 
know that it is impossible that in certain bodies dispositions occur to 
change their phases at a quicker rhythm, so that such a body would be 
disposed to accept a form for the acceptance of which it was not prepared 
before, which is claimed to be a miracle? There is no denying this, except 
through a lack of understanding and an unfamiliarity with higher things 
and oblivion of the secrets of God in the created world and in nature. And 
he who has examined the many wonders of the sciences does not consider 
in any way impossille for God’s power what is told of the wonders of the 
prophets.* 

Our opponents may say: ‘We agree with you that everything possible 
is in the power of God, and you theologians agree with us that the 
impossible cannot be done and that there are things whose impossibility 
is known and things which are known to be possible, and that there are 
also things about which the understanding is undecided and which it does 
not hold to be cither impossible or possible. Now what according to you is 
the limit of the impossible? If the impossible includes nothing but the 
simultancous affirmation and negation of the same thing, then say that of 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES $29 

two things the one is not the other, and that the existence of the one does 

not demand the existence of the other. And say then that God can create 20 
will without knowledge of the thing willed, and knowledge without life, : 
and that He can move the hand of a dead man and make him sit and 
write volumes with his hand and engage himself in sciences while he has 

his eye open and his looks are fixed on his work, although he does not see 

and there is no life in him and he has no power, and it js God alone who 
creates all these ordered actions with the moving of the dead man’s hand, 

and the movement comes from God. But by regarding this as possible the 
difference between voluntary action and a reflex action like shivering* is 
destroyed, and a judicious act will no longer indicate that the agent 
possesses knowledge or power.* It will then be necessary that God should 

be able to change genera and transform the substance into an accident 

and knowledge into power and black into white and a voice into an odour, 

just as He is able to change the inorganic into an anima) and a stone into 536 
gold, and it will then follow that God can also bring about other unlimited 
impossibilities.’ 

The answer to this is to say that the impossible cannot be done by God, 
and the impossible consists in the simultaneous affirmation and negation 
of a thing, or the affirmation of the more particular with the negation of 
the more general, or the affirmation of avo things with the negation of one 
of them, and what does not refer to this is not impossible and what is not 
impossible can be done. The identification of black and white is impos- 
sible, because by the allirmation of the form of black in the substratum 5 
the negation of the form of white and of the existence of white is implied; 
and since the negation of white is implied by the affirmation of black, the 
simultaneous affirmation and negation of white is impossible? And the 
existence of a person in two places at once is only impossible? because we - 
imply by his being in the house that he cannot be in another place, and it 
cannot be understood from the denial that he is in another place that he 
can be simultaneously both in another place and in the house. And in the 
same way hy will is implied the seeking of something that can be known, 
and if we assume a seeking without knowledge there cannot be a will and 
we would then deny what we had implied. And it is impossible that in 
the inorganic knowledge should be created, because we understand hy 
inorganic that which does not perceive, and if in the organic perception 
was created it would become impossible to call it inorganic in the sense 
in which this word is understood. 

As to the transformation of one genus into another, some theologians 
aflirm that itis in the power of God, but we say that for one thing to be- 
come another is irrational; for, if for instance, the black could be trans- 
formed into power, the black would either remain or not, and if it does not 
exist any more, it is not changed but simply does not exist any more and 
something else exists; and if it remains existent together with power, 
it is not changed, but something else is brought in relation to it, and if the 

2 

20 

537 

w 

19 

330 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

black remains and power does not exist, then it does not change, but 
remains as it was before. And when we say that blood changes into sperm, 
we mean by it that this identical matter is divested of one form and 
invested with another; and it amounts to this, that one form becomes non- 
existent and another form comes into existence while the matter remains, 
and that two forms succeed one another in it. And when we say that water 
becomes air through being heated, we mean by it that the matter which 
had received the form of the water is deprived of this form and takes 
another, and the matter is common to them but the attribute changes. 
And it is the same when we say that the stick is changed into a serpent or 
earth into an animal. But there is no matter common to the accident and 
the substance, nor to black and to power, nor to the other categories, and: 
it is impossible for this reason that they should be changed into each 
other. 

As to God’s moying the hand of a dead man, and raising this man up 
in the form of a tivying one who sits and writes, so that through the move- 
ment of his hand a well-ordered script is written, this in itself is not im- 
possible as long as we refer events to the will of a voluntary being, and it 
is only to be denied because the habitual course of nature is in opposition 
to it. And your affirmation, philosophers, thar, if this is so, the judiciousness 
of an act no longer indicates that the agent possesses knowledge is false, 
for the agent in this case is God; He determines the act and He performs 
it. And as to your assertion that if this is so there is no longer any difference 
between shivering and voluntary motion, we answer that we know this* 
difference only hecause we expertence in ourselves the difference between 
these two conditions, and we find thereby that the differentiating factor 
is power,' and know that of the two classes of the possible the one happens 
at one time, the other at another; that is to say, we produce movement 
with the power to produce it at one ume, and a movement without this 
power at another. Now, when we observe other movements than ours and 
see many well-ordered movements, we allain knowledge of the power 
behind them,? and God creates in us all these different kinds of knowledge 
through the habitual course of evenis, through which one of the two classes 
of possibility becomes known, though the impossibility of the second class 
is not proved thereby. 

I say: 

When Ghazali saw that the theory that things have no particular 
qualities and forms from which particular-acts follow, for every thing 
is very objectionable, and contrary to common sense, he conceded 
this in this last section and replaced it by the denial of two points: 
first that a thing can have these qualities but that they need not act 
on a thing in the way they usually act on it, e.g. fire can have its 
warmth but need not burn something that is brought near to it, 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 331 

even if it is usually burnt when fire is brought near to it; secondly 
that the particular forms have nota particular matter in every object. 

The first point can be accepted by the philosophers, for because of 
external causes the procession of acts from agents may not be neces- §38 
sary,' and it is not impossible that for instance fire may sometimes be 
brought near cotton without burning it, when something is placed 
with the cotton that makes it non-inflammabte, as Ghazali says in 
his instance of tale and a living being. 

As to the point that matter is one of the conditions for material 

things, this cannot be denied by the theologians,? for, as Ghazali says, 5 
there is no difference between our simultaneous negation and affirma- 
tion of a thing and our simultaneous denial of part of it and affirma- 
tion of the whole. And since things consist of two qualities, a general 
and a particutar—and this is what the philosophers mean by the 
term ‘definition’, a definition being composed according to them of ' 
a genus and a specific difference—it is indifferent for the denial of an 
existent which of its cwo qualities is denied. For instance, since man 
consists of two qualitics, one being a general quality, viz. animality, 
and the second a particular, viz. rationality, man remains man just 
as little when we take away his animality as when we take away 
his rationality, for animality is a condition of rationality and when 
the condition is removed the conditioned is removed equally. 

On this question the theologians and the philosophers agree, except 
that the philosophers believe that for particular things the general 
qualities are just as much a condition as the particular, and this the 
theologians do not believe; for the philosophers, for instance, warmth 539 
and moisture are a condition of life in the transicnt,? because they 
are more gencral than life, just as life is a condition of rationality. 

But the theologians do not believe this, and so you hear them say: 
‘For us dryness* and moisture are not a condition of life,’ For the 
philosophers shape, too, is one of the particular conditions of fife in § 
an organic being; if not, one of two following cases might arise: cither 
the special shape of the animal might exist without exercising any 
function, or this special shape might not exist at all. For instance, 
for the philosophers the hand is the organ of the intellect, and by 
means of jt man performs his rational acts, like writing and the 
carrying on of the other arts; now if intelligence were possible in the 
inorganic, it would be possible that intellect might exist without 
performing its function, and it would be as if warmth could exist 
without warming the things that are normally warmed by it.* Also, 

~ 

ou 

a 

. 340 

“a 

541 

to 

992 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

according to the philosophers, every existent has a definite quantity 
and a definite quality, and also the time when it comes into existence 
and during which it persists are determined, although in all these 
determinations there is, according to the philosophers, a certain 
latitude.! 

Theologians and philosophers agree that the matter of existents 
which participate in one and the same matter sometimes accepts one 
of two forms and sometimes its opposite, as happens, according to 
them, with the forms of the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth. 
Only in regard to the things which have no common matter or which. 
have different matters do they disagree whether some of them can 
accept the forms of others—for instance, whether something which 
is not known by experience to accept a certain form except through 
many intermediaries can also accept this ultimate form without 
intermediaries, For instance, the plant comes into existence through 
composition out of the elements; it becomes blood and sperm 
through being eaten by an animal and from sperm and blood comes 
the animal, as is said in the Divine Words: ‘We created man from 
an extract of clay, then We made him a clot in a sure depository’? 
and so on till His words ‘and blessed be God, the best of creators’. 
The theologians affirm that the soul of man can inhere in earth 
without the intermediaries known by experience,? whereas the philo- 
sophers deny this and say that, if this were possible, wisdom would 
conssst in the creation of man without such intermediaries, and a 
creator who created in such a way would be the best and most 
powerful of creators; both parties claim that what they say is self- 
evident, and ncither has any proof for its theory. And you, reader, 
consult your heart; it is your duty to believe what it announces, and 
this is what God—who may make us and you into men of truth and 
evidence—has ordained for you. 

But some of the Muslims have even affirmed that there can be 
attributed to God the power to combine the two opposites, and their 
dubious proof is that the judgement of our intellect that this is im- 
possible is something which has been impressed on the intellect, 
whereas if there had been impressed on it the judgement that this is 
possible, it would not deny this possibility, but admit it. For such 
people it follows as a consequence that neither intellect nor existents 
have a well-defined nature, and that the truth which exists in the 
intellect does not correspond to the existence of existing things. The 
theologians themselves are ashamed of such a theory, but if they held 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 333 

it, it would be more consistent with their point of view than the 
contradictions in which their opponents involve them on this point. 
For their opponents try to find out where the difference lies between 
what as a matter of fact the theologians affirm on this point and what 
they deny, and it is very difficult for them to make this out—indeed 
they do not find anything but vague words. We find, therefore, that 
those most expert in the art of theological discussion take refuge in 
denying the necessary connexion between condition and conditioned, 
between a thing and its definition, between a thing and its cause and 
between a thing and its sign. All this is full of sophistry and is without 542 
sense, and the theologian who did this was Abu-l-Ma‘ali.t The 
general argument which solves these difficulties is that existents are 
divided into opposites and correlates, and if the latter could be 
separated, the former might be united, but opposites are not united 
and correlates therefore cannot be separated. And this is the wisdom 5 
of God and God’s course in created things, and you will never find 
in God’s course any alteration.? And it is through the perception of 
this wisdom that the intellect of man becomes intellect, and the exis~ 
tence of such wisdom in the eterna] intellect is the cause of its existence 
in reality. The intellect therefore is not a possible entity which might 
have been created with other qualities, as Ibn Hazm imagined.? 

THE SECOND DISCUSSION 543 

Their impotence to show by demonstrative proof that the 

human soul is a spiritual substance which exists by itself and 

does not fill space, is neither body nor impressed on a body, is 

neither continuous with the body nor separated from the body,’ 5 

just as neither God nor the angels according to them is outside or 
instde the world 

Ghazali says: 

The discussion of this question demands the exposition of their theory 
about the animal and human faculties. The animal faculties are divided 
according to them into motive and apprehensive, and the apprehensive 
are of two classes, the external and the internal. The external are the five 
senses, and these faculties are entities impressed on the bodies.® The internal 
are three in number.” The first is the representative faculty in the fore- 
most part of the brain behind the faculty of sight; in it the forms of the 
things scen remain after the closing of the eye, and in this Faculty there 

oO 

to 

1§ 

$45 

334 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

is impressed and collected* what the five senses bring to it, and it is there- 
fore called the common sense. If it did not exist, a man who saw white 
honey and perceives its sweetness by taste could not, when he saw it a 
second time, apprehend its sweetness as long as he had not tasted it as 
he did the first ime, but in the common sense there is something which 
judges that this white is the sweetness, and there is in it, no doubt, a 
judging element for which both these things, colour and sweetness, are 
brought together and which determines then that when the one is present 
the other must be there too," 

The second is the estimative faculty,? which is that which apprehends 
the intentions’ whereas the first apprehends the forms;* and the meaning 
of ‘forms’ is ‘that which cannot be without matter, i.c. body’, whereas 
the meaning of ‘intentions’ is ‘that which does not require a body for its 
existence, although it can happen that it occurs in a body’—like enmity 
and concord. The sheep perceives the colour, shape, and appearance of the 
wolf, which are onty found in body, but it perceives also that the wolf is its 
enemy, and the lamb perceives the shape and colour of its mother and 
then perceives its love and tenderness, and for this reason it flees from the 
wolf while it walks behind the mother. Discord and concord need nat be 
in bodies like colour and shape, but it sometimes happens that they occur 
in bodies. ‘his faculty differs from the first*, and is iocated in the posterior 
ventricle of the brain.’ ; 

The third faculty is called in animals the imaginative and in man the 
cogitative,® and its nature is to combine the sensible forms and to compose 
the intentions with the forms? it is located in the middle ventricle between 
the place where the forms are kept and that where the intentions are re- 
tained.* Because of this man can imagine a horse that flies and a being 
with the head of a man and the body of a horse, and other combinations, 
although he has never seen such things. 1t is more appropriate, as will be 
shown, to join this faculty with the motive faculties than with the appre- 
hensive. The places where these faculties are located are knuwn only 
through medicine, for if a lesion occurs to one of these ventricles che 
faculties become delective.'° 

Further, the philosophers affirm that the faculty on which the forms of 
sensible things are impressed through the five senses retains these forms so 
that they do not disappear after their reception, for one thing docs not 
retain another through the faculty by which it receives it, for water 
receives without retaining, while wax receives through its wetness and 
retains through its dryness, by contrast with water."" ‘Fhrough this con- 
sideration that which retains is different from that which receives, and 
this is called the retentive faculty. And in the same way intentions are 
impressed on the estimative faculty, and a faculty retains them, which is 
called the memorative.'? Through this consideration, these internal per- 
ceptions, when the imaginative faculty is joined to them, become five in 
number, like the external faculties. 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 335 

The motive faculties’ form two classes, in so far as they are only stimu- 
lating motion or executing motion and acting; the stimulating motive 
faculty is the impulsive and appetitive faculty; this is the faculty 

which stimulates the acting mative power to move when, in the representa- _ 

tive faculty which we have mentioned,? there is inscribed the form of 

something to be sought or avoided. The stimulating faculty has two . 

branches, one called concupiscent which excites to a movement, through 
which there is an approach to the things represented as necessary or 
useful in a search for pleasure, and the irascible which excites to a move- 
ment through which the thing represented as injurious or mischievous is 
removed as one seeks to master it. Through this faculty the complete 
determination to act is effected, which is called will.? 

The motive faculty which itself executes movement is a faculty which 
is diffused in the nerves and muscles and has the function of contracting 
the muscles and drawing the tendons and ligaments which are in contact 
with the limbs in the direction where this faculty resides, or of relaxing 
and extending them so that the Jigaments and tendons move in the 
opposite direction.* These are the animal faculties of the soul as described 
in a suminary way, without the details. 

And as regards the soul which thinks things and is called the rational 
or discursive soul by the philosophers (and by ‘discursive’’ is meant 
‘rational’, because discourse is the most typical external operation of 
reason and therefure the intellective soul takes its name from it), it has 
two faculties, a knowing and an acting, and both are called intellect, 
though equivocally.* And the acting faculty is one which is a principle 
moving man’s body towards the well-ordered human arts, whose order 
derives from the deliberation proper to man. The knowing faculty, which 
is called the speculative, is one which has the function of perceiving the 
real natures of the intelligibles in abstraction from matter, place, and 
position; and these are the universal concepts which the theologians call 
sometimes conditions and sometimes modes,’ and which the philosophers 
call abstract universals. 

The soul has therefore two faculties on two sides: the speculative faculty 
on the side of the angels, since through it it receives from the angels 
knowledge of realities {and this faculty must always be receptive for the 
things coming from above); and the practica) faculty on the inferior side, 
which is the side of the body which it directs and whose morals it improves, 
This faculty must rule over all the other bodily faculties, and all the others 
must be trained by it and subjected to it. It must not itself be affected or 
influenced by them, but they must be influenced by it, in such a way that 
there will not through the bodily attributes occur in the soul subservient 
dispositions, called vices, but that this faculty may remain predominant 
and arouse in the soul dispositions called virtues.® 

This is a summary of the human vital faculties, which they distinguished 
and about which they spoke at great length, and we have omitted the 

190 

10 

547 

336 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

vegetative faculties, since there is no need to mention them as they are not 
connected with our subject. Nothing of what we have mentioned need be 
denied on religious grounds, for al] these things are observable facts whose 
habitual course has been provided by God. We only want now to refute 
their claim that the soul being an essence subsistent by itselft can be 
known by demonstrative rational proofs, and we do not seek to refute those 
who say that it is impossible that this knowledge should derive from God’s 
power or who believe that the religious faw is opposed to this; for perhaps 
it will be clear at the dividing on the Day of Judgement that the Holy Law 
regards it as true. However, we reject their claim that this can be known 
by mere reason and that the religious law is not necessary for its knowledge, 
and we shall ask them to produce their proofs and indeed they have many, 

I say: : 

Ali this is nothing but an account of the theory of the philosophers 
about these faculties and his conception of them; only he followed 
Avicenna, who distinguished himself from the rest of the philosophers 
by assuming in the animal another faculty than the imaginative,* 
which he calls the estimative faculty and which replaces the cogita- 
tive faculty in man, and he says that the ancients applied the term 
‘imaginative faculty’ to the estimative, and when they do this then 
the imaginative faculty in the animal is a substitute for the cogitative 
faculty in man and will be jocated in the middle ventricle of the 
brain. And when the term ‘imaginative’ is applied to the faculty 
which apprehends* shape,* this is said to reside in the foremost part 
of the brain. There is no contradiction in the fact that the retentive 
and memorative faculties should both be in the posterior part 
of the brain, for retaining and memory are two in function, but 
one in their substratum. And what appears from the theory of the 
ancients is that the imaginative faculty in the animal is that which 
determines that the wolf should be an enemy of the sheep and that 
the sheep should be a friend of the lamb, for the imaginative faculty 
is a perceptive oneS and it necessarily possesses judgement, and there 
is no need to introduce another faculty. What Avicenna says would 
only be possible if the imaginative faculty were not perceptive; and 
there is no sense in adding another faculty to the imaginative in the 
animal, especially in an animal which possesses many arts by nature, 
for its representations are not derived from the senses® and seer to be 
perceptions intermediary between the intellectual and the sensible* 
forms, and the question of these forms* is concisely treated in De 
sensu et sensato,’? and we shall leave this subject here and return to 
Ghazali’s objections against the philosophers, 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 337 

Ghazali says: 548 

The first proof is that they say that intellectual cognitions inhere in 
human souls, and are limited and have units which cannot be divided, and 
therefore their substratum must also be indivisible and every body is 
divisible, and this proves that the substratum of the cognitions is something 
incorporea]*.' One can put this into a logical form according to the figures 
of logic, but the easiest way is to say that if the substratum of knowledge 5 
is a divisible body, then the knowledge which inheres in it must be 
divisible too; but the inherent knowledge is not divisible, and therefore 
the substratum is not a body: and this is a mixed hypothetical syllogism 
in which the consequent is denied, from which there follows the denial of 
the antecedent in all cases; and there is no doubt about the validity of this 
figure of the syllogism, nor again about its premisses, for the major is that 
everything inherent in something divisible is necessarily divisible, the 
divisibility of its substratum being assumed, and this is a major about 
which one cannot have any doulst. The minor is that knowledge as a unity 
inheres in man and is not divided, for its infinite division is impossible, 
and if it is limited, then it comprises no doubt units which cannot be 
divided; and in short, when we know a thing, we cannot assume that a 
part can cease and a part remain, because it has no parts. 

The objection rests on two points, It may be said: 

*How will you refute those who say that the sulstratum of knowledge 
is an atom in space which cannot be divided, as is known from the theory 
of the theologians?’? And then there remains nothing to be said against 
it but to question its possibility, and to ask how all that is known can 
exist in one atom, whereas all the atoms which surround this one are 
deprived of it although they are near to it. But to question its possibility 
has no vatue, as one can also turn it against the doctrine of the philosophers, 
by asking how the soul can be one single thing which is not in space or 
outside the body, either continuous with it or separated from it. However, 
we should not stress this first point, for the discussion of the problem of the 
atom is fengthy,? and the philosophers have geometrical proofs against 
it whose cliscussion is intricate, atc one of their many arguments Is to ask: 
‘Does one of the sides of an atom between two atoms touch the identical 
spat the other side touches or not?’ The former is impossible, because its 
consequence would be that the two sides coincided, whereas a thing that 
is in contact with another is in contact, and the latter implies the affirma- 549 
tion of a plurality and divisibility,t and the solution of this difficulty is 
long and we need not go deeper into it and will now turn to the other 
point. 

Your affirmation that everything which inheres in a body must be 
divisible is contradicted by what you say of the estimative faculty of the 
sheep where the hostility of the wolf is concerned, for in the judgement of 
one single thing no division can he imagined, since hostility has no part, so 
that one part of it might be perceived and another neglected. Still, accord- § 

- 

o 

3 

io 

15 

550 

338 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

ing to you this perception takes place in a bodily faculty, and the souls of 
animals are impressed on their bodies and do not survive death, and all 
the philosophers agree about this. And if it is possible for you to regard 
as divisible that which is perceived by the five senses, by the common 
sense and by the faculty which retains the forms, this is not possible for 
you in the case of those intentions which are not supposed to be in matter. 

And if it be satd: ‘Absolute hostility, abstracted from matter, is not 
perceived by the sheep, but only the hostility of the definite individual 
wolf connected with its bodily individuality and shape, and only the 
rational faculty perceives universal realities abstracted from matter’—we 
answer that the sheep perceives, indeed, the colour and shape of the wolf 
and then its hostility, and if the colour is impressed on the faculty of sight 
and the same happens to the shape, and it is divided through the division 
of the substratum of sight, I ask, ‘through what does the sheep perceive 
the hostility? If through a body, hostility is divided, and I should like to 
know what this perception is when it is divided, whether it is a perception 
of a part of the hostility—and how can it have a part?—-or whether every 
part is a perception of the hostility and the hostility is known many times 
as its perception is fixed in every part of the substratum."' And thus this 
problem is a difficulty for their proof and must be solved. 

And if it is said: ‘This is an argument against the intelligibles, but the 
incelligibles cannot be denied,’ and as long as you cannot calt in question 
the premisses that knowledge cannot be divided and that what cannot be 
divided cannot be in a divisible body, you can have no doubt about the 
consequence’—-the answer is: ‘We have only written this book to show the 
incoherence and contradictions in the doctrine of the philosophers, and 
such a contradiction arises oyer this question, since through it either your 
theory about the rational soul is refuted or your theory about the estima- 
tive faculty.’ 

Further we say that this contradiction shaws that they are not conscious 
of the point, which confounds® their syllogism, and it may well be that 
the origin of their confusion lies in their statement that knowledge is 
impressed on a body in the way colour is impressed on a coloured thing, 
the colour being divided with the division of the coloured thing, so that 
knowledge must be divided by the division of its substratum,.? The mistake 
ties in the term ‘impression’, since it may well be that the relation of 
knowledge to its substratum is not like that of colour to the coloured 
object so that it could be regarded as being spread over it, diffused over 
its sides and divisible with it; knowledge might well be related co its 
substratum in another way which would not allow its divisibility although 
its substratum was divisible; yes, its relation to it might be like that of 
perception of the hostility to the body,* and the relations of the attributes 
to their substrata do not ail follow the same pattern and they are not all 
known to us with all their details so that we could rely on our knowledge, 
and to judge such a question without a perfect comprehension of all the 

. 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 339 

details of the relation is an unreliable judgement. In short, we do not deny 
that what the philosophers say gives reasonable and predominant reasons 
for beliel, but we deny that it is known by an evidence which excludes 
error and doubt. And it is in this way that a doubt about it may be raised. 

I say: 

When the premisses which the philosophers use are taken in an 
indefinite way the consequence Ghazali draws is valid. For our 
assertion that every attribute inhering in a body which is divisible is 
divisible through the divisibility of the body can be understood in 
two ways. First it may be meant that the definition of every part of 
this attribute which inheres in the particular body is identical with 
the definition of the whole: for instance the white inhering in the 
white body, for every part of whiteness which inheres in the indivi- 
dua! body has one and the same definition as the whole of whiteness 
in this body.' Sccondly, it may be meant that the attribute is attached 
to the body without a specific shape,? and this attribute again is 
divided through the division of the body not in such a way that the 
intension of the definition of the whole is identical with the intension of 
the definition of every part—for instance, the faculty of sight which 
exists in one whosces—but in such a way that itissubject to a difference 
in intensity according to the greater and lesser receptivity of the sub- 
stratum, and therefore the power of sight is stronger in the healthy 
and the young than in the sick and the old.? What is common to those 
two classes* is that they are composed of individuals, ie. that they are 
divided by quantity and not by quiddity, ic. that either the unique- 
ness of the definition and the quiddity remains or that they are 
annulled.* ‘Those which can be divided quantitatively into any parti- 
cular part arc one by definition and quiddity* and those which cannot 
be divided* into any individual part whatever’ only differ from the 
first class in a degree of intensity, for the action of the part which has 
vanished is not identical with that of the part which remains, since 
the action of the part which has vanished in weak sight does not act 
in the same way as the weak sight.¢ Those two classes have it in 
common that colour also cannot be divided by the division of tts sub- 
stratum into any particular part whatever and keep its definition abso- 
lutely intact, but the division terminates in a particular part in which 
the colour, when it is distributed to it, disappears.? The only thing 
which keeps its distribution always intact is the nature of the con- 
tinuous in so far as it is continuous, i.e, the form of continnity.® 

When this premiss is assumed in this way, namely by holding that 

551 

$52 

wa 

19 

553 

Ww 

340 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

everything which is divisible in either of these two classes has a body 
as its substratum, it is self-evident, and the converse, that every- 
thing which is in a body is divisible according to one of these two 
classes, is evident too; and when this is verified, then the converse 
of its opposite is truc also, namely that what is not divisible according 
to one of these two classes cannot be in a body. If to these premisses 
there is added further what is evident in the case of the universal 
intelligibles, namely that they are not divisible in either of the two 
ways, since they are not individual forms, it is clear that there follows 
from this that neither is the substratum of these intelligibles a body, 
nor is the faculty which has the power to produce them a faculty in 
a body; and it follows that their substratum is a spiritual faculty 
which perceives itself and other things. 

But Ghazali took firse the one of these two classes and denied that 
the universal intelligibles belong to it, and then made his objection 
by means of the second class, which exists in the faculty of sight and 
in the imaginative faculty, and in doing this he committed a sophism; 
but the science of the soul is too profound and too elevated to be 
apprehended by dialectics.' 

Besides, Ghazali has not adduced the argument in the manner in 
which Avicenna brought it out,? for Avicenna built his argument 
only on the following: If the intelligibles inhered in a body, they 
would have to be either in an indivisible part of it, or in a divisible 
part. Then he refuted the possibility of their being in an indivisible 
part of the bedy, and after this refutation he denicd that, if the 
intellect inhered in a body, it could inhere in an indivisible part of it. 
Then he denied that it could inhere in a divisible part of it and so he 
denied that it could inhere in body at all. 

And when Ghazali denied one of these two divisions he said it 
was not impossible that there might be another form of relation be- 
tween the intellect and the bedy than this, but it is quite clear that 
if the intellect is related to the body there can exist only two kinds 
of relation, either to a divisible or to an indivisible substratum. 

This proof can be completed) by saying that the intellect is not 
attached to any animal faculty in the way the form is attached to its 
substratum, for the denial of its being attached to the body implies 
necessarily the denial of its being attached to any animal faculty 
which is attached to the body. For, if the intellect were attached to 
any of the animal faculties, it would as Aristotle says be unable to 
act except through this faculty, but then this faculty would not 

ABOUT FHE NATURAL SCIENCES 341 

perceive the intellect. This is the argument on which Aristotle him- 
self bases his proof that the intellect is separate.' 

We shali now mention the second objection which Ghazali raises 4g , 
against the second proof of the philosophers, but we must first observe“ 
that their proofs, when they are taken out of their context in those 
sciences to which they belong, can have at the most the value of 
dialectical arguments. The only aim of this book of ours is therefore to, 
ascertain the value of the arguments in it which are ascribed to the - 
two parties, and to show to which of the two disputants the terms 
‘incoherence’ and ‘contradiction’ would be applied with greater 
justification. 

Ghazali says: 554 

The second proof is that the philosophers say: 

‘If the knowledge of one single intellectual notion, i.¢c. a notion abstracted 
from matter, were impressed on matter as accidents are impressed on 
bodily substances, their division would necessarily follow the division of 
the body, as has been shown before. And if it is not impressed on matter 
nor spread out over it, and the term ‘impression’ is rejected, let us then use 
another term and say, ‘Is there a relation between knowledge and the 
knower?’ 

Tt is absurd to deny the relation, for if there did not exist a relation, why 
would it be better to know something than not to know it*? And if there is 
a relation, this relation can take place in three ways; either there will be 
a relation to every part of the substratum, or to some parts to the exclusion 
of others, or to no part whatever. Jt is false to say that the notion has no 
relation to any individual part of the substratum; for if there is no relation 49 
to the units, there can be no relation to the aggregate, since a collection of 
disconnected units is not an aggregate, but itself disconnected. It is false 
to say that there might be a relation to some part, for the part that was not 
related would have nothing to do with this notion and therefore would not 
come into the present discussion. And it is false to say that every part of ihe 
substratum might be related to it, for if it were related in all its parts to 
this notion in its totality, then each single part of the substratum would 
possess not a part of the notion but the notion in its totality, and this 
notion would therefore be repeated infinitely in act; on the other hand, 
if every part were related to this notion in a special way, different from the 
relation of another part, then this notion would be divided in its content; 
and we have shown that the content of a notion, one and the same in 
every respect, is indivisible; if the relation, however, of cach part were 
related to another part of the notion, then this notion would clearly be 
divided, and this is impossible.* And from this it is clear that the things 
perceived which are in the five senses are only images of the particular 
divided forms, and that the meaning of perception is the arrival of the 

wa 

3 

555 

uw 

30 

556 

a 

342 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

image of the thing perceived in the soul of the perceiver, so that every 
part of the image of the thing perceived is related to a part of the bodily 
organ. 

And the objection against this is what has been said before. For by 
replacing the term ‘impression’ by ‘relation’ the difticulty is not removed 
which arises over the question what of the hostility of the wolf is impressed 
on the estimative faculty of the sheep, as we have mentioned; for the 
perception is no doubt related to it, and with this relation there must 
occur what you have said, and hostility is not a measurable thing possessing 
a measurable quantity, so that its image could be impressed on a measur- 
able body and its parts related co the parts of that body, and the fact that 
the shape of the wolf is measurable does not remove the difficulty, for the 
shcep perceives something else as well as the shape, namely the adversity, 
opposition, and hostility, and this hostility, added to the shape through the’ 
hostility, has no magnitude, and still the sheep perceives it through a body 
having magnitude; and that is necessarily a difficulty in this proof as well 
as in the first. 

And if someone says: ‘Do you not refute these proofs by asserting that 
knowledge inheres in a spatial indivisible body, namely the atom?’ we 
answer: ‘No, for* the discussion of the atom is connected with geometrical 
questions the solution and discussion of which is long and arduous. 
Further, such a theory would not remove the difficulty, for the power and 
the will ought then also to be in this atorn. For man acts, and this acting 
cannot be imagined without power and will, which would also be in this 
atom, and the power to write resides in the hand and the fingers, but 
knowledge of it does not reside in the hand, for it does not cease when the 
hand is cut off; nor is the will in the hand, for often a man wants to write, 
when his hand has withered and he is not able to do so, not because his 
will has gone, but because his power has.”! 

I say: 

This discussion is not an independent one, but only a complement 
to the first, for in the first discussion it was merely assumed that 
knowledge is not divided by the division of its substratum, and here 
an attempt is made to prove this by making use of a division into 
three categories. And he repeats the same objection, which presented 
itself to htm because he did not carry out the division of matter in the 
two senses in which it can be taken. For when the philosophers denied 
that the intellect could be divided through the division of its sub- 
stratum in the way in which accidents are divided through the divi- 
sion of their substratum, and there exists another way of division in 
body which must be applied to the bodily functions of perception, 
they had a doubt about these faculties. The proof is only completed 
by denying that the intellect can be divided in either of these ways, 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 343 

and by showing that everything which exists in a body is necessarily .. 
divisible in one of them. 

For of those things in the body which are divided in this second 
way, i.e. which are not by definition divisible through the division 
of their substratum" it was sometimes doubted whether they are 
separable from their substratum or not.* For we see it happen that 
most parts of the substratum decay and still this kind of existence, 
i.e. the individual perception, does not decay; and it was thought 
that it might happen that, just as the form does not disappear through 
the disappearance of one or more parts of its substratum, in the same 
way the form might nat disappear when the whole was destroyed, 
and that the decay of the act of the form through its substratum was 
similar to the decay of the act of the artisan through the deteriora- 
tion of his tools, And therefore Aristotle says that if an old man had 
the eye of a young man, he would see as well as the young one, 
Meaning that it is thought chat the decrepitude which occurs to the 
sight of the old man does not happen because of the decay of the 
faculty but because of the decay of the organs.? And he tries to prove 
this by the inactivity of the organ or the greater part of it in sleep, 
fainting, drunkenness, and the illnesses through which the perceptions $57 
of the senses decay, whereas it is quite certain that the faculties are not 
destroyed in these conditions.4 And this is still more evident in those 
animals which live when they are cut in «wo; and most plants have this 
peculiarity, although they do not possess the faculty of perception.’ 

But the discussion of the soul is very obscure, and therefore God 5 
has only given knowledge of it to those who are deeply learned; and 
therefore God, answering the question of the masses about this 
problem, says that this kind of question is not their concern, saying: 
‘They will ask thee of the spirit. Say: “The spirit comes at the bidding 
of my Lord, and ye are given but a little knowledge thereof,” ’*® And 
the comparison of death with slcep in this question is an evident 
proof that the soul survives, since the activity of the soul ceases in 
sleep through the inactivity of its organ, but the existence of the soul 
does not cease, and therefore it is necessary that its condition in death 
should be like its condition in sleep, for the parts follow the same 
rule.” And this is a proof which all can understand and which is 
suitable to be believed by the masses, and will show the learned the 

. way in which the survival of the soul is ascertained, And this is 
evident from the Divine Words: ‘God takes to Himself souls at the 
time of their death; and those who do not dic in their sleep.” 

oO 

o 

558 

to 

559 

19 

344 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Ghazali says: 

The third proof is that they say that, if knowledge resided in a part of 
the body, the knower would be this part to the exclusion of all the other 
parts of man, but it is said of man that it is he who knows, and knowledge 
is an attribute of man in his totality without reference to any specified 
place." But this is nonsense, for he is spoken of as seeing and hearing and 
tasting, and the animals also are described in this way; but this does not 
mean that the perception of the senses is not in the body, it is only a meta- 
phorical expression like the expression that someone is in Baghdad, 
although he is in a part of the whole of Baghdad, not in the whole of 
Baghdad, the reference however being made to the whole. 

I say: 

When ic is conceced that the intellect is not related to one of man’s 
organs—-and this has already been proved, since it is not self-evident 
—it follows that its substratum is not a body, and that our assertion 
that man knows is not analogous to our assertion that he sees.?- For 
since it is self-evident that he sees through a particular organ, it is 
clear that when we refer sight to man absolutely, the expression is 
allowed according to the custom of the Arabs and other people. And 
since there is no particular organ for the intellect, it is clear that, 
when we say of him that he knows, this docs not mean that a part of 
him knows. However, how he knows is not clear by itself, for it does 
not appear that there is an organ or a special place in an organ which 
possesses this special faculty, as is the case with the imaginative 
faculty and the cogitative and memorative faculties, the localization 
of which in parts of the brain is known. 

Ghazali says: 

The fourth proof is that, if knowledge inhered for instance in a part of 
the heart or the brain, then necessarily ignorance, its opposite, might 
reside in another part of the heart or the brain, and it would then be 
possible that a man should both know and not know one and the same 
thing at the same time. And since this is impossible, it is proved that the 
place of ignorance and the place of knowledge are identical, and that this 
place is one single place in which it is impossible to bring opposites 
together. But if this place were divisible, it would not be impossible that 
ignorance should reside in one part of it and knowledge in another, for a 
thing’s being in one place is not contradicted by its opposite’s being in 
another, just as there may be piebaldness in one and the same horse, and 
black and white in a single eye, but in two spots. This, however, daes not 
follow for the senses, as there is no opposite to their perception; but some- 
times they perceive and sometimes not, and there exists between them the 
sole opposition of being and not-being, and we can surely say that some- 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 345 

one perceives through some parts, for instance the eye and the ear, and 
not through the other parts of his body; and there is no contradiction in 
this. And you cannot evade this difficulty by saying that knowing is the 
opposite of not-knowing, and that judgement is something common to 
the whole body; for it is impossible that the judgernent should be in any 
other place but in the place of its cause, and the knower is the place in 
which the knowledge resides; and if the term is applied to the whole, this 
is a metaphor, as when we say that a man is in Baghdad, although he is 
in a part of it, and when we say that a man sees although we know with 
certainty that the judgement of his sight' does not reside in his foot and 
hand but is peculiar to his eye. The judgements are opposed to each other 15 
in the same way as their causes, and the judgements are limited to the 
place where the causes reside, And one cannot evade the difficulty by say- 
ing that the place disposed to receive the knowledge and the ignorance of 
man is one single place in which they can oppose each other, for according 
to you theologians every body which possesses life can receive knowledge 
and ignorance, and no other condition but life is imposed, and all the 
parts of the body are according to you equivalent so far as the reception of 
knowledge is concerned.? 

The objection to this is that it can be turned against you phitosophers in 560 
the matter of desire, longing, and will; these things exist in animals as well 
as in men, and are things impressed on the body, but it is impossible thae 
one should flee from the object one longs for and that repugnance and 
craving in regard to one and the same thing should exist in him together, 
the desire being in one place and the repugnance in another. Still, that 
does not prove that they do not inhere in bodies, for these potencies, 
although they are many and distributed over different organs, have one 
thing that joins them together, namely the soul,? which is common both 5 
to animal and to man; and since this cohesive entity forms a unity, the 
mutually contradictory relations enter into relation with ie in turns. This 
does not prove that the soul is not impressed upon the body, as is quite 
clear in the case of animals. 

T say: 

The only logical consequence of what he says here in the name of 
the philosophers is that knowledge does not inhere in the body in the 
way colour and in general alt accidents do; it does not, however, 
follow that it does not inhere in body at all. For the impossibility that 
the place of knowledge should receive the knowledge and want of 
knowledge of a thing necessarily demonstrates its identity, since 
opposites cannot inhere in one and the same place, and this kind of 
impossibility is common to all attributes, whether perceptive or non- 
perceptive. But what is peculiar to the receptivity of knowledge is 
that it can perceive opposites together; and this can only happen 

° 

$61 

10 

562 

346 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

through an indivisible apprehension in an indivisible substratum, for 
he who judges is of necessity one, and therefore it is said that know- 
ledge of opposites is one and the same,' And this kind of receptivity 
is of necessity proper to the soul alone. What is indeed proved by the 
philosophers is that this is the condition of the common sense when 
it exercises its judgement over the five senses, and this common sense 
is according to the philosophers something bodily.* And therefore 
there is in this argument no proof that the intellect does not inhere 
in a body, for we have already said that there are twa kinds of 
inherence, the mherence of non-perceptive attributes and that of 
perceptive. 

And the objection Ghazali makes here is true, namely that the 
appctitive soul docs not tend to opposites at the same time alchough 
it resides in the body. I do not know of any philosopher who has uscd 
this argument} to establish the survival of the soul, unless he paid no 
attention to the philosophical doctrine* that it is the characteristic 
of every perceptive faculty that in its perception two opposites can- 
not be joined,‘ just as it is the peculiarity of contraries outside the 
soul that they cannot be together in one and the same substratum; 
and this is what the perceptive potencies have in common with the 
non-perceptive. It is proper to the perceptive faculties to judge co- 
existing contrarics, one of them being known through knowledge of 
the other,’ and it is proper to non-psychical patencies to be divided 
through the division of the body so that contraries can be in one 
body at the same time, though not in the same part. And since the 
soul is a substratum that cannot be divided in this way, contraries 
cannot be in it together, i.e. in two parts of the substratum, 

Such arguments are all arguments of people who have not grasped 
the views of the philosophers about this problem. How little does a 
man understand, who gives it as a proof of the soul's survival that it 
does not judge two opposites at the same time, for from this ic follows 
only that the substratum of the soul is one, and not divided in the 
way the substratum of the accidents is divided; and it does not 
follow from the proof that the substratum is not divided in the way 
the substratum of the accidents is divided that the substratum is not 
divided at all. 

Ghazalt says: 

The fifth proof is: If the intellect perecived the intelligibles through a 
bodily organ, it would not know its own self.6 But the consequent is im- 
possible; therefore itknows its own self and the antecedent is impossible, We 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 347 

answer: It is conceded that from the exclusion of the contrary of the conse- 
quent the contrary of the antecedent follows, but only when the consequence 
of the antecedent has been previously established, and we say wedo not con- 
cede the necessity of the consequence; and what is your proof? 

And if it is said that the proof is that, because sight is in the body, sight 
does not attach itself to sight, and the seeing is not seen nor the hearing 
heard, and so on with respect to the other senses; and if the intellect, too, 
could only perceive through body it could not perceive itself, but the 
intellect thinks itself just as ic thinks other things, and ic thinks that it 
thinks itself and that it thinks other things—-we answer; What you assert 
is wrong on two points. The first is that according to us sight could be 
attached to itself, just as one and the same knowledge can be knowledge 
of other things and of itself, only in the usual course of events this does not 
happen; but according to us the interruption of the usual course of events 
is possible. The second, and this is the stronger argument, is for us to say 
that we concede this for the senses; but why, if this is impossible for some 
senses, is it impossible for others, and why is it impossible thac there should 
be a difference in the behaviour of the senses with respect to perception 
although they are all in the body ?—just as sight differs from touch through 
the fact that touch, like taste, can only come to perceive by being in con- 
tact with the object touched, whereas separation from the object is a condi- 
tion of sight, so that when the eyelids cover the eye it does not see the 
colour of the eyelid,? not being at a distance Irom it.? But this diflerence 
does not necessitate that they should differ in their need to be in a body, 
and it is not impossible that there should be among the senses something 
called intellect that differs from the others in that it perceives itself. 

I say; 

The first objection, that the usual course of events might be inter- 
rupted so that sight might see itself, is an argument of the utmost 
sophistry and imposture, and we have discussed it already. As to the 
second objection, that it is not impossible that a bodily perception 
should perccive itself, this hag a certain plausibility, but when the 
motive is known which ted the philosophers to their assertion, then 
the impossibility of this supposition becomes clear, for perception is 
something which exists between the agent and the patient, and it 
consists of the perceiver and the perceived. It is impossible that a 
sense should be in one and the same respect its own agent and 
patient, and the duality of agent and patient in sense arises, as con- 
cerns its act, from the side of the form and, as concerns its passivity, 
from the side of the matter.4 But no composite can think itself, 
because if this were so, its essence would be different from that by 
which it thinks, for it would think only with a part of its essence; and 

563 

5 

190 

5 

$65 

348 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

since intellect and intelligible are identical, ifthe composite thought 
its essetice, the composite would become a simple, and the whole the 
part, and all this is impossible. When this is established here in this 
way, it is only a dialectical proof; but in the proper demonstrative 
order, i.e. preceded by the conclusions which ought to precede it, it 
can become a necessary one. 

Ghazali says: 

The sixth proof is that they say that, if the inte]lect perceived through a 
bodily organ like sight, it would be just as incapable of perceiving its own 
organ as the other senses; but it perceives the brain and the heart and 
what is claimed to be its organ, so that it is proved that it has no organ 
or substratum, for otherwise it would not perceive the brain and the 
heart*.* 

We have the same kind of objection against this as against the preceding 
proof. We say it is not inconceivable that sight should perceive its subject, 
for that it does not perceive it is only what happens in the usual course of 
events. Or* shall we rather say it is not impossible that the senses should 
differ individually in this respect, although it is common to them all to 
be impressed on bodies, as has been said before? And why do you say 
that what exists in a body cannot perceive the body, and how do you 
know its impossibility in all cases, since to make an infinite generaliza- 
tion from a finite number of individual cases has no logical validity? In 
logic it is stated, as an example of an inference inade from one particular 
cause or many particular causes to all causes, that when we say, after 
learning it by induction through observing all the animals, ‘all animals 
move the lower jaw in masticating’, the crocodile has been neglected, 
since it moves the upper.’ The philosophers have only made the induction 
from the five senses, and found this known common feature in them and 
then judged that alt the senses must be like this. But perhaps the intellect 
is another type of sense which stands in regard to the other senses as the 
cracodile stands to the other animals, and in this case there would be 
some senses which could perceive their substratum although they were 
corporeal and divisible, and other senses which could not do this; just as 
the senses can be divided into those which perceive the thing perceived 
without contact, like sight, and those which cannot perceive without con- 
tact, like taste and touch. Although, therefore, what the philosophers affirm 
creates a certain presumption, it does not afford reliable evidence. 

But it may be said by the philosophers:+ We do not merely point to the 
enumeration of the senses but lay stress on a prool, and say that if the 
heart or the brain were the soul of man, he could never be unaware 
of them, and never for a moment not think of chem, just as he is never 
unconscious of himself; for nobody’s self is ever unaware of itself, but it is 
always affirming itself in its soul, but as long as man has not heard any one 
speaking about the heart and the brain or has not observed them through 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES $49 

the dissection of another man, he does not perceive them and does not 5 
believe in their existence. But if the intellect inhered in the body, it would 
necessarily either think or not think of this body continually; neither the 
one nor the other is the case, but it sometimes thinks of its body* and some- 
times does not*. This can be proved by the fact that the perception which 
inheres in the substratum perceives that substratum either because of a 
relation between itself and the substratum—and one cannot imagine 
another relation between them than that of inherence-——and then the per- 
ception must perceive its substratum continually, or this relation will not 
suffice; and in this case the perception can never perceive its substratum, 
since there can neyer occur another relation between them; just as because 
of the fact that it thinks itself, it thinks itself always and is not sometimes 
aware, sometimes unaware of itself. to 

But we answer: As long as a man is conscious of himself and aware of 
his soul, he is also aware of his body; indeed, the name, form, and shape 
of the heart are not well defined for him, but he regards his soul and self 
as a body to such an extent that he regards even his clothes and his house 
as belonging to his self,’ but the soul or the self which the philosophers 
mention has no relation to the house or the clothes, This primary attribu- 
tion of the soul to the body is necessary for man, and his unconsciousness 
of the form and name of his soul is like his unconsciousness of the seat of 
smell, which is two excrescences in the foremost part of the brain resem 
bling the nipples of the breast;? still, everyone knows that he perceives smell 
with his body, but he does not represent the shape of the seat of this per- 15 
ception, nor does he define this seat, although he perceives that it is nearer 
to his head than to his heels, and, in relation to the whole of his head, 
nearer to the inside of his nose than to the inside of his ear, Man knows his 
soul in the sarne way, and he knows that the essence through which the 
soul exists is nearer ¢o his heart and breast than to his foot, and he supposes 
that his soul will persist when he loses his foot, but he does not regard it as 
possible that his soul should persist when his heart is taken away. But 
what the philosophers say about his being sometimes aware of his body*, 
sometimes not", is not true. 

IT say: 

As to his objection against the assertion that a body or a bodily 
faculty cannot know itself, because the senses are perceptive faculties 
in bedies and do not know themselves, this assertion indeed is based 
on induction, and induction does not provide absolute evidence. As 
to Ghazali’s comparison of this to the induction which establishes 566 
that all animals move their lower jaw, this comparison is only valid 
in part. For the induction that afl animals move their lower jaw is 
an imperfect one, because not all animals have been enumerated; 
whereas the man who assumes that no sense perceives itself has 

35° TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

5 certainly made a complete induction, for there are no other senses than 
the five." But the judgement based on the observation of the senses 
that no perceptive faculty is in a body resembles the induction by 
which it is judged that all animals move their lower jaw; for, just as 

to in the latter case not all the animals, in the former not all the percep- 

tive faculties are enumerated? 

As to his saying in the name of the philosophers that if the intellect 
were in the body, it would, when it perceives, perceive the body in 
which it is, this is a silly and inane assertion which is not made by 
the philosophers. It would only follow if everyone who perceived a 
thing had to perceive it together with its definition; but that is not 
80, for we perceive the soul and many other things without perceiv- 
ing their definition. If, indeed, we perceived the definition of the soul 
together with its existence, we should of necessity know through its 
definition*® that it was in the body or that it was incorporeal; for, if 

§67 it were in the body, the body would be necessarily included in its 
definition, and if it were not in the body, the body would not be 
included in the definition. And this is what one must believe about 
this problem. 

As for Ghazali’s objection, that a man knows of his soul that it is 
in his body although he cannot specify in which part—this indeed is 
true, for the ancients had different opinions about its seat, but our 
knowledge that the soul is in the body does not mean that we know 
that it receives its existence through being in the body; this is not 
self-evident, and is a question about which the philosophers ancient 
as well as modern differ, for if the body serves as an instrument for 
the soul, the soul does not receive its existence through the body; but 
if the body is like a substratum for its accident, then the soul can 
only exist through the body. 

Ghazali says: 

10 The seventh proof. The philosophers say that the faculties which per- 
ceive through the bodily organs become tired through the long-continued 
performance of the act of perception, since the continuation of their action 
destroys the mixture of their elements and tires them, and in the same way 
excessive stimutation of the perceptive faculties makes them weak and 
often even corrupts them, so that afterwards they are not able to perceive 
something lighter and more delicate; so for instance a loud voice and a 
strong light hinder or corrupt the perception of a low voice and delicate 
objects of sight afterwards; and in fact the man who tastes something 
extremely sweet does not afterwards taste something less sweet, But the 

§68 intellectual faculty behaves in the opposite way; a long observation of 

e 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 351 

intelligibles does not tire it, and the perception of important necessary 
truths gives it strength for the perception of easy observations and does 
not weaken it, and if sometimes tiredness may befall it, this happens 
because it makes use of and gets assistance from the imaginative faculty, 
so that the organ of the imaginative faculcy becomes weary and no longer 
serves the intellect,! 

Our objection to this follows the same line as before, and we say that 
it may well be that the bodily senses differ in this; and what is true for $ 
some of them need not be true for others—yes, it may be that the bodies 
themselves may differ and that some of them may grow weak through a 
certain type of movement, whereas others may grow strong through a 
certain type of movement, not weak, and that when this type of movement 
has made an impression on them, it causes a renewal of strength in them so 
that they do not perceive any new impression made on them. And all this 
is possible, since a judgement valid for some is not valid for all, 

I say: 

This is an old proof of the phitosophers, and it amounts to this: 
that when the intellect perceives a strong intelligible and afterwards 10 
turns to the perception of a slighter, it perceives it more easily, and 
this shows that it does not perceive through the body, since we find 
that the bodily perceptive faculties are impressed by strong sensations 
in a way which lessens their power of perception, so that after strong 
sensations they cannot perceive things of slight intensity. The reason 
is that through every form which inheres in a body the body receives 
an impression, because this form is necessarily mixed* with it; for 
otherwise this form would not be a form in a body. Now since the 
philosophers found that the receptacle of the intelligibles was not 
impressed by the intelligibles, they decided that this receptacle was 
not a body. 

And against this there is no objection, For every substratum which 
is impressed congruously or incongruously by the inherence of the 
form in it, be it little or much, is necessarily corporeal, and the 
reverse is also true, namely that everything corporeal is impressed 569 
by the form which is realized in it, and the magnitude of the impres- 
sion depends on the magnitude of the mixing of the form and the 
body. And the cause of this is that every becoming is the consequence 
of a change, and if a form could inhere in a body without a change 
it might happen that, there could be a form whose realization did 
not impress its substratum. 5 

Ghazali says: 

The eighth proof is that the philosophers say: ‘All the faculties of parts 

15 

570 

10 

352 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

of the body become weaker, when they have reached the end of their 
growth at forty years and later; so sight and hearing and the other faculties 
become weaker, but the intellectual faculty becomes strong in most cases 
only after this age.! And the loss of insight in the intelligibles, through ill- 
néss in the body and through dotage in old age, does not argue against 
this, for as long as it is proved that at certain times the intellect is strong 
notwithstanding the weakness of the body, it is clear that it exists by itself, 
and its decline at the time of the declining of the body does not imply that 
it exists through the body, for from a negative consequent alternating 
with a positive consequent there is no inference.* For we say that, if the 
inteliectual faculty exists through the body, then the weakness of the body 
will weaken it at all times, but the consequent is false and therefore the 
antecedent is false; but, when we say the consequent is true, sometimes it 
does not follow that the antecedent is true. Further, the cause of this is 
that the soul has an activity through itself, when nothing hinders it and 
it is not preoccupied with something. For the soul has two kinds of action, 
one in relation to the body, namely to govern and rule it, and one in 
relation to its principles and essence, and this is to perceive the intelligibles, 
and these two kinds of action hinder each other and are opposed to each 
other, and when it is occupied with the one action, it tums away from the 
other and it cannot combine both. And its occupations through the body 
are sense-perception and imagination and the passions, anger, fear, grief, 
and pain, but when it sets out to think the intelligible it neglects all these 
other things. Yes, sense-perception by itself sometimes hinders the appre- 
hension and contemplation of the intellect without the occurrence of any 
damage to the organ of the intellect or to the intellect itself, and the reason 
for this js that the soul is prevented from one action through being occupied 
with another, and therefore during pain, disease, and fear—for this also 
is a disease of the brain*—intelleceuat speculation leaves off. And why 
should it be impossible that through this difference in these two kinds of 
action in the soul they should hinder each other, since even two acts of 
the same kind may impede each other, for fear is stunned by pain and 
desire by anger and the observation of one intelligible by that of another? 
And a sign that the illness which enters the body does not occur in the 
substratum of the sciences is that, when the sick man recovers, he does 
not need to learn the sciences anew, but the disposition of his soul becomes 
the same as it was before, and those sciences come back to him exactly as 
they were without any new learning. 

The objection is that we say that there may be innumerable causes for 
the increase and the decrease of the faculties, for some of the faculties 
increase in power at the beginning of life, some in middle life, some at the 
end, and the same is the case with the intellect and only a topical proof 
can be claimed. And it is not impossible that smell and sight should differ 
in this, that smell becomes stronger after forty years and sight weaker, 
although they both inhere in the body, just as those faculties differ in 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 953 

animals; for in some animals smell is stronger, in others hearing and sight 
because of the difference in their temperaments, and it is not possible to 
ascertain these facts absolutely. Nor is it impossible that the temperament 
of the organs also should differ with individual persons and conditions, 
One of the reasons why the decay of sight is earlier than the decay of the 
intellect is that sight is earlier, for a man sees when he is first created, 
whereas his intellect is not mature before fifteen years or more,? according 
to the different opinions we find people to have about this problem; and 
it is even said that greyness comes earlier to the hair on the head than to 
that on the beard, because the hair on the head grows earlier. If one goes 
deeper into these causes and does not simply refer them to the usual course 
of nature, one cannot base any sure knowledge thereon, because the 
possibilities for certain faculties to become stronger and others weaker are 
unlimited, and nothing evident results from this. 

I say: 

When it is assumed that the substratum of the perceptive faculties 
is the natural heat, and that natural heat suffers diminution after 
forty years, then intellect must behave in the same way in this 
respect; that is, ifits substratum is natural heat,? then it is necessary 
that the intellect should become old as the natural heat becomes old. 
If, however, it is thought that the substrata for the intellect and the 
senses are different, then it is net necessary that both should be 
similar in their lifetimes. 

Ghazali says: 

The ninth proof is that the philosophers say: How can man be attri- 
buted to body with its accidents, for those bodies are continually in dissolu- 
tion, and nutrition replaces what is dissolved, so that when we see a child 
after its separation from its mother’s womb fall ill a few times and become 
thin and then fat again and grow up, we may safely say that after forty 
years no particle remains of what was there when his mother was delivered 
of it. Indeed, the child began its existence out of the parts of the sperm 
alone, but nothing of the particles of the sperm remains in it; no, all this is 
dissolved and has changed into something else, and then this body has 
become another? Still we say that the identical man remains and his 
notions remain with him from the beginning of his youth, although all 
the bodily parts have changed. And this shows that the soul has an exis- 
tence outside the body and that the body is its organ.* 

The objection is that this is contradicted by what happens to animals 
and plants, for when the condition of their being small is compared to the 
condition of their being big, their identity is asserted equally with the 
identity of man; still, it does not prove that they have an incorporeal 
existence.* And what is said about knowledge is refuted by the retention of 

571 

° 

10 

a 

$54 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

imaginative forms, for they remain in the boy from youth to old age, 
although the particles of his brain change. 

T say; 

None of the ancient philosophers used this proof for the survival 
of the soul; they only used it to show that in individuals there is 
an essence which remains from birth to death and that things are 
not in an eternal flux, as was believed by many ancients who denied 

» necessary knowledge, so that Plato was forced to introduce the forms. 

There is no sense in occupying ourselves with this, and the objection 
of Ghazali against this proof is valid. 
Ghazali says: 

The tenth proof is that they say that the intellectual faculey perceives 
the general intellectual unjversals which the theologians call modes, 
so that man in general is apprehended (whereas the senses perceive the 
individuality of a definite man), and this universal differs from the man 
who is perceived by the senses, for what is perceived by the senses is im a 
particular place, and his colour, size, and position are particular, but the 
intelligible absolute man is abstracted from alt these things; however, in 
him there is everything to which the term ‘man’ is applied, although he 
has not the colour, size, position, or place, of the man perceived by the 
senses, and even a man who may exist in the future is subsumed under 
him; indeed, if man disappeared there would remain this reality of man 
in the intellect, in abstraction from all these particular things, 

And in this way, from everything perceived by the senses as an indavi- 
dual, there results for the intellect a reality, universal and abstracted from 
matters and from positions, so that its attributes can be divided into.what 
is essential (as, for example, corporeity for plants and animals, and animality 
for man) and into what is accidental (like whiteness and length for man), 
and this reality is judged as being essential or accidental for the genus of 
man and plantand of everything not apprehended asan individual perceived 
by the senses, and so it is shown that the universal, in abstraction from 
sensible attachments, is intelligible and invariable in the mind of man, 

This intelligible universal cannot be pointed at,’ nor has it a position or 
size, and in its abstraction from position and matter it is either related to 
its object (which is impossible, for its object has position and place and 
size) or to its subject (which is the rational soul), and therefore the soul 
cannot have a position or be pointed at or have a size, for if it had all these 
things what inheres in it would also possess them.* 

And the objection is that the idea of a universal which you philosophers 
assume as ¢xisting in the intellect is not accepted by us.? According to us 
nothing inheres in the intellect but what inheres in the senses, only it 
inheres in the senses as an aggregate which they cannot separate, 
whereas the intellect is able to do so. Further, when it is separated, the 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 355 

single part separated from its attachments is just as much an individual in 
the intellect as the aggregate with its attachments, only this invariable 
part? in the mind is related te the thing thought of? and to similar things 
by one single relation, and in this way it is said to be a universal. For there 
is in the intellect the form? of the individual thing thoughe of which is 
first perceived by the senses, and the relation of this form to all the indi- 
yiduals of this genus which the senses perceive is one and the same. If, 
after seeing one man, someone sees another, no new form occurs to him, 
as happens when he sees a horse after seeing a man, for then two different 
forms occur in him. A similar thing happens to the senses themselves, for 
when a man sees water, one form occurs in his imagination, and if he sees 
blood afterwards, another form occurs, but if he sees another water, no 
other form occurs, but the form of the water which is impressed on his 
imagination is an image for all individual stretches of water, and for this 
reason it is often thought to be a universal. 

And in the same way, when for instance he sees a hand, there occurs in 
his imagination and in his intellect the natural position of its parts, namely 
the surface of the hand and the division of the fingers in it and the ending 
of the fingers in the nails, and besides this there occur to him the smallness 
or bigness of the hand and its colour, and if he sees another hand which 
resembles the first in everything, no other new form occurs to him; no, 
this second observation, when a new thing occurs, does not produce an 
impression on his imagination, just as, when he sees the water after having 
previously seen it in one and the same vessel and in che same quantity, 
ho new impression is produced. And he may see another hand, different 
in colour and size, and then there occurs te him another colour and 
another size, but there does not happen to him a new form of hand, for 
the small black hand has in common with the big white hand the position 
of its parts, differing from it in colour, and of that in which the second 
hand agrees with the first no new form is produced, since both forms are 
identical, but the form of the things in which they differ is renewed, And 
this is the meaning of the universal both in sensation and in intellect, for 
when the intellect apprehends the [orm of the body of an animal, then 
it does not acquire 2 new form of corporeity from a plant, just a3 in 
imagination the form of two stretches of water perceived at two different 
times need not be renewed; and the sare happens with all things that 
have something in common. 

But this does not permit one to assert the existence of a universal which 
has no position whatever, although the intellect can judge that there exists 
something that cannot be pointed at and has no spatial position; for 
instance, it can assert the existence of the creator of the universe, with the 
understanding, however, that such a creator cannot be imagined to exist 
in matter, and in this kind of reality the abstraction from matter is in the 
intelligible itself and is not caused by the intellect and by thinking.* But 

as to the forms acquired from material things, this happens in the way we 
have mentioned, 

573 

574 

575 

:. $76 

356 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

T say: ohne 

The meaning of the philosophical theory he relates is that the 
intellect apprehends, in relation to the individuals which have a 
common species, a single entity, in which they participate and which 
is the quiddity of this species without this entity’s being divided into 
the things in which the individuals gua individuals are divided, like 
space and position and the matters through which they receive their 
plurality. This entity must be ingenerable and incorruptible’ and is 
not destroyed by the disappearance of one of the individuals in which 
it exists, and the sciences therefore are eternal and not corruptible 
except by accident, that is to say by their connexion with Zaid and 
Amr; that is, only through this connexion are they corruptible, and 
not in themselves, since if they were transitory in themselves this 
connexion would exist in their essence and they could not constitute 
an identity,? And the philosophers say that, if this is established for 
the intellect and the intellect is in the soul, it is necessary that the 
soul should not be divisible in the way in which individuals are divi- 
stble, and that the soul in Amr and in Zaid should be one single 
entity.’ And this proof is strong in the case of the intellect, because 
in the intellect there is no individuality whatever; the soul, however, 
although it is free from the matters* through which the individuals 
receive their plurality, is said by the most famous philosophers not to 
abandon the nature of the individual, although it is an apprehending 
entity.* This is a point which has to be considered. 

As for Ghazali’s objection, it amounts to saying that the intellect 
is something individual and that universality is an accident of it, and 
therefore Ghazali compares the way in which the intellect observes 
a common feature in individuals to the way in which the senses 
perceive the same thing many times, since for Ghazali the intelligible 
is a unity, but not something universal, and for him the animality of 
Zaid is numerically identical with the animality which he observes 
in Khalid.’ And this is false, and if it were true, there would be no 
difference between sense-perception and the apprehension of the 
intellect. 

The Third Discussion 

And after this Ghazali says that the philosophers have two proofs 
to demonstrate that the soul after once existing cannot perish.® The 
first is that if the soul perished this could only be imagined in one of 
these three ways: either (1) it perishes simultaneously with the body, 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 357 

or (2) through an opposite which is found in it, or (3) through the 
power of God, the powerful. It is false that it can perish through the 
corruption of the body, for it is separated from the body. It is false 5 
that it can have an opposite, for a separate substance has no oppo- 
site.' And it is false, as has been shown before, that the power of God 
can attach itself to non-being.? 

Now, Ghazali objecting to the philosophers answers: ‘We theolo- 
gians do not admit that the soul is external to the body; besides, it 
is the special theory of Avicenna that the souls are numerically 
differentiated through the differentiation of the bodies, for that there 
should be one single soul in every respect and in all people brings 
about many impossibilities, for instance that when Zaid knows somes 
thing Amr should know it too, and when Amr does not know some- 
thing Zaid should not know it either; and many other impossibilities 577 
follow from this assumption.”? And Ghazali adduces against Avicenna 
the argument that when it is assumed that the souls are numerically 
differentiated through the differentiation of the bodies, then they 
are attached to the bodies and must necessarily perish with their 
decay. 

The philosophers, however, can answer that it is by no means 
necessary that, when there exists between two things a relation of 
attachment and love, for instance the relation between the lover and 5 
the beloved and the relation between iron and the magnet, the 
destruction of the one should cause the destruction of the other. But 
Avicenna’s opponents may ask his partisans through what the indi- 
viduation and numerica] plurality of souls takes place, when they 
are separated from their matters, for the numerical plurality of 
individuals arises only through matter. He who claims the survival 
and the numerical plurality of souls should say that they are in a 
subtle matter, namely the animal warmth which emanates from the 
heavenly bodies, and this is a warmth which is not fire and in which to 
there is not a principle of fire; in this warmth there are the souls 
which create the sublunary bodies and thase which inhere in these 
bodies.* And none of the philosophers is opposed to the theory that 
in the elements there is heavenly warmth and that this is the sub- 
stratum for the potencies which produce animals and plants, but 
some of the philosophers call this potency a natural heavenly potency, 
whereas Galen calls it the forming power and sometimes the demi- 
urge, saying that it seems that there exists a wise maker of the living 
being who has created it and that this is apparent from anatomy, but 578 

a 

$19 

358 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

where this maker is and what His substance is is too lofty a problem 
for human understanding.' From this Plato proves that the soul is 
separated from the body, for the soul creates and forms the body, and 
if the body were the condition for the existence of the soul, the soul 
would not have created it or formed it.? This creative soul is most 
apparent in the animals which do not procreate, but it is also evident 
in the animals which do. And just as we know that the soul is some- 
thing added to the natural warmth, since it is not of the nature of 
warmth gua warmth to produce well-ordered intelligible acts, so 
we know that the warmth which is in the seeds does not suffice to 
create and to form. And the philosophers do not disagree abouc the 
fact that there are in the elements souls creating each species of ani- 
mals, plants, and minerals that exists, and that each of them needs 
a directing principle and preserving powers forit to come into existence 
and remain. And these souls are either like intermediaries between the 
souls of the heavenly bodies and the souls in the sensible bodies of the 
sublunary world, and then no doubt they have absolute dominion over 
these latter souls and these bodies, and from here arises the belief in 
the Jinn,? or these souls themselves are attached to the bodies which 
they create according to a resemblance which exists between them, 
and when the bodies decay they return to their spiritual matter and 
to the subtle imperceptible bodies. 

And there are none of the old philosophers who do not acknow- 
ledge these souls, and they only disagree as to whether they are 
identica) with the souls in our bodies or of another kind. And as to 
those who accept a bestower of forms,* they regard these powers as 
a separate intellect; but this theory is not found in any of the old 
philosophers, but only in some philosophers of Istam, because it 
belongs to their principles that the separate principles do not change 
their matters by transformation in respect of substance and primarily, 
for the cause of change is the opposite of the thing changed.’ This 
question is one of the most difficult in philosophy, and the bese 
explanation that can be given of this problem is that the material 
intellect thinks an infinite number of things in one single intelligible, 
and that it judges these things in a universal judgement, and that 
that which forms its essence is absolutely immaterial. Therefore 
Aristotle praises Anaxagoras’ for having made intellect, namely an 
immaterial form, the prime mover, and for this reason it docs not 
suffer any action from anything, for the cause of passivity is matter 
and in this respect the passive potencies are in the same position as 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 359 

the active, for it is the passive potencies possessing matters which 
accept definite things. 

The Fourth Discusston 

Having finished this question Ghazali begins to say that the 
philosophers deny bodity resurrection.' This is a problem which is 
not found in any of the older philosophers, although resurrection has 
been mentioned in different religions for at least a thousand years 
and the philosophers whose theories have come to us are of a more 
recent date. The first to mention bedily resurrection were the pro- 
phets of Israel after Moses, as is evident from the Psalms and many 
books attributed to the Israelites.* Bodily resurrection is also affirmed 
in the New Testament and attributed by tradition to Jesus. It is a 
theory of the Sabaeans, whose religion is according to [bn Hazm the 
oldest. 

But the philosophers in particular, as is only natural, regard this 
doctrine as most important and believe in it most, and the reason is 
that it is conducive to an order amongst men on which man’s being, 
as man, depends and through which he can attain the greatest 
happiness proper to him,‘ [or it is a necessity for the existence of the 
moral and speculative virtues’ and of the practical sciences in men, 
They hold namely that man cannot live in this world without the 
practical sciences, nor in this and the next world without the specula- 
tive virtues, and that neither of these categories is perfected or com- 
pleted without the practical virtues, and that the practical virtues 
can only become strong through the knowledge and adoration of 
God by the services prescribed by the laws of the different retigions, 
like oiferings and prayers and supplications and other such utter- 
ances by which praise is rendered to God, the angels, and the 
prophets. 

Inshort, the philosophers believe that religious laws are necessary 
political arts, the principles of which are taken from natural reason 
and inspiration,’ especially in what is common to all religions, al- 
though religions differ here more or less. The philosophers further 
hold that one must not object cither through a positive or through a 
negative statement to any of the general religious principles, for 
instance whether it is obligatory to serve God or not, and still more 
whether God does or does not exist, and they affirm this also con- 
cerning the other religious principles, for instance bliss in the beyond 

580 

$61 

582 

ee ee 
5 . 

to 

583 

wn 

19 

360 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and its possibility; for all religions agree in the acceptance of another 
existence after death, although they differ in the description of this 
existence, just as they agree about the knowledge, attributes, and 
acts of God, although they differ more or less in their utterances 
about the essence and the acts of the Principle. Ail religions agree 
also about the acts conducive to bliss in the next world, although 
they differ about the determination of these acts. 

In short, the religions are, according to the philosophers, obliga- 
tory,! since they lead towards wisdom in a way universal to all 
human beings, for philosophy only Jeads a certain number of intelli- 
gent people to the knowledge of happiness, and they therefore have 
to learn wisdom, whereas religions seek the instruction of the masses 
generally. Notwithstanding this, we do not find any religion which 
is not attentive to the special needs of the learned, although it is 
primarily concerned wich the things in which the masses participate. 
And since the existence of the learned class is only perfected and its 
full happiness attained by participation with the class of the masses,” 
the general doctrine is also obligatory for the existence and life of 
this special class, both at the time of their youth and growth (and 
nobody doubts this), and when they pass on to attain the excellence 
which is their distinguishing characteristic. Fér it belongs to the 
necessary excellence of a man of learning that he should not despise 
the doctrines in which he has been brought up, and that he should 
explain them in the fairest way, and that he should understand that 
the aim of these doctrines lies in their universal character, not in 
their particularity, and that, if he expresses a doubt concerning the 
religious principles in which he has been brought up, or explains 
ther in 4 way contradictory to the prophets and turns away from their 
path, he merits more than anyone clse that the term unbeliever 
should be applied to him, and he is liable to the penalty for unbelief 
in the religion in which he has been brought up. 

Further, he is under obligation to choose the best religion of his 
period, even when they are all equally true for him, and he must 
believe that the best will be abrogated by the introduction of a still 
better. Therefore the learned who were instructing the people in 
Alexandria became Muhammedans when Islam reached them, and 
the learned in the Roman Empire became Christians when the 
religion of Jesus was introduced there. And nobody doubts that 
among the Israelites there were many learned men, and this is 
apparent from the books which are found amongst the Israelites and 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 361 

which are attributed to Solomon, And never has wisdom ceased 
among the inspired, i.e. the prophets, and therefore it is the truest 
of all sayings that every prophet is a sage,’ but not every sage a 
prophet; the learned, however, are those of whom it is said that 
they are the heirs of the prophets.” 

And since in the principles of the demonstrative sciences there are 
postulates and axioms which are assumed, this must still more be the 
case for the religions which take their origin in inspiration and 
reason. Every religion exists through inspiration and is blended with 
reason. And he who holds that it is possible that there should exist 
a natural religion based on reason alone must admit that this religion 
must be less perfect than those which spring from reason and inspira- 
tion. And all philosophers agree that the principles of action must 
be taken on authority, for there is no demonstration for the necessity 
of action except through the existence of virtues which are realized 
through morak actions and through practice. 

And it is clear from this that al! the learned hold about religions 
the opinion that the principles of the actions and regulations pre- 
scribed in every religion are received from the prophets and law- 
givers, who regard those necessary principles as praiseworthy which 
most incite the masses to the performance of virtuous acts; and so 
nobody doubts that those who are brought up on those principles 
are of a more perfect virtue than those who are brought up on others, 
for instance that the prayers in our religion hold men back from 
ignominy and wickedness, as God’s word certifies, and that the 
prayer ordained in our religion fulfils this purpose more truly than 
the prayers ordained in others, and this by the conditions imposed on 
it of number, time, recitation, purity, and desistance from acts and 
words harmful to it. And the same may be said of the doctrine of the 
beyond in our religion, which is more conducive to virtuous actions 
than what is said in others. Thus to represent the beyond in material 
images is more appropriate than purely spiritual representation, as 
is said in the Divine Words: ‘The likeness of the Paradise which those 
who fear God are promised, beneath it rivers fow.’3 And the Prophet 
has said: ‘In it there is what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor 
ever entered the mind of man.’* And Ibn Abbas said: ‘There is no 
relation in the other world to this world but the names.’ And he 
meant by this that the beyond is another creation of a higher order 
than this world, and another phase superior to our earthly. He need 
not deny this who believes that we see one single thing developing 

534 

o 

585 

19 

586 

10 

587 

ta 

362 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

itself from one phase to another, for instance the transformation of 
the inorganic into beings conscious of their own essences, i.e. the 
intellectual forms. Those who are in doubt about this and object to 
it and try to explain it are those who seek to destroy the religious 
prescriptions and to undo the virtues. They are, as everyone knows, 
the heretics and those who believe that the end of man consists only 
in sensual enjoyment. When such people have really the power to 
destroy religious belief both theologians and philosophers will no 
doubt kill them, but when they have no actual power the best argu- 
ments that can be brought against them are those that are contained 
in the Holy Book. What Ghazali says against them is right, and in 
refuting them it must be admitted that the soul is immortal, as is 
proved by rational and religious proofs, and it must be assumed that 
what arises from the dead is simulacra! of these earthly bodies, not 
these bodies themselves, for that which has perished does not return 
individually and a thing can only return as an image of that which 
has perished, not as a being identical with what has perished, as 
Ghazali declares, Therefore the doctrine of resurrection of those 
theologians who believe that the soul is an accident and that the 
bodies which arise are identical with those that perished cannot be 
truce. For what perished and became anew can only be specifically, 
not numerically, one, and this argument is especially valid against 
those theologians who hold that an accident does not last two 
moments, 

Ghazali accused the philosophers of heresy on three points. One 
concerns this question, and we have already shown what opinion the 
philosophers hold about this, and that according to them it is a 
speculative problem. ‘The second point is the theory attributed to the 
philosophers that God does not know individuals, but here again we 
have shown that they do not say this, The third point is their theory 
of the eternity of the world, but again we have shown that what they 
understand by this term has not the meaning for which they are 
accused of heresy by the theologians. Ghazali asserts in this book that 
no Muslim believes in a purely spiritual resurrection, and in another 
book he says that the Sufis hold it.2 According to this latter assertion 
those who believe in a spiritual but not in a perceptible resurrection 
are not declared heretics by universal consent,? and this permits 
belief in a spiritual resurrection. But again in another book he 
repeats his accusation of heresy as if it rested on universal consent.4 
And alt this, as you see, is confusing. And no doubt this man erred in 

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES 363 

religious questions as he erred in rational problems. God is the 
succourer for the finding of what is true, and He invests with the 
truth whomever He chooses. 

I have decided to break off my inquiry about these things here, 
and I ask pardon for their discussion, and if it were not an obligation 
to seek the truth for those who are entitled to it—and those are, as 
Galen says, one in a thousand'—and to prevent from discussion 
those who have no claim to it, I would not have treated all this. And 
God knows every single letter, and perhaps God will accept my 
excuse and forgive my stumbling in His bounty, generosity, munifi- 
cence and excellence—there is no God but He! 

588 

APPENDIX 

Page Bouyges’s text My readings 
4.3 oS dnl 
4.6 - ate Lee Uae 
11.5 | dp el 
13-9 0g SS oy SS 
14. 12 e wale’ se 
16. 8 ; ewes ote 
18. 12 candy he candy 
18. 13 as 4 Ag Yl as7 
aig AD ayy 
22. 13, 14 ele 4S ye 
25:5 Need oot 
= on cs 
26. 10 wer en 
28. 10 4,55 4K 
gt. at oe oe 
32. 14 ey os sep 
33. 4 oa oda 
33. 12 de by Sl B) 
33-13 els le Vl 
34-2 lege ade 
37-13 Ae yenoe| Syste | 
39. 8 oy ¥ oly 
40. 10 ~ ot 
40.11 reac ‘xed 

§0. 15 » Wi Ls 

89. 7 
93- 7 (95. 6) 
93-7 (95: 6) 

10t, 4 

Lil. bg 

132.7 

113. 14 

114.3 

114. 4 

115. 49 

116, 2 

TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Bouyges’s text 

wligll 
an} YI 
Aaladt 
Dyer bd 

ee 

My readings 

ote! 
We! 45391 

agny. 
shee! Gf slLesiYi 

APPENDIX 367 

Page Bouyges's text My readings 
129. 7 oMhoast eet 
130, 8 BtSe ay 
Igl. 14 uf Lt 
131. 15 ul ul 
193. 2 Lede Lipdhas 
194.5 pod poad 
135 stostybl fore Seal yen bres 
140. 11 pl eel SST 
140. 14 Hay astay 
142. 7 ro ' Nady 
150. 10 crt patu 6 oF bainn 
154. 12 wb; ple 
159. 2 ure L 

163 (5th line . 
from below) ud ou 
weighiee] a of 
166. 2 dpnyell dag 
166. 4 Spngell age Aesell yo 9m 
167.5 oy ol 
169. 6 bya ahi 
169. 6 ad gles bg gla 
169, 11 1> gm ge Synge 
171.9 aby be se AB y+ 50 
176. 2 Lidaell ols Laie jl 
178. 2 J) aj 
191, 2 Ab et, As 

194. 13 tho Ty 

368 

Page Bouyges’s text 
196. 7 pie 
196. 8 Faerel yore) 
00.13 | ASI nat phan) set 
reenet| 
200.15 | agngll arm ose lobeil 
209, 10 dle fe 
212, 1 ¢! rei 
214.6 ere) 
214. 15 lg 
225. 16 alas 
228.1 als 
228, 4 st 
229. 8 Nd gm g09 
233. 7 gal 
235-15 poe 
237. 2 end OF OU 
237.2 ps 
237.2 ay pend 
238. 7 ends 
238. 9 ya 
242.1 ees 
243. 16 ook 
245. 10 sii 
245. 10 oH \ i 

TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

My readings 
ne 
Oma) los > $m, sa) 

I omit these words which I 
regard as a gloss. 

I omit these words which 
seem superfluous, 

re dle J fe 
dase! pln VI 

choral aymss 

Lu 

Ge nae oss 

AVS oy 

Osh 

logge 

dal 

pe 9 

OY Sher s45 ane OF OY 
OE Oly pyladt ne pplell 
Oho 

. end 

TSW Aine yd 

Ly is™ 

Aas” 

yemaie)l 

cnhill 

ogi 

grolyi 

APPENDIX 369 

Page Bouyges’s text My readings 
_ 247.9 yl J de 5,251 
249. 3 Vly will SYIy ll 
© 250. 14 eS gS ee LS” Os te 
252.7 , ere any 
253-15 a dl p3) al 
258. 10 . gly Oss 
266. 8 aaa! GW OW 
271. 12 ons wc | 
273-3 ross pls 
280, 12 es ee pre 
283. 1 LiLwat barlesn! 
288. 6 Qe al 
289. 3 aL thay 
294. 3 4 Ys aw 
204. 12 AS garers Lge gored 
295: 3 ol, th 
296. 9 idee fool Ys sol. Va 
298.1 een) ome 
306, 15 aglad aS lay 
go8, 11 Jas Ou 
308, 18 plan] ole aa prod! tae eos 
311.6 2d Jag 
315-1 Latys als st 
315. 4 pall etl 
317-9 lgube ade 
328. 3 OYs ols 
929. 6 sts ad 

370 

TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Page 

333+ 4 
331+ 17 
335. 12 
339-1 
359-5 
gor. 12 
361. 14 
. 364.2 
368, 16 
370. 10 
yi. th 
373-3 
377-2 
377+ 13 
381.6 
387.5 
387. 10 
388. 2 
402, 7 
40g. 16 
410. 12 

413. 2-3 

413. 13 
415. t0 
421, 10 
422. 1 

Bouyges's text 
ty pal 
45lzal gl dope 
Js 
Oy 
lg: al 

My readings 

Transpose the words i255 
Sogdee dans S25ees 
after 52e 1S) 

APPENDIX 371 

Page Bouyges’s text My readings 
426. 4 ok» Lat ye 
492. 12 : sie! Ayla , % poll 5 hme 
437-5 Wb We 
44t.9 7 oli, alin, 
449-1 | aim aalye Y GY Migs |e galpe Yaa! gd 
445. 14 (d15) dala daly 
446. 1 rin, Je Je Ja Is ue 
448. 10 Si Synyt BSS) Dymy 
450. 15 Oss IK oI 
456. 1 ogee) cp eb] II BHI Slo! 
457. bo RY) AUSy 
458. 5 pois protin 
458. 7 DyKine Oy 
4§8. 11 omit dase 
458. 17 Gly LST, 
459-3 J wld 
470. 4 pels coed 
472.2 ely ag ps 
472. 2 of sJ YI 
472.4 as! out 
473.15 Bee jas 
478.3 os NL 
478. 6 Ughares Alar 
479: 3 pal ral 
483. 3 uss aia 
489. 9 slog! tau} 
48g, 9-10 ib clas oi sl laut 

498. 9 py ood pF pi cod 

372 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Page Bouyges’s text My readings 
497. 12 de pres 
498. 10 + gael aS jaall cuts 
501. 13 laa Tl ll 
502. 20 frm yo 
504. 1 to PUrages ae! rages 
504. 2 Leake (gall 
506. 15 Bel o Be) galt 
506, 16 gas lead 
506. 16 ret peed 459 es 

509 (1), 14 dace Ugas 
513.1 he ines 
513.8 pas phan 
513. 17 Aeodind Ugestoes 
513. 18 wheal clacl 
513. 20 qeterety etewrurl 
54. 2 Anus ol ge races bye 
515. 1 peel printed 
515.5 pa) ES ee hel A 
516, 8 Col zea ake euler 
516, to odd eres) 
517.9 coyet 3 all 
520.7 an Priis 
522. 5 ows Pcirii) 
522.7 aS lot ANyot 
524.8 pia Spain 
528. 12 Oo) OsK) 

APPENDIX 373 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 

ibn “Abbas, 58%, 8. 

Abraham, 52, 2. 5%, 3. 19%) 1. 193) 3 
416, 16. $27, 2. 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, 420, 12. 421, 13. 
4953 7: 

Anaxagoras, 177, 12. §79, 11. 

Aristotle, 21, 12. 49, §4- 79, 9, 14. 98, 12. 
T9t, 12, 14. 17%, 2 176, 3. 180, 3, 8. 
181, & 187, 9. 206, 2. 246, 10. 250, 7. 
259, 17, 14. 261, 10, 268, 12. 313, & 
373s 5+ 992; 12. 415, 9 421, 3, 10, 14, 15. 
422, 1s 451; 4- 510, 2- 553, 7, Q- 556, 14- 
575) Th. 

Ash‘arites, 8, 8. 12, 8. 13, 2. 14, 2. 15, 10. 
17, 9-10. 25, §. 89, 8, go, 2. 92, 10. 99, 8. 
94 7 117, 6. 124, 9 193, 15. 136, 9. 
137-139. 158, g. 169, 15. 172, 14. 205, 
fo, 218, 12—15. 219, 10, 229, 16. 225, 11. 
276, 8. 295) 4- 314, 4- 317, 9. 320, 13- 
321, 1, 6. 922, 5, 9. 324, 12. 333, 5. 364, 
1-4. 396, 3, 10. 402, 13 403, 14. 412, 2 
416, 16. 466, 4. 476, 6. 

Avicenna, 27, 7, If. 54, 19. 86, 10. g2, 1. 
107, 8. 141, T. 169, 8. 166, q, 11. 167, 6g. 
168, 6. 179, 9. t82, 5. 184, 6. 186, 5. 
197, 15. 198, 1. 199, 4. 296, EL. 237, 8. 
239, 8, 10. 245, I, 64. 249, 5. 252, 14: 
253) §- 254s 10. 259, 7. 270, 13. 27¢. 15- 
276, 2, 4, Lo. 278, 15. 279, 9. 280, 7. 
289, 7. 290, 7- 292 I. 293, F. 290) 5+ 
302, 13. 303, 2- 304, 16. 313, 9 320, IT. 
325, 2- 347s 5 370s Is 7. 371, 10. 386, 11, 
13, 380, 5. 39%, 14. 394, 6. 395, 1, 16. 
400, 3. 403, 12. 407, IT. 418, g 419, TO. 
421, 4-5. 442, 135 15+ 445) I- 444s 5s 14 
445» 5- 450, 8. 479, 19- 484, 5. 486, 3, To. 
495; 5- 497, 21. $00, IJ. 503, (2, 04. 5152 
9 515, 3, 7- 546, 15+ 547, HO. 552, 12. 
576, 8. 

Chaldaeans, 492, 8. 
Christians, 301, 5- 322, 13. 

Dahriyya, 20, 7. 266, 17. 269, 12, 16. 270, 
1, 4. 282, 6, 9. 283, 17. 284, 4. 416, 10. 
525) 2. 

al-Far3bi (abi Nagr), 54, 13. 179; 9 184» 
6. 245 Ts $4 371% 15+ 

Galen, 127, f1. 155, 4. 212, 16. 577, 15. 
588, 9. 

al-Ghazili, passin, : 
ibn Hazm, 208, 10, §42, 9, $90, 6 af 

Hippocrates, 140, 13, 
aba’l Hudhail, r1g, 14. 121, 2. 

Tsractites, 580, 5. 583, 11, 12. 

Jesus, 6g, 12. 580, 7. 583, 10. 
al-Juwaini (abi’) Ma‘ali), 542, 12. 

Karramites, 6, 9. 135, 11. 198, 7. 

Materialists, cf. Dahriyya. 

Melissus, 373, 5. 

Moses, 6g, 12. 580, 15. 

Mutakallimin, 21, 10, 22, 7, 10, 12. 25 
10. 35y 6. 37+ 3+ 51> M 84> 15- Bg, 1. 725 de 
78, 12. 99, 6. 132, 4. 188, 1. £93, 14. 210, 
5. 218, 11. 223, 16, 225, 16. 226, 6. 227, 
5. 242, 8, 246, 10, 276, 4. 284, 3. 295, 9+ 
295, J: 329, 1. 350s 15. 352, 1. 352, EE. 
378, 7. 411, 16. 425, 1. 426, 4, 490, 10. 
449, 13. 521, 16. 530, 18. 538, €. 538, 5, 
hy 15 it +540, 12. 54t, 10, 542, 2. 586, 

- SOF» 

Mu'tazilites, 105, 5. 106, 11. 194, 8. 218, 
12, 16, 222, 14. 225, 7. 242, 8. 276, 8. 
320, 13. 

Parmenides, 374, 5- 

Peripatetics, 178, 6. 206, 2, 299, 8. 250, 8. 
259, 14. $10, J. 392, 9. 420, 8. 

Plato, 25, 6. 29, 7. 171, 32. 17%, 1. 177, 15+ 
1B7, 10. 268, 10. 310, 7. 407, 10. 572, 2. 
578, 2. 

Porphyry, 260, t. 

Pythagoras, 177, 12. 579, tt. 

Sabaeans, 580, 8, 

ibn Sina, cf. Avicenna, 
Socrates, 268, 10. 

‘Sophists’, 542, 1, 11. 

Stoics, 479, 8. 

Sifis, 364, 4. 463, 11. 587, 7- 

Themistius, 271, 14. 
ZAhirites, 12,13. 429, 10. 

Zanidiqa (heretical Muslims), $27, @, ff. 
585, 14. 

VOLUME Ib °} 

CONTENTS 

(VoLuME [1) 
NOTES 
Index of Proper Names mentioned in the ino aed in the Notes 
Index of Subjects mentioned in the Notes 
Some contradictions in Aristotle’s System 
Arabic~Greek Index to the Notes 
Greek-Arabic Index te the Notes 

NOTES 

pover frlocopijoas “EAAnves Stvavras 
Only Greeks philosophize, 2PICURUS 
{CLEM. ALEX, Sirom, i, 15; DIOG. LABRT. x, 117) 

One must know that everything che Moslems, Mu‘tazilites 
as welt as Ash‘arites, have professed concerning these subjects, 
has been borrowed from the Greeks and Syrians who applied 
themselves to the criticism of the philosophers. 

(mapsonipEs, Grade of the Perplexed, i. 71) 

p. 1. 1, According to Aristotelian logic, demonstrative proof which affords 
necessary, absolute truth must be distinguished from dialectical and rhetori- 
cal proofs which only yield probability, The term , 33...a3 is a translation of 
the Stoic term ocvyxerdPeos, assent, and synonymous with Gard, but 
whereas for the Stoics assent may be given to the single representation, for 
the Aristotelian logicians in Islam assent refers always to a proposition. The 
Arabs divide Logic into two parts, the one treating of concepts, ) 4403, the 
other of judgements in so far as they refer to the exterior werld, bideas (cf. 
e.g. Avicenna, Salvation, ed. H. 1331, p. 3). 

p. 1.2. The general term for eternity is od (Greek diddrps), but Aristotle 
distinguishes the eternal a parte anfe, the ungenerated, dyevyroy, (431, from 
the eternal a parte post, the indestructible, df@aprav, .¢Ju1, There is also the 
term aidy, .» > (‘timeless eternity’), in scholastic philosophy aesum, used 
by Plato (Tim. 99d) and Aristotle (De caelo A g. 279%22), which becomes 
especially important in Neoplatonism. 

p. 1. 3. The basic ideas of this proof, which presumes an eternal agent, 
are to be found in Aristotle, who regards himself as the first thinker to affirm 
that the world is ungenerated (De caelo A to. 279°12) : that the world cannot 
have had an origin, because there could be no new decision in the mind of 
God for its beginning (cf. the passage of Aristotle—probably from the De 
philosophia fr. 22 Rose—quoted by Cicero, Acad. pr. ii. 38 ‘neque enim 
ortura esse unquam mundum, quod nulla fuerit novo consilio inito tam prae- 
clari operis inceptio’} ; that in all change there is potentiality (e.g. Phys. I 2) ; 
that the potential needs an actualizer which already exists actually (Met, 
@ 8, 1049524). 

The argument itself follows closely Proclus’ third argument in John 
Philoponus’ De aeternitate mundi, Rabe, p. 42, which I here give in sum~ 
mary: The demiurge will be either always in act or sometimes in potency. If 
he is always in act, then his work (Sqycoupyovpevor) also will he always in 
act; if he is sometimes in potency, there must be an actualizer of this 
potency. Therefore either we shall have an infinite regress, always secking a 
new cause for the actualization of this potency, or we shall have to admit a 

2 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

cause always in act. In the argument given by Ghazali we find the term 
Fctad (‘determining principle’, or more literally ‘what causes to incline’; 
the Greek word is 76 émxAivou—see for this word below, note 19.1.), which is 
used by the Muslim theologians in their proof (inspired by Aristotle) for the 
existence of God: the possible existence of the world needs for its actual 
existence a cara determining principle which cannot have itself a cause, 
as an infinite series of causes is impossible. The argument given by Ghazali 
is found in substance, for example, in Avicenna’s Salvaiion, pp. 415~17. 

Shahrastani, a younger contemporary of Ghazali, gives in his book 
Religious and Philosophical Sects (ed. Cureton, p. 338) a short and somewhat 
iraperfect enumeration of eight of Proclus’ eighteen arguments (that men- 
tioned above is the second). Shahrastani says that all these arguments have a 
logical flaw, that they were used by Avicenna, but that he himself has 
composed a special book to refute them logically (agho4 cyilsi Je). 

p. 1. 4, As an Aristotelian, Averroés ought to have accepted this argu- 
ment, and as a matter of fact he ultimately does so. In his objection, which 
corresponds to that of Philoponus, he seerns moved by a certain esprit de 
contradiction against his Moslem fellow-philosophers, Averroés argues hike 
Philoponus thac beth the ‘potential’ and the ‘actual’ are homonymous 
terms, Philoponus (op. cit., p. 46) distinguishes a potency which is a natural 
aptitude, ducckh émurqdeisrys fs 7, and a potency tn Abita, nad” Efe. 
According to Philoponus, a man having a natural aptitude to become a 
teacher needs an external cause to become a teacher; being once a teacher 
in habtlu, ie. having sufficient knowledge, he no longer needs an external 
cause, But the question of the internality or externality of the cause is not 
relevant to Proclus’ argument. 

p. 1.5. Common notions; common, 4sle = 6y9gd1, Le. xowdy == 
edolov = ra Soxotvra néow 4 Tois mAeiaras, the domain of probability 
(Top. A 1. toob22). That proofs are concerned with things proper to the 
same genus: Anal. Post. A 7. 

p. 1.6. The different meanings of the possible, Aristotle, Met. 4 12; ént 
76 TOW, GES YI; dar’ Aarrov, JFVI; ex” tor, Golucdl Jo. 

Pp. 2. 1. For the éai ré nodvd does not happen by chance; cf. Adet. d 30. 
ro25°15 and De caelo A 12. 283752. 

p- 2. 2. The natural has ils principle of movement in itself, the artificial 
is moved from the outside; Phys. Bt, 19213. 

p. 2. 3. The soul has its principle of movement in itself; De an. B 1. 
41216, 

p. 2.4, The four types of change: e.g. Phys, F 1, 22599. 

p. 2. 5. Le, the eternal unmoved mover and the eternally moved; cf. 
Met, A 6, 

" NOTES 3 

p. 2. 6, A sect named after Muhammed ibn Karram of Khorasan (ninth 
century), They say that God is a substratum for new accidents, and that 
nothing comes into existence in the world without being preceded by new 
accidents in God, e.g. new volitions (cf. e.g. Baghdadi, The Differences between 
the Sects, p. 202). 

Pp. 2. 7- Matter is the principle of all generation and corruption, e.g. 
Met. H 5. 1044527; matter is eternal, e.g. Met. B 4. 999°5. 

p. 2.8. This is the vots afyrixds, called in Arabic (in accordance with 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, De an. 82, 20 5qq. Bruns) also 3‘Y ag)! (jath, vods 
bAcxds, mentioned m Aristotle, De an. I’ 5, where he distinguishes an active 
and a passive intellect, the intellect which ‘does’ and the intellect which 
‘becomes everything’. Greek and Arab commentators elaborated Aristotle’s 
scanty and rather obscure remarks about the intellect and made a number 
of new distinctions. This potential intellect is regarded by Averroés (and by 
Thomas Aquinas) as eternal, in opposition to Aristotle, De an. I 5. 430%23: 
robro (i.e. 76 rowdy) ydvor dbdvaroy Kal didtov (see also below, note 14. 4). 

p: 2.9. The non-rational faculties only produce the effect proper to 
them, whereas the rational are able to produce contrary effects, e.g. Met, 
@ 5. 10488. 

p. 3. 1. This is the fallacy 76 ards 3 ay darAds, fallacia a dicto secundum 
quid ad dictum simpliciter, 

p. 3- 2. CF Aristotle, De caela A 5. 2718: elrep wai 7d paxpov wapaPiver 
Tis dAnGelag adiorapdvars yiverar wéppw pupromAdaror, a small deviation from 
the truth at the beginning multiplies itself later ten thousandfold. 

p. 3. 3. This is the Ash‘arite theory, which is in conformity with that of 
Philoponus in his sixteenth argument. One must distinguish, says Phitoponus 
{op. cit., pp. 567-8), between God’s eternally willing something and God’s 
willing it to be eternal, between God’s eternal will and the eternity of the 
object of His will. It was not in the nature of Socrates to be created before 
Sophroniscus; but before Sophroniscus became, God had willed that 
Socrates should be, not absolutely, not always, but when it should be pos- 
sible. Therefore God willed what He had ordained to be before it became, 
and He willed it to be at the time when its becoming should be possible. 

This agrees with the teaching of St. Augustine, who, using Cicero’s 
expression novum consilium, denies expressly that there could be in God a 
novum consitium (De civ. dei, Kalb,, xii. 15). However, St. Augustine is well 
aware of the difficulty of his theory and he says (loc. cit.) : ‘valde quippe 
altum est et semper fuisse et hominem, quem nunquam fecerat, ex aliquo 
tempore primum facere voluisse nec consilium voluntatemque mutasse’ 
(that God has always existed and that after a certain time He created man 
whom He had not wanted to create before, without having changed His 
mind and will—this, indeed, is very deep for us). 

4 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Pp. 3. 4. i.e. a change in the agent. 

P- 3. §. It is not clear why he regards this as difficult to prove, since the 
proof follows immediately, Probably he means that the whole problem of 
God’s relation to the world is a difficult one, 

p. 3. 6. The word ,jla which I translate here by ‘disposition’ is a most 
ambiguous one. I take it here to be the translation of the Aristotelian term 
&:4@cacs (‘disposition’) which is opposed to éfs, 40L, (‘habitude’}, the former 
denoting 2 temporary, the latter a more lasting condition. But Averroés, I 
think, uses this word here, too, in reference to its theological meaning, The 
systems of the Muslim theologians (called in Arabic Mutakallimun, a trans- 
lation of the Greek StaAexrsxot) are largely dependent on Stoicism, and their 
term ,|l. is a translation of the Stoic term mds gov, This term does not 
signify a thing, a material realicy, but a fact or event, either a state, e.g. the 
fact that a body is in space, or a result of a cause, ¢.g. the fact that I will, 
which is the result of the will in me, a living being. These states and events 
are regarded by the Stoics and those Muslim theologians who accept this 
theory as something either intermediate between reality and unreality or as 
not real; they are meanings (in a more or less objective sense}, Aexrd, lew; 
thoughts (in a more or less oppetive sense}, vorpara, phe! {both these 
Arabic words are very ambiguous: , for example, can also mean ‘idea’ 
in the Platonic sense). The theologians ‘accepted also from the Stoics the 
term ri, » ot, the ‘something’ which is defined as ave p5e3 Ol j yz Le 
everything of which something can be said, and which includes the real and 
the unreal. 

The term ,Ji. applied by the theologians to the attributes of God gives 
them a certain unreality so as not to impair God’s unity. Amongst the 
Muslim theologians there are never-ending discussions about the Sle 
(Sextus Empiricus, Adv. log. viii. 262, speaks of the dvijruros waxy among the 
Stoics about the existence of the Aerrd}. About the use of the term (Jl. for 
the universal by the Ash‘arites see below (for the Stoic theory see v, Arnim, 
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, ii. 48-49, 138-22, 131-3, and E. Bréhier, La 
Théorte des incorporels dans U ancien Stoicisme, deuxiéme éd., Paris, 1928; for the 
Muslim theory Shahrastani, The Utmost Proficiency in Theology, ed. Guillaume, 
pp. 131 $qq.). 

Tt may perhaps be noted that the Stoics introduced into philosophy the 
concepts of meaning and of event or fact. The Stoics distinguish the sentence, 
i.e. che words, from the judgement and from the fact meant; e.g. ‘it is rain- 
ing’ is at the same time a sentence, a judgement, and the objective fact, 
Taeant or expressed by these words. The Stoics, toa, saw that the realm of 
meaning, i.e. of the things meant, which includes the past, the future, the 
universal, the possible, the impossible, the imaginary, the false and illusory, 
is infinitely vaster than the universe of actual reality. The Muslim theo- 
logians use the Stoic theory of meaning to define the words of God as mean- 

NOTES st 5 

ings without the concomitance of physical speech (cf. op. cit., especially 
p- 289), and the theory of the ‘something’ to explain God’s knowledge of the 
non-existent possible world before its actual existence (see op. cit., pp. 
150 sqq-)- 

The paradox of the reality of non-being, that there are things which do 
not exist, was foreshadowed by Plato, Soph. 240 B. It is a characteristic of the 
undefinable act of meaning that its object need not exist. Indeed, all our 
planning concerns the not yet existing future just as our memories refer to 
the no more existing past. This is an ultimate fact which cannot be explained, 
i.e. reduced to another fact, nor represented, nor described by any material 
image. 

p- 3. 7. That this new disposition may be in the effect and not in the 
agent—in the creature, not in the creator—seems rather astonishing, but 
refers to the theological theory that the acts of God do not affece God’s 
essence, but are only related to che object (for this theory see Al-Ash‘ari, 
The Dogmas of the Muslim Theologians, ed. Ritter, p. 176). This conforms to 
Plotinus’ theory (Enneads vi. 9. 3) that to speak of God’s causation is not to 
attribute something to Him but to us, and to Christian dogma, e.g. St. 
Augustine, De trinttate v. 16: concerning the unchangeable substance of 
God we must admit that something may be so predicated relatively in 
respect to the creature that although it begins to be so predicated in time, 
yet nothing shall be understood to have happened to the substance of God 
itself, but only to the creature in respect of which it is predicated ; De civ. dei 
xxii. 2. 2 ‘cum deus mutare dicitur voluntatem, homines potius quam ipse 
mutantur’. 

p. 4. 1. ie, the act of creation depends on a new disposition, and this 
new disposition will be either caused by another God or by Ged Himself. 
Ifby God Himself, there will be an act of God prior to the creation which we 
regarded as God’s first act. 

The problem is set out by Aristotle, Phys. 8 1. 251530; if the moving had 
existed without moving, a cause would have been necessary for the change, 
one would then have had a change anterior to the first. 

p. 4.2. At haphazard and by themselves laaldi ope, dard radropdrou, 

Pp. 4. 3- The older philosophers concerned themselves only with material 
principles: see Aristotle, Afet. A 3-5. 

p. 4. 4. That desire (dpefcs) and purpose or will (spoatpeas) are able to 
produce contrary effects: Met. @ 5. 1048%q4. 

P- 4. 5. viv Sé 6 ev voids ob daiverar xvav dvev dpélews: 4} pap PavAnors 
Speges, for intellect does not seem to move without desire, and will is desire 
(De an. F 10, 433°22). 

p. 4. 6 This is much the same conception as in Plotinus, who denies that 
God has the power to do one of two conwaries which is the property of those 

6 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

who can abstain from always doing the best (vi. 8. 21) ; regards God as Free 
Will itself, atré 24” daure (vi. 8. 8); affirms that God’s will does not differ 
from His essence and that everything in Him is will way dpa BovaAnos Fv 
(vi. 8. 21); but stilt regards the world as produced by natural necessity 
(iii. 2. 2). 

Averroés’s criticism is justified in so far as the idea of will implies 2 choice 
of the unrealized and a possible realization of it in time; an eternal will is 
a contradiction in terms, and Averroés’s own theory that God’s action is 
intermediate between voluntary and involuntary action is untenable, 
because there is no such intermediate; his analogy with an existence neither 
outside nor inside the world is defective, for to the non-spatial neither 
‘outside’ nor ‘inside’ can be applied (according te Arist. De cade Ag. . 
279°18, God is not in space}. 

It is one of the difficulties of the Aristotelian system that it is frankly 
teleological and at the same time refuses to ascribe: will to God ; but, since 
every organism tends to an end, the difficulty of a teleological conception 
touches us all. Averroés’s theory enables him both to affirm and to deny that 
God has a will. 

p. §. 1. Convention »29, Sas, as opposed to ab, duis, nature, 

Pp. §. 2. The divorce becomes irrevocable when the sentence of divorce 
has been pronounced by the husband three times, The wife cannot then 
return to him until she has been married and divorced by another husband. 

p- 5. 3- Up to this poine everything agrees with Aristotle’s theory of the 
will, Met, @ 5. 

p. 5. 4. The point raised here cannot be met by the Aristotelian theory 
of the will, for Aristotle, like Plato, does not regard the will as something si 
generis. Aristotle either identifies the wilt with the decision (7 wpoatpesis) out 
of which the act follows of necessity, when the object of desire presents itself 
(Met. @ 5. 104811), or he regards the will as a reasonable desire (Dean. F'10. 
43324) and the impulse to motion is given by a davracia Aeytoriny (433°29) ; 
his theory, however, remains obscure. 

p. 6. 1. ie. the divorce is void, because it is not the immediate effect of 
the pronouncement. The validity of the conditionally pronounced divorce 
isa point of discussion in the legal schools of Islam. The ‘Literalists’ are a 
school of law which keeps to a literal interpretation of the religious texts. 

p. 6. 2. All proof depends ultimately on immediately known first prin- 
ciples (€yzeoa) (Anal. post. A 21), 

p. 6. 3. For the most certain principle must be also the best known, 
yruptpwrdry (Met. I 3. 1005>11). 

p. 7- 1. Common notions do not by themselves imply absolute truth, 
but belong to the domain of the probable (see note 1. 5). Compare, how- 
ever, the preceding note. What is indeed according to Aristotle the criterion 

NOTES 7 

for the objective truth of the first principles but their universal acknowledge- 
ment? 

p. 7. 2. According to the Muslim Aristotelians who combine in their 
theology Aristotelian with Neopiatonic elements, God knows Himself, but, 
knowing Himself, He knows all the universals without this plurality’s pre~ 
venting His unity: the knower, the knowledge, and the known are one, 

p. 8. 1. Assertions whose contrary is equally false are those in which the 
predicate does not apply to the subject (Top. B&. 11474), e.g. the colourless 
is neither black nor white. Ghazali’s assertion that there may be a proof of 
the opposite of a necessary truth can neither be proved nor refuted, since, 
being in opposition to the principle of contradiction, it annuls the idea of 
proof. 

p. 8, 2. For od may 7d dawépevor dAnbds (Met. £5. ro10>1). 

p. 8. 3. Sound understanding a6 %,b5, dp@ds Adyos, ratio recta; about 
the dpfds Adyos as a criterion amongst the older Stoics see Diog, Laert. vii, 
54 (Stoic. Vet. Fr. i. 142. 15). The word bs in the sense of /umen naturale is 
much used by the theologians, and we find it already in this sense in an old 
tradition: ‘Every child is born in che umen naturale (i.e. of Islam) ; it is his 
parents who make of him a Jew or a Christian or a Parsee’ (cf. Tereullian’s 
anima naturaliter christiana)—which shows how early Stoic influence is felt in 
Islam. The theologians often use 3 ball, (¢voec, by nature) where the philo- 
sophers would prefer ebh . Sometimes dp8és Adyos is translated simply by 
fic, as, for instance, in the translation of the Stoic definition ép@és Adyog 
MpooTaKTinas jsev bv rrocyrdoy, drrayopeurixes 82 dv ob zrocyréov; right reason 
commands what is to be done and forbids what is not to be done, a definition 
which the Mu'tazilites took over (sce e.g. the definitions of ; {4c in Farabi, De 
intellectu, ad init.; Massignon, Passion d’al-Hatlaj, pp. 543-4; Lane, Arabtc~ 
English Dictionary). 

p. 9. 1. This argument concerned with the impossibility of an infinite 
number is the first given by John Philoponus. The impossibility of an in- 
finite number of revolutions of the different planets is a favourite argument 
in Muhammadan theology (e.g. Shahrastani, The Utmost Proficiency, p. 293 
Ibn ‘Uthman al-Khayyat, The Book of Triumph, Nyberg, p. 35; and Ibn 
Hazm, On Religious and Philosophical Sects, ed. H. 137, i, p. 16) forthe creation 
of the world. It is not found in Philoponus in this connexion, but it derives 
from him (from his fost Refutation of Aristotle’s doctrine of the eternity 
of the world), for it is given as a quotation from him by Simplicius in his 
commentary on Pays. @ 1 (Diels, 1179. 15-27). Philoponus says in his 
first argument that if the world were eternal, there would be not only an 
infinite number of men, but also of horses and dogs; infinity therefore would 
be triplicated, which is absurd, because nothing can be greater than infinity. 

& TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 10. 1, i.e. the movements of, for example, Saturn will have the same 
proportion to the movements, for exampie, of the sun in one year as in 
ten years. 

p. 10. 2. This sentence is in fact contradictory : a potential infinite cannot 
be an infinite whole. For Aristotle the infinite can only be potential (Acirerar 
oby Suyapes elvae td dzecpov, Phys. P 6. 206918), by which he means that time 
can be infinitely, endlessly, increased or divided, number infinitely increased, 
space infinitely divided, but that there cannot be an actual infinite magni- 
tude (bid. 206716), where the word ‘infinite’ does not simply mean a 
negation, but something positive, a magnitude that contains the whole of a 
non-ending series, What is possible is to increase or to divide endlessly {for 
which the term ‘potential infinity’ is very badly chosen) ; the existence of an 
infinite whole is neither actual nor possible, according to Aristotelian prin- 
ciples, but totally impossible. 

That what has no beginning can have no end, and what has a beginning 
must have an end, is proved in De caelo A 12 (2822 <i fOaprdv, yevyrdy ..., 
et 8& ayévnrov, adbaprov drdxerras}. This is often regarded as more or less 
axiomatic, cf. ¢.g. Cicero, De nat. deor. 8.20: Shunc censes primis, ut dicitur, 
labris gustasse physiologiam, id est naturae rationem, qui quicquam quod 
ortum sit putet aeternum esse posse?’ {Do you think that one who believes 
that anything that has come into being can be eternal, can have the slightest 
notion of natural philosophy ?). See also Origen, Contra Celsum iii. 43. 

p. 10. 3. A shorter time bears a relation to a longer only if both are finite 
{De caclo A 6. 274°8). 

p. io. 4. This means that if there. existed things actually infinite there 
would exist a proportion between them (for—this I suppose is Averroés’s 
assumption—the actual infinite would have the same character as the actual 
finite), There is, however, nothing actually infinite. Nor, in a strict sense, is 
there any actual finite time. For actual, in a strict sense, means present. The 
present, the ‘now’, however is, according to Aristotle, a jimit of time, not 
time itself. In Averroés actual time is in fact synonymous with finite time and 
it is therefore not difficult for him to prove that all actual time is finite. 

p. to. 5. This argument (which is found, e.g., in Abu Zaid a}-Balkhi—or 
rather al-Mutabhar al-Maqdisi—The Book of Creation and History, Huart, i, 
p. 121, and in Ibn Hazm, op. cit. i, p. 18) is exactly Kant’s proof for the 
thesis in his first antinomy. Kant says; ‘For if we assumed that the world had 
no beginning in time, then an eternity must have elapsed up to every given 
point of time, and therefore an-infinite series of successive states of things 
must have occurred in the world. The infinity of a series, however, consists 
in this, that it never can be completed by means of a successive synthesis’, 

This argument is found in Philoponus’ first proof (op. cit., p. 10).: e ody 

NOTES 9 

7d dretpoy ddvefiratov, xa’? Exacrov b8 dropov mpotobaa 4 rod yévous Stadex7) 
bed dzreipar drone péyps ray viv Serer Karivenoey, Seliryrdy dpa ro daetpov 
yéyover: Snep doriv ddvvaror, if, therefore, the infinite cannot be traversed and 
the succession, which in each genus progresses along the different individuals, 
arrives at the actual present through an infinite number of individuals, the 
infinite has been traversed, which is impossible. 

p. 10. 6, This is a petitio principii and presupposes—according to Aristotel- 
ian theory-—that there cannot be an infinite series of causes (Met, « 2) and 
that all movement must end in a prime unmoved mover (Pfys. @ 5). 

p. tt. t, Aristotle’s theory of a first cause and a prime mover seems to me 
one of the more disputable points of his philosophy, and the Muslim thee- 
logians fully saw its difficulty. 

For Aristotle the world is eternal and uncreated; time and movement 
are both eternal and there is an eternal series of movements (it must be 
added that the Muslim Aristotelians, who combine Neoplatonic with 
Aristotelian elements, speak of a creation of the world, an eternal creation; 
the world emanates eternally out of God, but this does not change the 
problem essentially, since both an eternal cause for an eternally identical 
effect, and an ¢ternal creation, are contradictory conceptions, cause and 
creation both implying change). If, therefore, cause is regarded as ante- 
cedent to effect (and it is often regarded by Aristotle as an antecedent in 
time: man is produced from a prior man, cf. Met. @8. 104924), there cannot 
be a first cause, since there is no first moment. But according to Aristotle (see 
above) there must he an unmoved principle of ali movement. If we accept 
this, the world in its totality is passive, cause and effect are simultaneous, 
and Ged is not the first cause, but in fact the only cause. However, even this 
does not solve the difficulty, for if we regard uniform motion (the prime 
mover is the cause of uniform, ovvexjs, movement, Phys. 6 5. 259916) as an 
identical state, as we moderns do, who acknowledge the principle of inertia, 
no cause at all is needed ; if, on the other hand, we regard uniform motion 
as spatial change, a change in the effect presupposes a change in the cause 
and in this way changes in God would be introduced, in opposition to 
Aristotetian doctrine, which holds the contradictory view that an unchanging 
God can be the cause of a changing world (compare note 33. 1). 

p. 11. 2, The acts of God derive immediately from Him; there is there- 
fore no causal nexus between these, and we have no infinite causal series. 

p. 1. 3. Man, when he produces man, does not produce him essentially, 
but only accidentally (whatever this means) ; the real cause is God, the real 
essential relation between the prior and the posterior man is a time~ 
relation. This is not Aristotelian doctrine, but Averroés’s exegesis. Aristotle 
(Phys. @ 5, ad init.) distinguishes the immediate action of an agent from his 
acting through some instrumentality, a stick, for example, which he uses as 

10 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

a lever. You can say both that the last of a series of instruments is the mover 
and that the first mover (the man, e.g., who moves his hand which moves the 
stick) is the mover, but you will agree, according to Aristotle, that the first 
mover is the real mover, for without the first the last would not move 
anything, whereas the last does not move the first. Aristotle, however, tries 
to prove that there cannot be an infinite series of intermediates, although he 
regards the production of man out of man as eternal. Here lies the real 
difficulty. 

Pp. 11. 4. Le. God acts immediately, without instrument, as the mover of 
the world ; where He needs an instrument, as in the production of man, for 
which He needs a prior man as an instrument, He has no first instrument; 
i.e. there is no first man, but the series of men is infinite, 

P- 11. §- ode Cort cevijocas xivnors (Phys. Be. 225>15; Met. K 12. 106815) 5 
advvarov Tv apy érepdv 7 odcar elvar dpyijy (Met. N 1. 1087493; Phys. A6. 
18990). 

p. ts. 1. Averroés in his answer ignores the difficulty of how in the present 
a past infinite can have come to an end. Aristotle does not seem to have felt 
the contradiction between his thesis ‘that what has no beginning can have 
no énd, and that what has a beginning must have an end’ and his descrip- 
tion of the present, the ‘now’ (76 vdv,¢) V1) as a kind of intermediate (peodrns 
tts) containing both an end and a beginning—the end of an infinite past, 
the beginning of an infinite future (PAys. © 1. 250521). Lit is said there is 
here no end, for the end is also a beginning, what in that case will be the 
definition of an end? 

p. 12, 2, The unreality or subjectivity of an object of thought does not 
change jts characterization; a hundred real thalers, said Kant, do net con- 
tain the least coin more than a hundred possible thalers, 

The text has a variant: ‘Therefore, when we imagine a number of 
horses... .’ This may perhaps be the correct reading ; horses js a favourite 
example with Aristotle when speaking of numbers (e.g. Phys. 4 12. 220>11; 
11. 220824; 14, 22955}. 

p. 12. 3. For Aristotle possible existence does not mean only possible 
existence in the sense of my belief that a thing may possibly exist, but also 
the existence of a hypostatized possibility, an existing reality which is the 
source of an actual existent. For Aristotle all becoming is nothing but the 
change from a state of possible existence (in this second meaning) to a state 
of actual existence, and in contradiction to his own principium tertii exclust (i.e. 
that there is no fertium guid between existence and its opposite, non-existence), 
he regards this potential existence as something intermediate between 
existence and non-existence (De gen. ef corr. A 3. 31723). However, a 
potential existent ought to always have the possibility of becoming an actual 
existent, but here Averroés posits a potential existent, i.e. an infinite whole, 

NOTES MI 

which can never be an actual existent (cf. note 10, 2). That he regards 
potentiality as belonging to the domain of non-existence (in a certain sense) 
is in accordance with Aristotelian terminology (see Afet. N2, 1089%28), 
Certainly ail this is very confusing, and the ambiguity of Aristoile’s termino- 
logy is not only a source of confusion but itself the consequence of 4 confusion 
of thought. 

p. 12. 4. According to Aristotle the existence of time might be regarded 
as dubious, for the past exists no longer, the future is not yet, and the present 
is only a limit (Phys. 4 10. 217°92). ‘That only the present exists (iadpyer), 
whereas the past and future merely subsist (6deorqxévat) is maintained by 
Chrysippus (Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii, 164. 26; 165. 34}. See also Augustine, Confess. 
xii. 15: ‘praeteritum enim iam non est et futurum nondum est’; (ibid. 16) 
‘praeterita vero quae iam non sunt, aut Futura quae nondum sunt, quis 
Metiri potest, nisi forte audebit quis dicere metiri posse quod non est?” 

p- 13. 1. Here he seems to regard time as exclusively in the soul. This 
subjective conception of time is found already in Aristotle (d5vvarov efvac 
xpdvev puxis 47) obeys, Phys. A 14. 223*26). Throughout the whole history of 
philosophy there is confusion of the subjective with the non-existent, and 
time is regarded as incorporeal, i.e. subjective or non-existent, by the Stoics, 
who in their materialism and sensationalism deny the reality of everything 
which is not apprehended by the senses——they even make the self-contra- 
dictory assertion (which might be regarded as a definition of Kant's system} 
that it is we who put the relations into things (Store. Vet. Fr. ti. 133, 22: apd 
tt €ori rd mpos érdow voovperar), an assertion which, if taken seriously, would 
destroy the whole world, ourselves and our problems included, but in which, 
as we shall see, they are followed by the Muslim theologians. However, in 
these questions they show no consistency, and it would: be a mistake to 
regard Ghazali’s conceptions as especially subjectivist—as has been done—, 
this kind of subjectivism (of which we shall find many examples in Averroés 
too) being characteristic of Hellenistic philosophy generally (see note 41.2). 

Pp. 13. 2. This does not seem very consistent. First, representation or 
imagination is given as the reason why we falsely regard the objective 
infinite as finite; now it is given as the reason why the future is rightly 
believed to be infinite. 

p. 13. 3. Time has begun according to. Plato, but may he infinite. ‘Time 
has come into being together with Heaven in order that they may be dis- 
solved together, if ever they have to be dissolved’ (Tim. 38 b). 

p. 13.4. True to their principle, since according to Aristotle a beginning 
implies an end. For the incorruptibility of the world see below (Chapter IT). 

p. 14. 1. See note 8.1. 

p. 14. 2. The word I translate by ‘immediate intuitive apprehension’ is 
Lis, yevors, ‘taste’, a word which belongs to the mystical terminology of 

Lo] TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the Sufis and which means the immediate mystical apprehension of the 
Divine. Plotinus says (Enn. v. 1. 7) that the purest Intellect (6 vets 6 xaBa- 
pwraros) devours or swallows {xarantvewv) the intelligible gods and in i. 6. 7 
he speaks of the ézdAavois Peo’, fruitio dei, which becomes thence an accepted 
mystical term (the metaphor is obviously connected with certain rites of 
mystical religion). A definition of yeisis is given by Origen (Comm, in Joan. 
xx, 33; Migne, xiv. 671) as the power of the soul to taste and to apprehend 
the quality of intelligible food (puyis Sdvapts yevorue) Kai ayrAnrruch ris 
Motamres Tv vontay tpopaey), and Tauler (Predigt 26} says: ‘Das Hochste, 
was der Mensch empfangen kann, ist die sechste und siebente Gabe des 
Geistes: Verstandnis und schmeckende Weisheit fir Gott, fir die géttliche 
SiiBe, die siiGer ist als Honig und Honigseim,’ There is a close resemblance 
between fourteenth-century German mysticism and Sufism, both being 
derived from the same sources, Neoplatonism and Gnosticism, 

Pp. t4. 3. The philosophers. This is only true if by ‘philosophers’ is meant 
Aristotle and his more strictly Peripatetic commentators like Alexander ot 
Aphrodisias (according to Aristotle only the voids which comes from outside, 
Gvpabev, is immortal, which seems to imply that my individual personality 
does not survive ; however, the question as to what my individual personality 
consists in, was never asked by Aristotle or any other Greek thinker ; see next 
note) ; it is not true either for Plato or for the Neoplatonists, including those 
commentators of Aristotle who have a Neoplatonic bias—e.g. all the 
Muslim predecessors of Averroés who deny with Aristotle (see De an. A 3. 
407513 and 414#21) the pre-existence of the soul and. metempsychosis, and 
together with the Platonists accept the idea of personal immortality, although 
their pronouncements are various and are not always determined by purely 
philosophical considerations. At an earlier date Ibn Tufai! in his philo- 
sophical novel had complained about Al-Farabi’s inconsistency on this 
question. 

P. 14. 4. GAN’ doa dpiOud wodAd, Dryv ever (Met. A8. 1074°33). Gallias 
and Socrates differ only in their bodies, but are one in their form, i.e. in their 
soul (Z 8. 10345), and Socrates is unique only through his matter (1074235) 
(Aristotle, however, is not consistent, and declares (De an. A 3. 40726 and 
B 2. 414%21) that each soul is fitted only to its own special body). This 
theory identifies my spiritual identity with my bodily identity and implies a 
denial of a spiritual Ego. Nevertheless it was Aristotle who introduced into 
philosophy (De an, I’ 2 ad init.) the idea of selfconsciousness, ic. my con- 
sciousness of being the subject of my acts of sensation; but this conscious- 
mess concerns only acts of sensation and is itself a sensitive principle, the 
common sense {rd kowwdy aicSnrijprov}, situated in the heart, The Stoics took 
over this idea from Aristotle, giving this consciousness a special term, 
ovveidyors, ‘my knowledge of my own state’, translated by Cicero, De fin. 
iii. 5. 16 as sensus sui, originating in the jyeponndy, Sydatl Sgall, in the 

NOTES 13 

heart; Plotinus (iv. 3. 26) has four other terms for selfconsciousness: ovvecis, 
ovvaiobnars, wapaxodoveyois, atvdeows, all of which may be of Stoic origin. 
But the connexion of the purely rational faculties, which according to 
Aristotle have no localization in the bedy, with the sensuat faculties remains 
obscure. Avicenna in his Recovery, following Plotinus, Enz. iv. 7. 10-~ 
posits an immediate (lis Sy) awareness (i.e. one not mediated by any 
sensuat faculty) of my individual spiritual identity, which is incorruptible. 
For Avicenna, as for Plotinus (and for Plato}, my soul is the link between 
the Divine and the animal; as belonging to the Divine world, it is iden- 
tical with, or a part of, che Intellect and the World-Soul (both may be 
said, see note 15. 1) and this is my true nature ; as connected with the animal 
it is aware of the things of the body which it directs. The Intellect and 
the World-Soul stand in Plotinus’ system in the relation of Aristotle’s 
active and passive intellect; it is through his Neoplatonic interpretation 
that Averroés can regard the passive intellect as incorruptible, We live in 
two worlds and have in fact two souls, each of us possesses a double Ego 
(Sirrdv ov 70 yyeis, Enn. i. 1. 10), and the awareness of my individual 
spiritual identity in pure thought, which is mentioned by Avicenna, is but 
the awareness of the identity of my higher Ego with the universal Reason, 
The consequence would seem to be that everything that characterizes the 
individual, since it is connected with the body, is doomed to annihilation 
with the body. This, however, is a consequence which neither Plato nor 
Plotinus nor Avicenna seems willing to accept: the individual Socrates is 
immortal. 

p- 14. 5. This was not the opinion of Plotinus, who at Ena. v. 7. 2 (last 
sentence) accepts from the Stoics the principium identitatis indiscernibilium, 
known in modern philosophy through Leibniz: not twe hairs, not two grains 
are alike (Cic. Acad. pr. ii. 26. 85 ; Seneca, Zp. ad Luc. 113. 16), This principle is 
known also in Islam (see ¢.g. Ibn Hazm, op, cit. i, p. 93, 1. 1); the theologian 
Hisham al-Futi says, just as Leibniz does, that God cannot create two 
exactly similar things, since they would then be identical (Ibn Hazm, op. 
cit. iv, p. 196). 

p. 14. 6. According to Avicenna—e.g. Salvation, p. 203—entities which 
have no fixed order in space or nature, owls eax ad 43,5 YL, like 

certain angels and devils, may form a simultaneous numerical infinity, For 
Avicenna there cannot be a pre-existence of souls (see e.g. his Salvation, 
Pp. 300-2), because before their entrance into bodies they would have to 
be one or many; they cannot be many, because in an immaterial essence 
there is no principium indimduationis for a plurality; they cannot be one, 
because this one soul would have to be divided amongst the bodies, whereas 
the immaterial cannot be divided. They can, however, exist after separation 
from their bodies, because then they are distinct through the bodies in 

14 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

which they have been, through the times in which they were created, and 
through the distinctions in their own forms according to the different condi- 
tions of their former bodies. Plotinus (£xn. v. 7. 3), in order to avoid an 
actual infinity of spiritual entities (Adyos), accepts the Stoic theory of different 
world-cycles. This is also Origen’s solution of the difficulty of the actual 
infinite (cf. De princip. ii, g. 1 and iii. 5. 3). Marcus Aurelius, as a materialist, 
asks (iv. 21; ed. Stich, p. 37): ‘If souls endure, how will the air hold them 
all from eternity?’ 

Pp: 14. 7. This is the argument given by Aristotle against an actual in- 
finity ; Phys. 75. 204421, 

p. 15. 1. It is important to distinguish three theories which are confused 
by the Arabic commentators, 

(1) The Platonic theory that the individual soul stands in relation to the 
soul of the universe as the individual part to the individual whole (Plot. iv. 
3. 1): €k THs Tob mayrés Yaris Kai ras jyerépas efvas. Plato says in the Philebus 
(30 a} that, as our body is a part of the universe, so our soul is a part of the 
soul of the universe, and this idea finds its mythical expression in Timaeus 
41 d: the demiurge creates the individual souls out of the same material as 
he had created the universal soul, although fess pure. The same conception 
of the individual soul as a real part (u¢pos) of the World-Soul is found in 
Stoicism : see Marcus Aurelius i. 4, v. 27. 

(2) The Plotinian theory of substantial identity : wdeai af Yeyat rotvuy pte 
(Ean. vi. 5. 9). Platinus, who quotes both passages of Plato (iv. 3. 1 and iv. 3. 
7), regards the individual soul and the soul of the universe as ultimately 
identical ; he denies that this identity can be explained in any materialistic 
way (this, according to him, was not intended by Plato), and he remarks (vi. 
4. 12) that this identity is ike the identical noise that is heard by different per- 
sons or the identical abject which they see, showing by this profound remark 
that he is aware that the perception of one object by many percipients is an 
irreducible fact which cannot be described or represented by any material 
image. Greek psychology on the whole does not distinguish clearly between 
the percipient, the perceiving, and the object perceived, or between the 
thinker, the thinking, and the object of thought; subject and object are 
identified, and the theory of the oneness of all souls expresses the truth 
that the many can perceive one common object, just as Aristotle’s theory of 
the uniqueness of the active intellect expresses the truth that the many can 
think one identical thought, but the uniqueness of the object is transferred 
to the subject. 

(3) The Aristotelian theory of the identity of the universal. Callias and 
Socrates are one through their form ; this means that although individually 
two, they are one in their universal essence, their soul. The universal is the 
same in a number of different individuals, and the same yellow may be in 
many individuals; the identity of the universal and the identity of the 

NOTES 15 

individual should not, however, be confused. The universal ‘soul’ is hyposta- 
tized by the Neoplatonic commentators as the soul of the universe. 

p- 15. 2. Plotinus is fully aware of this obvious difficulty and discusses it 
unsuccessfully (Zvn. iv. 3. §); his spiritualism cannet explain man’s indi- 
viduality, man’s privacy of vision and thought. But Ghazali’s nominalism 
cannot explain man’s membership of a common world of sense and thought, 
for the consequence of all nominalism is solipsism. 

p. #5. 3. The different meanings of ‘part’ are discussed by Aristotle, 
Met. 4 26, and Plotinus, nn. iv. 3. 2. 

p- 15 4. This, of course, is a petitia principei and presupposes the Aristote- 
lian doctrine that all unity is based on form, all plurality on matter. 

p. 15. 5. After death all souls must be one. 

p- 15. 6, For the meanings of ‘identity’ (radré) and ‘different’ (Ssdgopor) 
see Aristotle, Met. 4 9. 

p. 16. 1. For the divisible, datperdy, i.e. the quantum, woody, see Met. 4 
1g, where the zoody xad” daurd and the sogdv xara ovpPefaxds are mentioned. 

p. 16. 2. In De anima (I 5. 430°15) Aristotle compares the active intellect 
to light, his third term in the comparison being the actualization of the 
potential: the active intellect actualizes the potential intellect as light 
actualizes the colours which exist already potentially. Averrots, however, 
uses the comparison as Plotinus does, for the soul generally, and he passes 
unawares from Aristotle's conception of the soul as a universal to Plotinus’ 
conception of the substantial identity of the universal and the individual 
soul. For Plotinus’ treatment see especially Enn. iv, 3. 22-23; it is interest- 
ing to observe how in this passage light is regarded at the same time as an 
image of the soul, puxq . .. bs 1d Peds (loc, cit, 22 ad init.) and as the reality 
of the soul, sidipa nepwrropévor (loc. cit. 23 ad init.) ; all representation tends 
to materialization. The metaphor of light goes back to the passage in Plato, 
Rep. vi. 508 b, c, 509 b. 

p. 16. 3, Philosophy distinguishes itself from sophistry through its ethos 
(Arist., Met. P2. 190424); 4 girooodiia Sagdper nis copeotucis rod Plov vA 
mpoupéres. 

p. 16. 4, In a tentative way, wepaorixds; dialectic is merely tentative, 
where philosophy claims to know (Arist., Met. I" 2. 1004625): gor 3é 9 
Seadexriny weipaorich wept dv } perovopia yrwors}. 

p. 16.5. This kind of argument in defence of objective truth, which is 
very common in Islam amongst the theologians as well (cf. Baghdadi’s 
arguments in Wensinck, The Muslim Creed, p. 251), goes back to Plato, 
Theat. 170 ¢. It is asserted by Aristotle (fet, IF 3. 6), in his elaborate dis- 
cussion of the principle of contradiction, that all discussion rests ultimately 
on first principles, and that not to know of what things one should and 

16 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

should not ask for demonstration is the result of lack of education (8’ darae 
Sevoiav, I’ 4. 10066). The Stoics argue against the Sceptics that you cannot 
deny the possibility of proof without proving it, and that he who affirms that 
nothing can be known with surety must know at least that he knows this (cf. 
e.g. Sext. Emp. Hyp. Pyrrh. ii. 186; Cic. Acad. Post. ii, 9, 28); and Lucretius, 
too, says (De rer. nat. iv. 469~70 ‘denique nil sciri si quis putat, id quoque 
nescit, |an sciri possit, quoniam nil scire fatetur.’ See also Cicero, De fin. ii. 
13. 43 and Seneca, Q. nat. vii. 92. 2). 

The argument is also found in the Christian Fathers; see especially 
Clement of Alexandria in his chapter against the Sceptics, Strom. viii. 35, 
Se. Augustine, De trinitate ix. 10 ‘. . . si dubitat, scit se nescire . . ”, and 
Eusebius, Praep. evang. xiv. 18. 760b . . . if 88 dyvooiiow (the Sceptics) éroiéy 
dott 16 Sijlov, ob dy eideiey odde ti 7d adyAov. : 

It may perhaps be added here that the Muslim theologians regard the 
conviction of the existence, for example, of a country or of a town by reliable 
hearsay, i.e, traced back without interruption to an eyewitness (JI 
pilyzeJl) as unassailable (see Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 312-14), here following 
the Greek empiricists, who also give the existence of a country or town 
(Crete, Sicily, Sardinia in Galen, Sudfig. Emp. 52; Alexandria in Galen's 
On Medical Experience, Arabic version, xx. 5) by hearsay from an eyewitness 
{atrémrns) as an example of reliable knowledge. In their rules for the relia- 
bility of a tradition the theologians seem to be influenced by the rules given 
by the empiricists (see Galen, Subfig. Emp. 51) for the reliability of traditional 
knowledge, forapia (ioropia éoriv dnayyedia rev ewpapévov), and like the 
empiricists they emphasize the concord (cvpduwria, albig.), trustworthi- 
ness, and situation of the witnesses; however, whereas the theologians 
distinguish between traditions the evidence of which is immediate and 
necessary and those the evidence of which is acquired and valid only for 
practical purposes (Jo), for the empiricists, those forerunners of the prag- 
miatists, all evidence is valid only in relation to our actions and the life of the 
community (6 Bios 6 xowds: see Sext. Emp, Hyp. Pyrrh, i, 237). 

p. 16. 6. In these three last sentences Averroés is following Aristotle, 
Met. K 6, 1063*7. 16 and Met, I 5. 1009"16-22. 

p. 17. 3. The introduction of the concept of possibility does not change 
the problem, and the difficulty remains the same, that of the completion of 
an infinite series. In what ‘follows Averroés wants to eliminate the concept 
of time and to base the argument merely on the concept of possibility. It 
was, says Averroés, in Gad’s unlimited power to choose one of an unlimited 
number of time-points for His creation of time. Averroés then transfers the 
unlimited possibility {of choice) in the subject, ic. God, to the object, i.e. 
the time-points, and regards the possibility as a qualification of these points, 
The termination of this infinite series of possible time-points would be a 
condition for the beginning of finite time, which according to the supposition 

NOTES 7 

was created by God (this condition introduces, of course, the concept of time, 
which is, however, already implied in the concept of creation). Aristotle 
himself bases an argument for eternity on the idea of possibility. If time, so 
he says (De caeio A 12. 28311 $qq,), had been generated, an infinite series of 
possibl. time-points {onpeta) would have existed before the generation of 
time, But an infinite series of possibilities is contradictory according to 
Aristotle, because the possible implies che possibility of existence and non- 
existence which, according to him, cannot coexist infinitely, The possible 
cannot be eternal. 

p. 17. 2. See pp. 48 sqq. 
p. 17. 3. ie. the finite time supposed to have been created by God. 

Pp. 17. 4. According to Aristotle, a quality can be attributed to something 
whether it possesses this quality potentially or actually; ‘seeing’ can mean 
both ‘having the capacity of sight’ and ‘seeing actually’ (Met. 4 7. 10171}. 
For the possible as disposition see Met. A 12. 10195. By a possibility which 
is simultaneous with a thing is meant a faculty, a capacity, an ability, a 
power. I shall discuss the difficult and ambiguous term ‘possible’ more in 
detail later. 

p. 18. 1. For the argument which Averroés gives is double-edged ; on the 
basis of God’s omnipotence one might also prove an infinite number of 
possible spatial extensions; according to the Peripatetics, however, the 
Spatial extension of the world is finite. 

p. 18. 2. The possible, i.e. che actualized or realized possible, the created 
time. The identification of the possible with the actual is, as we shall see 
later, a Megarian Ash‘arite theory. 

p. 18. 3. The passage which foltows is somewhat confused, and does not 
render quite correctly the real objection of the philosophers, which is closely 
similar to Kant’s argument for the eternity of the world in the antithesis of 
the first antinomy, The philosophical objection is that, since all time-points 
are similar, there is no difference in them which could determine God to 
choose a definite time-point as the moment for His creation (see e.g. 
Avicenna, Salvation, p. 418; the basic idea is in Arist. De caelo A 12. 283%11, 
ef. Phys. @ 252"14, and already in Parmenides, Diels, Fr. d. Vorsokr. fr. 8). 
But the problem is not quite the same as that of the presence of black or 
white in certain things of nature, for black and white are not similar; the 
problem here is that of God’s intention in choosing the one rather than the 
other. The confusion lies in the term , a,a5e, (‘differentiating principle’), 

which can mean as used by Ghazali (like ar praeponderans, determining 

principle or principle giving preponderance} (rt) a principle which, deter- 
mining or choosing without any motive one of two similar objects, establishes 

18 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

a distinction between them through this choice, (2) a principle which deter- 
mines or chooses, without the motive being known, the existence of one of 
two opposites which seem equally purposeful, (3) the dissimilarity which is the 
motive for the choice, The conception of a “differentiating principle’ is of 
Stoic origin. Through God as the logos the world graduaily develops through 
division (Diog. Laert. vii. 136); ail things are set in opposition through the 
logos, e.g. the mortal and the immortal, the material and the immaterial 
(Plutarch, De solert. an. ii. 9); Lactantius says (Stoic. Vet. Fr. i. 42. 23) that 
Zeno called the logos raturae dispositor ; Ps.-Arist. (De mundo 5. 397°17) has 
the word yaspifew (the natures of the different kinds of animals are separated) ; 
and Philo uses the expression (Quis rer. div. Aer. 26, 140) Adyos ropeds, the 
specifying logos. 

Ghazali probably borrowed his theory of a differentiating principle from 
his master Juwaini (for whose theory see Averroés, Theology and Philosophy, 
ed. Miiller, p. 40). 

Azistotie, although he is convinced that nature always does the best 
possible, 4 puces del wot rv evexopeve 76 BéArvoroy (De caelo B 5. 28842) 
(which seems te imply that even for nature—or for God—not everything is 
possible, a problem much discussed in theology, since it denies one of its 
postulates, God's omnipotence), and that nothing in the eternal world can 
happen by chance and at random, 28724, says (28731) that to ask a reason 
for everything would seem to show an excessive simplicity (et)j@ea} and zeal 
{zpofvyia). The Aristotelian and Stoic principle that God does always 7¢ 
BéArurroy, aed , is generally admitted by the Muslim theologians (cf. also 

Leibniz’s principium melioris). 
p. 18 4. We should not inquire after the motives of the Eternal, accord- 

ing to the Koran, xii. 23: God is not to be questioned concerning what 
He does. 

p- 19. 1, According to Plutarch (De stoic. rep. xxiti, Stoie. Vet. Fr. ii. 973) 
there were certain philosophers, ios 7év dudocdguy, who accepted a faculty 
in the soul which could determine the soul to choose without any external 
cause, when there is an absolute equipoise of motives, and Plutarch uses for this 
faculty (loc. cit.) the term 7é émdtvoy, ie. that which inclines, etal 

(Chrysippus denied the existence of such a faculty, which would imply the 
existence of the causeless, dvaizov). ‘This is the theory which, as we will see, 
Ghazali adopted for the human will. However, in the definition he gives here 
(and he seems to speak here of the will in general and not only of the Divine 
Will; but the whole passage is ambiguous) he regards the will in every act 
of will as an émdivoy or a Topeds, since he assumes in the agent for every 
voluntary act an equal possibility of acting or not acting. This is the Pelagian 
conception of the iberum arbitrium, 

p- 19.2. This would be rather an argument for the opposite of Ghazali’s 

NOTES 19 
thesis, for will is a faculty, a power, which needs for its actualization a cause, 

a mative. 

DP. 19. 3. séoa Straps due ris dvrddocds éorw, every potency is at one 
and the same time a potency of the opposite (Met. @ 8. 1050%8). 

P- 19. 4. According to the Mustim theologians God has power to act and 
to will, 

p- 19.5. For the Divine Will also could only choose between things 
exhibiting a dissimilarity. 

p- (9.6. It is, however, the similarity, not the opposition of the time- 
points, which constitutes the philosophical objection ; see pages 22, 25, and 
32, and note 32. 4. 

p- 20. t. Differentiating principle, i.e. a dissimilarity ; the term ‘differen- 
tiating principle’ has a different sense for Averroés from that which it has 
for Ghazahi, 

p. 20.2, Lt would not contain the possibility of contrary effects; warmth 
—says Aristotle (Met. @ 2. 1046%5)—is capable only of heating, but the 
medical art can produce both disease and health. 

p- 20. 3. ie, they reject the idea of a Divine Will, at least in the theo- 
logical sense. 

P- 20.4. $8, perapopd ; for transference as a form of sophistry, see De 
soph. elench, 18. 17620. 

p. 21.1. Le. in the Koran will is attributed to God. 

p. 21.2, The original of this example is in Aristotle, De casio B 13. 
295°32, where, discussing Plato’s theory that the earth és sustained in heaven 
through the equivalence (dowrjs) of the surrounding heaven (Phaedo 
108 e), he speaks of the constraint of equivalence in a man who, at an equal 
distance from food and drink and equally starving and thirsting, must 
remain where he is. More or less the same example, duo cibi acqualiter appeti- 
biles, is found in Thomas Aquinas, Summa theol. 1 ii. 13. 6, and in Dante, 
Par. iv. t-6, who adds, however, the much less paradoxical example of a 
Jamb standing egualmente temendo between two hungry and fierce wolves. 
The paradox becomes known later as that of Buridan’s ass (although in 
Buridan, who often gives asses as examples, this particular ass is not found), 
and the example of an ass dying with hunger between two similar bundles 
of straw at an equal distance is mentioned and discussed by such different 
authors as Montaigne, Essais, it. 14; Spinoza, Scholion at the end of Eth. ii; 
Bayle in his Dictionnaire; and Schopenhauer, Die betden Grundprobleme der 
Ethik, and ed., p. 58. 

p. 22, t, According to Aristotle there are four classes of opposition ; con+ 
tradiction, privation, contrariety, relation; the first opposition is that of 
being and not-being , sparn earrimcis Efis nai orépnors redeia (absolute 
privation, ie. non-being) (Adet. F 4. 1055733). 

20 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 22.2. ie, it is only through our desires that we regard two similar 
things as different. 

p. 22.3. For the definition of will as desire of a good, 4 PovAnows spefis 
dyabos, see Top. Z 8. 1465. 

p. 22.4. “The desires which belong to the essence of the things willed’. 
This contradictory sentence, which implies that the thing willed is the 
willer, refers to Aristotle’s theory of God as the mover of the world through 
being desired and loved («tve? cbs epiyevov), and is but a consequence of the 
profound contradiction in Aristotle’s system in that Gad is both the supreme 
Agent and the supreme End. Not only does Aristotle ascribe the motion of 
the heavens to their love—‘l’Amor che muove il sole ¢ l’altre steile’-—but he 
attributes even to matter a desire for the divine, the good, and the desirable 
(Phys. Ag. 192*16). That to be is better than not to be, BéArcov 76 efvar roi p29} 
elvas (De gen. et corr. B 10, 33628) is Aristotelian optimism, 

p. 23. 1, Averroés misses the point here completely. Certainly the donkey 
will take one or the other of the two bundles rather than die, but the ques- 
tion is what determines its taking the one rather than the other. Obviously 
it will take the one that comes first to hand; only, when there is a complete 
equivalence of all conditions, this is ‘ :possible, and Spinoza says bluntly 
that the donkey will have to die. As a matter of fact, in such cases a complete 
equivalence of psychological and physical conditions is never reached; no 
living body even is strictly symmetrical, and if per impossibile such an 
equivalence could be momentarily reached, the world is changing, not 
static, and the donkey will move and not die. 

Pp. 23.2. What Averroés wants to express here, I believe, is not the 
principium tdentitatis indiscermbilium, but simply the fact that two individual 
things, even when completely similar, are not identical. Averroés, I think, 
confuses similarity with identity. By ‘the quality exclusive to it’ he means, 
probably, its spatial or temporal localization. 

p. 23.3. The impossible—like the necessary—is for Aristotle of rwo kinds, 
the logically impossible, the impossible through the necessity of thought, 
and the empirically impossible, not based on the necessity of thought (see 
Aristotle, Met. 4d 12. rorgb21). Since a logical impossibility is here in 
question, the impossibility is valid for all cases: divine, natural, and logical. 

p. 24.1. The sun, by moving on the ecliptic, approaches to and recedes 
from the different points of the earth, and isin this way the cause of change, 
of coming te be and passing away in the sublunary world (De gen. et corr, 
B 10), The theory of the eccentric sphere, «ios éxxenrpos, and the apogee, 
andyeov, belongs to Ptolemaic astronomy, see e.g. Alm. iii. 3 {according 
to Simplicius, Jn Arist, tbr. de caelo, Heiberg, p. 507, the Pythagoreans were 
perhaps the first to introduce an eccentric sphere for the sun). The apogee 
is the point farthest from the earth on the orbit of a planet which has its 

NOTES ar 

centre outside the earth. All change in the sublunary world is conditioned 
by the positions and movements of the heavenly spheres, rais dvw dopats 
(Meteor, A 2. 399%21). 

p. 24.2. The problem why the heaven revolves in the one direction 
rather than the other is posed by Aristotle at De caelo B 5, and the problem 
why the planets have a movement different from that of the sphere of the 
fixed stars at De caelo B 3. According to Aristotle only two points on the 
sphere of heaven have a distinguishing mark (Sta¢opd) and they ave the two 
poles through their immobility. 

p. 24. 3. In Arabian astronomy the ninth sphere serves to communicate 
the diurnal motion to all the other spheres. The fineness of the simple body 
increases with its distance from the centre: see De caelo B 4, 287520 and 
Meteor. A 4. 3406. 

p- 24.4. These two spheres, i.e, (a} the ninth sphere; (4) all the other 
spheres together. 

p: 24.5. Ghazali means, evidently, that the ecliptic might have passed 
through the points which are in the actual world occupied by the poles; 
the actual poles would then have had to occupy other points; he cannot 
mean that the ecliptic might go through the poles, since the order of the 
world depends on the relation between the ecliptic and the poles. Ghazali’s 
objection is not quite analogous to that ofthe philosophers, who argue against 
a creation which implies a pre-existence in time by saying that since all 
time-points are similar no definite time-point could cause a new volition 
in God. Ghazali’s objection, that God could not choose individual points 
from among the homogeneous points of the world-globe to serve as poles, 
does not imply that God first created the globe and then chose the poles 
from amongst its homogeneous points ; the implication is that any other two 
points which God might have chosen, while creating the world, would have 
been equally purposeful, so that the choice of the actual poles cannot 
depend on a choice made by God based on His conception of the bese 
possible world. There is no answer to this objection, which is valid against 
a complete explanation of the world by final causes; one might as well ask 
why God created me and not someone similar in my stead (one cannot ask— 
says Plotinus, £nn. iil, 3. 3, why plants have no sensations and are not 
animals, or animals are not men; this would be like asking why men are not 
gods); all explanation in terms of final cases presupposes a number of 
primitive facts and laws which cannot themselves be explained by final 
causes. Theophrastus in his Metaphystcs (see especially ad fin.) had already 
remarked that certain things do not seem to exist for the sake of an end, and 
that we must limit teleological explanation. The consequence of Ghazali’s 
theory that God’s will is not determimed by any motive at all, however, 
would seem to be that there is no wisdom whatever in the world and that 

22 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

nothing has a purpose, But Stoics and Aristotelians, Mustim theologians and 
philosophers alike, believe in the principle of 76 BéArsavov, gee, “que tout 
est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles’, 

p. 25.1. Asalience and a differentiation of the angles [gi glass Lfs} ta 
older yap dsrnprapsdvov Syet od8€ mpodyor, Ganep 74 edOiypayjiov (De caelo BB, 
29056). 

p. 26, t. Possible, éSeydpevey, i.e, accidental, cup PePyuds. The accidental, 
according to Aristotle, is what may or may not happen, and is not based on 
any inner necessity: cuppPeByxds 5¢ dorw . . . 5 dvddyerar tndpyew drwoiv 
et cai r@ adrG wat ya bwdpyew (Top, A 5. 102°4), Averroés means that the 
position of the poles seems accidental, but is nevertheless based on necessity. 
In what follows Averroés reproduces the Aristotelian doctrine as found in 
the De caelo, 

Pp. 26. 2. 76 83 xvxdw odipa depopevor dddvaroy yew Bapos 4 xovddrnra 
(De caelo A 3. 26930). 

p. 26. 3. The properties of the four elements in the matter of weight and 
lightness are treated by Aristotle, De caele 4 4; fire is absolutely lizhe, because 
it rises higher than anything else ; earth is absolutely heavy, because it sinks 
below everything else. 

p. 26.4. High, (yi, dvw, ie. away from the centre; low, inl, 
«dru, i.e, towards the centre (De caelo A 2, 268421), 

p- 27. 1. The sphere has only one surface, ém¢dvers, (De caclo B 4, 286430), 
and is therefore the primary body, just as the circle is the primary figure; 
the spherical shape of heaven is proved by Aristotle at De caelo B 4. 

p. 27.2. Rectilinear bodies (74 <d#}ypazma) are not essentially finite, 
since an addition to a straight line is always possible (28620). 

p. 27. 3+ The impossibility of there being any bodily mass or any empty 
space beyond heaven is demonstrated by Aristotle, De caefo A 9g. 

p- 27.4. Since the heaven is alive (¢ obpaves duyuyos), it is clear—says 
Aristotle (De caelo B 2. 285*30)-—that it must possess a right and a left; see 
also note 28. 4. 

p. 27.5. That all generation is effected through the movements of the 
heavenly bodies is shown by Aristotle, De caelo B 3. 286%1~g. For the theory 
that this continual production and corruption is based on the movements 
of the heavenly bodies, see De gen. et corr, B 10; cf. also note 24. 1. 

p. 27.6. Cf. Philo, De prowd. ii, 74 (Stoic. Wet. Fr. it. 932.9): ‘Numerus 
autem planetarum prodest universo’. ‘Mundum esse opus providentiae’ is 
especially emphasized by the Stoics. According to Aristotle toi Sv0 airta, 
76 O od Evexa xal rd ef dvdynns (e.g, Phys, B 7. 19817). See note 41.1, 

p. 28.1. That each heavenly sphere has its own eternal principle of 
movement is stated in Aristotle, Met. 4 8, 1079993; that the heavens are 

NOTES aa 23 

composed of simple bodies moving through their own nature and not by 
force, having their definite natural movement, a circular one, which has no 
contrary as rectilinear movement has, since it turns, i.e. it moves at the 
sare time in two directions, is stated in Aristotle, De caele A 2. The sentence 
about the magnet is not found in Aristotle, nor, as far as I know, in any Greek 
commentator ; it touches a very delicate point in the Aristotelian philosophy, 
for according to Aristotle the spheres move through an external principle, 
God, their final principle; they move in fact like iron which is attracted by 
the magnet (with the exception, as Averroés mentions, that the magnet can 
attract from any direction). One could say that the heaven either moves in 
virtue of its own nature (card thy davrod dvow) or through an external 
principle which attracts it; Aristotelianism, however, wishes to have it 
both ways, 

p. 28. 2. Thispassage isacommentary on Aristotle, Decaelo B 2. 28512 sqq. 
Aristotle has (285215) the sentence that certain living beings differ only in 
power or faculty, whereas other living beings differ also in shape (7a pav 
yap rH Suvduer Siagdper pdvov, ra. 8¢ xal rois oyjpaot , . .). That the world 
needs for its spherical movement neither hands, legs, nor feet is laid down 
in Timaeus 34. 

p. 28. 3. Aristotle proves (Afet. A 8. 1074*31) that there can be but one 
heaven, since only chrough matter can there be plurality (man is one in 
species but numerically many because of his matter, e.g. Socrates, Callias). 
But the heavenly bodies are in a sense immaterial (Met. H 4. 1044%7) and 
yet they form a plurality and have a plurality of immaterial moving prin- 
ciples (the heavenly bodies and their movers are not always well distin- 
guished). This plurality is explained by the Neoplatonic commentators as 
being not a plurality of individuals which would need matter, but as a 
plurality of universals, Every divine being, although it is unique (advra 
povadind 7a otpdina Lda, Simplic., Comment. de caelo 276. 52), forms a species 
in itself and is a universal (voyrov). These beings are called angels by the 
theologians, both Muslim and Christian, and Thomas Aquinas affirms that 
there are as many species of angels as there are individual angels, 

p- 28.4. According to Aristotle heaven possesses 76 dvw xai «draw, 70 
Seckedr nat dprorepdv, 76 Eurrpooter nai Smadev (cf. De caelo B 2 and Bs), The 
diurnal revolution from East to West moves in the better direction (émi ré 
rigtetepov) and js a forward movement. Aristotle regards the south pole 
as the more divine and the superior. If you imagine yourself standing with 
your feet to the north pole and your head to the south pole, you will see 
heaven turn in front of you in its diurnal movement from your left to your 
right (see De caele B 2 ad fin., and 8 5 ad fin.). 

p. 29. t. Koran x. 65. 
p- 29.2. Koran xxx. 29. 

24 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 29. 3. According to Aristotle the organ derives from its function (not 
the reverse), and he censures Anaxagoras for saying that man is the most 
intelligent being, because he has hands ; whereas, according to Aristotle, he 
has hands because he is the most intelligent being. Nature, like an intelligent 
man, provides everything with the instrument it can use (De part. an. A 10. 
687°7 sqq.)- 

On the movement of the crab (wepxtvos} see Aristotle, De an. tncess. 14 
712513. 

p- 29.4. According to Aristotle nature (or God) acts like the craftsman 
(see ¢.g. Phys, B 8 ad fin. and 9 ad fin.). That in every work of art, one must 
inquire for its intention (réAos, 4:1¢) is a doctrine found, for example, in 
Aristotle, Phys. Bg, where as an example we find the saw, d mpiwy, ylarJI- 
(200*r0), as also below in the text, p. 54. See also note 31. 1. 

Pp. 29.5. Koran xviil, to3~4. 

p. 30. 1, Koran vi, 75. 

p. 30.2. Heavenly bodies are in trine or sextile or conjunction, when, as 
viewed from the earth, they are respectively distant from each other a third 
of the zodiac (i.e. 120°) or a sixth or in close proximity. 

p- 30.3. Aristotle has an answer to this: the highest sphere has the 
greatest dignity and must therefore have the superior movement {riped- 
+epoy), which is the diurnal movement from East to West, whereas the other 
spheres move from West to East (see note 28. 4). 

p. 31.1. The whole of this passage is rather confused, but it is a conse- 
quence of Aristotle’s dualistic conception of nature, i.e. of a necessary and a 
teleological element in nature. Aristotle introduced the conception of 
immanent teleology; nature itself strives towards an end {but in different 
places—see De caela A 4, De gen. et corr. B10, Eth. Nic. K 11, Polit, H 4— 
Avistotle identifies nature and God, which of course destroys the opposition of 
immanence and transcendence; the Muslim commentators often put the 
emphasis on God rather than on nature). But just as a craftsman cannot 
make asaw without iron, so nature is bound by the necessities of its material ; 
in order to create, nature needs materials with specific qualities and in- 
herent necessities. This conception would imply that certain materials 
having their own laws are presupposed by nature, and so are not nature 
itself; nowhere, however, does Aristotle indicate what these materials are, 
and indeed this whole conception is in opposition to his fundamental thesis 
that matter in itself, i.e. without having as yet received any form—and form 
and end are fundamentally identical for Aristotle—is absolutely undeter- 
mined, It may be added that the basic relation of matter and fori is 
extremely obscure; both primary matter and form are ungenerated, none 
spatial, non-individual, but yet it is said that the form enters inte matter 
and that out of the combination of these ungenerated, non-individual 
entities the transitory individual comes into being. Besides, man as a univer- 

NOTES , 25 

sal form is eternal ; as an individual man he is transitory, For Aristotle, only 
individuals exist; what then can it mean to say that the universal form is 
ungenerated ? The Neoplatonic commentators explained this by saying that 
universals exist in the mind of God {a theory found already in the Middle 
Platonist Albinus), and the Muslim Aristotelians followed this tradition. It 
is God who is the source from which everything emanates, it is He who 
provides matter with its forms, (either directly, or indirectly as in Plotinus 
and Avicenna through the wots, jac, é xopnyds rv Adyuw Enn. V. 9. 3, 
3H) arly, the dator formarum) and this is Averroés’s conception also. 
Nevertheless we frequently find in Averroés the more naturalistic concep- 
tion of matter as having its own qualities, its own potencies and necessities ; 
and such a passage we have here, It may be-—he says—that the exis- 
tence of man cannot be explained by the potencies of his substratum alone, 
and that we must look for a final cause; but other actualities can be 
wholly explained by the potencies which are found in their substrata, and 
he gives as an example the seeing of the eye—probably referring to Aristotle, 
Metear. 4 12. 390*10, where it is said that the eye is an eye in full actuality 
when it sees. See also notes 31. 7 and 62. 6, 

p. 3t-2. The word I translate by ‘substratum’ is .jlall, which is a 
translation of 76 sdoyov, 75 waPos. Like many Aristotelian terms this word is 
ambiguous; it is often synonymous with troxeiyevay, substratum, and as 
this is the sense it has a few lines farther on I take it so here; but rd@y, Epya, 
and #pdges are sometimes synonymous and on¢ might perhaps translate 
‘the effect of both is equivalent’, which would seem more logical. 

p. 3. 3. For example, a period of 5,000 years ago is not equivalent or 
similar to that of 6,000 years ago; these two times are equivalent only in so far 
as there is nothing in them which would determine God to choose the one 
rather than the other as the moment of creation, 

p. 3t. 4. Since a desirable result cannot be accomplished through any 
and every material, but needs materials that have the required nature, 
See note 31, 1. 

P- 31,5. However, possibility implies always two opposites. Averroés 
means the time of its production is different from the time of its corruption. 
For the underlying problem see below note 52. 6. 

p- 31.6. Time, says Aristotle (PAys. 4 14. 222530), is the condition for 
every change and for everything that moves: ¢avepdv S74 mdca pera fod) Kat 
Grav 76-xivoupevov ev xpore. 

Pp. 31.7. The proximate matter of things which have the principle of 
becoming in themselves—a grain, for example—develops by itself when 
there is no exterior obstacle; whereas out of wood a carpenter can make 
either a chair or a table; see Met. @ 7. 1049713. 

26 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 32. 1. This is not very clear. The source of the proof for God, based on 
contingency, i.e. that the possible must be actualized by a necessary 
existent, is certainly in Aristotle; it is only the term ‘determining principle’, 
Fetal which is taken from the theologians (see note 1. 3). The argument is 
found in Farabi, e.g. The Book of the Gems ad init., and Avicenna, The 
Recovery iv. 1. 6. For Aristotle, Farabi, and Avicenna God is the prime, 
indirect cause of all aces; for the Ash‘arites God is the direct, indeed the 
only, agent. 

P. 92.2. 7d ampérepov Kai Yorepov mis eorrat xpdvow jx) dvros; Phys. 
6 1..251b10. 

Pp. 32.3. The prior in the past is that which is farther away from the 
present moment (ré vév), the prior in the future that which is nearer to it; 
Met. 411. 101815, (see note 41. 2). 

p. 32.4. For why should the world be generated just at this particular 
moment, when for an infinite time it had not existed? De caelo A rz. 283913. 

Pp. 32. 5. i.e, there is no analogy between the difference in moments of 
time and the difference in directions, 

p. 32.6, “The second objection’, compare p. 3. 

p- 33-1. For this argument compare note 11. t. According to Aristotle, 
although movement is eternal, God is the first mover; according to the 
Muslim Aristotelians, although the world is eternal, God is its creator 
{Ghazali, as we shall see, rightly rejects the idea of eternal creation, as did 
John Philoponus, who asks, op. cit., p. 14,1. 14: 76 yap det dv mdig dv eis 7d 
elves mapdyorro ; how could what always is be brought into being?). 
Aristotle himself tried to prove at Met. a 2 that there cannot be an infinite 
series of causes and that there muse be a first cause. But if the world and 
time are eternal, and a cause precedes its effect both in nature and in art, 
says Philoponus (op. cit., p. 14, l. 19), there will be an infinite series of causes 
and effects, ¢.g. an infinite series of fathers and sons, If one denies such an 

* infinite series, time must be finite and there must be a first cause for this 
finite temporal series. However, Aristotle does not deny, but admits, an 
infinite series of individuals in a sequence of causes and effects; what he 
denies (Met. a 2) ts an infinite series of genera—that flesh may come from 
earth, earth from fire, fire from something else, and so on ad infinitum. 

P- 33-2. This whole passage seerns to be a commentary on such passages 
as Aristotle, Met, a 2. 99430 sqq-, where it is said that coming to be out of 
another thing, as water comes from air, implies the destruction of that 
other thing: the generation of the one is the destruction of the other, for 
there is no absolute becoming of substances, cf. De gen. et corr. A 3. 319820: 
xai éorw 9 Oardpou ydveas det ent rar ator dou POopa Kat ij Gov Popa 
dAAov yévercs. 

NOTES 27 

Pp. 33. 3. See p. rr. 

” p. 33-4. Of'a circular nature (in Greek, dvaxdunrew). This is clearer in 
the case in which water comes into existence out of air, and the process is 
reversible, than it is in the example of a man coming into existence from a 
man. However, the meaning is that there is no ascending series, either 
infinite or finite, to a first cause. And here is the difficulty of the whole 
conception, for if man can come into existence out of man eternally, in an 
¢ternal causal series, where is the need to posit a first cause at all? And if it 
is claimed that God is the condicio sine qua non of the existence and indeed of 
the possibility of this process, the relation between two eternally constant 
terms is not a causal one, since causation presupposes change. 

Pp. 33.5. Pays. P 5. 20g>22, 

Pp. 34. 1. This is a Neoplatonic rather than an Aristotelian conception; 
it is not the individual man, but man generically that proceeds from God, 
i.e. man generically emanates from the idea of man in God. Nothing, how- 
ever, is more obscure than the Neoplatonic conception of emanation, which 
is not a flowing from a source, not a causal relation in time: the idea of man 
in God, and man generically, are simultaneous eternally; and even this, 
perhaps, is not true, since the idea in God exists in timeless eternity {see 
text below). 

Pp: 34. 2. This means probably that if there were no eternal agent there 
could not be an infinite series. 

P- 34-3. oH Kar’ atolav, Aristotle, Met, A 7. 1072°7. 

P. 34. 4. As concerns its parts; The sphere of heaven, in its uniform and 
circular movement, always follows the same course and therefore does not 
change as a whole; it is simply that its parts change their place. However, 
the term .4>, ‘part’ (like the original Greek term pepos—and pepicds—in 
late Greek use) is ambiguous and can mean also ‘particular’, and on the 
ambiguity of this term the plausibility of the argument depends in part: 
the movement of the heavenly sphere, since it does not change as a whole or 
generically is the cause of the eternal and genericai, but in so far as it changes 
in its parts or particulars it is the cause of the particular and temporal 
(cf. note 35. 1). (The word Ate , ‘whole’, is also ambiguous, and can mean 
‘universal’.) 

P- 34. § Through the inclination of the ecliptic the sun is the cause of all 
generation and corruption ; see Aristotle, De gen. et corr. Bio. 

p. 34.6. The four kinds of change: in substance, quality, quantity, 
locality. See note 2. 4. 

P- 34. 7 dopa. yap % mpurry rev peraPordr, Aristotle, Met. A 7. 10728. 
‘The whole passage is a comument, with a slight Neoplatonic bias, on Aristotle, 
Met, A 7. 1072>4-10. 

28 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 34.8. Essentially and accidentally. As Averroés explains in the fol- 
lowing passage, moving essentially means moving by a mover existing 
simultaneously with the thing moved, moving accidentally means moving 
by a mover preceding the thing moved; this distinction is not found in 
Aristotle and as a matter of fact annuls the proof, for it cannot be seen why 
an infinite series of accidentally moving movers should not suffice. 

P- 34-9. Phys. @ 5. 256817: didvarov ydp els drepow lévat td xewoidv wai 
xwotpevor bi’ dev atts: tor pap dmeipww obx Zor obdey xpdrov. 

Pp. 34-10. Preservation bis , cwrpia. For God as preserver, own}y, of the 
world, see Ps.-Arist. De mundo 6, 39720. 

Pp. 34. t1, ‘Heaven and earth and all that is berween them’ is a Koranic . 
expression, Sur. xx. 5. 

P- 35.1. See note 34. 45 jya. wepueds, means ‘particular’ or ‘of the 
parts’; J: > OAxés, ‘universal’ or ‘of the whole’, 

Pp. 35.2. ie. God. This is not very well expressed; no alternative should 
have been put forward. It is the movement of heaven, in which eternity and 
temporality are combined, which forms the link (ovSecpzes, Las l) between 
the eternal and the temporal. 

Pp. 35-3. Surely chis strange theory, which stems both to deny and to 
imply a creation of che world in time, was not propounded by any philo-~ 
sopher. Ghazali seems to advance it only for the pleasure of refuting it. 

Pp. 35. 4. ie. how can new things arise in the world? 
p. 36. 1. ie. gua temporal. 

p- 36. 2. ie. Socrates as an individual depends on the transience in the 
movement of heaven ; Socrates ag. a universal, as a human being, depends on 
the eternity of the First Mover (or—Averroés’ position here shifts—on what 
is eternal in the movement of heaven). This conception is not Aristotelian. 

p- 36.3. Ghazali’s argument is perfectly sound. The unchanging infinite 
eternal and the transient finite individual are incommensurable. No change 
can depend on the unchangeable, and to posit as a tink an entity partici- 
pating in both natures does not solve the difficulty but doubles it, for the 
relation of the primary terms to the intermediate term remains as obscure as 
the relation between che primary terms. The idea of the link, of mediation, 
goes back to Plato’s conception, in Tim. 35, of the World-Soul which 
possesses the opposite qualities of the rabrov and the Pérepor, of uniformity 
and change; it became in later Greek philosophy one of the chief devices to 
safeguard God’s transcendence. And all transition is gradual: natura non 
facit salium (Arist. Hist. an. @ 1. 5884), org ls or al gle os L, ‘you 
do not find any discontinuity in God’s creation’, as the Arabs have it. Cf. 
also Leibniz’s principium continut, 

NOTES a9 

p. 37.1. The following argument, the substance of which is found in 
Avicenna (c.g. Salvation, p, 419), is based on Aristotle, Phys, @ 1. 251 10 (cf. 
Met. A 6. 1071°8): How could there be any ‘before’ (mpérepov) or ‘after’ 
(Sorepov) if there were no time, or how could time itself exist if there were 
no motion? Proclus in his fifth argument gives a variation not based on the 
term ‘before’ put on the term ‘once’ (word). He says in brief: When once 
there was no time, there was time, for ‘once’ implies time (7b yap wore 
" xporuéy) ; and since ume is the measure of the movement of heaven, heaven 
is coeternal with time. The same argument is found in Ps.-Philo, De incor, 
mundi 53, p. 89, 8 Cohn-Reiter (notwithstanding Cumont’s arguments I still. 
regard this work as spurious, as does, for instance, von Arnim)}. See also 
Sextus Empiricus, Adv. pays. ii, 189. 

P- 37.2. Definitions of ‘prior’ (and ‘posterior’) are given by Aristotle, 
e.g. Cat, 12 and Met, 4 ¢1, ‘Essential’ and ‘natural priority’ are Aristotelian 
terms: mporeppy xat’ ovoiay (Phys. @ 6, 260b19) and ampdrepor duces (g. 
26522). The example of one and two is given in Cat. 12 and found also in 
Avicenna, loc. cit 

Pp. 37-3. Aristotle gives it as an example of the simultaneity of cause and 
effect, where cause and effect are not reversible, that the intervention of the 
earth causes the <clipse of the moon (Anal. Post. 8 16). This presupposes, of 
course, that light does not travel. 

Pp. 37.4. Since the effect always follows the cause, 

P- 37. § The builder, however, is also prior to the wall in the order of 
causation. 

p. 38. 1. Just as Averroés’ objection to the first argument was inspired by 
John Philoponus, so in this objection he is influenced by Philopenus’ 
objection to Proclus’ fifth argument. Philoponus says that when, for 
example, it is said that God was before men knew God, ‘was’ cannot express 
time (4v is not a ypouxdy zpdgpypze), since God is not in time, but in the 
ateéy, timeless eternity. Averroés also denies priority to God in the sense of 
causation. This is a necessary consequence of the denial of the simultaneity 
of God and of the world: since causation is in time, a time-relation is the 
necessary condition of any causal relation (neither Plato nor Aristotle, who 
also regard God as existing in timeless eternity, has seen this consequence). 
Philoponus does not treat of that problem in this argument, but Plotinus 
regards God as a causa sut generis (whatever this means) and declares, Enn. vi. 
8. 8, that in one way God is an dpy}, in another way not; and this is also 
Averroés's theory here. But up to now the whole argument against the theo- 
jogians has been built upon the idea that God is a cause and the world His 
effect, and Averroés’s way of hunting with the hounds and running with the 
hare lands him, as we shall see, in the most flagrant contradiction. 

go TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 38.2. Ghazali’s originality lies in the example. In such sentences, says 
Philoponus (op. cit., p. 116, 1. 10), ‘existed’ or ‘was’ (fv) expresses a mere 
existence, YnA} Umapiis (cf. Plato, Tim. 48a). Philoponus also regards the 
¢avragie, which can represent the timeless only in time, as the cause of the 
error. 

p. 39-1. Here is the flagrant contradiction I mentioned, for here the 
relation between God and the world is, notwithstanding the denial immedi- 
ately preceding, regarded as a causal relation in which the cause does not 
precede the effect, but is eternally sirnultaneous with it. 

p. 39.2. See Cat. tt. 14915; Sydov $2 drt cal wept radrdy i ees 4 yéve 
nédune yivecba, 1a dvavria, . 

p- 39.3. The difficulty exists only when the effect is axiomatically 
regarded as following the cause immediately in time; if the effect can be 
delayed, it must be in time; and if ie is in time, the cause must be in time. 

Pp: 39-4. This proof is found in Aristotle, Phys. @ 1. 251*17~-20. 

P- 39. 5. That noth‘ng can be in movement or at rest at an instant {rd 
viv, OMI is proved by Aristotle, Phys. Z 3. 234"24—-%9. According to Plato, 
Parm. 156 d, ©, the transition from rest to movement takes place 
instantaneously (76 ¢£atévns) and for the Megarians movement takes place 
at an instant, discontinuously by jumps (see Arist. Pays. 2 1. 232°6-10; 
ib. g. 240>30-241°6 ; and Sext. Emp, Adv. phys. ii, 85). The discontinuous 
conception of movement is found also in Stoicism (exe: 16 adAw Kai rdw 
Simpl. Zn Arist. Cat., see Stote. Vet, Fr. ii, 161, 21). In Islam the idea of a 
jump (2,abt) in movement is connected with the name of an-Nazzam, but 
asa matter of fact the conception of the discontinuity of reality, combined 
with the Megarian and Stoic denial of potentiality, is one of the basic ideas 
of Muslim theology. 

Pp. 39.6. That change (becoming or motion) is the actualization of what 
exists potentially, in so far as it exists potentially (1) rod Suvdpes ovros évreAd- 
xara, } rowirov, «ivnots dor), is proved by Aristotle, Phys. P 1. 200%25- 
201429. 

P- 40. t. wdvra 7a ey xpdvep Svra mepedyeo9ar dad ypdvov, Aristotle, Phys. 
4 12, 22128, 

P- 40. 2. I take this sentence to mean: God is not prior to Jesus in time, 
provided that you do not regard God as creating the world (and Jesus) in 
time and as preceding it, Jesus is only a posterior entity in so far as He is an 
effect—what Averroés calls here an accidental posteriority—of an infinite 
series of causes and effects. The duration of the world as a whole is not 
preceded by anything, since time is infinite; it is only particular parts of 
this duration that are preceded and followed by time. 

NOTES 31 

p- 40.3. This question is discussed by Philoponus, p. 716, 1. 12, who 
answers it in the same way as Averroés does: It is permissible to say of the 
Timeless, He was when there was no time, and He will be when there wilt 
be no time, qv dre ove Fv xpdvos Kai Eora: Gre ovx Eorat. Philoponus adds 
that we must not mind the weakness of our expressions, but give our aiten- 
tion to their meaning. 

p. 41.1. ‘God was indulgent and compassionate.’ One might translate 
equally: ‘God is indulgent’. The so-called perfect in Arabic can indicate a 
state either in the past or in the present. The example, however, given by 
Philoponus, who himself quotes Plato, Tim, ag¢, is: dyabés qv, dyad be 
otdeis rep adders obdénore eyytyrerat 68évos, God was good and the good can 
never have the slightest envy of anything (therefore God created the world). 

p. 41.2. In the following interesting, but slightly confused, passage 
Ghazali is no longer dependent on Philoponus, He begins by saying that 
future and past are relative to us (he ought to have said to the ‘now’ in 
which we are at present). The subjectivity of time, as I have remarked already 
(see note 13.1.), is often asserted in Hellenistic philosophy. In de Ei apud 
Detphos, Plutarch, in a passage quoted hy Eusebius Praepar. Evang. xi. 11.5298 
in which he expounds a Heraclitean view of nature which comes very near to 
the conceptions of the Mustim theologians, says: ‘the terms of time, ‘‘after- 
wards”, ‘‘before”’, ‘‘will be’, “has been’”’, are already by themselves a con- 
fession (€fopoAdynots) of the unreality of time’. Proclus in a passage of his 
commentary on Plato Tim. (Stote. Vet. Fr. ii. 166. 4) says that the Stoics and 
many Peripatetics assert that time is car’ émivovay yadjv, a mere product of 
thought. (Stobaeus, Eclog. Phys. 252, mentions by name the Peripatetics 
Antiphanes and Critolaus, as saying that time is a vdnpa 3 peérpov, ov'y 
inéoraois, a concept or measure, not an existent.) Ghazali, however, does 
not develop this idea, but goes on arguing quite rightly that, if an extreme 
limit in time-extension is illusory, an extreme limic in spatial extension is 
iusory also. But, whereas we moderns regard such a limit as logically 
impossible, i.e. contradictory, Ghazali regards it as well founded and its 
denial an illusion of the imagination; for although denying the eternity of 
movement he seems to accept the Aristotelian conception of time and space 
as dependent on motion and body, 

Pp: 40.3. This argument would have been more convincing if Ghazali 
could have shown that the past may also become the fuuure. 

p. 41. 4. All this, Le. the beliefin the infinity of time. 

p. 42.1. This definition agrees with the conception of Sidernpa, day, 
‘extension’ or ‘interval’, as quoted by Simplicius (Comm. in Arist. phys. 571. 
22): 76 Sidornpa 76 peraks trav doxyadrwy Tod wepréyovros Tév réov. This is, 
however, a conception of space which Aristotle himself rejects (Phys. A 4. 

32 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

_ 20157}, but which seems to have been adopted later by the Stoics, according 
to Simplicius (loc. cit.) and Themistius (Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 165. 13). 

P. 42.2. Sidorqya, tx: , ‘extension’, can mean also ‘dimension’, for which 
Aristotle has also the term dedoracis; as space has three dimensions—pijxos, 
wdétos, Bibos (Phys. A 1, 209*4)—high and low are only one of the three 
relations into which extension can be divided. 

. p. 42.3. By counting; the relation of the soul to time is treated by 
Aristotle, Phys. d 14. 223716-29. 

p. 42.4. The necessary is eternal and unmovable ; nothing compulsory or 
against its nature attaches to it (Arist. Afet. 4 5 ad fin.}. 

P. 43.1. @ ydp | Kimors brdpyet, rovrov 4 dxuwnoia #pepia, Aristotle, 
Phys. D2. 202%4. 

Pp. 43.2. Absolute becoming cannot be a movement, for, if it were, the 
non-existent in its becoming would have to move: Aristotle, Piys. 1. 
22525. Absolute becoming would imply that the non-existent existed 
already, ibid. 28. 

P. 43-3. The Arabic text has only one word, pss orépnos; both the 
Arabic word and the Greek can mean, according to the context, either 
absolute non-existence, 76 4«} Sv, or privation; here, of cougse, relative 
non-existence, privation, is meant; becoming develops from contrary to 
contrary, the privation of health, for example, is sickness, of warmth, cold- 
ness, the sick man becomes healthy, the warm thing cold, but coldness and 
health, being forms, do not become or perish; they ‘are eternal (sce e.g. 
Phys. B 5. 205°6 and Met. B 4. 99955). 

P- 43-4. A vacuum, emptiness, which according to Aristotle does not 
exist, would have the potenttality of extension, because a body could occupy 
it: «evdr 3° elvad pact ev cb pur} evumdpyec gGca, Suvardr 8” dori yevéabor, De 
caelo AQ. 279°13 (this is a definition accepted later by the Stoics, see Sext. 
Emp. yp. Pyrrh. tii, 124). In using the expression ‘for instance’ Averroés 
thinks probably of a matter, JAn, without extension which might be erron- 
eously assumed to exist. 

Pp- 43. 5. The paralogism Ghazali commits, according to Averroés, is that 
mapa. Tip edu tod Adyou, i.e. based on an insufficiency in the definition 
(De soph. elench. 5. 167422). 

p- 43-6. Since time does not abide, says Aristotle, it cannot have position 
(Aors), and one should rather say of it that it has order (rdé:s), through its 
relations of prior and posterior (Cat. 6. 527-30}. 

P: 44. 1. 1d viv redeury Kai dpy} ypdvov. ... Too pév mapixovros TedeuT?}, 
dpy7j 52 rob péMovros, Phys. A 13, 222°33-56. 

Pp. 44.2. Since it is impossible that time could exist or be conceived 
without the present, and since the present is a kind of middle combining 

NOTES 33 

beginning and end (dpyjv xai redeuriy Eyoy dua) .. ., time must be eternal 
and stretch away from it in two directions, Phys. @ 1. 25161926, 

P. 44. 3. 1} oreypey mépas ypaups e.g. Top. Z 4. t44>20-21. 

P- 44. 4. 9) oreyu doy} vpaupis e.g. Top. A 18. 10830. 

Pp. 44. 5. “That its becoming is a vanishing’—this is one of the paradoxes 
of continuity. The past ‘now’ must have vanished before the present ‘now’, 
but it could not have vanished when it was itself the ‘now’, because then it 
would not have been, nor could it have vanished in another ‘now’ than 
itself (see Arist, Phys. 4 g, 218915-18). 

p. 44. 6. It is clear, says Aristotle, that the ‘now’ is not a part of time any 
more than points are part of a line, Pays. d 11. 220°18. 

p. 44. 7. Spatial quantity has position (@éos); number and time have 
order, rdfis, Cat, 6. §*15 (see note 43. 6). 

p. 44.8. i.e. of being a present and preceded by a past, for this is its 
definition. 

P- 45. 1. So far as the infinite void is infinite, says Aristotle, it could not 
have a high (dvw) or low (xdé7w), and so faras it is emptiness, no high nor low 
could be distinguished in it, any more than any distinctions can be made in 
the nothing; and emptiness is nothing positive, but a mere erépyas, Phys. 
AB. 21538, 

p. 45. 2. For how can there be any natural movement in the undifferent- 
iated infinite vacuum? loc. cit. *6. 

P- 45. 3. See note 27. 2. 

P- 45. 4. On the whole Aristotle regards the accident as a universal (only 
in Cat. 2 does he draw an explicit distinction between the universal and the 
individual accident), in agreement with our common language, for when we 
say, “This table is yellow’, ‘yellow’ is a universal, and when we speak of ‘this 
yellow’ we mean this shade of yellow, a universal and not an individual 
yellow. The commentators, however, often regard the yellow of the table 
and the yellow of the chair as individually different, and as individualized. 
and localized through their substratum, and this is what Averroés means 
here. He makes the true observation that the point is localized in the 
individual line and can be pointed at, it is a this, a 70Se 71, it is here or there; 
but the ‘now’ is everywhere, for it is everywhere now, or, as Aristotle ex- 
presses it, Phys, 4 12, 2205: ‘everywhere the identical time is simultaneous’. 

P- 45- 5- Time is not movement, says Aristotle, but that by which move- 
ment can be numerically expressed, ote apa xivmars 6 ypdvos GMA’ F dp:Opde 
exee } xtnars, Phys. 4 11. 2192. 

p- 45.6. The relation between movement, the ‘now’, time, and number 
in Aristotle’s physics seems very obscure, ¢ xpévos éori 14 dpwWovpevon xai ody 

34 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

& dpPpodper, time is the thing numbered and not the numbers by which 
we count (219°7) and it is the ‘now’ which counts according to Phys. 
220*22, Plotinus in his attack on Aristotle’s definition of time, Znn. iii. 7. 8, 
says that there is no explanation given whether the time is the measure or 
the thing measured, Still, what Averroés says expresses at least one of the 
things Aristotle intended. The number ‘ten’ can be attributed to ten horses 
or any other group of ten, says Aristotle, 220923; and a hundred men and a 
hundred horses have the same number, but the horses numbered are 
different from the men numbered, 22010. 

P- 45. 7. Aristotle does not speak of a cave in connexion with time fhe has 
the simile of the cave, inspired by Plato, in De philosophia fr, 12 Rose—Cic, 
De nat. deor. 2. 37. 95), but he says, Phys. 4 11. 219%4, that even in the dark, 
and even if we had no perceptions through the body, we should know time 
through a movement in the soul, 

‘p- 45.8. That movements exist in time is clear, but how the things 
numbered can exist in number cannot be understood; it is rather number 
which exists in the things numbéred. This shows the fallaciousness of the 
analogy. 

Pp. 46. 1. 6 xpdvos dmubuds dors xevjoews KaTd 76 mpdrEepor Kal Yarepoy, C.K. 
Phys. 4 41. 2191-2. 

p. 46. 2. For it would be the individual accident of that individual 
movément. 

p. 46. 3. i.e. the comparison of the temporal with the spatial limit. 

p. 47. 1. The answer Ghazali here gives in the name of the philosophers 
is not one that can have been given by a philosopher of the school of 
Aristotle, for whom ‘above’ and ‘below’ not only have a real physical 
significance, but who distinguishes explicitly berween an objective sense, by 
nature, dvoe, and a relative sense of the terms up, down, right, and Jeft 
according to the position we take up («avd thy Céaw drws av orpafape, 
Phys, 4 1. 208516). As a matter of fact the argument is based on a passage 
in Tim. 62 d-63 a, in which Plato says, to put it briefly, that, since the 
universe is in the form of a sphere and its circumference is everywhere at the 
same distance from the centre, the earth, which cannot be called anything 
else but centre, it would be irrational té call any part above or below. A 
man walking round the earth in a circle would often stand at the antipodes 
{derizovs) of his former position and would then call the same direction 
above which formerly he had called below. This passage is summarized by 
Aristotle, De caelo 4 1. 308718, in one sentence: some say that there is no 
above and below in the world, because all directions are equivalent and 
anyone walking round from anywhere will come to stand at his antipode. 
Aristotle then refutes this theory by saying that ‘above’ has a real physical 
sense and means ‘nearest to the extreme, 7é ézyarov, the circumference’, and 

NOTES 85 

‘below’, ‘nearest to the centre, the earth’. Ghazali seers on the whole to agree 
with the argument given in the name of the philosophers. He does not seem 
to be aware that it is in contradiction with two of the principles enunciated 
by himself: that time is relative to us (see p. 41), for time is regarded here ag 
objective and irreversible; and that spatial extension is apprehended as 
divided through the relation of high and low (see p. 42). 

Pp. 47. 2. For the answer is irrelevant, since the problem is; Why is there 
4 final term to the objective spatial dimension ? 

Pp: 47. 3- does. 

Pp. 47. 4. See p. 27. 

p. 47. 5. Ghazali will not really object that ‘above’ and ‘below’ form an 
infinite series because of experience based on imagination, since according 
to him ‘above’ and ‘below’ have no definite sense; he will now use the terms 
‘outside’ and ‘inside’, which for Averroés, however, have the same meaning 
as ‘above’ and ‘below’. 

p. 47. 6. Aristotle docs not distinguish space from place, i.e. the space 
actually occupied by a body, The consequence of this is his negation of the 
void. The space of the world is contained as in a vessel by its extreme sur- 
face. A body is in a place when it is surrounded by another body outside it; 
but if not, not {Arist. Phys. d 5, 212938). 

p. 48.1. To be consistent Ghazali ought to have said ‘cannot be 
imagined’. 

p. 48.2. Imperceptible, 51d, dvaie@yrov. Those who believe in the 
void, says Aristotle, believe it to be an extension not occupied by any 
perceptible body (PAys. 4 6. 219927) ; and he says, Phys. 25. ad init., that it 
is impossible that there should exist an infinite void separated from the 
perceptible. 

p. 48 .3. Amongst the five reasons which Aristotle, Phys. I 4. 203°r5, 
gives for the belief in something infinite, he reckons the imagination as the 
most important. Through imagination that which is outside heaven, 76 cw 
tot otpaved, seems to be unlimited, and this would imply also the infinitudée 
of body. 

p: 49. 1. The word I translate by ‘measure’, 30 , is ambiguous and can 
mean also ‘possibility’; either meaning would be appropriate here. 

p. 49. 2. The whole of this passage is a variation on the argument given 
by Averroés, pp. 17-18, see also note 17. 1. 

P. 49. 3. ob pdvow Si rHv xivqow 7H ypdven petpoduer, GAG Kai 7H} Kijoes 
voy xpdvor Sid 76 dpileras Sx” AyAwr: not only do we measure movement 
through time, but reciprocally time through movement, since they mutually 
determine each other, Aristotle, Phys, 4 12. 22014, 

36 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Pp: §0. I. Le. we can find that one movernent is longer than another by 
measuring them with units they both have in common. ‘Aristotle says, loc. 
cit, 1. 18: ‘when we call time much or little we measure it through units of 
motion, as we measure numbered things through the units of number—the 
number of horses, for example, by taking one horse as a unit’. 

p. 50. 2. Every actuality is the actualization of a potentiality, and since 
movement is the actualization of the mobile as such (¢apéy 3} rH Kivnow 
etvas évreddyecav 108 xuntod § xegrév Pips. @ 1. 25149), it presupposes the 
existence of a mobile. And since movement is measured by time, time also 
must be eternal. 

p- 50. 3. This argument is found, for example, in Avicenna’s Salvation, 
p- 18g and p. 421. 

Pp. 50. 4. ie. every potentiality will realize its.actuality and every actuality 
is the consequence of its own potentiality ; e.g. if God had created the world 
a thousand years ago, this would have been the actualization of the potential- 
ity of creating the world a thousand years ago, and the world could not have 
been created eleven Inindred years ago, because this was never realized and 
therefore was not possible. Averroés refers here to one of the problems most 
discussed in Islam, whether there can be possibles that are never realized. 
According to Aristotle, Met. @ 4 ad init., you cannot say that a certain 
thing may possibly be but will never be, for this would destroy the definition 
of the impossible, since ‘impossible’ means what will never he (it is this 
conception of the possible which is meant by Aristotle when he declares that 
there cannot be an infinite possible time, since a possible cannot be infinitely 
unrealized; see note 17. 1 and below). Averroés himself often accepts this 
definition, but it is contrary to the basic idea of Aristotelian philosophy, the 
reality of a potentiality which may or may not happen; and by declaring 
that the possible must happen he reduces it to necessity. This conception of 
the possible—which is also maintained by Simplicius, fn Phys. 1225. 32 
dwvarh ddvvarov ody Ererarc—forms the basis of the argument given by the 
Megarian Diodorus Cronus, see my Eg, d. Met. d. Av., p. 209. 

Pp. 50. 5. Le.since every possible movement in the world is in time, it may 
well be that any ‘possible’ is connected with time (the question, however, is: 
Are there any ‘passibles’ outside the world ?). 

p- 51. 1, There is certainly no difference. 

p. 51. 2. The reasoning is: it is impossible to imagine the world smaller or 
higger than it actually is (this is a petitie principti, for it needs to be proved that 
actually it is not infinite}, but before the world existed and its possibility 
was actualized, the world might possibly have any size, since it was then 
not yet necessary that the world should have its actual size. This implies that 
the future is not yet determined, but that when a thing has once occurred it 
must necessarily be what it is. This conception is found in Aristotle, De 

NOTES 37 

interpr. 9. 19°23: that a thing is in the time in which it is, is indeed necessary 
(76 edo ofp elvat td dv drov 3... dvdyen), but it is not necessary that a naval 
battle will take place tomorrow, it is only necessary that either it will take 
place or not. In reference to the future there are therefore three natures: the 
possible, the impossible, and the necessary. 

Pp. 52, 1. See note 27, 3. 
Pp: 52: 2. i.e. it is based on reason, not on mere imagination. 

Pp. 52. 3. That the generation of the world would imply a odcracs, some 
formation out of which the change could take place, is laid down by 
Aristotle, Decaelo A 10. 280*23, and he proves, ibid. 7” 2. 301530302", the 
impossibility of a generation ex nifzlo, since it demands an empty space to 
hold previously non-existent bodies. Compare the Stoic argument (Ps.- 
Philo, De incorrupt. mundi 102, Stow. Vet. Fr. ii. 188, 24} that there has to be 
empty space in which the world can dissolve itself at its conflagration. 

Pp. 52.4. This sentence expresses of course a certain contempt for the 
theologians. Maimonides in his Guide of the Perplexed, i, ch. 73, where he gives 
a summary of the systern of the Muslim theologians, says only of the older 
Mutakaflimun that they believed in the theory of the Void. Empty space is 
refuted by Ibn Hazm, op. cit. v. 70, 71 and i. 25 sqq. 

Pp. §2. 5. By the Ash‘arites. Ghazali here gives in Ash‘arite terminology 
a theory of the Ash‘arites which he criticizes, although he accepts it ulti- 
mately. He pretends, however, that it is given by the philosophers, and 
indeed it may have been given by a philosopher for the reason stated in 
note §0. 4 (cf. also next note), but there is here some confusion in Ghazali’s 
mind. 

p- §2. 6. i.e. the world, having the size it has, could not have been created 
otherwise, for the possible is what will be some day realized; a difference in 
size was never realized, and it was therefore not possible and cou/d not have 
been realized, i.e. it is impossible that reality should have been different 
from what it actually is (cf. Spinoza, Ets. i, prop. xxxiii: ‘res nullo alio 
modo neque alio ordine a Deo produci potuerunt, quam productae sunt’). 
The theory of the Ash‘arites comes to the same as Aristotle’s doctrine that 
the possible must always be realized, but neither Aristotle nor Averroés is 
aware of the implication of this doctrine, i.e. that it destroys their own theory 
of objective pessibiliey—the possibility of opposite acts. The Ash‘arites in 
their doctrine of the possible are dependent on the Megarian and Stoic 
conception of the possible, just as in their whole conception of fate and will 
they depend on the Stoics. The Ash‘arite doctrine that there is no possible 
before the real, actual fact, that the possible is coexistent and coextensive 
with the actual, is the Megarian theory ‘that a thing can act only when it is 
acting, and when it is not acting cannot act’, criticized by Aristotle at Met. 

38 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

@ 3. 1046ag. The word 55.4., which I translate by “can be done’, corre- 
sponds in its original meaning to the Stoical term eiuappydrov, that which is 
decreed ; but since for the Ash‘arites what is decreed is the real, and the real 
is the possible, and the possible is what can be done, the term takes the 
meaning which it has here, that of anything that can be done by a will, be it 
the eternal Will or the will ofa transitory being (the same development had 
taken place in Stoic doctrine, where the ejpeppéry became identified with 
the émdexrindy to8 yeréabm, ie, fate is what is capable of becoming, see 
Plutarch, De stote. rep. 46 and note §3. 1}. We find in Shahrastani, Religious 
and Philosophical Sects, p. 69, 1, the following definition ye CuuwKell 
Bolbl SH) eT froltly oh a aWG y9aJ which I sould translate: 

‘acts in our power (12a) corresponds to the Stoic term 76 ¢$° Fair) are 
those which have been decreed to be done, and therefore can be done, by 
the power ofa transitory being, and can be realized by it’. This is the Stoic 
conception of the will of the creature as an instrument through which the 
predestined will of God can be realized. It seems to me embodied in such 
definitions as in Alexander of Aphrodisias, De¢ fato 13, Stow, Vet. Fr. ii, 285. 93 
nas bia tay Cun dnd rie dpappdrys ywopdvas emt rots Cqiows edvac; what is 
in the power of animals is what is realized by fate through them as, its 
instrument; or in its Latin form in Chalcidius, Commentary on the Timaeus, 
Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii, 272. 4: ‘quae in nostra potestate posita, omnia certe ex 
initio disposita atque decreta’. 

The Ash‘arite deniat of potentiality, i.¢. the denial of the possible in rerum 
natura, taken from the Megarians, is founded on the law of thought, later 
formulated and violated by Aristotle—see note 12. 9-—that a thing either 
is or is not, ferfium non datur, whereas the potential, as what may be, is not 
yet, still seems to have some reality. From this law of thought, too, the 
Megarians and the Ash ‘arites, as before them the Eleatics, had deduced that 
there can be no becoming (since what becomes neither is nor is not) nor 
transition in time, nor movement in space, for what passes in time ty not in 
time, since it passes, and what moves would de nowhere, since it moves. 
Therefore the Megarians and the Muslim theologians conclude that what 
we call movement is the being (or illogically «ujuara, timeless jumps— 
illogically, for there is no identity in the atoms) of a material atom (dpepds) 
at the next time-atom in the next space-atomn (that this is the theory of the 
Megarians can be seen from Arist., Phys. Z 10, 240°31, and Sext. Emp. Ady. 
flys. ii. 85). This implies the atomic structure of nature (see Pyrrh. Hyp. iii. 
32; for the atomic view in Islam see, ¢.g., the extensive discussion in Ibn 
Hazm, op. cit. v. g2). This atomic structure of nature is not admitted by the 
Stoics, who believe in the infinite divisibility of matter, time, and space (the 
Mu'tazilite an-Nazzam, who is the Islamic thinker most influenced by 
Stoicism, also accepts this infinite divisibility) ; but from them che Mustim 
theologians take the idea of a passive material universe and the one active 

NOTES...” 39 

principle, God, In Islam, however, the immanent Stoic God, the agent of a 
unified universe, becomes the transcendent Allah, who discontinuously 
creates and re-creates His atomic world, 

The problem of the existence of potentiality, i.¢. objective possibility— 
capacities, faculties, tendencies, dispositions, powers, ali the entities that 
imply the term ‘can’ {and every individual is a centre of such possibilities) — 
in which we all seem to believe when we are not philosophizing, was much 
discussed in later Greek and Roman philosophy (see ¢.g. Ps.-Plutarch 
De fate, Cicero De fato, and especially Alexander of Aphrodisias De fato, 

an important book which has never been properly translated) and even 
became a subject of polite banter (see Cicero, Ad familiares ix. 4, Stoie. Vet. 
Fr. it. 93). The problem is very difficult, and ¥ do not see how the Eleatic— 
Megarian argument can be refuted. 

Aristotle argues against the Megarians (Met. @ 3} that potentiality must 
necessarily precede actuality; before a man builds, he says—and it seems 
almost a truism, for it seems evident that it is through the knowledge which 
he has acquired and which lies dormant in his soul that the builder will 
practise his art—he must possess the art of building, i.e. he must be a potential 
builder; before a man actually sees or walks he must have the capacity to 
see or walk. However, there is here a difficulty—-which the Megarian 
Diodorus Cronus saw in his xuptevor Adyos, his ‘master-proof’ (for the prob- 
lem compare Cicero, De fato 7.3 where the question is discussed whether 
a signet-ring, gemma, which never will be broken can be regarded as 
breakable): it is not possible for a man to see, i.e. he cannot see, before all 
the conditions of his seeing are fulfilled, e.g. when ic is tight and his eyes are 
uncovered ; it is impossible that he should walk if he does not will to walk, 
But ifall the conditions of his seeing and walking are fulfilled, so that he can 
see and walk, he will see and walk actually and his seeing and walking will 
be necessary, not possible. Indeed, we seem to hold the contrary propositions 
that we act because we have the power to act (because we can act), and that 
we act because we have to act. The difficulty is felt by Aristotle, where he 
says (Met. © 7, 104978) that a house is potentially a house when there are no 
obstacles and when nothing has to be added or subtracted or altered. But in 
such a case the potential house is already the actual house, and there is no 
process, no becoming. 

The idea of potentiality (and potentiality in Aristotle does not only mean 
‘capacity’, ‘power’, te. ‘can do’, but also ‘can be’, ‘can exist’, ‘can undergo’} 
seems to express our belief in the fundamental identity of things, our belief 
that ex nihilo nihil, que rien ne se crée, rien ne s¢ perd, that all change, all becom- 
ing is but a transformation of what existed previously under another form, 
is but a coming-to-be out of something, a development, an evolution (i.e. 
an unrolling; cf. Cicero, De diz. i. 56. 127: the series of events in time is 
like the uncoiling of a rope, quasi rudentis explicatio), that tomorrow is 

40 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

contained in today, that ciascuna cosa, qual ella 2, diventa (Dante, Parad. xx. 78). 
But the idea of potentiality leaves two things unexplained : (1) the status of 
potentiality, this mysterious state of dormancy between being and non- 
being; (2) the very process of actualization, of development, of evolution, 
for in the actualizing process either something is added to. the potentiality 
and then we have a becoming out of nothing, or nothing is added and then 
there is no change. Aristotle tries to have it both ways. In the example of the 
house given above the potential house is already the actual house, there is 
no process, no becoming; in the example of wine turning sour (cf. note 
6:1. 6), the actual sourness is the actualization of a potential scurness, but 
how this actualization takes place cannot be understood, as Aristotle him- 
self admits, and the actual sourness, since it was not there before, arises out 
of nothing. 

p- 52. 7. They have compromised themselves by accusing their opponents 
of charging God with impotence, since they themselves hold that it is 
impossible that the world should be bigger or smaller than it actuaily is. 

p- §3- 1. The implication of this argument is that for God only the 
contradictory is impossible. Ghazali here makes the important distinction 
between fogica! impossibility or necessity and factual or hypothetical impos- 
sibility or necessity, 76 drayxaior dwlds and 76 dvayxaiov €€ broPécews, found 
confusedly in Aristotle, De part. an. A t. 63g9%2q4 (cf. Met. 5 5. 1015%9 and 
Met. A 7. 1072>12; see also note 23. 3). This distinction is known in modern 
phitosophy through Leibniz’s distinction of verttés de fast and vérités de raison 
(Monad. 33, Nouv. Essais, i. 1. 26). A vérité de raison is that A is not not-A; a 
vérité de fait, that fire burns. The distinction is, however, complicated by the 
fact that we believe that there are reasons why fire burns, as Leibniz acknow- 
hedges, Mfonad, 31-32, that in the apparent changing events there are under- 
lying identities, and the aim of science is to find, in the wérités de fait, véritds de 
raison, The problem of possibility in relation to God was much discussed both 
in Eastern and Western scholasticism. Some, like Ibn Hazm, hold that God. 
can do the impossible, whereas the Ash‘arites exclude the logically impossible 
or what they hold to be the logically impossible (see Ibn Hazm’s criticism 
of them, op. cit. iv. 214, |. 1}. Both Ghazali and the Ash‘arites hold the 
contradictory propositions that nothing is possible but what exists, and that 
for God everything is possible but the logically impossible. Plutarch, De 
stoic. repugn. c. 46, Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. G4. 39, reproaches the Stoics with the 
same contradiction. In modern philosophy Descartes believed in Godl’s 
omnipotence; Leibniz excluded the logically impossible. 

Pp. 53-2. i.e. the possibility that the world might be larger or smailer than 
it actually is. 

Pp. 53. 3- Averroés does not express himself well, but what is implied is 
sound, He should have said: All logical inference is necessary ; no inference 

NOTES 4t 

about fact, however, is based solely on logical necessity, but needs as an 
initial premiss a fact, self-evident (cogito, e.g.) but not logically necessary ; if, 
however, by false reasoning you assume a fact, contradictions will follow 
from this assumption whose exposition is called by Aristotle €« (or da) rod 
auydrov Sexviwae (or droga), e.g, Anal. Pr. A 17. 37*Q, a reductio ad 
absurdum, 

P- 53. 4. Ware ore viv clot mAclovs otlpavol or” eyévarro ott’ evddyerat 
yevcba: mreious: ddr’ els Kai povos Kal TéAaos obros obpards €orw, De caclo 
A 9. 279°9. 

Pp. 53. 5. ie. after the study of logic. 

p. 53. 6. From the thesis that it is impossible that something which has 
not happened (or will not happen) might have happened, Ghazali concludes 
rightly that everything that happens is necessary (of course this implies a 
beliefin natural law ; if you deny natural law with the Ash‘arites, things are 
neither necessary nor possible, they simply are}. This necessity is admitted 
by Averroés. Ghazali, using the double sense of ‘necessity’ in Aristotle, 
proceeds to conclude, from the fact that everything happens by necessity, 
that it will have no cause. Aristotle, as we saw, distinguishes logical necessity 
and factual necessity—a fact is necessary when it has happened through a 
cause ; primary logical necessity is not conditioned, but is necessary by itself 
and eternal, i.e. ie is eternally true or valid. Aristotle, who constantly 
confuses the individual and the universal, facts and propositions, regards 
God’s existence as such an eternal truth and therefore unconditioned and 
necessary by itself (see especially the passage at Met, 4 5. 1015>g indicated 
above in note 53. 1). 

Pp. 54. !. Thisdoctrine is not proper to Avicenna, but, as we have shown, 
is fundamentally Aristotelian. It is the correct answer, according to Aristotle, 
that God’s existence is necessary through His own essence, whereas the 
existence of transitory beings needs an extraneous cause, 

p. 54. 2. This example (see note 29. 4) is highly confused. He has to 
show that transitory existents which are necessary have a cause; what he 
shows is that there are necessities which cannot be attributed to ¢xistents 
because they express a relation between universals. The necessity he 
mentions here concerns the conditions for a saw being a saw, but does 
not refer to the existence of any particular saw. 

Pp. 54-3. There is no necessary connexion between the atoms of the 
Ash‘arite atomic universe, nor does God stand under any law or any con- 
straint; on the contrary, He is the Jaw, the Adyos, the Néyos (the Arabs 
have the word (yal, ndmis). The latter idea is Heraclitean and Stoic, 

Pp. 54. 4. i.e. according to Ghazali: the opponent of the philosopher, i.e. 
the Ash‘arite. 

42 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 54. 5. The argument is not similar, but identical. The thesis is: the 
world is only possible during its existence. Convert this statement and you 
have: the world is impossible before its existence. This is the objection which 
Aristotle makes against the Megarians, Met. @ 2. 1047%10: re e¢ dddvarov 76 
dorepnevov Suvdpews, 7 17) yerdpevov dddvarov Zoras yevéoGas ; again, if that 
which has no possibility is impossible, that which is not happening cannot 
possibly happen, i.e. if the possible is what happens, that which does not 
happen (‘that which has no possibility’) is impossible; therefore, Aristotle 
concludes, before the possible thing happened it was impossible. Aristotle's 
argument rests on a quaterme terminorum; he takes ‘possible’ in its Megarian 
sense of ‘happening’ and ‘impossible’ in the usual sense of ‘what cannot 
happen’. If he had given to the word ‘impossible’ the sense the Megarians 
intended, his argument would only have amounted to this; ‘If that which. 
is not, is not, that which is not happening is not happening,’ Ghazali turns 
here completely round; he now makes the philosophers, using Aristotte’s 
argument, attack the Ash‘arite thesis, which he pretended they held, and he 
defends the Ash‘arite thesis which he previously attacked himself. 

p. 54 6. If you take ‘impossible’ to mean, as it does for the Ash‘arites, 
‘non-existent’ and ‘possible’ ‘existent’, this is certainly quite obvious, 

Pp. $4. 7- Ghazali now reverts to his former argument based on the 
analogy of time and space; this sentence has no connexion with what im- 
mediately precedes, 

p. 54. 8. ic. the suppositions of different possibilities in time for the 
creation of the world as given in Avicenna’s argument, pp. 48-49. 

P- 54-9. 1.¢, because all things are in time, imagination represents God 
as in time. 

Pp. 55. 1. i.e. the possible implies the impossible, but the impossible is what 
necessarily cannot happen and therefore implies necessity. 

p- 55. 2. This- refers to Aristotle, det. 4 t2, ro1gb23 and De caelo A 12. 
26127: to assume that what is impossible may exist, ¢.g. the fact that the 
diagonal of a square is commensurate with the side, is an impossible false. 
hood, because, according to Aristotle, its contrary is net only false, but also 
false of necessity; to assume that the possible may exist is a possible false- 
hood, because the contrary is not necessarily false; that a man should be 
seated is possible, says Aristotle, since it is not necessarily false that he is 
seated. 

P. 55: 3. This is quite true. The Megarians and the Ash‘arites should 
not have said that the possible is coextensive with the actual; they should 
have said that ‘possible’ has no meaning at all, 

p. 55-4. If it ts impossible before its existence, it cannot be true, as he 
has just said, that a thing should be possible before its existence, 

NOTES 4a 

P- 55-5 Nothing absolutely incorruptible--says Aristotle, Met. 0 
10§0%16—is absolutely potential: otddv dpa trav dd@dpraw da\ds Suvdjec 
éoriv dmaas. 

p- 55-6. See notes go. 4, 17. 1, and below. 

p- 59. t. This is one of the fundamental ideas of the Aristotelian philo- 
sophy and also one of its fundamental contradictions: in action (evépyea) 
ci, lies the perfection (érreddyera) SLXGu1, of every being, and indeed 
these two terms are often used synonymously ; on the other hand, the idea of 
action presupposes the idea of perfection, of an end; action is not an end in 
itself (this is denied by Arist. Met. @ 6, 1048518, at least for certain actions), 
but tends towards an end. We have here the old difficulty of change 
and becoming, concealed through the ambiguous use of the term évépyera. 
évépyeia is the act, the actualizing, it is also the end of the process of actualiz- 
ing, the ding in actuality, the reality attained, and in fact it is synonymous 
with reality. Without realizing it Aristotle identifies becoming and being, 
the act, dvépyeia, towards the end becomes the end, évreAdyera, and inversely 
the end, érerdyera, becomes the act, evépyece. There is a similar confusion in 
Aristotle’s theory of movement which he defines Phys, @ 5. 25758 as an 
incomplete action, érreAdyesa &reAjs. Now every activity is the actualization 
of a potency, ic. a change, and every change for Aristotle is movement, 
However, in this definition Aristotle seems to mean by action not the pro- 
cess, the attaining of the end, but the end attained, whereas in the definition 
of movement as 4 rod Suvdjer évreAdyera by entelechy the process is meant. 

p- 57. 1. This proof is the same as that of Avicenna (pp. 48-49) and 
Averroés (p. 17), only here it is applied to the existence of the world. It is 
based on the idea that what is possible must at some time be realized, and 
thae therefore nothing can be eternally possible; and it is a petitio princtpii, 
ie. it assumes that the world is ungenerated (if you substitute the words 
‘existence of Socrates’ for ‘existence of the world’ the argument will not 
prove the eternal existence of Socrates). The world is not eternal, because 
jt could not not have been, but, because the world is eternal, it could not 
not be, The same petifio principii is found in Aristotle, De caclo A 10-12, 
which is the source of this argument, where, besides, Aristotle proves in 
extenso the two truisms (1) that what exists during an infinite time—-and 
he implies by ‘infinite’, infinite @ parte ante and a parte post—can neither 
become nor perish, since if it did, it would only be at some time; and (2) that 
what is both ungenerated and incorruptible cannot be of the nature of the 
possible {i,e. the changing), i.c. can neither be generated nor be destroyed. 

Pp. 57-2. ‘Possible’ in the sense of what ‘has to be’, 

P. 57. 3- 1. is logically necessary; absurd, Iles, dromos. 

P- 57: 4. Cf. De caelo A 12. 28120: if anything that exists for an infinite 
time is destructible (¢@ap7év), it must have the possibility ofnot being. 

4 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 57. 5. Or more exactly, Aristotle says, Phys. I’ 4. 203°90: G&déyeoPat F 
civan obdév Stagépea év rois diSiots, in eternal. beings possibility (i.e. realiza- 
tion) and existence coincide. 

p- 57. 6. This is in opposition to the Ash‘arite doctrine that possibility 
conforms to reality, ie. is coextensive with it. 

p. 58. 1. This sentence agrees with the Ash‘arite doctrine that the pos- 
sible is what has become (i.e. that possibility is coextensive with reality) ; i.e. 
Ghazali first affirms in this passage, in opposition to the argument of the 
philosophers which implies that what becomes had necessarily to become, 
that there is objective possibility: the world could become at any time 
whatever, i.e. God could create at any moment, but did aot do so; and then 
he denies this in the last sentence by saying that only what has been realized 
is possible. What he wants to say is this: the world might have been created 
at any time, but it has been in fact created (its creation was possible, in the 
Ash‘arite sense) at a definite specified time. This is, of course, a petttio 
principit, since.the problem is whether the world was created or is eternal. 

p. 58.2, The problem of an alternative generation and corruption, as 
asserted by Empedocles, the Atomists, and Heraclitus (the Stoics later renew 
the Heraclitean doctrine of the world as darépevos pérpa, droaPendperos 
vézpa, inflamed and extinguished according to measures), is discussed by 
Aristotle, De caelo A 10. 280°11, He compares this to the evolution of a child 
into a man, and the production of a child out of a man, and says it must be 
an ordered, not a fortuitous process, and must be not an absolute generation 
and destruction of the world, but only a change in its dispositions (8:a- 
Oécets). 

p- 58. 3. The theologians believe in the corruptibility of the world, for 
which, as we will see in the next chapter, they give the main Stoic argument. 

p. 58. 4. See, for example, Aristotle, Afet. Z 7. 1032*20: évvaray yap xai 
elvas Kat prj elvas Exagtov abraiv, totre 8 cativ H év éxdarw Sdn, for whatin every 
thing has the potency to be or not to be, that is the matter in every thing. 

p. 58. 5. This is not absolutely true; che forms do not become either— 
form is eternal like matter, and becoming is a change of form in matter. 
Aristotle, however, has also (Phys. A g. 19251) the term duowd xai ¢dapra 
«yj, natural and perishable forms. See note 31. 1. 

Pp. 59. 1. eg. Met. @ 8. 109016: odfev dpa ray ddddpruw drids Gude 
€oriv dy dias, nothing which is essentially incorruptible is essentially in 
potency (i.¢. can be or not be}. 

p. 59. 2. This is not absolutely true; it isin contradiction to what Ghazali 
has just said, namely that matter itself is the essentially potential. It is, 
however, true that in Aristotelian philosophy potentiality is at the same time 
the substrate, the potentiality in the substrate, and the potentiality of the 
agent. See the text below and note 62. 6. 

NOTES *° 45 

P- 59. 3. See note 11. 5. 

P- §9. 4. le. that a man can do something is a consequence of his 
Possessing the power to do it, 

P- 59 § ie. an objective reality, not samething subjective, 

Pp. 59. 6. i.¢, matter, 

p- 60. 1. For the circularity of this process see page 33 and note 33. 4. 

p- 60. 2. Aristotle admits both an objective necessity and an objective 
possibility. The Stoics, who regard the world as a closed unique system in 
which everything that happens is the necessary consequence of an eternally 
determined concatenation of causes and effects, deny objective possibility 
(not quite consistently, as we have seen) and define possibility and chance in 
terms of our human ignorance of the Jaws of nature, airla adnAos évépamiveys 
Aoywoped (Alex. Aphr. De fate c. 8, p. 174. 2, Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 281, 35). Te 
would seem that only the Eleatics and Megarians, who absolutely deny all 
becoming, could deny both objective necessity and objective possibility. 
However, the Stoics divide ‘things’ (see note 3. 6} into the corporeal and the 
incorporeal, relations belonging to the incorporeal. Necessity and possibility, 
being both relations and incorporeal, would have to be regarded by them 
as subjective. The Stoics seem to have committed the same inconsistency as 
many moderns who appear to believe in the objective necessity of cause and 
in the necessary character of objective laws of nature, but regard both 
possibility and necessity as expressing not the characteristics of things, 
but the conditions of our knowledge of them. That Ghazali may have taken 
his argument from some late Stoic source is indicated by the expression 
‘provided no obstacle presents itself’. Sexeus Empiricus tells us in fact 
(Ado. og. i. 253} that che later Stoics regarded the apprehensive presentation 
Thy naradyrray ¢avrasiay as a criterion of truth, provided that it hes no 
obstacle, +5 pnSév Exovsay Evornya. The term xarednarés, eogies the appre- 
hended, comprehended (comprehendibile in Cicero’s translation, see Stete. 
Vet. Fr. i. 18. 18), is frequently used in Muslim theology (see ¢.g. Massignon, 
op. cit., p. 56), and is often regarded by the theologians as synonymous with 
‘possible’... For the intermediate position of the apprehensive presenta- 
tion see Cicero, loc. cit.: ‘sed inter scientiam et inscientiam comprehen- 
sionem . . . coliocabae (scilicet: Zeno), eamque neque in rectis neque in 
pravis numerabat, sed soli credendum esse dicebat’, Chrysippus’ definition 
of the possible (Alex. Aphr. De fato c. 10, Stoic. Vet, Fr. ii, p. 279. 15) as that 
which is not prevented from happening by anything, although it may not 
happen (Suvaréy efvae yerdoGar rod70 8 bn’ ovderds Kwrveras yevéaBar, xav ps3} 
yerjrat} implies of course objective possibility (see also note 241. [). 

p. 60. 3, This, the most obvious definition of truth, is based on Aristotle, 
De interpr. 9. 19°33 Spolws of Adyor GAnGeis dowep ra mpdypara. The definition 

46 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

becomes somewhat problematic when one asks what in the mind conforms 
to realiey; but when rightly interpreted it is undoubtedly true, since it 
expresses in the form of an image the tautology that a true judgement is 
a judgement which expresses a truth ({‘“truth’ which is assumed in alt thought 
is indefinable and irreducible like all primary concepts). Aristotle has also in 
this form the definition Met. IF 6. 1011526: 76 pév yap Adyew 76 dv ph elvan 
h TO ph bv elvar feddos, 16 S€ Sv elvar nal rd wp Sv po} efvar dAnGés. Aristotle 
holds three views on truth: (1) the conformity of thought with reality; 
(2} a connexion berween concepts (cupmAon} vonsdrwv) inside the judge- 
ment, De an. F 8. 432°11; (3) reality itself, Met. @ 10. 10511. 

p- 60. 4. It is an Aristotelian assumption that every logical concept has its 
counterpart in reality; thus the absence of a quality (privation, rrépyocs) 
takes for Aristotle a positive meaning, and even cf absolute privation, the 
non-existent, he says (Afe¢. J” 2. 1003%10) that it is something, namely the 
non-existent (see note 61, 7), The ‘something’ (ri, see note 3. 6) plays an 
important role in Stoicism, which distinguishes between meaning and exist- 
ence: ‘nothing’ means something, but the ‘something’ it means does not 
exist, Averroés in his answer might have said that the impossible, like the 
non-existent, expresses a negation; neither the impossible nor the non- 
existent exists, and therefore they need no substratum, but the non-existence 
of the impossible does not imply the non-existence of the possible, and the 
problem Ghazali has touched upon does not concern the impossible only, 
the negation of the possible, but negation generally; however, he follows a 
more Aristotelian train of thought, and regards the privation of the possible 
as a reality. 

p. 61.1. Ghazali seems to hold that every concept has to be either 
necessary, impossible, or possible; modality, however, refers only to 
judgements, Ghazali’s argument would have seemed more plausible, if 
he had given as an example that four can be divided by two, which is 
a purely cational judgement and does not refer ta any definite time. 
Ghazali’s argument may be an interpretation of the Stoic theory as, for 
example, expounded by Cicero (loc. cit,}: ‘visis non omnibus adiungebat 
[scilicet: Zeno} fidem, sed tis solum quae proprtam guandam haberent declara- 
tionem earum renum quae viderentur’, The apprehending presentation 
carries with itself its own evidence, 

p- 61. 2. By the ‘possible’ as predicated of the recipient he means the 
at present existing and actualized matter which is changing, losing one 
attribute and taking the contrary; e.g. wine turning into vinegar. The 
opposite of this possible is the impossible, for the matter of the wine can 
never become non-existent. The opposite of the sweetness of the wine is the 
acidity of the vinegar, and chis acidity is necessary because the wine, 
turning into vinegar, will necessarily become acid. 

NOTES 47 

p. 61. 3. The sweetness (i.e. the potentiality to become acidity) loses its 
potentiality when the wine has become acid, i.¢, the sweetness is not there 
any more (odx é-undpye:, see Phys. A 8, 191516). 

p- 61. 4. It is the wine which is potentially vinegar, and which changes 
from potential vinegar into actual vinegar; in other words, becoming is not 
the change of a quality into another quality, of the sweetness into acidity ; 
the substance, the substratum (the wine ; the term ‘substratum’ is ambiguous, 
and I shall explain the difficulty below) becomes another substance through 
a change of quality. Something persists, says Aristotle, Met. A 2 ad init., but 
the opposite does not persist; there is, therefore, a third entity besides the 
opposites, namely matter, cf. Phys. A 7. 190817. 

p- 61. §. So far as I know, this definition is not found in Aristotle in 
exactly this form, but it expresses his conception perfectly. Cf such passages 
as Met. N 2. 1089728 : 76 xara Siva (viz. py dv) de rodrou } yéveais dori, out 
of the possible (which is said not to be} generation follows, and Met. @ 8. 
1050>11: 76 dpa Svvardy eva evddyerar wat efvar xat yey) efvae, that, then, 
which can possibly be can either be or not be, 

p- 61.6, The possible non-existent lies in the orépyas of what may 
become ; in our example, the sweetness is the orépnors (i.e. it is the non- 
acidity} of the acidity. In this orépnass, in this sweetness (the non-acidity), 
the acidity lies potentially hidden; this potency is a kind of intermediate 
between pure nothingness and full reality. It seems an astonishing and 
unbelievable paradox, Aristotle himself says (PAys. A 8. 191916), chat any- 
thing can become in this way out of the non-existent. 

p. 61. 7. Indeed, the Mu'‘tazilite doctrine of the non-existent as a 
reality is based on Aristotle’s doctrine of orépyois as something positive (see 
also note 3. 6). There is an interesting parallel in early medieval Western 
philosophy: Fredegisus of Tours {an Englishman who was a pupil of 
Alcuin and who died in 819) says in his Epistola de nihilo ef tenebris (ed. 
Migne, Pats. L. cv. 755}: ‘Omnis significatio est quod est. “Nihil!” autem 
aliquid significat. Igitur “nihil” eius significatio est quid est, id est rei 
existentis.’ 

p- 62. 1. The actualized matter, wine gua wine, is in actuality; in the 
wine, however, there is an underlying substratum, matter, dAn, which is in 
potency. The last section of this passage is redundant and only repeats what 
I have tried to explain in notes 61. 2 to 61. 6. 

p. 62.2. The acidity of the vinegar is the outcome of the process of 
becoming ; i.e. it belongs to the becoming in so far as it is actual, it exists in 
the product, whereas the non-acidity, the sweetness changing into it, has 
disappeared. 

p- 62. 3. Le. matter cannot be already actual, for becoming implies 
something that is not actual. 

48 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 62. 4. ie. both Mu'tazilites and philosophers regard non-existence as 
something positive, The philosophers, however, believe that non-existence, 
which they call matter, never exists in reality without being connected with 
a form. The transition from blood to sperma and from sperma to the mem 
bers of the embryo refers to Aristotle’s theory, De gen. an. A 19. 72655, that 
sperma is concocted blood coming from alk parts pépra, «Lasl, of the animal 
and possessing potentially all the parts of the new animal. 

p. 62.5. i.e. it would be an independent reality, fully existent and 
actual in itself. 

p. 62.6. The whole of this passage is a faithful, although somewhat 
redundant, summary of Aristotle's theory of becoming, discussed in Phys. A 
6-10. This theory is contradictory, for it is said that becoming is the transi- 
tion of a ordpyars into a positive quality (e.g. non-acidity into acidity) and 
that in the ordpyors its opposite potentially es, but it is also said, as T have 
explained in note 61. 4, that the sweetness, the orépnats of acidity does not 
become acidity ; it leaves the wine and is replaced by its opposite, the acidity, 
and therefore it is the substratum, the substance, the wine, which becomes 
acid, i.e. the potentiality lies in the wine, not in the sweetness. But even this 
latter thesis can only be maintained through an ambiguity in the term 
‘substratum’ or ‘substance’. For although the wine may be called asubstance 
or substratum, according to Aristotte’s definition (Caf. 5) that the substance 
is the individual, the real substratum of the whole process is not the wine 
but matter. For the wine is nothing but the combination of matter and form; 
when wine tums into vinegar some forms leave the substraturn, matter, to be 
replaced by other forms ; there is here no becoming, only a change of forms; 
the real substratum, unqualified matter, remains, and remains eternally. 
For matter is eternal, although according to Aristotle it is pure potentiality, 
and nothing potential, according to him, can be eternal, and in this eternal 
matter eternal forms alternatively appear and vanish eternally, for forms 
too are eternal. Eternal forms and eternal matter, indeed, are the basic 
Principles of the whole system, and through the combination of these 
principles the transient world is said to arise. But how can such hetero~ 
geneous elements as matter and form combine; how can the transient 
individual arise out of the combination of these two eternal elements? 
Whence do these eternal forms come, and whither do they go? Concerning 
this last problem there are two attempts at solution: (1) the transcendent 
Middie Platonic and Neoplatenic solution that they lie eternally in the 
mind of a transcendent God; (2) the immanent Stoic solution that the 
individual forms {Adyor) lie in germ (emeppastxds) hidden in the immanent 
divine logos which unfolds itself in the world fatally and inexorably. The 
theory of a germinal development, Og » was known in Islam and is 
ascribed to an-Nazzam (cf. note 31. 1 and compare my Epitome der Meta- 
physik des Averraes, pp. 199-1). 

NOTES 49 

p. 62. 7, Although this is in verbal agreement with Avicenna it is scarcely 
true in fact, for according to the Muslim philosophers, who combine the 
Plotinian concept of the soul as a substance with the Aristotelian concept of 
the soul as a form, the human soul never subsists by itself; during life it is 
in need of the human body, and after death it is, in one way or another, part 
of the universal soul; see notes 15. 1 and 14. 4. 

p. 62. 8. ghee » ‘impressed’, is a translation of the Stoic term rvzodpevor 

or evodpaytdpevor used of the presentation, ¢dayragia, as stamped on the 
material soul (see e.g. Sexe. Emp. Hyp. Pyrrk. ii. 70; Adv. fog. i. 228). The 
expressions rémos and odpaysiduevot are used earlier by Aristotle, De memoria 
1. 450*31-32; see also note 67. t. That the soul is not impressed on the body 
is often maintained by Avicenna, ¢.g. Book of Theorems and Notices, ed. Forget, 
p. 219. 

p. 63. 1. According to Aristotle the soul has its seat in warmth (Sepydr) 
or in spirit (wvespa) ; see De gen. an. B 3. 73629, cf. note 64. ¢. 

p- 63. 2. i.e. becoming implies a relation to a pre-existent matter and to 
an agent, but the individual souls do not become out of anything, nor are 
they created (ex nikilo) by God. The mystery of the human personality, the 
uniqueness of my Ego, cannot be explained by science, which tries to 
rationalize events by seeking to find the underlying identities in the apparent 
changes. However much I may resemble my parents, however much the 
same universals may describe my physical and moral constitution, itis I, my 
unique Ego, individuum ineffabile, who becomes, lives, thinks, suffers, enjoys, 
and dies. Neither the traducianism of the rationalists, nor the creationism of 
the faithful, can explain the primary fact of my individual, personal 
existence, 

p. 63. 3. ie. God. 

p. 63. 4. See note 14. 6. 

p. 63. 5. Light, according to Plotinus (Ena. iv. 5. 7}, is incorporeal ; the 
image in the mirror is the act of the object reflected, and when the object 
disappears, the image vanishes ; in the same way the individual soul reflects 
the light of the world-soul (cf. Leibniz’s conception of the monad as ‘un 
miroir vivant, représentatif de I’Univers selon son point de vue’, Cuvres, 
Erdmann, p. 714). According to Aristotle, Meteor. F 2. 372°33, there are in 
mirrors different possibilities of reflection, in some of which only shape is 
reflected, in others colour also. 

p. 63. 6, ‘Sound understanding’, ép@és Adyos, see note 8. 3. Islam has 
no faith in the self-taught man (autodidactus) : doles GU225! a) pm y cre 
‘Satan is the master of him who has no master’, says an Arabic proverb. 

p: 63. 7. This is an Arabic proverb. Maidani has it in this form: 
pa BS olgdl Gl (Freytag, Meid, Prov. i, p. 11). 

5° TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 64. &. The distinction between knowing and the object known pro- 
vides the conclusive argument against all subjectivism. If perception and 
thought had no object beyond themselves, we should dwell in timetess 
monads without windows or communication—timeless, for time would 
be subjective toc. All knowledge is relational, related to an-object of know- 
ledge; if percipere and cognoscere were identical with their objects, there 
could be neither illusion nor falsehood, but everything would merely be. 
The Platonic Socrates in the Theaetetus realized this when he drew the 
consequence from Protagoras’ doctrine (167 a): obre ydp ra 2x Svea Suvardy 
dofdea odre dda, zap’ & av ndoyy, raira 8 dei dAn 4, for no one can think 
anything but what he thinks, nor perceive anything but what he perceives, 
and this is always true. For all our thinking the existence of a unique, 
common, objective world is an unavoidable primary assumption. Cf. 
note 65. 3. 

p. 64. 2. Le. the Platonists and Neoplatonists. 

p. 64. 3. Galen says, ¢.g. Quod anim. mor. corp. temp. seq. ¢. 3.775 K., that if 
the soul is mortal (which seems problematic to Galen), all the forms and 
parts of the soul will have potentialities which foliow (8dxne, cm) the 
temperament (xpaas, z! }:-+) of its matter. 

p. 64. 4. ‘The possibility prior to the becoming is relative to matter’; 
this refers probably to Aristotle’s theory that the seat of the soul is in warmth 
and spirit, by which he wishes to explain how the soul can be transferred 
through procreation from one being to another. The problem, however, is 
how and whence the new individual sou? arises. This problem was not seen 
by Aristotle, for whom soul is a form, a universal, whereas Callias and 
Socrates are individuals only through their bodies; see notes 14. 4 and 
67. 3. 

p. 64. 5. According to Aristotle the soul is exreAdyeca 3} parry odbparos 
dvoixoG épyanxad, the first entelechy of a natural, organic body (‘organic’, 
i.e. used as an instrument), De an. Bi. 4125s; the body is merely there to 
serve as an instrument for the soul, De part. an, A. 641*29. 

p. 64. 6. That they have objects seems in contradiction to Ghazali’s 
theory, which appears to assert that concepts simply are. If they have objects, 
what, according to Ghazali, are these objects, and in what, according to 
Ghazali, does science consist? 

p. 55. 1. Blackness and whiteness, black and white, however, are just as 
much universals as receptivity of colour. 

p. 65. 2. ive, if it is not impossible for other concepts to exist only in 
minds, not in the external world. 

p. 65. 3. We have entered here upon the perennial problem of univer- 
sals, Ghazali is justified in saying that one cannot assert the objectivity of 

NOTES 51 

necessity and possibility and deny the objectivity of universals, If we believe 
with the Aristotelians in the ‘natures’ of things, we have to admit the 
objectivity of universals, although we may be at a loss to explain the mode 
of their being and how these universals and ‘natures’ are related to the 
individuals. Ghazali’s own nominalistic view is untenable ; it is based on the 
common illusion of representing the spiritual, of regarding as representable 
what cannot be represented, and on the consequent representation, 
materialization, and localization of thought as imprints in the soul, as 
individual spiritual atoms tn the mind. Material things, however, are sub- 
sistent by themselves—they merely are; but every perception, every thought, 
expresses a relation, and points beyond itself. We perceive things, we think 
about things, and every object of thought can become the object of echought 
for innumerable thinkers: the basic, unrepresentable fact of thought, in- 
explicable and indefinable—since it is assumed in all definition and explana- 
tion—, is that we can mean something objective, and that our meaning can 
be communicated to others and understood by them. 

p. 65. 4. That knowledge is not knowledge of the universal concept is 
a view contrary to that of Aristotle, who says that knowledge is always of the 
universal, e.g. Met. B6 ad fin. xafédou 7} emoriun warrwy. This is the great 
and insoluble difficulty of his system, that for it all reality is individual, ail 
knowledge universal. The second assertion, that the individuals are known 
in a universal way, yrupiorras 7 xabddov Ady, agrees with Aristotle, Met. 
Z 10, 103698. 

p. 65. 5. ie. although potentially things are universals, namely when 
they are known, This is, of course, a petstto principit, for the question is: 
How can, and why should, the mind think as a universal, what in reality 
is an individual ? 

p. 65. 6. The conception of the real as accidentally individual, essent- 
ially universal, is not found in Aristotle; it is not very clear what it means, 
and it seems rather a Platonizing conception of Aristotle. (It is true, of 
course, that according to Aristotle the individual consists of a universal form 
plus matter, but this rather adds to the difficulty, for how, out of these two 
heterogeneous and non-individual elements, can the individual arise?) 

p. 66. 1. According to the Neoplatonic conception of the Muslim 
Aristotelians, universals, i.e. the ideas, exist permanently in the Mind of God, 

p. 66. 2. e.g. blackness is impossible for a thing which eternally possesses 
the opposite of blackness, i.e. whiteness. 

p- 67, 1. This sophistical argument seems to imply that words can mean 
only existents; now the impossible does not exist, and therefore the term 
‘impossible’ cannot be applied to anything. The whole argument is a 

52 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

reductio ad absurdum of a materialistic and nominalistic conception of thought, 
of the conception that every thought is an individual imprint (rérwas) in 
the soul, This Stoic conception was definitely refuted by anticipation in 
Plato Theaet. 191 ¢ sqq.. (Plato already uses the terms drorumoicbat, 
receive an impression, and daxrurlay onpeta, seats of signet-rings). The Mu ‘tazi- 
lites (and Acistotelians) affirm that, since ‘non-existence’ means something, 
the non-existent exists (in a way); Ghazali asserts that, since the non- 
existent does not exist, ‘non-existence’ does not mean anything. The diffi- 
culty was seen by Plato, who makes Socrates ask at Theaet. 189 a: “Will not 
he who thinks of the non-existent (7) 6v} think of nothing (ovdée) ? And does 
he who thinks of nothing think at all?’ 

p. 67. 2. This seems in contradiction to Ghazali’s own theory that there 
is no objective possibility. 

p- §;. 4. See note 63. 2. For Aristotle the soul of the child is transmitted 
by the parents (both Aristotle and the Stoics are traducianists), or rather 
there is one soul, a universal in all human beings. The real crux of Platon- 
ism, Aristotelianism, and Neo-platonism is the relation of the universal to 
the individual. 

p. 67. 4. A remote or secondary relation, since the soul in its essence or 
existence, at Ieast according to the Neoplatonic commentators, is not 
dependent on the body, but is essentially a part of the World-Soul and 
comes from the outside into the body. It is not impressed on the body, 
but merely directs the body. 

p. 67. 5. ic. God, who can produce them ex aihilo by His will. Ghazali 
means that you might just as well say that the soul is potentially in God as 
that it is potentiaily in matter, since the soul is not extracted by God out of 
matter. The statue is not more potentially in the marble than in the sculptor, 
since the sculptor brings the form of the statue out of himself into the matter 
of the marble. And the relation of the soul to the body is sti!l more ‘remote’ 
for the commentators than the relation of form to matter, For, says Plotinus 
(Enn. iv. 3. 20}, the soul, which is not in the body as in a place, év ré7q, or in 
a container, ev dyyetw, is not its form either, for the form which is involved 
in matter is not self-subsistent ; if it is said that the sou! is not engendered 
but selfsubsistent, how can the self-subsistent soul be in the body? 

p. 67. 6. See the Aristotelian definition of the soul quoted in note 64. 4. 

p. 67. 7, The metaphor of the soul as a steersman or pilot is found in 
Plato, Phaedr. 247 c, where the rational part of the soul is called pvyjs 
xuBeprrirns (cf. Arist. De an, Bc. 419%9). At Tim. 41 ¢ the demiurge is said 
to have placed the souls abs és éynpa, as in a ship. 

p. 68. ¢. This refers to the Aristotelian doctrine of the triad which exists 
where there is motion, Phys. @ 5. 256513: the mover, the instrument of 

NOTES 53 

motion, 76 @ «wed, and the object moved. The living being is a cause of 
motion, it moves itself: kwetsae yap 76 L@ov adre tp’ atrot, Phys. @ 4. 254°16, 
it is a mover and a thing moved. To set it in motion it needs an eternal 
mover which is not itself moved, for if everything in motion were moved, it 
would follow that whatever was capable of causing a change would be 
capable of suffering a change, Phys. 8 5. 257415. 1 do not see how this 
theory settles the difficulty, 

p, 68. 2. Averroés substitutes the word ‘identical’ for the word ‘simitar’, 
which he used previously. 

p. 68. 3. How could it be otherwise? Besides, according to Averroés, 
all judgements refer to something outside the soul, 

p. 68. 4. This seems rather like the aporetic (dropqranj}) or dubitative 
method of the Sceptics, see Sext. Emp. Hyp. Pyrth, i. 3. 7. 

p. 68. 5. The title given in the text is The Foundation of Dogmatics. There 
is no such work, although the second book of Ghazali's Vizification of Theology 
bears this name. Its third chapter contains a very short and popular sum- 
mary of his Golden Mean in Dogmatics (written immediately after the present 
work) to which he himself refers the serious student. Probably through an 
error of the copyist the title of this book is given wrongly in the text, but 
Ghazali refers without doubt to his The Golden Mean in Dogmatics (which 
has been translated into Spanish by M. Asin Palacios, Madrid, 1924), in 
which he sets out to prove by reason the dogmas of religion according to the 
Ash‘arites. In his introduction Ghazali says, for example, that theology, 
i.e. religion based on rational proof, is not incumbent on the faithful (and 
may even be dangerous for certain types of men), since Islam does not 
distinguish between faith based on (i} an act of faith and mere acceptance, 
on (2) tradition or authority, on (3) rational proof. The book has four parts: 
(i) God’s existence and essence ; (ii) the divine attributes and the properties 
of these attributes; {iii} the divine operations; {iv} demonstration of pro- 
phetic revelation. There is no full discussion in it of the problem of the 
temporal creation of the world, but he repeats in it some of the arguments 
given in the present book, e.g. the argument based on the revolutions of the 
different spheres. 

p. 69. 1. Probably the correct title was not given in Averroés’ copy of 
Ghazali’s Incoherence of the Philosophers. 

p. 69. 2. The same remark concerning the same book is made by 
Averroés in his Theology and Philosophy, ed. Mueller, p. 21. The Niche for 
Lights is a commentary, following the Neoplatonic mysticism of the Sufis, 
{t) on the verses of the Koran (Sur. xxiv. 35}, which cry out for a mystical 
interpretation: ‘Allah is the light of the heavens and of the earth. His light 
is like a niche wherein is a lamp, the lamp within a glass, the glass as if it 
were a glittering star. From a blessed tree it is lit, an olive-tree neither of 

54 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the East, nor of the West, the oi] whereof were well-nigh luminous, though 
no fire touched it. Light upon Light’; and {2) on the Tradition: ‘Allah has 
seventy thousand veils of light and darkness; were He to withdraw this 
curtain, the splendour of His countenance would surely consume anyone 
who apprehended Him with his sight.’ In this treatise Ghazali expresses his 
belief in God's absolute transcendence and utter ineffability, in a mediating 
principle between God and the world (see note 36. 3), and in mystical 
ecstasy. 

p- 69. 3. i.e. as an ordered universe, xécpos. 

p- 70. 1. One would expect ‘must conform to the possibility’; that it 
‘may or may not conform’ is the theological view (see below, note 70. 4}. 

p. 70. 2. Abu Hudhail ibn al-Allafof Basra, one of the earlier Mu'tazilites 
of the beginning of the ninth century, and a contemporary and adversary 
of an-Nazzam. He applied the theory that what has a first term must 
have a last term even to God’s knowledge and power and, according to 
Ibn Hazm, op. cit, iv, pp. 192-3, he said that God, having arrived at the 
final term of His power, would not be any more able to create even an atom 
or to move a leaf or to resuscitate a dead mosquito. 

p- 70. 3. Simultancously, tiathis, dea xard xpdvov; successively 
Wigluz, épefqs; ic. at any moment all the parts of the past are there in their 
totality. 

Pp. 70. 4. According to the Koran, Sura xxxix, 67, on the Day of Judge- 
ment ‘the whole earth shall be His handful and the heavens will be rolled 
up in His right hand’. That we can know only through the Divine Law that 
the world will end was held by certain Mu'tazilites. According to, for 
example, ‘Abu Zaid al-Balkhi’ (cf. above, note 10.5), The Book of Creation and 
History, i, p. 125 {see also ii, p. 133), there is no‘rational proof of the anni- 
hilation of the world; the series of numbers needs a first term, but no fina) 
term, and a man may have eternal remorse, although his remorse must have 
a beginning. It became the orthodox view that the annihilation of the whole 
world (including the destruction of heaven and hell, which, however, will 
not happen, as is known by revelation) is possible, 3 Lu, considered as some- 
thing in God’s power, see Baghdadi, op. cit., p. 329. Thomas Aquinas held 
that simifarly the problem of the eternity of the world a parte ante cannot be 
solved by mere reason. 

Pp. 70. 5. We have seen, however, p. 37, that Averroés himself regards 
God as not existing in eternal time, i.¢. in an eternal sequence of past, 
present, and future, but in timeless eternity, ic. addy, 4» >. The conception 
of God as existing in timeless eternity severs all relation between God and 

NOTES ~** 55 

the world; the conception of God as in eternal time implies in God an 
instability, a change, a passing, a past. 

p. 70. 6. Averroés takes ‘first term’ in a chronological sense and ‘the 
First’ in the sense of the highest principle (in Arabic the expression ‘the 
first’ is used here in both cases). 

p. 70. 7. Here ‘first term’ means God and ‘its act’ is the world, which 
according to the theologians has a beginning. 

p. 7t. 1. This is rather a difficult theory, for even if God and movement 
are eternal, the past states or acts of God and the past movements would 
seem to have ended. 

p- 71. 2- It is not clear whether any definite philosopher is meant; of 
course many philosophers must have admitted that the past acts of the 
Eternal are past and ended. He may perhaps mean Plato, for whom the 
world has a beginning. 

P- 78.3. Incomprehensible 39 0+ p¢ = ¢ gine pe, dxardAnaros. 

p. 71.4. Compare Aristotle, Phys. 4 12,2213: the eternal, 7a det dvra, 
is not in time. 

Pp. 71.5. This, I believe, does not signify anything but the tautology that 
only the present or the present movement exists or takes place at present. 

p. 72. 0. Le. finite existence, since the infinite cannot be represented. 

p. 72. 2. When the existence of a thing is perfect, ie. when all the 
conditions of its existence are fulfilled, its action cannot be delayed, 

P. 72. 3+ petitio principii, glbaSl le dala. dirreobat rijs Cyrjoces ef 
apxis. 

Pp. 73. §. Averroés wants to suggest that the philosophical view of an 
eternal creation is not in contradiction to the Koranic view and that the 
verb ‘to produce’, “to cause to happen’, which occurs in the Koran, Sura 
Ixv. 1, does not necessarily imply a time-factor, and that therefore the 
Ash‘arites gave a wrong interpretation of the true conception of the Koran. 
(The verb ‘to produce’, “sta in Arabic is a causative form of the verb ‘to 
become’ which corresponds to the Greek yiyvec@at.) 

p. 73. 2. Here he wants to suggest that the philosophical view is in fact 
_ the common view of Muslims, and that when they say that the world is not 
eternal, they really mean that the world has a cause, so that the difference is 
only verbal, (a » Hot factual, yas. 

p- 73. 3» He is possibly alluding here to the Maturidites who—in oppesi- 
tion to the rival school of the Ash‘arites—see, for example, Muhammad al- 
* Murtada, Commentary on Ghazali’s Vivification of Theology, ii, p. 8—regard 
“ God's attributes of action, ers) slag, and His creative production, 
a ca) as coeternal with the attributes of His nature. Ibn Hazm, op. 
: ge iv, p. 212, speaks of even the Ash‘arites as holding the heretical view 

56 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that the world is eternal. For, according to him, the Ash‘arites affirm that 
God says eternally ‘as ’ ‘let it be’ to all things, whether they have been 
created or will be created, and this, according to Ibn Hazm, implies the 
eternity of the world, The theological distinctions are in any case very 
subtie. 

Pp. 74. I. This is an Aristotelian principle (Top. A 3) which Aristotle 
himself puts into practice. 

p. 74.2. This argument, as far as I know, is not found in those works of 
Galen which have come down to us, although there is a reference to our 
problem in De plac. Hippocr. et Plat, Mueller, p. 783 (K. v, p. 760), where 
Gatien says: It is not astonishing that more questions have not been settled 
in philosophy, since in philosophy one cannot base one’s judgement on 
evident experience (weipa); and so some declare that the world has not 
come into being, others that it has. Most probably the argument was found 
in the fourth book of the fost work De demonstratione, ITepi darobetfews, 
Ole Jt og, 4 work of which, among other parts, the first half of Book TV 
was known to the Arabs. In this book Galen discussed those arguments 
which, since they are based on an imperfect experience, can only reach a 
certain degree of probability, Averroés in his commentary on De caelo (see 
Tl. Mueller, Uber Galens Werk vom wissenschafitichen Beweis, Abh. philos.~ 
philolog. Ki. d. K, Bayr. Ak, d. W., Bd. xx) refers to.Galen’s arguments in 
De demonstratione about the eternity of the world and says: ‘Galenus aestimat 
quod nullus potest scire mundum esse aeternum nisi per has propositiones 
quarum origo est a sensu et testimonio; dicit in sua libro quem composuit 
de eis quae credit, quod nihil certam habebat de mundo utrum esset novus 
aut antiquus, et manifestum est quod ipse non utitur in antiquitate mundi 
nisi talibus propositionibus ex verbis suis et in libro suo quem appellavit 
Demonstrationem.’ Philoponus, De aet. mundi xviii, p. 599. 23 gives a long 
quotation out of Galen’s De demonstratione in which Galen comes to the 
conclusion that ‘ungenerated’ implies ‘indissoluble’, but not the reverse, for 
what is indissoluble may be indissoluble not essentially but extrinsically, 
‘since it may haye been provided with immortality’, and Galen himself 
quotes Tim. 41 b, where the demiurge says to the gods he has created: 
‘since you are created, you are not altogether immortal and indissoluble, but 
you shall not be dissolved nor experience the fate of death’. 

Galen’s argument is directed against the Stoic syllogism to prove the cor- 
ruptibility of the world (see Diog. Laert, Vitae vil. t4.1 and Ps.-Philo De aetem. 
mundi (24 (p. to. 11 Reiter); the argument is found also in Philoponus, De 
aet. mundi, p. 502): ‘That whose parts are corruptible is corruptible as a 
whole. Now the parts of the world are corruptible, and therefore the world 
is cortuptible. Moreover, everything is corruptible, if it is capable of decay 
{emdexrixdy rijs éxi 16 yet pov peraBodijs).’ The premiss of the Stoic argument 
seems to be assumed by Ghazali. The Ash‘arites accepted this Stoic argument, 

NOTES 57 

and say (see e.g. the Arabic text of our book, 466.5): oigdl ales Le | 
udrer 9gd ‘everything in which transient entities inhere is itself transient’. 
(This argument is refuted at length by Averroés, Philosophy and Theology, 
ed. Mueller, pp. 31 sqq.) 

Galen’s argument is based on De caelo A 3. 270%11, where Aristotle says: 
the truth of the eternity of Heaven is clear from the evidence of the senses, 
at least so far as to warrant the assent of human faith, for we find in what 
has been handed down from generations no trace of a change in either the 
whole or the parts of the outermost heaven. According to Plato, Tim. 33 a, 
the world is dyrjpwr Kat dvegos, ‘undecaying and free from sickness’, 

That, if the heaven were destroyed, the sun, which according to the 
Stoics is a visible God, atg@yrés beds, would be destroyed, is argued by 
Ps.-Philo, op. cit. 46 (p. 87. 1 Reiter), 

P- 74. 3- ie. the ordinary hypothetical syllogism ,}.a~ ey unl, 
ournypdvov srauhoc in opposition to the hypothetical disjunctive syllogism 
urls , delevypdvor dftwya. (for these terms and the ambiguity 

of the term bectenyutvse dfiwua see Galen, intr. dial. 3, Stoic, Vet. Fr. ii, 71. 15). 

p- 75. 1. That the transitory things of our sublunary world are of no 
significance in relation to the size of the universe is stated by Aristotle, 
Met. F5. 1010928: 6 ydp repi yds rod alobyrot rémos ev Plopd xal yeréoer 
Scarede? pdvos cv, GAN obros ovbev ws eimetvy pdpov tod mavrds éorw. Cf. 

Meteor. A 3. 399513-340°18. 

Pp. 75. 2. This all agrees with Aristotle, De caelo A 3. 270%13-35; 4 9. 
278>21, 

P- 75- 3. In the Posterior Analytics Aristotle says (A 3) that everything 
cannot be proved, but there are immediately evident: principles, dpyat 
dyeoos. These principles are of two classes, those common to all the sciences, 

and those proper to specific sciences, ¢.g. number and magnitude, Anal, 
Post, A7 ad fin. 

P- 75. 4. “Abu Zaid al-Balkhi’, op. cit. ii. 18, tells us that the generality 
of astronomers affirm that the sun is 16645 times the size of the earth. 
Actually the surface of the sun exceeds that of the earth 11,900 times, while 
its volume is 1,306,000 times greater than that of the earth, 

p- 77. §. The difficulty mentioned in this section did not exist for the 
Greek philosophers, who admit neither a creation ex nihilo nor a destruction 
in nihil, Nobody is so naive (edj@qs}—says Ps.-Philo, op. cit. 5 (p. 74. 3 
Reiter) as to ask whether the world can be absolutely annihilated, since 
absolute annihilation, 4} ee 70d dyros dvafpeats, is a non-entity, dvimapKror ; 
the question is, rather, whether its order can be corrupted and dissolved ; 
however, says Ps.-Phito 83 (p. 98. £6 Reiter} if there were, as the Stoics 
believe, a conflagration, éxmépwors, of the world, in what would God’s 

58 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

activity, Ged’s life, then consist, and would not His mactivity be in fact: 
His death, since life is activity? it 

p. 77. 2. For temporal production implies annihilation. 

p: 77. 3. For the performance of nothingness is doing nothing. The 
problem is a consequence of the failure to distinguish between the act and 
the end or intention of the act. It is another example of the identification of 
the process of the act and its end, mentioned im note 56. 1, which language 
itself does not always distinguish sharply; ‘annihilation’ can mean the act 
of annihilating or the result of this act. Non-existence, even my own non- 
existence, can be my intention, but my act of annihilating is something 
positive, 

p- 78, 1. ie. the theologians deny potential existence, they deny that 
there is a tertinm quid between existence and non-existence, that there is a 
passage frorn the one to the other, i.e, becoming ; they transfer the mystery 
of change to the agency of God, or rather, through the miraculous idea of 
creation they eliminate the idea of becoming: God said ‘let it be’ and the 
thing was, immediately, without any process. 

p. 78. 2. i.e. either there is no agent or cause at all, or God’s act must 
attach itself to the non-existent. 

p- 78. 3. Contrary opposites (évevria) that have middle terms can, 
according to Aristotle, only pass into each other through the middle terms ; 
e.g. before arriving from white at black one has to pass grey (Met. 1. 7 and 
Cat, 10). The difficulty, however, of the problem of becoming lies precisely 
in the fact that there is no middle term between being and not-being; a 
thing either is or is not. 

p. 78. 4. The simile is taken from Plato, Rep, vii, 514. 2qq.: beings living 
in a cave and brought into light will, owing to the weakness of their eyes, 
believe that the shadows they formerly saw are truer than the objects which 
are now shewn to them, 

p. 78. 5. In this defence of the doctrine rien ne se crde, rien ne se perd there 
still is, besides the general problem of becoming, this difficulty: it may be 
said that I existed potentially before my actual existence, in so far as my 
existence was possible, but once gone I am gone for ever and have no 
potential existence any more, since ‘potencial’ refers always to the future. 
Uptorn trees are not rooted again. 

p. 78. 6. This is not quite correct; according to Aristotle neither matter 
nor form, both of which are eternal, is subsistent by itself. The only thing 
subsistent by itself is the combination of both, the individual, and this is 
transitory. 

p- 79. 8. Since the theologians regard the act of God not as a process but 
as a Static fact in which the intention, the result, and the act all coincide, 

NOTES 59 

they do not make the result of the annihilating act, namely the annihilation 
of the world, i.¢. nothingness, directly dependent on Him, for this would mean 
thatGod intended anddid nothing. Thefollowing rather naive theories, which 
seem indeed to have been inspired by the criticism of the philosophers, have 
therefore the tendency to interpolate between God and the annihilation of 
the world a éertium guid, a quasi-positive entity which causes the annihila- 
tion. By doing this they of course introduce a process between this tertium 
guid and the annihilation. 

p- 79. 2. This theory is ascribed by Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 168 and 183, 
to Jubbai and his son Abu Hashim. Abu Hashim is regarded as the most 
important Mu‘tazilite of his generation. According to this theory God can- 
not destroy an atom without involving the destruction of Heaven and 
Earth, 

P: 79. 3. Le. if extinction existed in a substratum, it could not be the 
opposite of existence, ic, non-existence, since a non-existent existent is 
absurd. 

p. 79.4, According to Bagdhadi, op. cit., p. 319, most of the Karramites, 
however, regarded it as impossible for God to destroy the bodies in the 
Universe. 

p. 80. 1. Condition, |J\a : for the theological sense see note 3. 6. 

p, 80. 2. This is rather a strange conception. The Karramites assert that 
the act of God is an external relation and does not change the essence of the 
substratum, i.¢. His essence, but inheres in the substratum, (A favourite 
example for both the philosophers and the theologians of an external rela- 
~ tion is that of right and left; there is no difference in the objects themselves, 
* whether J am at their right or their left, Aristotle argues, De caclo B 2. 285%1.) 
This is a contradiction, for if it inheres in the substrate, it is not merely an 
external relation. The obvious objection is that an act is not an external 
relation, since it assumes in the agent a change, a newness, like the change 
from whiteness to blackness. Averroés, however, moved perhaps by an 
esprit de contradiction against the Ash‘arites, takes just the opposite view, 
denying that an act does inhere and admitting that it is a purely external 
relation. 

p: 80. 3. He evidently means temporal reality in the world, for there is 
a temporal reality in God, or in relation te God, produced by Him. 

p. 80. 4. Since the temporal reality in Ged, or in relation to God, does 
not affect His essence. 

p. 80. §. This amounts to saying that an act is not an external relation, 
since it assumes in the agent a change, a newness. 

P. 80, 6. yoy dy Ol jle bis dymgell (fl V34, If the existent ex- 
ists one instant, it is permissible that it should exist two instants, says Ibn 

60 ; TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Hazm, op. cit. iv. 85, who also admits the logical possibility of an eternity 
@ parte post. 

p. 8r. t. We do not perceive identity, which is a rational concept. 
There is no piace for identity (nor for similarity) in a nominalistic and 
sensationalistic system. Our judgement that we have an identical individual 
assumes (1) that there is an exterior world, {2} that every change is based 
on causation. Ghazali, who accepts the Ash‘arite principle that there is no 
natural causation, but that God is the only agent, has no right to assert the 
identity of individuals, since everything is continually changing and every 
change depends on a new creative act of God (besides, since hair grows, it is 
not unconditionally true that the hair on a man’s head today is identical 
with the hair there was yesterday). In addition, we must distinguish between 
‘This white is the same as that white’, which asserts an identity of universals, 
and “This is the identical hair’, which asserts the identity of an individual. 
Ibn Hazm, criticizing the Ash‘arites (v. 107), says there is no more extra- 
ordinary foolishness, (go> (> (Hl LF Y, than co say that the white- 
ness of snow, the blacks of of tar, the greenness of grass are different now 
from what they were before. 

p. 81. 2, Compare Aristotle’s argument, Met. K 2. 1060°34: If there are 
perishable principles for perishable things, we need other perishable prin- 
ciples for them, and so shall have an infinite regress. The difficulty in an 
infinite regress exists for all relations, AJ] duality implies infinity, since 
between any two terms there is a middle term, as the Eleatics saw. This had 
become a well-known argument with the Greek Sceptics and Neoplatonists 
and the Muslim theologians and Mystics for proving the subjectivity 
and unreality of relations. The question whether the creating act was 
different from, or identical with, the thing created was discussed in Islam. 
The opponents of their duality based themselves on the infinite regress this 
dualicy would involve (see Ibn Hazm, op. cit. v. 40}. The Mu'tazilite 
Mu‘ammar was widely known in Islam for his acceptance of the infinity of 
relations (Jl,o!). He regarded them, however, in the Stoic fashion as 
gladt , 74 Aexrd, something intermediate between being and not-being (see 
note 3. 6). 

p. 81. 3. Flux, Gt, 76 petr, of. Aristotle, De caelo It. 298629, mdvra 
ylyveoBae Kai pety . . . Step eoixace BovhecBas AKyeev dot ve woddol Kai 
‘Hodirerros 6 "Edéacos. It is a curious fact that the two schools, the Hera~ 
cliteans and the Megarians, who start from opposite premisses, the former 
that there is no being but only becoming, the latter that there is only being 
but no becoming, arrive at the same conclusion: that nothing is permanent, 
Both theories may be spoken of as theories of flux. 

p- 81. 4. This is the theory of the famous Ash‘arite theologian Baqillani 
{end of the tenth century). Ibn Hazm, op. cit. iv. 222, gives a quotation 

NOTES rags 61 

from Baqillani’s Book about the Doctrines of the Qarmates, where Baqiltani says: 
‘Accidents cannot endure, and their annihilation is necessary in the second 
instant after their becoming, without an annihilating cause. The accidents 
annihilate the substances, since they annul the spatial relations and condi- 
tions without which the substances cannot exist.’ Ibn Hazm adds that this 
implies the heretical doctrine that God is not the cause of their annihilation, 

p. 82. 1. ‘does not inhere in a substratum’: i.e, the individual sub- 
stance, ¢.g. this stone, according to the definition at the beginning of Cas. 5: 
odola $2 dorw . . . } ire ad” droKepévov turds Adyerae pyr’ ev dtoKEe 
peeve seni egrey. 

p. 82. 2. This is not quite correct; the individual substance is transient ; 
what he means is that it dees not become absolutely non-existent, since its 
matter and form are eternal. 

p. 82. 3. This argument is based on Aristotle’s argument against the 
Megarians, Phys. Z 10. 24017-30: a thing which is changing must be 
partially this and partially that, but in the indivisible instant there cannot 
be a change: it must be wholly this or that, wholly existent or wholly 
non-existent. 

p. 82. 4. ie. that the accidents should be made a condition for the 
persistence of the substance. 

P- 83. 1. dyad 3é dryes, ef Ev Fv 6 dvOpurmos obSémore ay HAyeev: ob3€ yap dy 
By, Up’ Srov dAynjocier év Edy, Isay : if man consisted of a unique substance, he 
would not suffer, for what would be for this simple existent the cause of his 
suffering ? This sentence is a quotation from the second chapter of Ps.-Hippo- 
crates Hepi piccos dvipaimov. In this little treatise, which starts by discussing 
the view that the human body consists of one unique substance, there is 
expounded the theory of the four bodily humours: the sanguine, thecholeric, 
the phlegmatic, and the meiancholic. Aristotle (Hist. an. F 3. 512612) gives 
a quotation from the second part of this work, which, however, he ascribes 
to Polybus. Gatien, who regarded the book, or at feast the first part of it, as 
genuine, wrote on it a still extant commentary which was in part translated 
and abbreviated by Hunain ibn Ishaq (see G. Bergstrasser, 1. thn Ishag und 
die Spr. und Arab. Galen-Ubersetz., No. 102). The Arabic translation of 
De natura hominis, with Galen’s commentary, is still extant in three copies, 
cf. H. Diels, Handschriften der antiken Arzte, i, p. 101 and Aya Sofya 3632. 
This same quotation is found in Nemesius, De natura hominis, Migne, xl. 629. 

p- 83. 2. See note 14. 6, 

p. 83.3. Ghazali’s theory might be explained by saying that God wills 
the annihilation, and then the annihilation occurs. OF course the problem 
is: What is the relation between the object of His wiil and His will, in what 
does His act consist? But this relation is not more obscure for His annihila- 
tive than for His creative act, for when God wills ‘let it be’ and ‘it is’, why 

62 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

is it, why is tts being the act of God ? And since by God's power is meant the 
fact that He can do it, what does He do, besides willing it? 

p. 84. 1. The same idea is very well expressed by ‘Abu Zaid al-Balkhi’, 
Op. cit, ii, 135: ‘If it is said that we cannot understand production out of 
nothing, for, for example, a ring must be made out of silver, it must be 
answered that the shape of the ring is something new which did not exist 
and its maker created it out of nothing. If the coming into existence of a new 
accident is possible, why not the coming into existence of a body out of 
nothing? The whole question is, do new things appear? well, we see them 
appear.’ 

p. 85. 1. The so-called answer of the philosophers is in fact a conse- 
quence of the Megarian theory, and Ghazali ought to agree with it. The 
Megarians are true to the principle that something either is or is not, 
tertium non datur; there is no becoming, since becoming is illogical, and 
there is no disappearing, which is just as irrational. At one time-atom there 
was black, at another time-atom there is white ; nothing else can be affirmed. 
Reality is positive, but in becoming and disappearing a non-positive reality 
seems implied. 

p. 85. 2. This answer comes dangerously near the Mu‘tazilite proposi- 
tion that the non-existent exists. It is true that the existence of white implies 
the non-existence of black ; but the truth that the existence of white implies 
the non-existence of black does not imply the existence or reality of the 
non-existent black. What we consider as real is the event, the passage, the 
passing from black into white, the becoming of white, the disappearing of 
black, bue this very passage is denied by the Megarians and Ash‘arites. 
Becoming and disappearance imply time, whereas the laws of identity and 
contradiction do not imply time. For the laws of thought, as for the prin- 
ciples of mathematics, there is ao such process as change; they are valid 
timelessly. 

p. 85. 3. For even God cannot do the impossible; for another instance 
see, for example, my Ep, d. Met. d. Av., p. 106, Aristotle himself at Eth. Nic. 
2 2. 113910 quotes Agathon’s lines: 

For even God lacks this one thing alone, 
To make a deed that has been done, undone. 

p. 86. 1, Cf. Aristotle, Pays, A 8. 19113 about ordpqas: nothing comes 
absolutely from not-being, odSév daAws éx yj Svros, but only from what is 
not-being per accidens, ex pp dvros xara oupPePynds, 

p. 86. 2, Cf Aristotle, Phys. B 6, 229525: dads évartion xivgass Kiwijeet, 
dvrixecrar 5d xai jpenia, orépnors yap. Movements are contrary, when the 
one passes from this opposite to that, and the other from that to this, 

p- 86.3, ie. not the opposition of two positives. 

NOTES 63 

p. 86. 4. For the contradiction in Aristotle’s theory of becoming and 
orépnois see note 62. 6, The Aristotelians would answer that the movable 
potentially possesses movement and has therefore a positive ordpners (of 
course when one speaks of a positive ordpnois the opposition of és and 
ordpyos, of possession and non-possession, is annulled). 

p. 86. 5. The vitreous humour of the eye cpall cys Azteladl dygbH, 
76 varoedés dypdy rod sfPahyod. According to the Aristotelian theory 
of perception the sense-organ receives the form of the object perceived 
without its matter. According to De sensu 2. 43812 sqq. sight has its seat in 
the pupil, «37, which consists of water (cf. Hist. an. Ag. 491%21: 70 bypdr 
rod dpOarpot a Préwec, 4 xdpn). 

p. 86.6. See note 58. 2. 

p- 87. :. There may be here an allusion to the title of one of Ghazali’s 
books, The Distinction between Faith and Heresy. ; 

p. 87. 2. Here, indeed, we have the fundamental difficulty of the Neo- 
platonic philosophy of emanation and of the theology of the Muslim 
philosophers. If we admit with the Eleatics that ‘becoming’ cannot mean 
anything but ‘coming from’, and that ultimate Reality is nothing but the 
absolute, simple monad, how then, from this highest principle, this abso- 
lutely simple monad, can the infinite variation of this world of multiple 
things derive, how can the One provide the plurality it does not possess 
itself (as Plotinus himself asks, Ena v. 9.15: & ph Eyer mas wapdoyer ;}? 
Plurality, if it exists, must consist of units, says Zeno the Eleatic (Diels, Fr. d. 
Vors.5 i, p. 252. 23 sqq.), and since there cannot be a plurality of units, there 
is only the One (cf Arist. Met. B 4. 100127). The Sceptics reaffirm this 
Eleatic doctrine, and Aenesidemus says (Sext. Emp. Adv. Phys. i. 220): obre 
yap 78 &v yevéobat dio duvardy dort obre ra. S¥0 rpirov dnoredei, two cannot arise 
outof the one, nor can the two producea third (Democritus too had said that 
one cannot come into existence from two nor two from one, a dictum which 
Aristotle approves, restricting it, however, to actual existence, see Met. Z t3. 
103979). The Muslim Aristotelians accept the principle that from the one 
only one can proceed, but use it illogically to explain the emanation of the 
many from the one according to the Neoplatonic principle of a gradual 
pluralization, laid down, for example, in Porphyry, Sententiae xi: af dodparos 
broordras troBatvovea pew peptlorrar kal mAnOivorrat . . . irepBajvovoar be 
évilovra: (cf. Plotinus, Enn. v. 3. 16). Ghazali’s criticism in the following 
chapter consists in showing the inconsistency of the philosophers in their 
surreptitiously introducing a plurality both into the One itself and into its 
emanation. 

p. 88. 1. The conception of will as a passivity seems rather strange: one 
would imagine that it is the activity xar’ éfoy7jv, However, according to 
Aristotle, the will is ultimately based on pleasure and pain (De on. B 2. 

41323) and will is the sign (cyetov) of pains and pleasures (Arist. Rhet. 

64 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

B 4. 138147). Sexeus Erapiricus says (Adv. phys. i. 146): ‘Sensation is a kind 
of alteration. . . . If God, then, has a sensation, He is altered, if He is 
altered, He is capable of alteration and change . . . and if so, He is also 
perishable,’ 

p. 88. 2. i.e. will brings to perfection the qualities of the willer. 

p. 8g. 1. ie. man is an agent and therefore a cause; the sun is a cause; 
therefore we may metaphorically (but not properly) call the sun an agent, 
the fertium compearationis between man and sun being that they are both 
causes, 

p. 89. 2. In the proper sense. 

p- 89. 3. There is some confusion in this paragraph, Ghazali reproaches 
the philosophers who, according to him, admit only a natural causal 
relation between God and the objects of His acts, with calling God an 
agent; only a voluntary agent is an agent according to him. At the same 
time he reproaches them with calling all natural causes agents. The conse~ 
quence would seem to be that the philesophers do not distinguish between 
agent and cause, To ascribe an act to a non-living being would seem to 
Ghazali, to use a modern expression, a kind of animism or fetishisrn, Non- 
living beings do not act, according to him; between fire and burning there 
is onty a constant time-sequence. This is also the theory of modern empiri- 
cists. However, for the modern empiricist, as well as for the Ash‘arite Ghazali, 
all causal relations (inclusive of voluntary acts} in the empirical world are 
reducible to a time-sequence. According to Hume, between my will and 
the movement of my arm there is no other relation: than an empirically 
perceptible sequence in time, and the same is said by the Ash‘arites, 
who, as I shall show later, are dependent on Greek empiricism. (The 
Ash‘arites acknowledge one voluntary essential agent, God, who, how- 
ever, is not of this world.) But why then speak of animism or fetishism, 
as the empiricist E. Mach does—-e.g. Die Mechanik, p. 455~—, or why this 
distinction between agent and cause which Ghazali establishes? Averroés 
is aware of the contradiction in Ghazali, and in the following passages he 
puts forward some forceful criticisms. 

p- 8g. 4. ic. a voluntary act, like any potential act, is not inseparably 
conjoined with its agent, but heat cannot be separated from fire. This would 
imply, ia contradiction to Aristotle’s theory, a superiority of the potential 
to the actual; and besides, according to Aristotle, God’s act is inseparable 
from Him—God is eternally in activity. 

p. 90. 1. ‘Separated’ seems to be used equivocally ; as used here of God 
it seems to have the meaning of transcendent. 

p. 90. 2, Cf helow, notes go. 4 and go. 5. 

p- 90. 3. For God's bounty as the motive of creation cf. Plato, Tin. 
2g d, ¢ and Plotinus, £na. v. 4. ¥. 

NOTES 65 

p- 90. 4. This astonishing quotation—which as far as I know has never 
been discussed—is not found in any of the genuine or spurious works of 
Aristotle that have come to us. It seerns 2 quotation from a Muslim religious 
writer rather than from a Greek philosopher. However, by creation ex nihilo 
is not meant here the orthodox conception of a temporal creation ex nihilo, 
butan eternal creation, An eternal creation, as I have tried to show, is a con- 
tradictory conception, and of course to regard such a creation as ex nihile 
emphasizes the contradiction, since logically this can only mean that che 
creation was preceded by nothingness, although this is explicitly denied. 
This contradiction does not seem to have been felt by Averroés, but I do 
not think Aristotle can have expressed this contradiction so manifestly, On 
the other hand, it does not seem improbable to me that this quotation is in 
some way connected with Aristotle’s dialogue De philosophia, the theology 
of which seems to have been, according to the Epicurean in Cicero’s De nat. 
deor. i. 13.33 (fr, 26 Rose), somewhat confused. In the dialogues Aristotle ex- 
presses himself in a more popular way and takes on the exposition of his own 
ideas (cf. Cicero, Ad Att, xiii. 19. 4). The passages of De philosophta quoted by 
Cicero (frr. 12, 22) show that Aristotle regarded the world as an eternal, 
divine work {opus} ; we find in De philosophia the proof for the existence of God, 
based on the degrees of being (fr. 16, fromm Simplicius, De caelo i. 9, p. 288, 28 
Heiberg; this proof is developed by Cleanthes—see Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. i, 
88~-93—and is one of the proofs of Thomas Aquinas} ; the stars are regarded in 
this dialogue as having voluntary movements (fr. 24 from Cicero, De nat. deor. 
ii, 16, 44) and, according to a passage in Ps.-Philo, De aetern. mundi (fr. 18), 
Aristotle accused in it those who did not recognize the eternity of the world 
as guilty of a terrible atheism, dew} ddedrns, since they compared the 
transitory works of man, xeepsxpyra, with such great visible gods, like the 
sun, the moon, and all the other divine stars. 

p- 90. 5. Cf. Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo ¢. 6. 397'g: God is the cause which 
holds the Universe together : 3} trav dAwy ouvenrixy atzia, No nature is suffi- 
cient by itself, so that it can be deprived of God’s conserving power (ovSepia 
38 ddors abry xal?” dauriv dotw adrdpxys dpnnubeioa ris de rovrou cwryptas 
397°15)- Compare also Aristotle, Met. 4 ro ad init. : order exists in the world 
as in an army, for the order of the army depends on the leader, whereas 
the leader does not depend on the army. See also Plotinus, Ena. iii. 2. 2 
about the dppovia and overages in the world. The ideal of éppovia is 
originally Pythagorean. The term ovvexrixy aizia is of Stoic origin. 
According to Clement of Alexandria (Stoic, Vet, Fr. ii. 121. 25) a synectic 
cause is one in whose presence the effect remains, while on its being 
removed the effect is removed. See also note 137.3 in my Ep. d. Met. d. Av. 

Pp. 99. 6, i.e, the composition of matter and form is the condicio sine qua 
non of all individual existence. 

66 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p, ot. 1. In the expression ‘living being-man’ there is a redundancy, 
because in the definition of man ‘living being’ is included, For Aristotle 
there is a difficulty in such expressions as ‘snubness (oizsdrys) of the nose’ 
which seem redundant, “for snubness is only found in a nose, so that we 
must include in its definition the nose, since what is snub is a concave nose’ 
(Met. K 7. 1064%23, of. Z 5.103017), 

p- 91. 2. In Avicenna’s system there is a tripartite division of reality: 
the absolute necessary (or necessary by itself}, ic. God; the hypothetical 
necessary {or necessary through another), i.e. heaven, the absolute possible, 
it, matter. This division conforms to Aristotle’s of the unmoved mover, 
i.e. the first, immaterial, mover; the moved and also moving, i.¢. heaven; 
the moved but non-moving, Le, matter (Afet, 4 7, 107224, Phys. @ 5. 256520; 
De an. P to. 43313). For Aristotle afl reality is in the end based on the 
actuality of an eternal prime mover, existing of necessity: €£ dvdyxns dpa 
€ariv dv (Met. A 7. 107210). Cf. notes 164 .4 and 164. 5. 

p- 91.3. Tsuspect that the meaning of this somewhat obscure sentence is: 
if you mean by ‘agent’ a creator who gives existence, perhaps the world can 
be explained without such an eternal creator; only an eternal prime mover 
is necessary which brings out, by its setting in motion, potency into act. If 
this interpretation is correct, Averroés, in order to contradict Avicenna’s 
theory of an eternal creation, which is, in fact, also his own, returns here to 
a strictly Aristotelian point of view. 

p- 92. 1. The natural faculties of the living body are treated by Galen in 
a special work, De facultatibus naturalibus, in which he regards the three 
biological faculties of genesis, growth, and nutrition through which the 
animals are directed (SiovxefoPac) as acts (épya) of nature, not of the soul. 
The animal has the faculty of nutrition to maintain itself'as long as possible, 
Snags ws wheiorov Srapvraye# (De fac. nat. i. 9). 

P- 93. 1. Koran xviii. 76. 

P- 94. 1. i.e, fire always gives heat, but the voluntary agent has a choice 
of opposites: ¢.g. Aristotle, Met. @ 2. 104654, 

P- 94. 2. i.¢, since, according to the Ash‘arites, God creates our acts in 
us, the action of the human will must, according to them, be an illusion; how 
can we therefore know that there is such a thing as voluntary action in the 
Divine World? (Compare note 89. 3.) 

p. 95. t. The first mover in the example given above would be the man 
who threw the other into the fire. 

P- 95» 2. For this type of fallacy, ro dwAdis 3 wi) ands, see Aristotle, 
De soph. elench. 25. 

p- 97-1. For this argument, which is the logical outcome of the theory 
that the world is eternally existent, i.c. eternally in act, although it has a 

NOTES 67 

cause, compare Avicenna, Salvation, p. 346, where he defends the thesis that 
it is the existence, not the non-existence of the effect which is related to the 
agent: dgmglt hy hela cps nd grind poll (see also op. cit., p. 356 
and Avicenna, The Recovery, Met. vi 1, p. 523, ed. Teheran, 1885). It is a 
significant fact, as showing that this argument destroys the idea of causation, 
that it forms part of the sceptical refutation of the concept of cause in 
general, Sextus Empiricus, having asserted (Adv. phys. i. 233} that the 
simultaneous cannot be the cause of the simultaneous, since so far as their 
existence is concerned both are equivalent, denies that the cause can be 
prior to the effect, since the effect does not yet exist and the cause cannot 
be related to something non-existent (cf. also Diog. Laert. ix. 98). 

P- 97. 2. i.e, according to Averroés Avicenna neglects potential existence. 

p. 98. 1. ‘Bringing into existence’; here, of course, the intrinsic contra- 
diction lies in that it brings into existence what already exists from eternity. 

p. 98.2. Averroés fails to solve the difficulty. The philosophical proof 
of the eternity of the world is, as we have seen, hased on the argument that, 
if the world were in a state of potentiality, a new cause would be necessary 
to actualize it, Averroés’ solution would therefore imply a continual change 
in the agent. Aristotle himself says, Met, @ 8. 1050520, that there is no 
potentiality in the eternally moved (i.e. heaven), except in the matter of 
‘whence’ and ‘whither’, For the whole problem compare note 11. 1. 

p. 98. 3. Aristotle himself distinguishes at Met, @ 8, 1050°90 between 
actuality in the product and in the agent. Where the product is something 
different from the action, the actuality is in the product, e.g. the act of 
building in the thing that is being built, but where there is no product 
besides the action, the actuality exists in the agents themselves, e.g. the 
act of secing in the man who sees. This distinction rests on the ambiguity of 
the term ‘actuality’ (évépyes) which can mean both ‘reality’ and ‘action’. 

p. 98. 4. ‘Cannot become an effect’; the Arabic is ambiguous and may 
also be translated ‘can be an effect’. This ambiguity conceals the difficulty. 
An existent can be an effect, when by ‘effect’ is understood the result, not 
the process of becoming ; but an existent cannot become an effect, i.c. it can 
no longer become what it is already. 

p- 99. 1. This section refers to Avicenna’s theory in The Recovery, 
Met. vi. 2, p. 525, where he defends the theory of the simultaneity of 
cause and effect, tyler ae gi dle JS” Ol, against the argument of the 
theologians that, for example, the building remains when the builder has 
disappeared, Of course, according tothis conception of causation God cannot 
be regarded any longer as a creator, nor ¢ven as a cause of change, as.a prime 
mover. The relation between God and the world is here conceived as static: 
God is merely 3} rv SAwy ovvexteny aizia, the power which holds the universe 
together, as it is expressed in Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo 6. 3979 (see note go. §). 

68 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Pp: 99- 2. For this section compare the distinction made by Aristotle in 
the passage quoted in note 98. 3. Averroés means that there cannot be, for 
example, a thought (or thinking, for the Aristotelian philosophy does not 
usually distinguish between these two) without a thinker, for a thought as 
an effect consists in its relation to a thinker and where there is no thinker 
there cannot be a thought, But the building can exist when the builder 
exists no more, since its relation as an effect is not essential to it and it has 
an existence and a substance or matter of its own. Here we have one of 
those naturalistic conceptions in Averroés to which I referred in note 31. 1. 
It is directly opposite to the Neoplatonic idea of the world as an eternal 
emanation from God, and even to the conception of God as the airéa 
ouvexsixy, the binding element without which the world would disintegrate. 
As regards the real problem, Averroés is not aware of the ambiguity of the 

_ term ‘effect’, If by ‘effect’ is meant the process of change, it is true that 
causa cessante cessat qffectus ; if by ‘effec’ is meant the result of the process, the 
effect remains when the cause has ceased to act (we saw in note 56. 1 that 
the Aristotelian philosophy dees not distinguish consistently between the 
process, évépyeca, and the result, evreAdyeca). 

p- 99. 3. The thoughts of the celestial bodies are, as pure ideas, reality 
itself, and have no other existence than as ideas, whereas the thoughts of 
human beings are, according to the Aristotelian psychology (De ax. I 4), 
forms abstracted from the matters in which they exist in reality. 

p- 100, 1. Aulus Gellius (Noct. Att. vii. 13) says that his master, the 
Platonist Taurus, used to discuss the problem whether—since a man is 
either dead or alive—he dies when he is alive or when he is dead. The same 
question is posed by St. Augustine, De cio. dei xiii, 11 (see also Sext. Emp. 
Hyp. pyrrh. iii, prt and Ado, Math. i. 269 and ii. 346). There are three answers 
given to this question: (1) The Platonic answer (Parmenides 156 d, e), given 
by Taurus and St. Augustine, that time is discontinuous and that there is 
an intermediary between life and death, a timeless passage in the instant, 
in which a man is neither alive nor dead. (2) The Megarian answer, that 
time is discontinuous and that there is no passage—a man is either alive or 
dead, but does not die, (3) The Aristotelian answer, that time is continuous 
and chat there is a process in time during which a man is neither alive nor 
dead, but dies. One would have expected Ghazali to give the Megarian 
answer, since according to his Ash‘arite conception there is no process in 
nature, but every change is immediately the effect of God’s creative act. 
But the fear of attaching God’s will to the non-existent makes him choose 
the Aristotelian solution (according to this conception, however, dying is 
not an existent, although neither is it a non-existent). Ghazali does not 
realize that voluntary action is always related to the non-existent; in the 
realm of physics only the actually existing exercises an influence, but in 
the realm of the soul it is the hope and fear of a not yet existing future— 

NOTES 6g 

hope and fear which may even be based on an illusion—that determine its 
actions. Throughout this passage what is meant by ‘effect’ is not the result 
of the process but the process, the passing itself which is caused by the agent; 
the result is regarded as the consequence of the process, while the initial 
non-existence of the result is regarded as a necessary condition for causal 
action, 

p. 100.2. According to the definition that wind is a movement of air, 
& dvepos xivnots dépos Aristotle, Meteor. A 13. 349719. The comparison is, of 
course, lame, for without movement the air remains, whereas, according to 
this passage, the world, deprived of movement, becomes non-existent. 

p- 100. 3. e.g. thunder (Bpovry, see Meteor. F 1) and lightning (aorpamj, 
see Meteor. Bg). 

Pp. 100. 4. It is movement which is eternally ‘in becoming’; here, how- 
ever, Averroés identifies the world with movement, and regards the world 
as eternally becoming. 

p- 105, 1, According to Cat. 8 there are four classes of quality: disposi- 
tion, Aabitus, passive quality, and shape (figure and form). 

p. 101. 2. The difference between Avicenna and Averroés, according to 
his opinion in this section, is very slight, if indeed there is any difference at 
all. Avicenna says, as does Averroés in many places, that without God’s 
sustaining power the world would become non-existent. Averroés affirms 
here that, without God as a moving cause and the form bestowed by Him 
upon the world the world could no longer exist. Averroés seems here to 
regard the world as having its matter by itself, bue as matter cannot exist 
without form the existence of the world depends entirely on Gad. 

p. tot. 3. He seems to mean that if the water moved later than the hand, 
the water, when the hand moved, would have first to move out of the hand 
and then detach itself and start its own movement. 

p- 101.4. This is, of course, a petitio principit : the effect cannot be prior to 
the cause, because in that case it could not be an effect. 

p- 101. 5. “The stable existent’ and ‘that which exists without moving 
or resting by nature’ i.e. che immaterial Intellects. They stand in another 
relation to God than the moving world; a timeless relation. 

p- 101.6, i.e. ifsomething happens to it that impedes its action. 
p. tog. §. ie, action implies change. 

p. 102.2, Ghazali, as his example shows, is here expressing a correct idea 
wrongly, What he really wants to say is that the causal relation implies 
time and change, but that che logical relation of ground and consequent is 
timeless; however, through the ambiguity of language which uses the term 
for both ground and cause, he is only dimly aware of this fact, and tends 

jo TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

—as his expression shows—to regard the logical relation as also an onto- 
logical one (I might have translated, instead of ‘cause’, ‘ground’, but the 
next sentence shows clearly that he confuses ground and cause; of course 
what we call ‘cause’ is regarded in the Aristotelian philosophy as only one— 
the agent or efficient cause—amongst several causes, and inthe Aristotelian 
philosophy there is no consistent distinction between the logical and the 
ontological). 

p. 102. 3. He ought to have said: the consequence of a fact is not the 
effect of this fact, except metaphorically (the ontological term ‘effect’ has 
been substituted for the logical term ‘consequence’). 

p. toz. 4. This sentence invalidates Ghazali’s whole argument, according 
to which God is not only an agent but the sole agent, and stands in flagrant 
contradiction to what follows. Here, however, it is not the Ash‘arite theo- 
logian Ghazali who speaks, but Ghazali the mystic, for whom every 
expression relating to Gad is but a symbol: ‘Alles Vergingliche ist nur ein 
Gleichnis’. 

Pp. 102. §. Le. it is a change; this is in fact the Aristotelian conception of 
God: an eternal mover. 

p- (o2. 6. This of course reduces all life to a puppet-show. But compare 
Sebastian Franck, Paradoxon, 264-8: ‘Der Vogel singt und fliegt eigentlich 
nicht, sondern wird gesungen und in den Liiften dahingetragen, Gott ist ¢4, 
der in ihm singt, lebt, webt und fliegt. Alie Kreaturen tun nur, was Gott 
will. Diesen Unterschied hat es aber mit der Menschen, diesem hat er 
freien Willen gegeben und will iin mit diesem fiihren und zieken.’ 

Pp. 103. 1, Le. that cause and effect are both existents of the same order, 
and that the relation of cause and effect does not imply an act of God, 

p- 103.2. This refers to Aristotle, Met, 3. 1o7otat: 7a piv aby Kwobyra 
aivia ws mpoyeyernuéve dvra, ra 8° ds db Adyos dza, the moving cause precedes, 
but the formal cause is simultaneous. The father, for example, precedes the 
son as his efficient cause. Averroés means that God as an efficient cause acis 
eternally, although this eternal action is not implied in the idea of an 
efficient cause. 

p- 103. 3. ¢.g. according to Simplicius, Aristotle and Plato agree about 
the problem of creation: Aristotle only denies the coming into existence of 
the world in time from not-being into being (Comm. in ébr. De Caelo, p. 103. 
4-6}. Simplicius says—Jn Phys. tibr, 1363. 8-12—that his master Ammonius 
wrote a special book with many arguments, alorets, to show that according 
to Aristotle God is also the efficient cause (sromrudv aizrov) of the Universe. 
This book was known to the Arabs, and is mentioned in the Fisrist, p. 259, 
under the title dhell Sb gediblany) ali cots Explanation of 
Aristotle's theories about the Creator, 

NOTES 4X 

Pp. 103. 4. ‘Has come to be’, i.e. implies a change. All this is to some 
extent sophistical. It is true, of course, that movement implies a change, but 
the movement of the world is eterna} and uniform and this uniformity does 
not change (compare note 11. 1). Throughout this passage Averroés identi- 
fies mover and creator. 

p. 103.5. According to Aristotle, however, matter and form, the con- 
stituents of the world, are eternal. 

p. 104. t. For this principle, ex uno non fit nist unum, as it is expressed by 
the Schoolmen ; see note 87. 2. 

p- 104. 2. Here Averroés does not seem to acknowledge this principle, It 
is, however, acknowledged by him, ¢.g. in his Epitome of Metaphysics (see my 
translation, p. 135 and note 135. 1). The only criticism of this principle he 
allows himself is that, following Avicenna—The Recovery, Met. v. 6—he 
asserts that the principle cannot be reversed, ie. it is true that from duality 
only duality can proceed, but it is not true that duality can only proceed 
from duality. 

p- 104. 3. This comparison with the carpenter and his instruments, the 
axe and the saw, is found in Farabi, The Zdeat State (Dieterici, p. 16. 17). 

Pp. 104. 4. There is a slight confusion in this paragraph. He wants to 
reproduce the thesis of Farabi and Avicenna that from the One a pluratity 
can only proceed through mediation (see e.g. Avicenna, The Recovery, Met. 
v. 6, where he tries to prove that there cannot be any plurality or matter 
in the First, and Farabi, loc. cit.), bue in fact he reproduces the thesis 
that no plurality whatever can procced from the One, even through media- 
tion, Sexeus Empiricus (Ade. phys. i, 244) says that it would be absurd to 
say that the cause of the syllable a could be only the ¢ without the i, and 
he goes on to argue (247) that the plurality of the effect cannot be explained 
by one unique power in the cause, since the sun dries mud but melts wax, 
whitens clothes but blackens our faces, an example which Ghazali repro- 
duces here (cf. also p, 326 text). 

Pp. 105. 1. Le. somewhere unity and plurality will have to meet. 

P- 105. 2. Le. ex uno unum is true, but referring to God it has only a sym- 
bolic meaning, just as will, when ascribed to God, is auributed to Him only 
by analogy with our human will. Of course this amounts in fact to a denial 
of the principte. 

p. 106. 1. That the series of final, formal, and efficient causes ends in a 
supreme cause is proved by Aristotle, Afet. a 2, For God as pure self-conscious 
thought, see Met. A g. 

p- 106. 2, See note 104. 2. 

p. 106. 3. This refers to the passages in Aristotle, Met. A 4. 98492, where 
Aristotle discusses the theory of Empedocles that tove is the cause of good 

72 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

things and strife of bad, and Met. A 10. 1075925 sqq., where he shows the 
impossible or paradoxical consequences (dSvvara ¥j droma) of those who 
‘make all things out of opposites’, and where, 1075°1, Empedocles’ theory is 
discussed. 

p. 106. 4. Both these comparisons are based on Aristotle, Adet. A 10, 
where the order of the world is compared to the order of an army through 
its leader (see note 90. 5) and to the order in a state through its own 
ruler, This comparison of the world to a state—which is developed in 
Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo—is very frequent in later Greek-Roman philosophy 
and is found, for example, in Philo, Epictetus, Sextus Empiricus, Plotinus, 
Cicero, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius. 

p. 106. 5. Koran xxi. 22. Even in the Koran a feeble echo is sometimes 
heard of the all-pervading voice of Greek philosophy. Here we have a 
vague reminiscence of the Greek (Heraclitean, Pythagorean, Aristotelian, 
Stoic, Neoplatonic) conception that a unity is needed to prevent the dis- 
integration of opposite principles. That there cannot be two hostile Gods is 
stated by Plato, Pit. 269 e. 

p. 106. 6. In an accidental way, card rapaxodov@now, as the Stoic term 
is, Le. as an accessory phenomenon, not intended but unavoidable. This is 
one of the principles of the Platonic-Steic theodicy. The most complete 
exposition of these principles is found in Plotinus, Enz, tii. 2. 

p- 106, 7. This is Stoic: the bad happens not uselessly (ob« dypyiorws) but 
with respect to the administration (otxoroia) of the whole, as in states (cf. 
Phatarch, De Stoic, repugn. 95). 

p- to6. 8. According to the optimistic Aristotelian principle (De gen. et 
corr, B 10. 936528: BéArcov 70 efvat 76 ws} elvar) that existence is better than 
non-existence. 

p. 107. t. CE Sext. Emp., dde. pigs. i. 6: Anaxagoras says, ‘All things 
were together and Intellect came and ordered them’; he assumed that 
Intellect, which according to him is God, is the efficient cause, dpy} 
Spacoripios, and the mixture, woAvpeyia, of the homoeomeries, the material 
principle. 

p- 107, 2, Cf. note 36. 3. Itis a pity that Averro¢s does not tell us whom 
he intends by those who introduce plurality through instruments. ] presume 
that the difference here between mediators and instruments is that the 
former are regarded as living beings—e.g. the created gods who are aot 
essentially immortal, Tim, 41 a-d, and the eternal movers which, accord~ 
ing to the Muhammadan commentators, emanate from the First—-the 
latter not. In that case the instrument is ré 54’ od, that by which things come 
to be, which is, according io Aristotle, Afet. Z 7. 1032°24, their nature, their 
form. 

NOTES 3 

p. 107. 3. About Averroés’ contemporaries little is known. However, at 
the court of the Almcohad Caliph Abu Ya‘qub, the patron of Averroés, who 
favoured the arts and philosophy, who collected books from all parts, and 
who sought the company of the learned, there must have been a great 
interest in philosophical speculation. One of his favourites, his chief physi- 
cian Ibn Tufail, in his well-known work Hayy thn Yagzan, although admitting 
the eternity of the world and its eternal emanation from God, does not treat 
the question which occupies us here, i.e. how this emanation takes place. 

p. 107. 4. Averroés here denies explicitly a gradual emanation from God, 
but by making the immaterial principles ascend to God and form a causal 
series his theory is identical with the theory he wants to refate and which, 
indeed, he himself holds in his Epitome of Metaphysics. As a matter of fact the 
idea of a gradual emanation is the basic idea of Arabian Aristotelianism, 
and cannot be eliminated without destroying the system. 

p. 107. §. The forms in the four elements are the first forms that enter 
into, or are in, prime matter, matter not yet qualified. 

p. 107. 6, This passage is contradictory. The problem is: Do the forms 
and the matters all emanate from God, or have some, and especially primary 
matter, an independent existence previously? Averroés affirms both at the 
same time. The problem is a crucial point even for the Aristotelian philo- 
sophy. How, in a monistic system in which everything derives from one 
supreme principle, can the perishable, the temporal, the finite, derive from 
the imperishable, the eternal, the infinite? Aristotle saw the difficulty 
clearly, when he discussed at Met. F 4. 1000'S the aporia (problem) whether 
the principles for the eternal and the perishable can be the same or must be 
different (cf. note 36. 3, and my Epitome, p. xx), 

p. 108. 1. It is, however, Averroés’s own theory in his Epitome of Meta- 
physics (see my translation, pp. 131-2), 

P- '08, 2. Awe 5é 3 vois doriv é Kar’ evépyecay ra. mpdypara ... (Aristotle, 
De an. I’ 6. 431>16), Intellect therefore cannot be the cause of any duality 
{for the problem of the unity in the vets according to Aristotle see my 
Epitome, notes 47. 6 and 124. 1). According to Plotinus, however, Intellect 
implies a duality, for self-consciousness, as the word avv-aic@nots indicates, 
implies a duality and the First is beyond Intellect (Zan. v. 3. 13). For the 
Arabic Aristotelians, who combine Aristotelian elements with others from 
Neoplatonism, the First, God, is a self-conscious Unit from whom the First 
Intellect, vets, emanates. 

p- 108. 3. Le. for the agent in the empirical world ex uno unum is valid, ie. 
each agent has its specific act (fire cannot but burn), but the divine agent is 
an agent sui generis. This, however, does not seem to be the opinion of 
Aristotle, who affirms at Met. A 8. 107328 that a single movement can be 
performed only by a single, eternal mover (ri pilav xivnow bd’ évds), 

74 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 108, 4. Le. the active Intellect; the connexion with the preceding 
sentence is not very clear; it would almost seem that Averroés identifies 
God here with the active Intellect; this is, as a matter of fact, Alexander of 
Aphrodisias’ conception (De an. Go. 16-92. 11; Mantissa 106. 19-113. 24), 
which is not accepted by Averroés, 

p. 108.5. This is not exact ; see note 2.8. The passive Intellect is the same 
as the potential or materiat Intellect. 

p. 108.6. Compare Plotinus, Enn. vi. 5. 1: 16 ev Kal radrdv dpidud 
Bovrayow de Srov elvar xown pev tis Evvacd grow .. ., that the identical one 
is wholly everywhere is a common human notion; instinctively we declare 
that the God who lives in us all is one and identical. 

p. 108, 7, The idea (which became one of the principles of Neoplatonism 
—see ¢.g. Proctus, inst, Theol., prop. 7) that the cause possesses in the fullest 
measure that which tt communicates to others, is, with this example taken 
from warmth, found in Aristotle’s Afetaphysics (2 1. 993>24-~—ascribed in the 
ancient world to Pasicles) : &xacrov 8 padre adrd rev dMwr Kal” 3 xat rots 
dow trapyes 7d cuveivuptov, olov 10 wip Cepdrarov. 

p- 10g. 1. This sentence shows up the getitio principit in the whole argu- 
ment: ‘since they are many’; but the problem is precisely, How can there 
be a rmany—how can the many proceed from the one? 

Pp. 109. 2. ie. the matter of the sublunary world. 

p. 109. 3. The term ‘First Intellect’ is confusing. The ‘First Intellect’ 
corresponds to the vois of the Neoplatonic system, according to which the 
absolute First, the Monad, does not think. But according to the Arabic 
philosophers God, the First, is Himself intellect—a theory found as early as 
Simplicius, Conun. in Enchir. Epict. c. 38, who asserts that the highest prin- 
ciple, the doy dpyar, the God of Gods, possesses the highest yes. 

p. 109. 4. ie. the sphere surrounding the world assumed by Ptolemy to 
explain the precession of the equinoxes (see my Ep. d. Met, d. Av., note 
112. 6). 

Pp. 110, 1. ie. these intellects are of a gradually diminishing unification 
and dignity. According to Proclus, Jast. Theol., prop. 95, the more unified a 
power, the more capable it is of infinitude. wéoa Svvapss, évinurépa ottoa, THs 
aAnbovonerns arerporepa. 

p- 110. 2. For the degree of nobility compare Proclus, fast. Theol., prop. 
129: All divine bodies are divine through the influence of a divine soul, ali 
divine souls through a divine intellect, and afl divine intellects through 
participation in a divine monad, 

p. 110.3. Or from a superior intellect, for this process repeats itself 
cight times, since there are nine spheres. 

NOTES ~ 75 

p- 110. 4. This sentence invalidates the whole theory; there is an admis- 
sion here that there is something in the effect which is not found in the cause, 
that although the Monad is the ultimate Source of everything, the effect 
cannot be wholly deduced from the cause. The same contradiction is found 
in Proclus, who, notwithstanding his theory of gradual emanation, admits 
avunéorara, self-subsistent entities ({nst. Theol., prop. 40). Further, Aris= 
totle’s monism of a First Mover ar a First Causé is contradicted by his 
pluralism, by his acceptance (Afet. A 8. 107333) of a number of unmoved 
movers for the planets. 

p. 110. 5. This section contains a succinct exposition of the ingenious 
theory of emanation, as it is found amongst the Arabic philosophers (e.g. in 
Avicenna, Recovery of the Soul, Met. ix. 6 and Salvation, pp. 448 sqq., and 
especially p. 455; Farabi, The deal State, p. 19; and also in Averroés in his 
Ep. d. Met. d. Av.—see my translation, p. 131 —-who seems there to accept 
the general: principles of the theory he denies here). This theory combines 
Aristotle’s astronomical theory with the Neoplatonic theory of emanation, 
and introduces into the Aristotelian framework Proclus’ conception of the 
triadic process of emanation, pve, apordvat, emozpedew (Inst. Theol., 
prop. 35). 

Although this theory is by no means consonant with the general natural- 
istic trend of Aristotle’s system, there are two aspects of his philosophy in 
which it may be defended or from which it can be deduced. (1) In the 
closing chapters of his theology (/§et. 4) God is much more than a mere 
Prime Mover: the world hangs on God (4prara, 1072%14), it is God who 
gives unity and order to the world, which without God would disintegrate 
and become non-existent. (2) Aristotle’s idea of God as the Absolute First 
Cause implies the gradual ascent of a single series of causes to God, and the 
proposition mentioned in note 108. 7, that the cause contains the effect in a 
superior way, implies a gradual descent from God—a degradation, i.e. an 
emanation, from God.The thesis of, for example, Simplicius and Ammonius 
that God, according to Aristotle, is not only a Prime Mover, but the 
Eternal Creator of an eternal world, has therefore a certain plausibility {in 
strict logic the theory of an eternal creation or, what amounts to the same 
thing, the theory of emanation, implies the contradiction that the world 
proceeds eternally, ic. timelessly from God, i.e, is eternally both inside 
and outside God). 

I have not found the theory, described in the text, in any Greek philo- 
sopher; it seems to me, however, highly probable, both because of its plausi-~ 
bility and because of the absence of originality in the Arabic commentators, 
that it is not, as Averroés suggests, an invention of theirs, but must have 
been found in the later Alexandrian School of Neoplatonic commentators, 
ic. the School of Ammonius Hermiae, which combined the exegesis of 
Aristotle’s treatises with a moderate Neoplatonism. It may be remembered 

96 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

that the idea of the fundamental identity of Aristotle's system and Plato’s 
was widely upheld among the Neoplatonists. We find amongst the works of 
Porphyry mentioned by Suidas a ereatise ITept rot caw elvac ry TAdrwwas 
xat ApovordAous alpeow, and there is a treatise, attributed to Farabi, and 
edited and translated by Dieterici, bearing the same title wh on et 
prdibshayls we Osh Kl cynonKF1 (in which the epithet, blasphe- 
mous in Muhammadan eyes, of ell , Setos, is given to Plato). In this 
latter treatise Ammonius and Themistius are mentioned and the Theology of 
Aristotle is referred to, to prove that Aristotle regarded God as the eternal 
creator of this eternal world, e/ll tag! Fceacondl Glall. 

p- 11t, 1. One would have expected Averroés to say: rational animals 
. +. Moving themselves at the command of these principles. As a matter of 
fact the whole theory is confused : the principles of the heavenly bodies are 
their intellects and souls; these intellects and souls are regarded as com~ 
manding them, but the heavenly bodies themselves are rational beings, i.e. 
they include intellects and souls. The theory is based on the metaphors of 
Aristotle, who regards the relation of God to the celestial bodies as that of 
the beloved to the lover, «wei dis épuipevov, 1072*3, and as the relation of the 
leader of an army, ezparqyds, 10751 4, to the army ; but these metaphors are 
not equivalent: according to the first, God is passive and only an object of 
desire (the term ‘mover’ is ambiguous in Aristotle and can mean both the final 
cause and the efficient cause of the movement), whereas according to the 
second, God has a certain activity. According to both, however, the move~ 
ments of the celestial bodies have their source of movement, their moving 
cause, in themselves, their souls. The comparison of the world as a Stace in 
which the orders of the highest authority are transmitted by proxies is found 
in Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo 6. 3g8°6. The conception of the world as a State is 
general in the Stoics; cf. Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii, pp. 327 sqq.: ‘mundum esse 
urbem (vel demum) bene administratam’. 

p. 111. 2. eri ray dvev Dang 73 atird Cort 1d vaetv Kal 76 vootpevov, Aristotle, 

De an. F 4. 430°4. For this theory compare my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., note 47. 6. 

p- 111.3. No fatigue or weariness; this is based on Aristotle, De caelo 
B 1. 284°13, where the mover of the world is said to be dmrovos: cf. also 
Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo 6. 400610, where He is described as dAvmos, doves, 
naons Kexwptopeves gwpariis doGeretas, and Philo, De providentia ii, 74 
(Stoic. Vet, Fry. ii. 208. 10): ‘item sine labore et defatigatione est earum 
(sci, stellarum fixarum) circumactio’. 

p- ti1.4. Koran xt, 11, 

p. 112.1, This is Stoic. Man as a reasonable being stands under the 
obligation of the universal divine law (see e.g. Cicero, De leg. i. 12. 33). It is 

NOTES 7 

his first duty to know and acknowledge God's power and majesty. Compare, 
for example, Seneca, Epist. 95. 50: ‘primus est decorum cultus deos credere, 
deinde reddere illis maiestatem suam, reddere bonitatem, sine qua nulla 
maiestas est’, and Epictetus’ beautiful words (Disc. i. 16. 20): ‘what else can 
I, an old cripple, do but sing for all others my hymns to God. If I were a 
nightingale, a swan, I would sing like the nightingale and the swan, but 
since I am a reasonable being, it is in the manner of a reasonable being that 
I have to sing my hymn ta God.’ 

The term (JSS, ‘divine command’, ‘imperative injunction’, ‘divine 
law’, which corresponds to the Greek spooraxrixdy and vdyos, is a technical 
term in Muslim theology (cf. Baghdadi, The Roots of Religion, Stambul, 1928, 
PP. 149, 205, 207 9qq., and Dict. of Techn. Terms under 215 , p. 1255), and 
the important problem it involves, i.e. the problem of the autonomy of 
ethics, is much discussed in Islam under the influence of Greek philosophy. 
What is the foundation of moral obligation? What is the foundation of our 
obligation to know God? According to the Mu'tazilites it is reason ; accord- 
ing to the Maturidites it is the command of God which, however, is known 
by reason; according to the Ash‘arites it is the fact that it is written in the 
Divine Book (see Goldziher, Vorlesungen aber den Islam, p. 110}. The first two 
conceptions are in accordance with the Stoic view. Right and wrong are 
autonomous, and exist by nature, don, aJl , not by convention or tradi- 
tion, béee, ay Jl; , and it is the law of Nature, which is identical with the 
law of God, found by reason, which commands what is to be done and 
forbids what is ta be avoided. According to Marcianus (see Stoic. Vet. Fr 
iii. 77. 34) Chrysippus began his book JTepi yduzow with the words: 6 voyos 
mavrow ears Paoeds Oelav re xat dvbawriar mpayudrwe: Set Sé adrav 
mpoordryy re elvas THY KAADY Kat TOV acoypwy Kai dpyovra Kal Hyepdva, Kai 
xara rofTo Kavéra re civar Sixatwy nai ddinwy cat raQv dice wodcrinav Cdwv 
MporraxtiKar per coy nosmréov, dmayoperrixey be div od wotqréov. A thing is 
not good because God has ordained it, but God has ordained it because it is 
good. The relativist Carneades, for whom morals exist only in relation to 
society and who maintained that the terms ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ can there- 
fore not be applied to God—see Cicero, De nat. deor. iii. 15. 38—had ebjected 
that if God had virtue by nature, He would stand under the power of the 
moral law—cf. Sext. Emp. Adv. phys. i. (76. The Mu‘tazilites fully grant the 
inference, and admit that just as in the logical domain God's power is re- 
stricted, since even He cannot perform what is logically contradictory, He is 
also bound by the moral !aw, and it is of necessity that He has ordained what 
He has ordained and forbidden what He has forbidden; indeed, He stands 
under the double bondage of reason : that of pure reason and that of practical. 
The orthodox Muslim, however, denies that there is any necessity for God 
in the moral domain. It was possible, > a, for God to impose other laws 
than those He has actually decreed. 

78 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 112. 2. Positions, i.e. they keep a certain order, réZ:s, in Latin ordo (cf. 
Cicero, De nat. deor, it, 16. 49). 
p. 112. 3. Koran xxxvii. 164. 

p. 112. 4. Connexion, bU5)|, ie. their order and union, ovorans, cf. 
Ps.-Aristotle De mundo 5. 39623: 4 trav SAwy avoraacs. 

Pp. 112. 5. i.e. the systematic study of their works, beginning with logic, 
ef. Aristotle, Afet. I” 3. 10052. 

p. 112.6. One may freely accept, says Aristotle, Tap. A 10. 104911, that 
on which the wise agree, when it does not stand in opposition to the opinion 
of the many. This is contrary to Epicurus’ aristocratic view, see Seneca, £p. 
29. £0: ‘nunquam volui populo placere, nam quae ego scio, non probat 
populus; quae probat populus, ego nescio’. 

p. 113-1. Cf e.g, Cicero, De nat. dear. ti. 16, 43+ ‘sensum autem astrorum 
atque intellegentiam maxume declarat ordo eorum et constantia; nihi lest 
enim quod ratione et numero moveri possit sine consilio, in quo nihil est 
temerarium, nihil varium, nihil fortuitum... .’ 

p. 113. 2. Conservation, Lis, cwrnpia, cf. Ps.-Aristotle, De mundo 6. 
4004. 

p. 113.3. It was Aristotle who first asserted—De gen. et corr. B t0. 
396*31—-that it was the sun’s movement on the ecliptic, ) dopd ward tdv 
Aogév xvxAov, which influenced all earthly change, all earthly becoming and 
decay. All that follows agrees with the traditional views of the Stoic theo- 
dicy, cf. ¢.g. Cicero, De nat. deor. ii. 19 and ii. 40. 

Pp. 113. 4. Cf. Aristotle, Meteor. B 4. 361°7. 

p- 113. §. Koran xiv. 37; xvi. 12. 

p. 114. 1, The detter being cannot fail to possess in the highest degree the 
best qualities, ic. life and reason. The basic idea of this argument is Stoic, 
ef. Cicero, De nat, deor. ii, 14. 38: How can the world, which embraces all 
things, fail to possess that which is the best? But there is nothing better than 
intelligence and reason: the world therefore cannot be without them. 

p- 114. 2, Koran xl. 59. 

Pp. 114. 3. Cf. eg. Cicero, De nat. deor. ii. 91. 79: if mankind possesses 
intellect, faith, virtue, whence can these have flowed down to the earth, if 
not from the gods? 

p. 114. 4. For the gods—according to Plotinus (zn. v. 8. 3)—-are not 
concerned with human affairs, they contemplate only the Divine and the 
Intelligible: xai toace mavra, «al yryvacKover od 74 dvOpwirea, GAG vd 
faurar, Ta Oeia Kai Sea vos dpG. 

Pp. 114. 5. Koran ali, 10. 

NOTES 79 

p- 115. 1. Cf. eg. Cicero, De nat. deor. ii. §. 13: when a man goes into a 
house or a gymnasium or to the market place, and sees the method, the 
order, the discipline in all things that happen there, he cannot possibly sup- 
pose that afl this comes about without a cause, but he understands that there 
is someone who commands and whose orders are obeyed. 

p. 1:4. 2. Koran vi. 75. 

p. (15. 3. According to Averroés’ Ep. d. Met. (see my translation, p. 113) 
there are forty-five of these movers, if each of the seven planets has its own 
mover for its daily revolution. ‘Seven or eight’ seems rather strange; one 
would have expected ‘eight or nine’, i.c. one for the daily movement of the 
heaven of the fixed stars, seven for the daily movement of the planets, and a 
problematic one to explain the precession of the equinoxes {perdmrwots). 
Compare for ail this my #p. d. Met. d. Av., pp. 112-13 and notes. 

p- 115. 4. Cf Plotinus, Enn. v. 5. 3: 6 5é exe? Pacwtede ob eMorpiwy 
dpxywy, GV Exwr rh Ssxacordray xai pdoe dpynv «at ray dinOF Baotrelav, 
dre ris dAnbelas Paorrevs xal dv Kata diiow Kvptos Tod adrod dbpdov yen}- 
paros .... In yonder world the king does not govern like a man governs 
aliens, He exercises the most just and the most natural government, the true 
kingdom, for He is the King of Truth and has by nature power over all those 
He has engendered Himself. 

Pp. 115.5. Koran xix. 94. 

p. 116, 1. Koran vi. 75. 

p. 116. 2. Probably Averroés thinks here of rav Saxpdrar radrédpara, 
‘those marvellous things which move themselves’, mentioned by Aristotle, 
Met. A 2. 983%14, at which people wonder who have not yet ascertained 
their causes. 

p. 117. 1. The proof, of course, that it is necessary. 

p- (17. 2. For then in the First also the necessity of existence would create 
a duality. Ghazali’s argument is excellent and unassailable, and exposes 
clearly the surreptitious introduction of duality. The basic idea was put 
forward by Aenesidemus (Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. t. 219 sqq-) in his denial of 
causation: a cause can only act by either remaining by itself or joining with 
something else. In the first case, it cannot effect anything but its own nature, 
in the latter case the two together cannot produce a third ; therefore nothing 
can come into being which did not exist previously, 

p. 118.1, Acondition, UL. , ms éxov, something subjective, i.e. not some- 
thing outside the soul, an external relation (for Averroés often regards all 
relations as subjective, as is frequent in post-Aristotelian philosophy, or 
even as negations). 

p. 118. 2. ie. the necessary is that which has no cause (or rather which 
needs no cause) for its existence ; all other entities have (or need) causes for 
their existence. We shall discuss later this definition of the ‘necessary’. 

80 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 118.3. Averroés here raises incidentally the important problem of 
those notions, like ‘one’ and ‘being’, which are predicated of everything and 
are called by the schoolmen notiones iranscendentates (the aporia of ‘one’ and 
‘being’ is discussed by Aristotle, Met. B 3. 998514: they are not genera, 
because they have no species), and which Averroés seems here to regard as 
subjective (unity he regards, in fact, as negative, cf. Aristotle’s definition of 
povdo— Met. A 6. 1016%24-25—as 7d xara 76 nogdv 4 mocdr ddiaiperov aévry 
wal derov), 

The whole discussion is irrelevant to Ghazali’s argument and does not 
invalidate his dichotomy : if necessity and possibility do not add anything to 
existence, then neither the necessary existent nor the possible existent con- 
tains a plurality, and the emanation of a plurality out of the Monad 
remains unexplained. 

p. 118.4. The real possible, matter, is transitory; the first effect is 
eternal, ie. necessary, although it is possible. The same contradiction 
exists for Aristotle: the material world is eternal, ie. necessary, although 
matter is potential and nothing potential is eternal. The contradiction 
rests finally on the confusion between logical and ontological necessity. 
Cf. notes 53. 6 and 163. 4. 

p. 118.5. We are here involved in a circle: Averroés seems here to regard 
both ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’ as mere negations, ‘necessary’ being the 
negation of ‘possible’ and ‘possible’ the negation of ‘necessary’. 

p. 118. 6. He seers to mean that if, through the necessity in it, there were 
a duality in the necessary existent, the necessary existent would be necessary 
by itself and at the same time its necessity would be caused by the necessity 
in it; but then the necessary existent would not be necessary by itself. 

p. 018. 7. Cf. Kant, Arit. d. rein. Vernunft, A 598, B 626: ‘Sein ist kein 
reales Pridikat d. i. ein Begriff von irgend etwas, was zu dem Begriffe eines 
Dinges hinzukommen kénne.’ 

p. 118. 8. When we say a thing exists, or a thing is one, ‘exists’ and ‘ane’ 
are predicates arid therefore, according te Avicenna, accidents (for the dis- 
cussion of this theary see my Ep. d, Met. d. dv., pp, 8 and ¢7 and notes), 

p- 118. 9. This is not correct; the theory is originally Aristotelian, e.g. 
sav pev &} Erepor airtoy rod dvaynata elvar, Tay Se odbey, dd Sed rabra 
irepa car ef dvayxys, some things have an extraneous cause of their neces- 
sity, others not, but are themselves the cause of necessity in other things 
(Adet. 4 5. 101510; for the discussion of this theory see my Ep, d. Met. d. 
Ab., p. 150). 

p. 119. t. For Aristotle this composition exists in the generated only: 
every individual is the synthesis of two things, matter and form, and it is its 
matter to which possibility is attributed, e.g, De gen. et corr. Bg. 335*32: 
obs dv obv By rots yeovgrois dariv alzwov 76 Suvardy elvas xak pp elven, Ch, 
however, note 141. 2, 

NOTES 81 

p. 119.2. This is rather a curious way of putting it, since ‘relation’ is one 
of the ten categories. As we have seen, the Stoics, the Sceptics, and also the 
Muslin theologians regarded relations as subjective. 

p. 119. 3. This does not seem to me to follow from the sentence he quotes. 

p. 119. 4. This seems in absolute opposition to the view held by Aristotle, 
and by Averroés himself, that al! becoming is but the transition of a pre- 
existent potentiality to actuality. 

p. 120, t. This is the very point Ghazali makes. 

p. 120. 2, I think he means that every body has actually a unity, i.e. it is 
one, but is a synthesis of matter and form, and, since matter represents the 
potential, is a plurality potentially. 

p- 120. 3. For, since it is pure form, it lacks matter—ie. potency, the 
principle of plurality. 

p- 120. 4. But a thing is either simple or composite—fertium non datur. 

p. 120, 5, The theory seems something of a petitio princifii. Ghazali asks: 
‘How, from the absolutely simple One, can a plurality proceed?’ Averroés 
answers : “The One is absolutely simple, but contains potentially a plurality, 
ie. a plurality proceeds from it.’ 

p- 121.1. This form, i.e. this second principle. 

p. 12t. 2, In the soul of an individual man there are, according to the 
Arabian Aristotelians, different intellects, e.g. the material and the active 
intellect, i.e. different forms having different definitions. The second prin- 
ciple would therefore be a composite intellect like the intellect of man, 

p. 121. 3. Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Ja Afet. lib. xii. 11: ‘nec tamen sequitur 
quod omnia alia a se ei sunt ignota; nam intelligendo se intelligit omnia 
alia’. 

Pp. [21. 4. Of course this is no answer to Ghazali's objection, ~~~ 

p. 122, «, The thing known is the perfection of the knower: Suvdyec mes 
dare rd vonra 6 vods, dN” évredeyela older, apiv av vor (Arist. Dean. I" 4. g2g>30; 
however, God's Intellect is eternally in act, eternally in perfection). Avicenna 
affirms (Salvation, p. 404} that God, knowing Himself and knowing that He 
is the principle of everything, knows everything that emanates from Him, 
but knows individual things only in a universal way. But Avicenna denies 
(op. cit., p. 403) that God knows things through the things themselves, for 
in this case His essence would depend on these things (ie. if through my 
free wili I perform an act and God knows this act, God’s knowledge will 
depend on my action). The difference between Avicenna and Averroés here 
consists, therefore, only in the fact that Averroés denies that it is through 
God’s knowledge that He is their principle, that He knows all things. For 
Averroés the essence of God consists in all things knowable in the noblest 

82 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
form of knowledge (according to the Aristotelian theory that the Intellect 

in act is identical with the things known). 

p. 122.2. But compare p. 120 and note 190. 4, and below: ‘they need 
not all have the same degree of simplicity’, and p. 123. 

p. 129. 1. Le, the intellect would not know the things as they are. 

p. 123. 2. Cf. Aristotle, Anal. Post, Ai. 7141: wdea StSacxadla xal wéoa 
pabnos Savonrean éx mpoimapyovons yiverat yriceas. 

p. 123. 3. Possibly he is here referring to Alexander of Aphrodisias, who 
admits that the natural and necessary consequences of God's causation are 
known to Him (Qyeest. nat. ii. 21), ie. that there is in God a xpdvosa, a 
providence for the sublunary world, At De jato xxx (see also the passage 
in Freudenthal, Die durch Averroés erhaltenen Fragmente Alexanders, p. 112) 
Alexander denies the Stoic theory that the gods know future events ;. for 
future events are not yet determined, contain a potential element, and are 
infinite, and are therefore unknowable before they come into actuality. It is 
unreasonable to attribute even to the gods knowledge of the unknowable; 
even for them the impossible keeps its character. Avicenna’s theory, which 
I shall discuss later in more detail, seems an elaboration of Alexander's. 

p. 124. 1. Asimilar objection is made by Aristotle (De an. A 5. 4104 3qq,., 
cf. Met. B 4. 1000>3) to Empedocles, whose theory, according to Aristotle, 
would imply that God is the most unintelligent, adpovesraros, of beings, 
since He alone cannot know what every mortai being knows. 

p. 124.2. Koran xviii. 49. 

p.124. 3. ‘who think wicked thoughts about God’: words used at Koran 
xbviii. 6. 

p. 125. t, Averroés is here referring probably to Met. A 8. 107459, where 
Aristotle says that the arts and sciences in fact do perish, and chat in the first 
utterances of science there is something like a divine inspiration, Belws 
eipjedat, according to the faulty Arabic rendering followed by Averroés 
(Met., p. 1687 Bowyges): eV! Jil 03 Ol od. Human affairs turn 
ina circle, Paci yap xixdor elvat ra dvOpumva apdypara, Phys. 4 14. 22324, 

p- 125, 2. Ibn Hazm, op, cit. i. 72. The superhuman origin of the sciences 
and arts is current in Greek mythology. It is embodied, for example, in the 
myth of Prometheus (the ‘Fore-Thinker’), Hephaestus, and Athena as told 
by Plato, Pit. 274 c. Ibn Hazm says, loc, cit., tine ¢: ‘We know clearly that 
man could never have acquired sciences and arts guided solely by his own, 
natural powers and without being taught.’ He enumerates different sciences 
(e.g. medicine and astronomy) and arts, which man could never have 
acquired without divine assistance. One of the examples he gives is language 
‘which man could never have fixed by convention without using another 
language or by starting from another language’ (according to Aristetle, 

NOTES 83 

De interpr. c. 2. 16419, language, although not the psychological basis of 
language, is fixed by convention, @dc«, or xara ovpFquyr; Epicurus asserts 
that language exists by nature, dues, cf. Diog. Laert. x. 75). 

Pp. 125, 3. The substance, sai, here synonymous with the essence 
wlJl, ie. the substance or the essence xar” éfoxriv: God. 

p- 126. 1, God as the reckoner : Koran iv. 7 and xxxiii. 99, 

p. 126.2. According to Aristotle, however (De an. 3. 427>11 and 
428411), perception, afoPnos, is always true; only through judgement and 
imagination are we liable to error, But Zeno affirmed {Cic. Acad. post. i. 14. 
41) that one should not have faich in all sense-impressions (Lists, davracias), 
but only in chose that are trustworthy, ie, parractas xaradymrtxad; against 
which Epicurus said (Cic. De nat. deer. i, 25. 70} that if one single sense- 
impression were false, none would be true, 

p. 126. 3, In normal cases, like the generation of man from man, the 
father (the proximate agent, 76 ¢yytraroy airwv, 3 UI clu) and the 
son are identical in species (man), but in abnormal cases, like the generation 
of the mule from a horse and a donkey, they participate only in the genus 
next above them {cf. Arist. Met. Z 8 103333}. 

p. 126. 4. He refers here possibly to Strato (see note 251. 1} or the natu- 
ralistic theory ascribed to Avicenna, in his Oriental Philosophy; see below, 
note 254. 4. 

p. 127. t. I think he means, by ‘abstract principle, connected with the 
heavenly bodies’, one or possibly more immaterial movers of heavenly 
bodies. A principle inferior to Gad would be, for example, the World-Soul 
or the First Intellect. 

Pp. 127. 2, ‘elements’: the text has ih! ele » 7a anha owpara, it, 
7a orotyeta, the elements. The mutual transition of the elements is caused 
by the movement of the celestial bodies; see Aristotle, Meteor. A 2. 939%21 
and ibid, 4 1, ad init. 

p. 127. 3. ‘the formative faculty’, 3; jad] SgMl, 7 Sveapus 1} Ssardacrem) 
pv 84 xal rexvenny elvar A€youey, through which everything has a purpose and 
nothing is in vain (apysv) or superfluous (zeptrrov}, Galen, De natur. facult, 
i. 6. 15. 

p. 127. 4. By ‘abstract principle’ he probably means here Avicenna’s 
dator formarum which is the last tneellect emanating from God and which 
is identified with Aristotle’s active intellect. 

Pp. 127. 5. ie. the World-Soul of the Platonists. 

p. 127.6. 6 7oF odiparos hav Syoupyds, whose substance (otoia) is 
unknown to us and who is called by Hippocrates ‘nature’, vars (Galen, 
De plac. Hipp. et Plat., Mueller, p. 809. 6). 

84 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 127. 7. Cf. my Ep. d. Met. d, Av., p. 44 and note 44. 2. 

p- 127.8, Cf. Aristotle, De caclo A 10, 280%4. 

p. 127.9. Description, 4), droypags), a term of Stoic logic. Through the 
dnoypady we describe by their proper qualities those highest concepts which 
cannot be defined ; ef. Simplicius, fn Cat. 75. 30. 

p- 128. 1, This refers to Aristotle, De an. A 3. 407*9g-20, where he criticizes 
Plato’s theory of the World-Soul by saying that thought does not possess 
unity through magnitude, i.e, cannot be divided through the division of the 
body. For how will Mind think, if it be extended, and through which parts 
of the extension? (Cf. also 430%15 .where it is said that the Intellect thinks 
through an indivisible mental act, and De sensu 7. 449*3.) The same criti- 
cism of a materialistic conception of thought is found in Plotinus, Znn. iv, 
7. 8, The whole problem will be treated later in extenso, 

p. 128.2. Cf Aristotle, De gen. ef corr. A 4. 32082: or, Se WAN pddeora prey 
Kal xupiws 70 droxeipevor yeréocws xat dbopds SeaTixéy. 

p- 128. 3. Cf. Aristotle, De caelo A 10. 280°24. 

p- 128. 4, Perception is the reception in the soul of the form of the ex- 
ternal thing perceived without the matter, Aristotle, De an. B 12. 42417; 
intellect is a form which knows or apprehends intelligible forms, Aristotle, 
De an. F 8. 491°20-432°3 {for this theory compare my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., 
note 47. 6). 

p. 128. 5. Cf Aristotle, Afe?. A 7. 107218: 4 8¢ vdqocs 4} Kad” atrip rot 
nad” adré dpioroy, xal 3 pdAvora tod pddurra. 

p- 128. 6. ie. the relation of intellectual to sensible existence is like the 
relation of craftsmanship to its material (olor 4 réy1y apes THY DAny, De an, 
F' 5. 430%12); the image (e(SwAor) of the craftsmanship, says Plotinus (Enn. 
¥. 9. 5), penetrates into the matter, but the craftsmanship itself remains in 
its identity outside the matter, 

p- 129. 1. This is the important Plotinian theory of creative knowledge, 
If the First Intellect, says Plotinus (Ena, y. 9. 5), has to be the creative power 
of the Universe, it cannot think it, in creating it, as existing in that which 
does not yet exist. The intelligibles must therefore exist prior to the world, 
and cannot be an image of the sensible things; on the contrary they are 
their archetypes . . . . This theory was accepted by both Christian and 
Muhammadan theologians. He know the things because they are; they are 
because God knows them. St. Augustine says (De érin. xv, 22}; ‘with respect 
to ali His creatures, both spiritual and corporeal, He does not know them, 
because they are, but they are because He knows them’ (‘non quia sunt, ideo 
novit, sed ideo sunt, quia novit’}. And John Scotus Eriugena, De div. nat, 
Migne, cxxii. 596 8, says: *. .. divina siquidems cientiao mnium, quae sunt, 
causa est. Non enim ideo Deus scit ea, quae sunt, quia subsistunt, sed ideo 

NOTES 85 

subsistunt, quia Deus ea scit." Compare St, Thomas Aquinas, Summ. Theol. 
i, qu. tq, art. ro. We shall see that this theory is accepted also by Ghazali 
(cf. too his analogous doctrine that God differentiates things through His 
choice, not chat He chooses them because they are differentiated). 

p. 129. 2. For this compare Ptolemaeus, Hypotheses (ex Arab. interpret, 
est L, Nix, Leipzig, 1907}, p. 119, and note 115. 1 of my Ep. d. Met, d. Az. 

p. 130. 1. For it is a basic principle of Neoplatonism that emanation 
implies a progressive degradation (€éiryAov)}, e.g. Ean, iii. 8. 4: éuoyerdés 
yep det Set 71d yervdipevov elvar- doPeréorepov pev 7G e&irpAov KaraBaivoy 
ylyveoPar. 

p- 130, 2. In this rather obscure sentence there is of course a contradic- 
tion: if the First is the cause of everything, the inferior Intellects cannot 
create anything, Averroés means evidently that the First is only the first or 
supreme cause of everything and that the inferior Intellects are subordinate 
causes. By ‘saying* each intellect is the cause of its own essence, i.¢. the human 
intellect’, I think Averroés means that all these separate (xywpiords, cf 
De an. T 5. 43017) Intellects are (or are the cause of) the Active Intellect 
{6 rotnrixds vods) which exists in each human being from birth to death, 
whenever he thinks. 

p. 130. 3. These are God’s seven attributes, about which the Muham- 
madan theologians agree, although they disagree about their nature. 

p. 130. 4. ie. God is the unique efficient cause. 

p- 130.5. The Ash‘arites, like the Stoics, ascribe to God knowledge of 
individual things. Against this the Peripatetics hold (see Alexander of 
Aphrodisias’ argument in Die durch Averroés erhaltenen Fram. Alexanders, p. 113 
and my Ep. d. Met. d. Au,, p. $45) that the knowledge of individuals, since 
there is in infinite time an infinite number of them, would imply an infinite 
actual knowledge, and an actual infinite is impossible even for God- 

p. (31. ©. i.e. they could not explain the relation. 

p- 131. 2. Averroés refers here to the Stoic argument of the Ash‘arites, 
that everything in the world is transitory and that which is transitory in its 
parts is transitory as a whole. 

p. 131. 3. Le. there is no objective necessity in them, since the things of 
this world have no ‘natures’, characters, dispositions, capacitiés, 

p. 131. 4. This may mean either that there are no wérités de raison (the 
Ash‘arites, however—but not orthodox theologians like Ibn Hazm— 
admitted that the contradictory is not possible even for God) or that the 
intellect cannot find any necessity in the world. 

Pp. 130. §. This is a true and profound remark: if there is ne necessity in 
things, there can be no wisdom, no reason, in their maker. For wisdom 
implies necessity, since reason is the making of inferences, the finding of 

86 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

objective necessities. It may be added that to ascribe wisdom to God is to deny 
His omniscience, as was seen by Carneades, who said (Sext. Emp. Adv. phys. 
i. 167-8) that God cannot possess reason (¢pévqets) and cannot deliberate 
(BovAeveoBat), since one who reasons has not yet found, It is the prerogative 
of man to reason and to act, because he partly knows, partly does not know. 
All action implies a supposition and the knowledge of a necessary relation: 
1 can act voluntarily when I know that, if I do this, that will happen, All 
reasoning implies an ignorance and the possible knowledge of a necessity: 
T reason when I want to find that, if, when I do ¢his, that will happen, 

p- 131. 6, ‘This is very true; cf. note 89, 3. 

P- 131. 7. ie. we infer voluntary action in the Divine only by analogy 
with voluntary action in ourselves. 

p. 132.1. Namely God who possesses attributes. 

p. 132.2. i.e. they proved that the heavens are produced by admitting 
in them accidents, i.e, transitoriness, and by the argument that that which 
is transitory in its part is transitory as a whole, 

p- 132. 3. ie. they supposed that this creation had taken place ex nihilo. 
P. 132. 4. ic. ex athilo. 

p. 132. 5. Koran xxiii. 12-14, 

p. 132. 6. Koran xxi, 31. 

p- 132. 7. Koran xi. 9, 

p. 132. 8. Koran xli. 10, 

p- 132, 9. According to the Aristotelians the individuality of a thing is 
based on its being composed of matter and form; but every atom is an 
individual by itself, in its simplicity. 

Pp: 133. t. It is the non-cold (the warm, for omnis determinatio est negatio) 
which takes the place of the cold, when a thing becomes warm. Every 
negative is just as much an object of the mind as the positive, and possesses 
therefore a certain reality, according to Aristotle. The non-existent world 
was, according to the Mu'tazilites, an object of God’s thought before the 
creation of the world. God creates the world by conferring on this object 
of His thought the attribute of existence (for existence is an attribute for the 
Mu'tazilites and for Avicenna, though not for the Ash‘arites and Averroés). 

p. 133.2. Cf my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., note 63. 2, for the inherence of 
corporeality in primary matter. 

P- 133. 3. &g. an individual man has individual transitory qualities, and 
therefore the individual man is transitory; but man as a universal is a 
rational being, this rationality which is one generically is eternal and has no 
first term; therefore, why should man in general be produced? 

NOTES 87 

Pp. 133. 4. ‘necessary’, ie. it is a necessary, evident proposition for the 
philosophers that infinitum actu non datur. But the philoscphers and Ash‘arites 
did not agree about the infinitum actu. 

Pp. 134. 1. i.e, the father is the cause of the son, but the father is himself'a 
son, i.e. the effect of anather father; if therefore the power the father had to — 
generate a son had to come to him from a father who had generated him, 
we should have an infinite regress, There must therefore be a power (an 
all-pervading power, Sdvapis did rijs Hays weporrnxvia, as the Stoics have it) 
which moves the matter in itself motionless (5Ay Kab’ adrijy axivntos) of the 
Universe, and this power will he God. 

This Stoic argument (see Sext. Emp. Adv. phys. i. 75-77) is a logical cor- 
rection and consequence of Aristotle’s doctrine of the prime mover. Accord- 
ing to Aristotle there is an infinite sequence of fathers and sons, of causes and 
effects. But all change derives ultimately from a prime mover, itself unmoved, 
not itself'an effect. This prime mover, however, is not at the beginning of the 
causal series father-son-father, since this series is infinite, but, moving 
eternally, is so eternal with this series; the prime mover is therefore, in fact, 
the unique mover, the unique cause, and source of all change. 

P- 194. 2. This is in agreement with Aristotle’s theory of movement, e.g. 
Phys. @ 4. 255916: we must always distinguish the mover from the moved, 
just as we see this when a living agent moves a lifeless thing; and Pays. @ 5. 
257°9: the mover is already an actual existent, 76 Se xwodr 75q evepyetg 
éeriv; bute I do not see how this refutes the Ash‘arite argument. 

P- 134. 3. i.e. that there is no causation in the world. 

P- 134. 4. ‘end’: this is just the point; the series father-son—father is 
infinite, and does not end in an agent which itself is not an effect, i.e. the 
prime mover, but the prime mover acts eternally and is coeternal with the 
series, which would not exist at all without this prime mover. 

p- 134. 5. This is both Aristotelian and Neoplatonic. For Aristotle every- 
thing immaterial is indivisible, Met. A 9. 1075°7: ddsatperov wav 74 py Eyow 
dAyv. In God the thinker and the thought are identical, and the divine 
thought is eternally indivisible. For Neoplatonism compare, for example, 
Proclus, Jnstit. theol. v, prop. 47; wav 76 avbumdoratov dyepés €ore Kai dahoby, 
‘all that is self-subsistent is without parts and simple’, and its proof; and 
especially Plotinus, Enn. v. 4. 1: 10 ree dalody rav ey abr drAdv Sedpevor 
iv? # ef éxetvesv, ‘that which is not simple needs simple entities for its 
composition’, This doctrine has profoundly influenced monotheistic theo- 
logy, Christian (see next note}, Muhammadan, and Jewish. In Muham- 
taadan theology the word J.»3, ‘God’s one-ness’, ic. ‘the uniqueness of 
God’, takes also the meaning of God’s simplicity. This problem will be 
discussed later in extenso, 

88 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 134.6. ie. they are termini transcendentales. For this theory of the Mu‘ta- 
zilites see, for example, Shahrastani, op. cit. ed. Cureton, i. 30, and Baghdadi, 
The Different Sects, p. 93. That there is no composition in God is also affirmed 
by the Alexandrian Fathers, e.g. St. Athanasius (Migne, xxvi. 1044.8) : ob yap 
ouvbezos 6 Beds 6 Td Tdvra cis 76 elvar cuvrebecnass ...' andi} ydp orw atola év 
# ob és modrns, God who has compounded everything is not Himself 
compounded . . . for a substance in which there is no attribute is simple. 

p- 134. 7. The Ash‘arites assert that God’s atiributes are distinct from 
His essence. 

Pp. 195.1. Cf. e.g. Aristotle, Met, Bt. 995% and Top. A 2. ror95. 

P- 135. 2. “God’s essence exceeds even the understanding of the blessed 
in their mystical union with God’ {‘excedit ipsam copulationem intellectus 
beatorum, qui essentiam Dei vident per copulationem’}, says Thomas 
Aquinas following Dionysius Areopagita, De divin. nom. vy. 1. 

P. 135. 3. Averroés refers here to the theory originally held by the 
Mu‘tazilite Abu Hashim (cf. e.g. Fakhr ad-Din al-Razi, Compendium of the 
Opinions of the Ancients, Cairo, H. 1323, p. tii), that God possesses a positive 
quality which characterizes Him, i.e. His being God, His divinity (i. Y1), 
other theologians denied this (see Razi, loc. cit.} and applied to God the 
method of negation, 4; 5:3 (literally ‘removal’; the word is an exact trans- 
Jation of the term ddaspeoss), i.e. they asserted that God had to be described 
by negation, and that there are negative qualities in Him, and that the 
positive qualities He possesses He does not possess in the way other beings 
possess them. Negative theology is a characteristic of Neoplatonism (see 
Exn. v. 3. 13, where the First is said to be ineffable, gppyrev) and, indeed, 
of all mysticism, since in its ultimate consequence the elimination or syn- 
thesis of opposites in the Absolute—as in the self-contradictory assertion of 
Dionysius Areopagita that nothing positive or negative can be asserted 
ef that which is itself the cause of everything positive and negative, 4 mévrwyv 
dois, 4 wavrwy apaipeats, 76 trip nécay xei Paw xai aaipeow—it is the 
total surrender of reason hefore the mystery of God. Negative theology is 
emphasized especially by the later Neoplatonists; e.g. for Damascius, De 
principiis (Kopp, pp. 5 sqq.), the First is neither a cause nor a non-cause, 
neither a principle nor not a principle, neither at the beginning of the 
Universe nor transcending it (énéxewa wdyrwv). Dionysius Arcopagita, in 
his Mystical Theology, iv and v, enumeratés more than fifty negations about 
God. 

Pp. 135. 4. This is rather unusual, for according to the Arabic philosophers 
{Averroés included) the Platonic ideas, i.e. the universals, exist eternally in 
the mind of God (this synthesis of Plate and Aristotle is found already in 
Middle-Platonism, Neo-Pythagoreanism, and Philo Judaeus). But by 
“‘universals’ Ayerroés here evidently means the universals that have a 

NOTES 89 

transitory existence in the minds of men and are abstracted from individual 
things in the way described by Aristotle, Anal. Post. B 19. Averroés here 
employs both the method of theology fer negationem and that of theology 
per analogiam or per eminentiam (d7epoyy). God has a thought superier to our 
thought, but none of the attributes of our thought is valid for God’s thought. 
The obvious objection is to ask how God's thought can be regarded as 
thought at all. According to Dionysius Areopagita, there is a threefold way 
to the knowledge of God: by absolute negation, by absolute superiority, 
and by regarding Him as the absolute cause (é +7] ravrww ddaipdcer xat 
drepoyh Kai év THR wderwy aizia (De div. nom. viii. 3). 

p. 135.5. Cf, however, the argument of Alexander of Aphrodisias 
against God’s knowledge of individuals (note 130. 5}, an argument which 
Averrots copies in his Epitome (see my translation, p. 145). 

p. 136.1. The implication of this petstro principit would seem to be 
that the order of the Universe proves definitely the existence of a creative 
intellect. 

p. (96. 2. That existence or being has different degrees is a basic idea of 
Aristotelian thought: 76 8 dv Adyera: pew roMayds says Aristotle, e.g. at the 
beginning of I’ 2 of his Metaphystes; and at Met. F 2. 10036 he says: 
some things are spoken of as being, because they are substances, others 
because they are affections of substance (2d@1 ovoias), others because they 
lead towards substance . . . and therefore we say that even non-being és 
non-being. 

p. 136. 3. A strange conception, but a consequence of a theory of per- 
ception without an ‘ego’; cf. Aristotle, De an. P 2. 42522: én 5€ wai rd 
dpiav fori as Kexpwpdriorac: 76 yap alabyrijpior Sexrixdy rod atabytad avev 
Ths FAs Exacrov, i.e. that which sees is, in the act of seeing, in a way coloured, 
for it receives without its matter the identical form which exists in the 
coloured object perceived. 

p. 136. 4. Imagination, which according to Aristotle differs from sense- 
perception and is included in thought, is the faculty in virtue of which we 
say that an image presents itself to us, 1) gartacia Kab Fv Adyopev ddvracud 
ket Heiv ytyveabac (De an. I 3. 4281). 

p. 136, §. Memory is imagination consciously referring to an earlier per- 
ception of which the image is a copy, Aristotle, De mem. 1. 44924 sqq. 

p. 136. 6. That the universe is a unified body, jvapévor + odya, kept 
together through its one cohesive power, é£ts, is a Stoic doctrine, cf. Sext. 
Emp. Ade. phys. i. 77-78. 

p. 137. 1. That the first tendency of the animal is towards its own pre- 
servation (4 mpwrn dpyy éxi 7d rnpeiv éaurd Diog, Laert. vii. 85, cf. v. Arnim, 
Stoic. Vet. Fr. iii. 43 sqq-) is a Stoic doctrine which is found, for example, in 

go TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

St. Augustine (De cio. dei xi. 28), Thomas Aquinas (Contr. gent. ili. 65), 
Hobbes (English Works, Molesworth, iv. 83), and Spinoza (‘una quaeque 
Tes, quantum in se est, in suo perseverare conatur’, Eth. iii, prop. 6). Accor- 
ding to the Stoic doctrine as exposed by Cicero (De fin, iii. 20) there is no 
conflict between self-love and the equally natural love of humanity: the 
theatre of the world is open to all, although every spectator has a right to 
his own seat. And Seneca says (Ep. 48. 2): ‘alteri vivas oportet, si vis tibi 
vivere’, you cannot but live for others, if you want to live for yourself. 

p. 137.2, Le. avetua, spirites, the Stoic life-spirit. 

p. 137-3. The analogy between the world, the macrocosm (the term 
‘macrocosm’ is not found in classical Greek; Aristotle—see below~-has 
péyas xdopyos; it occurs for the first time in its Latin form in Higden, tgth 
century, but it may well be older, cf. O.E.D. s.v.), and the living being 
(especially man), the microcosm, was maintained by various Greek philo- 
sophers, e.g. Democritus (ff. 34 Diels), Plato, Aristotle (Phys. @ 2. a52b24: 
i 8 éy Lim robre Swwardy yevdodar, ti KwAver 76 add OvpPAvat mal Kara 7d 
nay; et yap dv penp@ xdopw yiverat, xat ev peyddw), and, especially in ity 
Stoic form of a universal ‘sympathy’, cvprdteva rév cAwy, had a great in- 
fluence, both in Oriente and Occident, on mystical writings, on alchemy, 
chiromancy, astrology, magic, and also medicine (al-Kindi, Cardano, 
Paracelsus, R. Fludd) in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It finds its 
deepest poetical expression in Goethe’s Faust, 

Pp. 137. 4. That the universe is unified and connected by the all-permeat- 
ing pneuma, 76 wav tpidobal re Kai cvvéyeobar medpards twos Sed mravrds 
Seijxovres adroé is a Stoic doctrine which, however, is denied by Alexander 
of Aphrodisias, De nxt., p. 223, 25 (Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 145. 16). 

p. 137. 5. Koran xxxv. 39. 

p. 137.6. i.e. in the immaterial celestial world opposites coincide; the 
one can be many, the identical differentiated. 

p. 138. 1. ie. God. 

p. 138.2, Whether the daily movement of the heaven of the fixed stars 
and of the spheres of the planets proceeds from one mover, and all the 
spheres are connected (as would seem to be Aristotle’s theory at Afet. A 8. 
1073 25), or whether every planet has itsown mover for its daily movement 
{as would seem to be his theory at 1074"15), forms a point of discussion 
among the commentators (see my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., p. 113). 

p. 138. 3, ‘On them’; but, indeed, those immaterial existenty are them- 
selves nothing but the forms. 

p. 138. 4. According to Aristotle (PAys. B 7. 19825) form and end are 
identical generally: 73 pew ydp ti dore wal 7d od Evexa Ev dori. 

NOTES gt 

p. 138. 5. Ihave already discussed Aristotle’s theory of God as the prime 
mover and supreme end (note 22. 4); the theory here exposed shows that in 
God the opposites coincide-—He is the One who contains the Many, He is 
the form and the end He bestows on others, He is the prime mover and the 
supreme end-—and substantiates Ghazali’s accusation of the irrationality of 
this theology. 

p. 138.6. Through the introduction of the idea of creation Aristotle’s 
conception of God as the ultimate passive end of desire is vitiated. The 
world tends towards God, but the ultimate motive lies in God's desire to be 
loved with a love—conscious and voluntary in man, unconscious in the ~ 
animated (cf. August. Sof. i. 2: “Deus quem amat omne quod potest amare, 
sive sciens, sive nesciens’), expressed in motion; cf. Bernard of Clairvaux, 
Liber de dilig. deo vii. 22: ‘causa diligendi deum deus est . . . nam et efficiens 
et finalis: ipse dat occasionem, ipse creat affectionem, desiderium ipse 
consummat’, Neoplatonism distinguishes three kinds of unifying and con- 
joining force, &wruch xal ovyxpatucy Suvayss, three kinds of love in the 
created (for the Neoplatonic theory of love cf. Plotinus Enn. iii. § and Proclus, 
Comm. in Platonis primum Alcibiadem, ed. Cousin, vol. ii, pp. 78sqq. and 
Ppp. 137 $qq.-; for the terminology see also Dionys. Areop, De div. nom. iv. 15): 

(1) €pars duccnds, amer naturalis, love as the cosmic force of attraction and 
movement in all natural things (this is based on Eryximachus’ speech 
in Plato's Sympasiwn 186-9—cf. Empedocles fr. 17 Diels—and on the 
passage of Aristotle, Phys. A g. 192*16) ; 

(2) Epws duyinds, amor sensitious, in man and the living, ‘earthly love’, i.e. 
the principle of procreation, a desire for the eternity and duration of 
the species (the distinction between earthly and heavenly love is 
based on the distinction between an earthly and a heavenly Aphrodite 
in Plato’s Symposium t8o c, d); 

(8) pws voepés, amor (or caritas) intellectious (or rationalis, or intellectualis} 
in man, ‘heavenly love’, the love for God, the love for the divine, _ 
immortal forms, which in its greatest intensity becomes ¢pws éxorari- 
«ds, in which the identity of the lover vanishes in the beloved (for the 
definition of ecstatic love see Dionys. Areop. De div. nom. iv, 13, 
ad init.). 

This Neoplatonic conception of love is found in mystical theology both 
in East and West; in Islam, for example, in Avicenna’s Treatise on Love 
eAel 3 UL, and there are ideas connected with it in Ghazali’s section 
on Love in the sixth book, fourth section, of his Vivifcation of Theology (for 
Ghazali primary natural love is self-love, ic. the desire of everything for its 
own preservation—see note 137. 1; for Ghazali as for medieval theologians, 
like Bernard of Clairvaux and Thomas Aquinas, and Renaissance authors 
like Telesio and Campanella, there is a continuous gradation from self- 
love to love for God), In the fifteenth century, through the revival of 

92 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Neoplatonism it finds a new expression in such works as the Commentary on the 
Symposium of Marsiglio Ficino and the Dialoghi d’Amore of Leo Hebraeus 
{Judah Abrayanel}. R. Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy (Part VIL, sec. 1, 
mem. i, subs, 2) mentions Leo’s division of Love in his second dialogue into 
natural, sensible, and intellectual love. Spinoza took his idea of amor in- 
tellectuatis from Leo Hebraeus. For the poetical expression of this idea com- 
pare Dante’s sublime words (Parad. xxx. 40) : 
‘Luce intellettual, piena d’amore; 
Amor di vero ben, pien-di letizia; 
Letizia che trascende ogni dolzore.’ 
p. 138. 7. Koran xcodii. 72. 
p. 139.1. CE my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., note 1£2. 3; astronomical theories, 
according to the Greeks, are only concerned with phenomena and do not 
provide knowledge of the underlying reality. 

Pp. 139. 2. The reasons why the action of the highest sphere seems superior 
are mentioned by Averroés in his Epitome of the Metaphysics (see my transla- 
tion, p. 132 and note 132, 2) ; the most important are thas the highest sphere 
gives motion to the greatest number of bodies (Arist. De caelo B 12. 292>25) 
and that what is nearest to the mover must haye the most rapid motion 
{Arist. De caelo A g, 279%16; Phys. @ 10, 26756). 

p. 139. 3. For this, compare my Zp, ¢. Met. d, Av., note 122. 2: Stoic 
philosophy regarded the sun as the jyeporerdy. 

p. 140. 1. ie. if the knowledge of its cause—which is a second effect, 
surreptitiously introduced—is possible. 

p. 140. 2. It hay no cause according to the Jatter alternative ; Ghazali’s 
argument is of course perfectly sound; from the One no plurality can be 
logically deduced. 

p. 140. 3. Since according to the theory of emanation the superior in- 
cludes the inferior (but in this case Ghazali would seem to accept the theory 
of emanation) ; or perhaps he only means that the Creator must know His 
creation, 

Pp. 140, 4. ie. a proof of one who does not think that knowledge of the 
effect in the knower implies a duality in the knower. 

p. 140. 5. This is of course a petitio principtz. 

p. 141. 5. Cf eg. Aristotle, Met, 4 5, 1015512; 16 xuplus dpayxeioy 7d 
dmAotv (‘that which is absolutely necessary is the simple’), and Afet. 6 8. 
1006, ‘The eternal is essentially prior to the generated (¢@eprd) and 
nothing eternal is potential’. 

p. 141.2. The fault lies not with Avicenna, whose conception of the 
necessary is in agreement with Aristotle’s, but with the contradiction that 
there is here in Aristotle’s system. According to Aristotle there are several 

NOTES 93 

unmoved, immaterial, eternal movers {this in itself contradicts the theory 
that matter is the principium indiziduationis). Since nothing eternal is potential, 
there cannot be any potentiality in these movers, and they seem therefore 
independent of the First Principle and in any case their relation to the First 
Principle is nowhere explained. On the other hand, the First Principle is the 
First Cause, and therefore everything must depend on it; and since these 
immaterial movers thus receive their necessity from an external cause 
(Erepor airiov, Met, 4 5, 1015%20), there must be an element of potentiality 
in them, and only their cause, the First Principle, can be xupiws dveyxatov, 
absolutely necessary. There is a similar contradiction in Aristotle over the 
categories. He asserts (Afet. Z 1. 102829) that substance is the cause (ia 
ravrqy) of the other categories, but also (Met. A 4. 107061) that the cate- 
gories cannot be deduced from one another (apd ydp riy ovoiav cat Tae 
7a KaTyyopovpera obddy eos xowdv), There are both monistic and pluralistic 
tendencies in Aristotle; the later commentators emphasized the monistic. 

p: 142. 1. This refers probably to Aristotle, De an. Bz adinit. : the ‘object 
of sight is the visible . .. and that which is visible in itself (xa@ adré) is not 
visible by its essence (Aédyw) but because it contains in itself the cause of 
visibility’. Averroés means that colour which exists by itself, ie. which is 
something real in a body, is the cause of sight; still the colour does not 
change by being seen, but only enters into an external relation with the 
percipient. A cat may look at a king, but the king does not change by being 
the cause of the cat’s seeing him. 

p- 142. 2. This would be true only on the assumption (one often made in 
post-Aristotelian philosophy) that all relations are unreal, and indeed if all 
relations are unreal, only the One remains. 

p- 142. 3. According to Aristotle (De an. B 12) perception is the reception 
of the sensible forms S.11 )5,a)!, 74 aco#yrd Sn, without their matter. 

p. 142. 4, Ghazali here raises a delicate point in Aristotelian philosophy. 
Heaven seems to be a body. Now body is something material, but it is not 
simply matter, for matter is by definition the unqualified—Plotinus says 
explicitly (e.g. Enn, iii. 6. 7) that matter is dedparos—and body possesses 
dimensions. Although Aristotle nowhere explains how matter can become 
body (for he seerns mostly to have regarded matter as something corporeal) 
the commentators discuss the question of the form through which prime 
matter can become body (cf. my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., note 63. 2; the problem 
has been posed by Plotinus, Env. ii. 7. 3). Since matter and form always 
exist conjointly and in mutual dependence, there must be two principles for 
their existence, as Ghazali rightly remarks. 

P- 142. 5. One would have expected, instead of ‘the second intellect’ 

‘the first intellect’, ie. the first effect; here, however, Averroés seems to 
regard God as the first intellect. 

94 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 142. 6. i.e, matter and form are conditions for each other’s existence. 

p. 142. 7. Here the process of emanation is described in a somewhat 
different manner from that mentioned above, p. 109. 

p. 142, 8, If one understands by ‘matter’, as Averroés does here, follow- 
ing Aristotle’s definition De gen. et corr. A 4. 320*2, the substratum of pro- 
duction and corruption, 73 dwoneipevov yevésews nal dBopds dextexdy, heaven 
does not possess matter (but it can in that case hardly be called body) ; if, 
however, by dA» is meant the substratum of locomotion (as, eg., Met. A 2. 
toGgh2s, where Aristotle says that what is eternal has matter, not a matter 
which admits of generation, but a matter which only allows motion from 
one place to another), then the heavenly substance {aiésjp) possesses or is 
matter. 

Pp. 142. 9. Asa matter of fact, according to Aristotle (De caelo B 12. 292*18), 
and Averroés himself, the heavens (or spheres or stars) are living beings. 

p. 143. 1. ‘body in its entirety’, i.e. body as composed of matter and 
form; matter as the substratum and receptacle of forms (troxeiperdy tt xat 
trodoyy dav, Enn, ii. 4, 1), does not emanate from the First, 

Pp. 143. 2, This is a very strange conception; we have seen, however, that 
Averroés ascribes a definite measure to the sun, a heavenly body; but here 
Averroés follows Themistius (see note 161. 2). 

P. 143. 3. Averroés here avoids the difficulty by passing from a super- 
natural agent to an agent in the empirical world, 

Pp. 143. 4. For becoming is ‘coming from’ (see note 87. 2). 

p. 144. 1, For our world is one and unique and perfect, els cat pevos Kal 
réAeios otros otpavds dovw (Arist. De caelo A. g. 279*10). 

Pp. 144. 2, ie. the order, the measure of the world, must have been a 
cause, and this cause must have been determined or specified by an agent, 
God. 

P. 144. 3. Averroés does not, and cannot, explain how this is possible, for 
how can the universal form of body contain the infinite variety of accidents 
of the individual bodies ? 

P. 144. 4. Le. the Ash’arites believe that God is the only agent, the only 
cause of everything chat happens; the philosophers believe that God is the 
primary cause, but that there are intermediate causes; the Mu tazilites 
believe that at least human actions, since man acts spontaneously and his 
will is free, are not directly dependent on God, and the Mu'tazitite Muam- 
mar believed even (cf. Shahrastani, op. cit., ed. Cureton, p. 46) that God 
has created bodies alone and that accidents arise by natural necessity from 
the body. 

p- 145. 1. The four elements, ovotyeta, are called by Aristotle ra dwAd 
odpara or 74 dnd, e.g. Met. A 3. 98426. 

NOTES “i 95 

p- 145. 2. See above, note tq2. 8. 

p- 145. 3. For the simple as synonymous with the unmixed, 76 dptyés 
(opp. +3 xexpazdvov), ie, the homogeneous, cf. e.g. Aristotle, De sensu 7. 
447°18. 

p- 145-4. For, according to both Aristotle (cf. Phys. B 8. 19926) and 
Plotinus (Enna. iii, 8. 2 ad fin,), Nature, although its acts tend towards an 
end, does not choose or deliberate. 

p- 146.1. For the Niche for fights compare note 69. 2. Ghazali's 
mediating principle is regarded by him as the mover of the ninth sphere, 
like Avicenna’s First Intellect, The proposition ‘ex uno non fit nisi unum’ 
is not mentioned by Ghazali. 

p. 146. 2. ie. there are in the First Effect pluralities which cannot be 
deduced from the fact that it is a first effect, since as a first effect it ought 
to be simple. 

p. 146. 3. Gf the analogous argument, p. 24. 

p. 146, 4. This seems true enough, but is more closely in agreement with 
the Stoic denial of possibility than with Aristotle (and with Averroés him- 
self), for whom on the contrary the possible can become, or has to become, 
necessary through an externa! agent, and who distinguishes what is abso- 
lutely necessary from what is so hypothetically (cf. notes 141. 1 and 141, 2). 

p. 147. 1. ie. the outermost sphere. Ghazali wants to show in what 
follaws that God is the immediate cause of everything, and that He cannot 
act through mediation, as is the Neoplatonic doctrine, and also his own in 
the Niche for Lights. 

Pp. '47. 2. Thisamounts to saying that the First Cause and the First Effect 
are absolutely similar; they both have the same plurality, and notwith- 
standing their plurality they are both a unity ; the opposites of plurality and 
unity coincide in them both, As Ghazali is going to remark, why then not 
say that the cause and the effect are identical? For what is their priacipium 
individuationis ? 

p. '47.3. For these two principles are both eternal and immaterial, i.e. 
not in place; they have no principium individuationis, 

Pp. 147. 4. ‘things which do not differ from them in time and place’, i.e. 
all heavenly and human souls and all earthly and heavenly bodies; but 
souls differ from them in time, for they are not eternal, and bodies differ 
from them in space, since qua bodies these bodies are in space. But perhaps 
one must understand that in the Divine Mind human souls in some in- 
comprehensible way are eternal, and bodies immaterial. 

p. 148.1. Cf p, 108. 

p. 148. 2. For in the absence of a rival he cannot be overtaken; for this 
proverb sce Maidani, ed. Freytag, i, p. 315, ch. xxi. 27. 

96 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 148, 3. Le, three; from the First Effect three things emanate. 

p- 149. 1. That there is one primary reality: the prime, eternal, im 
material, immovable mover. 

p- 149. 2. Cf. Aristotle, Met. 4 8. 1073917: we must show that on the 
number of principles other thinkers have made no clear statement whatever, 
Ere wept rAROous over elprixace 3 71 Kal cages eimetv. 

Pp: t49. 3. In the Almagest (ed. Halma, t. ii, p. 831) the number of stars, 
as established by Hipparchus, is given as 1,022, to which the three stars of 
the wAdxapos, & £4)! (Coma), which he has omitted, must be added. The 
number 1,025 was generally accepted by the Arabs, although Abd al- 
Rahman al-Sufi, Description des étoiles fixes, trans]. Schjellerup, p. 40, says 
that there are many more stars which, however, are so faint that they 
cannot be counted. 

Pp. 149. 4. The Greek astronomers divided the stars according to their 
apparent magnitude, i.e, their luminous intensity, into six classes, which 
were again subdivided by al-Sufi. 

p- 149. 5- In the Almagest (7. 5) six stars are called reddish, dadxcppos 
(subrufus), amongst which is Sirius, which to us today appears white; cf. 
Schjellerup, op. cit., p. 25. For the statements of the Arabs concerning the 
colour of some stars compare Nallino, al-Battant, Opus Astronomicum, ii. 283-g. 

p- 149. 6. As an example of stars in the shape of a man, GLY! 3) 5405 
al-Sufi gives, for example, Gemini, 21} 441 (op. cit. D. 40). 

Pp. 149. 7. ¢.g. the pernicious influence of Sirius is mentioned as early as 
Homer, iad xxii. 30, and our expression ‘dog-days’ (xuvoxatwara, dies 
camculares) still testifies to the belief in the influence on the weather attri- 
buted to this star (Canicula, the dog-star). 

p- 149. 8. For the differences between Hipparchus (in the Almagest) and 
al-Sufi over the luminous intensities of the stars compare the synoptic table 
in Schjellerup, op. cit., p. 5. 

p- 150. &. For this dangerous theory (for what remains of the 7d5¢ 74, the 
individual substance, when the accidents are eliminated?) compare 
Aristotle, Afet, £2, where the accidental its said to be very near to the non- 
existent, 76 cupBeBnxds eyyls 7 rod yw Svros, and where it is afRrmed that 
there can be no speculation about the accidental, wepi 73 xard cupfefyxds 
ovseuia dori Cewpia, 

p- (50. 2. This too is a somewhat dangerous theory; they are not indi- 
vidually different, because they have no matter, and for the same reason 
(for the genus represents the matter in the definition, cf. Arist. Met. H 6. 
1045*34) they are not specifically different; how then can they differ at all? 

P- 150. 3. i.e. possibility is only a formal logical concept and does not 
make a material change in what might possibly exist. As Kant has it 

NOTES 97 

‘Hundert wirkliche Taler enthalten nicht das Mindeste mehr als hundert 
mégliche.’ 

p. 151. 1. In this passage Averroés, although he affirms that Avicenna’s 
theory is not true, seems to regard it as plausible, neglecting the objections 
he himself has made; and, indeed, it is the theory of mediation which he 
himself accepts, the theory of a supreme ruler who governs the world by 
proxy. 

p. 151.2. The terms ‘living through life’, ‘willing through will’, &c., are 
found in the Ash‘arite formulation of God’s attributes. 

p. 151. 9. This is not the point Ghazali makes, Ghazali reproaches 
Avicenna with making categorical and, as he believes, absurd assertions 
about a purely hypothetical entity. Averroés ought to have shown that only 
from such an hypothesis can the observed facts be reasonably deduced. 

p. 152. 1. Celsus (Orig. Contra Cels. i. 68) does not regard miracles as a 
justification of truth, they might equally well be the work of wicked men 
under the influence of an evil spirit. It may be remarked that Muhammad 
himself {see Koran xxix, 49, xiii. 27-30, xvii. 92-97) does not really claim 
to have performed any miracles (the Koranic word is wb] signs; cf. the 
Christian term onzeia), although the Muhammadans ascribe to him a 
number, the greatest of which is the Koran itself (as a proof of this Koran 
cxix. 48 is quoted). My great compatriot Hugo Grotius uses Muhammad's 
concession to refute Islam. Jesus wrought miracles—he says—but Muham- 
mad declared that he was sent with arms, not with miracles, ‘Mahumetis se 
missum ait non cum miraculis, sed curn armis’ (De vera religione christiana, 
lib. vi). 

Pp. 152.2. i.€. let us not ask how it happened. Vi,5° 34) ‘without the 
“how” ’, i.e. without inquiring how it happened, is the formula by which 
the Ash‘arites express their ignorance of the right way to interpret the too 
anthropomorphic religious conceptions of the Divine, which, however, they 
refuse to abandon. Compare the dictum credo quia absurdum ascribed to 
Tertullian. 

p. 152. 3. This tendentious saying, ascribed to the Prophet, which, as far 
as I know, is not found in the canonical Collections of Traditions, seems to 
recommend the acquisition of worldly knowledge. According to the orthodox 
conception, however, the religious Muslim ought to avoid all the worldly 
sciences of the ancients («Lai ¢. gle); and the equally tendentious tradi- 

tion of the prayer of Muhammad is often quoted, that God might protect 
him from useless science { fea Y phe) (cf. Goldziher, Stetlung der alten 

islamischen Orthodoxte zu den antiken Wissenschaften, Abh. d. K. Pr. Akad. d. 

98 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Wiss., Jahrg. 1975, phil.-hist. KL, No. 8, p. 6; see also Goldziher, Buck vom 
Wesen der Seele, Abh. d. K, Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu Géttingen, 1907, phil.-hist. 
K1., No. 9g, p. 60). 

P. 15% 4. dem ,the mercy of God, corresponds to the Hebrew conception 
of pwy2 and the Christian conception of eos. That revelation rests on 
God’s mercy is found in Christian checlogians also; cf. ¢.g. Lactantius, De 
doin, inst. i, 1. 6: ‘quod quia fieri non potuit, ut homini per seipsum ratio 
divina innotesceret, non est passus hominem Deus lumen sapientiae requiren- 
tem diutius errare . . ., aperuit oculos eius aliquando et notionem veritatis 
muaus suum fecit,’ Cf. Koran xxi, 107. It is the Stoics who base their proof 
of the reality of divination on the love shown by the gods. If there are gods, 
so itis said (Cic. De div. i. 38. 82), and they de not show to man in advance 
what is going to happen, they do not love man (‘si sunt di neque ante de- 
clarant hominibus quae futura sunt. . .non diligunt homines’). 

This passage of Averroés is not in agreement with his usual purely 
rationalistic attitude; it must, however, be remembered that even his 
master Aristotle expresses, in De philosophia, fr. 10 Rose, his belief in divinely 
inspired dreamns (cf. also the Aristotelic passage from Ps,-Arist., Problems A 1, 
in Cie. De div. i. 38. 81). It may be added here that the well-known Aver- 
roistic conception of religion as threefold, the religion of the masses, of 
the lawyers, and of the philosophers, is based on the theory of such Stoic 
and eclectic philosophers as Panaetius, Mucius Scaevola, and Varro; cf. 
St. Augustine, De civ, det vi. 5: ‘tria genera theologiae dicit (ie. Varro) 
esse... corumque unum mythicon, alterum physicon, tertium civile’. The 
first is, according to Varro, the theology of the poets (i.e. for Averroés, of the 
masses), the second of the philosophers, the third of the State (i.e. for 
Averroés of the lawyers). Compare also De civ, det iv. 27: ‘pontificem 
Scaevolam disputasse tria genera tradita deorum : unum a poetis, alterum a 
philosophis, tertium a principibus civitatis’. (There is an allusion to this 
passage in Gibbon, Dectine and Fall, ch. ii, where he says: ‘The various 
modes of worship which prevailed in the Roman world were all considered 
by the people as equally true, by the philosophers as equally false, and by 
the magistrates as equally useful.’} This threefold division must have been 
widely accepted, for we find it also in Phetarch, Amator, 18. 10, where he 
says that we have received our religious views from three types of men: 
motyrai, vopolérar, prdaogor. For Origen just as there is a threefold nature 
in man, body, soul, and spirit, so there is a threefold sense of Scripture, the 
literal, the moral, and the mystical (Orig. De prin. iv. 11: ‘sicut ergo homo 
constare dicitur ex corpore et anima et spiritu, ita etiam sancta scriptura’). 
Compare the gnostic division of mankind into vAkol, puyixol, mevparixol. 
(As early as Aristotle, Met. a 3. 995*6, three kinds of people are distinguished : 
those who accept only mathematical proof, those who accept proof by 
example, and those who accept proof by poetical quotation.} 

NOTES © 99 

p. 153. 1. This refers, I think, to the passage (Anal. Post. A ro. 76618) 
where Aristotle says that the certainty that number exists is not the same as 
the certainty that cold and warmth exist: od yap dpoiws Sijrov dre dps 
fore xal rt puypov Kai Pepydy. 

P: 153.2. Le. everything has its own specific ‘nature’, its own specific 
‘powers’, from which its own specific acts follow. If there were no cause, 
we read in Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. i. 202, everything might come from any- 
thing and at any place and time. Ghazali, as we shall see later, is well aware 
of this objection against the denial of cause. 

p- 153. 3. The soul ts the principle of the living, i.e. of that which has the 
faculty of self-movement which, in its most simple form, in planes, is limited 
to nutrition, growth, and decay, tpodj, adfyoss, fOicrs (cf. Arist. De an. B 
2. 413*20}, 

P. 153-4. e.g. only man can beget man, only the physician can produce 
health through the concept of health he possesses (see e.g. Arist. Adet. 
A 4d fin,), 

Pp. 154. 1. ie. if the One were regarded as a universal and if it were 
regarded as acting gua universal, Here Averroés turns against Plato’s theory 
of ideas; however, the word he uses here in the text for universals, (JL, is 
that used by the theologians (a translation of the term was éxov of the 
Stoics); he seems therefore to have in mind here those theologians who 
regard universals not like the ideas of Platonists, which are ultimate realities, 
but more like the Stoic Aeerd, things intermediate between reality and 
unreality (see note 3.6). The argument he gives, however, is based on that of 
Aristotle against the conception of Platonic ideas as causes (e.g. Mef. A 9. 
99119 sqq.): How can the identical idea remain in itself and exist apart, 
and at the same time transfer itself to innumerable things? How can it be 
at the same time the model and the copy? But Aristotle's conception 
of becoming exhibits the same difficulty, and the relation of the universal to 
the individual remains obscure. For when John begets Peter, what John 
transfers to Peter is not his identity, but a universal form, i.e, humanity, the 
identical form which every father transfers to his son. But how can the many.- 
possess what is identical and transfer it, and how can the individual proceed 
from the universal? 

Pp. 154. 2. According to the Aristotelian doctrine that what exists pri- 
marily and absolutely is the individual substance (cf. e.g. Arist. Met. Z 1. 
1028430), 

p. 154.3. Le. in a becoming through universals. 

Pp. 154. 4. According to the Aristotelian conception of truth (Adet. I 6. 
1011%26) as the correspondence between thought and reality. 

Pp. 154. 5. See p. 107 and note 107. 2. 

100 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 154.6. Avicenna shows in his Theorems and Notices, p. 180, the sarae 
lack of appreciation for Porphyry whose ’Afopyai he regards as utterly 
worthless (iéo). St. Augustine (De civ. dei xix. 22) shows a greater appre- 
ciation of Porphyry, whom he calls ‘doctissimus philosophorum, quamvis 
Christianorwm acerrimus inimicus’. But Eusebius, Praep. Ev. v. 14. 230 says 
that Porphyry, whom he calls, ironically, 6 yevratos “EAjvw prdcaogos, & 
Baupaorés Geodrdyos, 6 Tév azoppirwy porns, ‘this noble philosopher, this 
marvellous theologian, this adept of the mysteries’, tries through his quotation 
of oracular texts to give the impression that his philosophy—in fact inspired 
by a demoniac power—contains the secrets of the gods. (For further 
appreciations of Porphyry see Holstenius, De stta et scriptis Porphyrii, philo- 
sopht, Rome, 1630, p. 11.) 

Averroés refers here probably to the theory of gradual emanation in 
Porphyry’s "Agoppat apds ra von7a (known to the Arabs under the title 
giaty jal! y, cf A. Mueller, Die griechischen Philosophen in der arab. 
Uberlieferung, p. 25). 

p. 155-1. Cf. note 142. 8. 

Pp. 155. 2. 2.e. 80 far as these acts aim at the conservation of the sub- 
unary world; for the less noble cannot be what the more noble aims at 
(see e.g. Porphyry, Sententiae 30). 

Pp. 155. 3- Le. their efficient causes, i.e, the third principle, 4 zpéry épy}, 
{besides matter and form) of which Aristotle says (De gen. et corr. B g. 
335>7) that none of his predecessors had been able to establish it, although 
they had some slight inkling of it. 

P- 155. 4. Svo xunjoes (De gen, et corr. B 10. 336°34), the two motions of 
the sun along the ecliptic by which it approaches and recedes from any 
given point on the earth. 

Pp. 155. §. See the parallel passage (p. 136 and notes). The question of 
the common internal sense, sensus communis, atobnors now} (see e.g. De an. I" 
1. 425°27) I shall treat later. 

p. 156, 1. The world, in the state it exists in, i.e, eur world, the world as a 
cosmos, an ordered whole. 

p. 156. 2. See note 33. 1; cf. also Ibn Hazm, op. cit. 1. 24: becoming 
implies a prior non-existence, OF ai of po be 5h Codzeall cae. It may 
be added here that Zacharias of Mytiiene, a contemporary of Philoponus, 
who in the same way as Philoponus tried to refute Proclus’ arguments for 
the eternity of the world, attempted, in his dialogue Ammonius seu de mundt 
opificie, to rebut Ammonius Hermiae’s arguments for this eternity, also 
asserts that an eternal creation is a contradiction in terms (op. cit., ed. 
Migne, Ixxxv. 1093). 

p. 156. 3. Because of the factual evidence, 8,’ ¢umeipiav. 

NOTES 101 

p. 156. 4, Aristotle distinguishes, Met. @ 8. 1050290, the actuality which 
is in the product, ¢.g. the house which is being built, from the actuality 
which is in che exercise of the action itself, e.g. the act of seeing which is 
in the seeing subject. 

p- 156. 5. Cf pp. 98-99 and notes 98. 3 and gg. 2. 

p- 157. 1. TheArabic word I translate by ‘has come into being’ is Sala. 
I have translated the same term one line above by ‘temporal; the 
speciousness of the argument lies in the ambiguity of this term. 

Pp. 157. 2. Aristotle lays down as a condition for the First Principle that it 
must be itself unmoved, that it must be an unmoved mover, Phys. @ 5. 
257°*31-25 7°13. 

p- 158. 1. By ‘materialistic theory’ is meant not only the mechanistic and 
atomistic conception of nature held by Democritus and Epicurus (for the 
arguments against Democritus cf. Arist, De gen. an. E 8), but also such a 
system as that of Strato, who denies the need for an immaterial divine 
principle for the explanation of the universe (cf. Cic. Acad. Pr. ii. 38. 121 
‘Strato . . . negat opere deorum se uti ad fabricandum universum’). 

p- 158. 2. Aristotle tries to prove (Adet. 2 2), for all four types of cause, 
that they cannot form an infinite series. 

Pp: 159. 1. See p. 33 and note 33. 2. For the two ways of coming from 
another thing, the one in which the process ts irreversible, the other in which 
it is reversible, cf. Aristotle, Met. a 2. 994922 sqq. (see also Arist. De gen. et 
corr. B11. 338%5 about rectilinear, ecs edd, and circular, nicdiw, generation). 
The difficulty of the whole problem lies in this, that when the cause is 
regarded as prior in time to the effect and time is eternal, the causal series 
also has to be eternal. 

p. 159. 2. The soul, i.e. the soul as totality, the Platonic or Neoplatonic 
World-Soul ; the intellect, i.e. the rots as a supramundane entity, 

Pp. 159. 3. e.g. Aristotle, Met, A §. 1071413: dvOpwrov atriov ... 6 marip, 
kai... 6 ito, dvOpwaos avOpurtov yee xai auos, Phys. B 2. 194513. 

p- 159. 4. This sentence seems to be tautological. 

P- 159. §. First, i.e. nearest to the product of art, but, in fact, last in the 
series of instruments. 

p- 159. 6. This is completely arbitrary; all the instruments are conditions 
for the existence of the product (cf. also note 11. 3). 

Pp. 159. 7. i.e. from the matter of the dead man a plant comes into being, 
which through nutrition becomes sperm or menstrual blood (cf. my Zp. d, 
Met. d. Av., p. 73 and the note 73. 1). 

p. 160. 8. See note 142. 8. 

102 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 160. 2. Body in itself is what is extended in any direction (Arist. Phys. 
I’ 5, 204520: odpa ev ydp dors 76 rdvty Exow Sedoracw) and is perceptible 
in place (Arist. Phys. I 5. 20531: vay ocpa aigbyrév ev rérw. 

p. 161. 1. Cf the dictum of Zeno of Citium (Sext. Emp. Adv. phys. i. 
104): the rational is better than the non-rational and the animate better 
than the inanimate, but nothing is better than the cosmos, therefore the 
cosmos is rational and animate. 

p. 161, 2, This refers, I think, to the passage in Themistius, Paraphrasis in 
br. A Metaphys., ed. Landauer, 5. 22: ‘in omnibus vero, quae mutantur, id 
quod mutationem subit necessario corpus est quoddam ; idcirco substantiae 
perpetuae [i.¢. the heavenly movers which are identified with their bodies] 
quae generationem et corruptionem non subeunt, cum loco mutentur et 
ipsae, fteri non potest quin corpora sint.’ 

p- 161. 3. ic. they are life in themselves; this seems to me, however, an 
impossible conception, for life or soul is defined by Aristotle in relation to a 
body which is moved by it; soul is the faculty of selfmovement in a body, 
De an. B 1. 412°16: 4 fuyh Adyos odpatos fucinod torovdi Eyovros dpyw 
xumoews Kai ordoews ev Eavrg. 

p. 161, 4. For that which can be attributed to a substance is its accidents, 
and the accidental—cf. e.g. Aristotle, Met. K 8. 1065*1—is what occurs, but 
neither necessarily nor for the most part; and what can or cannot occur 
possesses matter (cf. ¢.g. Met. @ 7. 1032°20). 

p. 161.5. A first cause, according to Ghazali, implies a coming into 
existence, but a circular process is infinite a parte post. 

p. 162. 1. i.e. the first cause. 

p. 162, 2, That an infinite series of entities not having position is possible 
does not follow any more than that an infinite series of entities having a 
position should be impossible. 

p. 163. 1. See, however, note 14. 6, 

p. 163. 2. Cf note 14. 6. 

p- 163. 3. Leibniz, who, of the great philosophers since Descartes, is the 
one most strongly dependent on scholastic philosophy (in Spinoza the 
influence of Stoicism is overwhelming) has this argument in the following 
form in his Monadotogy (Erdmann, p. 708}: The connexion of all contingent 
things leads us to conclude that outside this connexion there is a necessary 
Being who is their source and origin. 

p. 163. 4. Avicenna, for the reason given by Averroés, places this argu- 
ment at the beginning of the metaphysical part of his Recovery (i. 6-7). 
He is perfectly justified in ascribing this argument to the philosophers, 
for it is implied in Aristotle’s whole system, and ali the elements in it are 

NOTES 103 

found in Aristotle himself: the dichotomy of reality into the eternal and 
divine and the possible is asserted by Aristotle, De gen, an. Bt. 731>24; 
that everything absolutely necessary is eternal, Eth. Nic. Z 3. 119924 
(absolutely, éAds, as distinguished from the hypothetically, ef sroéoews, 
necessary: see eg. Phys. Bg. 199>34}; that ‘eternal’ and ‘necessary’ are 
convertible, De gen. et corr. B 11. 33841; that the eternal is essentially prior 
to the perishable, Met. @ 8, 10507 ; that the actual is essentially prior to the 
potential, Afet. © 8. 105074; that certain things owe their necessity to some- 
thing other than themselves, others not, but are the cause af the necessity 
in others, Met. 4 5. 1015%9; that nothing which exists necessarily can be 
potential, Afe?. @ 8. 1050518; that in its primary and absolute sense the 
necessary is the simple, Mfet. 4 5. 101511 ; finally, the necessity of an eternal 
unmoved substance is proved Met. 6, and it is affirmed at Afet. A 7. 
1072510 that the first mover possesses its existence of necessity, €& dvdyxne 
Epa éoriv Sv. 

The argument is based on the confusion, deeply rooted in Aristotle’s 
system, of the ontological with the logical—here-of ontological necessity 
with logical necessity, of necessity in reality with necessary truth. That the 
angles of the triangle are equal to two right angles is a necessary universal 
truth ; it is not valid at one time, invalid at another time (see Arist, Met. @ 
10, 105274}, but its validicy is eternal or rather timeless (this immutability 
of truth concerns not only the relations of universais but also all past events; 
for also the past is at rest, forever beyond the sway of time—it is eternally 
true that once there lived in Athens a man called Socrates; it is the tremb- 
ling, ever-changing ‘now’ that alters today’s truth into tomorrow’s faise- 
hood). This being-valid of truth is confused by Aristotle with ontological 
being, i.e. the existence of individuals in reality; and he says at Met. @ 10. 
to51%1 that being in the strictest sense is truth, ré6 5é xupudrara dv ddybés 
(about the threefold conception of truth in Aristotle see my Ep. d. Met. 
4. Av., note 81. 3). So it comes about that the intrinsic necessity attributed to 
timeless universal truth is transferred to the eternal existence of an individual 
prime mover, i.e. God. This identification of God and Truth is found in both 
Christian and Muslim theology ; ‘te inveco, deus veritas, in quo et a quo et 
per quem vera sunt quae vera sunt omnia’, says St. Augustine, Solilog. i, 
1.3 and ‘The Truth (, 344)’ is an epithet applied to God by the Muslim 
theologians with the meaning of ‘the necessarily-existing by His own essence’ 
(see Lane, Ar.—Engt. Dict.). 

p. 163. 5. The theory of the theologians that the possibles in God need 
for their actualization in time a necessary eternally existent, i.e. God, is 
nothing but the Jewish-Christian—-Muslim conception of creation expressed 
in Aristotelian terminology. 

p. 164. 1, e.g. in his Recovery, Met. i. 6: a5; agai] Gmlell OI dt 
dhe a) ast; Xaali Sly a) dle Y. The potential (ic. matter) needs a cause 

104, TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 
for its actualization, and everything in che world except the prime mover 
has some degree of potentiality, since potentiality implies a capacity for 
change. 

p. 164. 2. See below and note 164. g. 

p. 164. 3. Averroés here means, I think, by ‘possible’ the transitory, sub- 
lunary things, and by ‘necessary* the separate Intellects, the eternal celestial 
bodies, or the world as a whole. 

p- '64. 4. ie, matter, or rather the transient individual. 

p. 164. 5. Le. everything eternal with the exception of God; in this 
argument there is implied a trichotomy of reality into the absolutely neces- 
sary (i.e. the prime mover), the necessary-possible or hypothetically neces- 
sary {i.e. everything eternal, with the exception of the prime mover), and 
the possible (i.e. actualized matter), which corresponds to the Aristotelian 
trichotomy of the absolute mover, the moving and moved, and the absolutely 
moved (cf. De an. F' 10. 433°13; Met. 4 7. 1072924; Phys. @ 5, 256520), 

p- 164. 6. But such an assumption would be false, as Averroés will show 
below, for there cannot be an infinite series of necessary causes. 

p. 164. 7. For material causes cannot proceed from one another end- 
lessly, e.g. flesh from earth, earth from air, air from fire, and so on (Arist. 
Met. a 2. 9943). 

p. 164. & i.e. that the world, which is eternal as a whole, has a cause. 

p. 164. 9. This formula shows clearly the confusion between the logical 
and the ontological, for ‘cause’ is a purely ontological concept and an event 
is necessary just when it Aas a cause. 

p. 164. to. Ghazali regards it as contradictory that every member of the 
series should have a cause, but that the whole series should have none. He 
accepts it, however, here for the sake of argument. 

p- 165. 1. ie. the elements are eternal. 

p. (65. 2, Ghazali’s argument is irrefutable. It is always the same 
question: How can an eternal world have a first cause? 

p. (65, 3. Averroés means that by proving that the possible transient 
causes need an eternal necessary cause (heaven, for instance) it is not yet 
proved that the series of necessary agents is finite. The proof he gives is 
of course a petitio princtpii, for why should there be more than one eternal 
mover? 

p. 165. 4. Averroés tries to avoid Ghazali’s objection by dropping Avi- 
cenna’s identification of the necessary and the causeless, but the objection 
remains valid and can be directed against Aristotle himself; for if eternity 
implies hoth a necessity and an actuality which need no actualizer, the 
world as a whole, being eternal, will be both necessary and causeless, 

NOTES 105 

p- 166. 1. ie. the material causes, flesh, earth, and air are essential, and 
therefore cannot form an infinite series. 

p- 166. 2. Cf. note 165. 4. 

p- 166.3. The eternity of the one eternal being is timeless eternity, 
aigy, o>; see, however, note 70. 5 and p. 37. 

p. 167. 1. ie. Ghazali, as frequently, does not want to make a positive 
assertion ; he wants only to show the futility of the philosophers’ arguments; 
cl: Li dan5 (petitio principi’) is a literal translation of the Greek ro é€ dpyjs 
aircicAan. 

p- £67. 2. i.e. the totality of a finite number of finites is finite (chis is, of 
course, 4 tautology). 

p- 167. 3. ie. the materialists believe that every member of the series has 
a cause, but that the members are iafinite in number and therefore there is 
no first cause; he ought really to have said, since he speaks here of a tem- 
poral, not a causal series, ‘The materialists believe that every part has a 
beginning, but that the parts are infinite in number and that therefore the 
series has no beginning’; but since time is, in Aristotelian philosophy, a 
function of movement (for time is the number of movement in respect of 
before and after), the time-series and the series of movements are identified. 

p- 157. 4. Here, too, Averroés speaks of a causal series, not of the time- 
series. Genera are eternal according to Aristotle, De gen. an. Bt. 741535: 
5:6 yevos det dvépdimaw xal Lawv dori xai fuzav, e.g. in the series father-son- 
father every individual is mortal, but the series is infinite and man as a 
genus is eternal; it is through reproduction and the eternity of their genus 
that animals participate in the eternal and the divine, cf. Aristotle, De an. 
B 41429 and Plato, Symp. 206 e and 207 a. Cf. also St. Augustine, De civ. det 
vi. 4: ‘alii namque, sicut de ipso mundo crediderunt, semper fuisse homines 
opinantur. unde ait et Apufeius, cum hec animantium genus describant: 
singillatim mortales, cuncti tamen universe genere perpetui’. 

p. 167. 5. i.e. the phitosophers do not object to an infinite series of non- 
essential causes, but this series must depend on an eternal essential cause 
outside it. 

p. 168. 1. This subjective conception would seem to imply that all fini- 
tude and particularity depend solely on our minds, and is in contradiction 
to p. 33—and also to the following sentence in the text—where the particu- 
larity in the heavenly movements serves to explain the particularity and 
transiency of sublunary affairs. The contradiction is based on the difficulty 
of, on the one side, guarding the eternal from all contamination with the 
transitory, and on the other, deriving the transient from the eternal. 

p- 168, 2, This sentence is of course tautological: he who does not con- 
cede the infinity of a series of causes must admit that this series is finite, 

106 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 169. 1. i.e. even if some of these imaginary things are segecied a ™ 
causes of other imaginary things. 

p. 169.2, Cf. p. 12. 

p. 169. 3. Cf p. 14. 

p. 169. 4. i.e. of the one eternal soul subsisting by itself. 

p. '69. 5. For the origination of the elements from each other see Aris- 
totle, De gen. et corr. B 4. 

Pp. 170. t. Le. they would be individually different, but would have the 
species of necessary existence in common. The argument given here by 
Ghazali is taken from Avicenna’s Salvation, p. 374, where the author sum- 
matizes the argument he gives in The Recovery (Met. i. 7} by which he 
tries to prove that the necessary existent can be neither a genus nor a 
species, but must be the simple Monad. (That the absolute One, ré 2avrws 
é, cannot be predicated of anything, and therefore cannot be a genus, is 
proved by Plotinus, Znn. vi, 2. 9.) This argument, although its elements 
are to be found in Aristotle (see note 163. 4}, does not occur in his works in 
this form. It rests on the Platonic, Aristotelian, and Neoplatonic confusion 
between the logical concept of species and specific difference, and the 
ontological concept of cause (the word efdes in Aristotle’s philosophy means 
both the logical concept of species and the ontological concept of ‘form’, 
which is for Aristotle a kind of cause; Plato also gives his ‘ideas’ a dynamic 
sense—e.g. Phaedo 100d): every plurality has a specific difference which 
must be caused by an entity, which, if it contained a plurality, would again 
need a cause, (There is a similar confusion in Aristotle’s philosophy between 
the logical concept of genus and the ontological concept of matter; cf., for 
example, Met, J 28. 102459.) 

Pp- 170.2. Avicenna, Recovery, loc, cit., says: > 5a5)t coats dam od 
dgeg)l aE wet ‘Yt, ‘the nature of the necessary ¢xistent is simply the 
establishing of its existence through its essence’; cf. Spinoza, Eth. 1, prop. 
iii: ‘ad naturam substantiae pertinet existere—ipsius essentia involyit neces- 
sario existentiam’. 1 should agree with Ghazali that the only meaning one 
can give to this—as to Spinoza’s related expression causa sui—is that it has 
no cause whatever. Plotinus also affirms that the existence of the First is 
identical with His essence: od« dAro per atrd, ao $e 4 oboia adrob, Enn, 
vi. 8. 12. 

p- 170. 3. Cf Aristotle, Met. A 8, 1074233: plurality is the consequence 
of matter, dca dpe ToAAG oAqv Exe... humanity applies to many, e.g. to 
Socrates, &c,... but the primary essence has no matter, for it is perfect 
reality (évreAdyera). That the Monad is prior to plurality (wav mAjGos 
dedrepév dart 108 évds) is one of the basic principles of Neoplatonism ; for its 
proof, based on the confusion mentioned above, see, for example, Proclus, 

Instit. Theat., prop. v. 

NOTES 107 

p. 171. t. ie. if black is black through its essence and the essence of black 
is the species ‘colouredness’, then red will not be a colour; if, on the other 
hand, the essence of black is black itself, the species (or exterior cause) 
‘colouredness’, which has made it a colour, will be added to it; in this case, 
however, black ought to be separable from colour in thought or imagina- 
tion, for something added to an essence by a cause can be separated from it 
in thought (Ghazali here means, I presume, the non-essential characteristics 
of a thing, e.g. a man may be thought of as being without hands: cf. Aver- 
roés’s discussion below), but black is not separable in thought or imagina- 
tion from colour, and therefore cannot have been made a colour by a 
cause. The difficulty of the separation of black and colour in thought 
involved in this argument, in which there is a serious confusion between the 
logical and the ontological, rests on the common confusion between the 
meaning of the abstract universal and its representation: black in reality or 
as represented is indeed a colour, but the abstract term ‘blackness’ means 
only the characterization of a colour, not a colour itself, just as ‘humanity’ 
does not mean a man. Ghazali’s argument seems to refer to the passage in 
Avicenna’s Salvation, p. 378, where he raises the difficulty why colour cannot 
exist in reality without being black or white, although colouredness is not 
colouredness through either of them. 

p- 172. 1. Averrods in his answer implies, of course, what Ghazali denies, 
that the assertion that the necessary existent exists through its essence has a 
positive meaning. 

p- 172. 2. Avercots seems to mean that everything except the necessary 
existent needs a cause for its existence, and only the necessary existent has 
the property of existing through its essence; although the common term 
‘existing through a cause’ cannot be applied to the necessary existent, this 
property is not denied. ‘This answer implies what Ghazali denies, that the 
essence of the necessary existent has a positive property. 

p- 173. 1. This sentence is of course self-contradictory, for how can 
existents be differentiated, when they differ neither in species nor indi- 
vidually ? As we have seen, the existence of a number of immaterial, inde- 
pendent movers is one of the contradictions in Aristotle’s philosophy, which 
bases all plurality on matter and makes all becoming dependent on one 
primary cause (cf. note 141. 2). 

Pp: 373-2. Difference in rank, however, presupposes both a numerical 
and a specific difference. 

p- 174. 1, The tripartite disjunction is: two necessary existents differ (1) 
either numerically, (2) or in species, (3) or in rank. The third case is true, 
therefore the necessary existents are one. This is, of course, self-contradic- 
tory. What he means is that the third case is false too, There can be only 
one First, 

108 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 174. 2. This so-called second proof, that every duality implies a unity 
ptior to it, is simply an elaboration of the first argument. Avicenna in his 
Salvation devotes three sections to proving the uniqueness of the necessary 
existent, in a passage in which is found the substance of what Ghazali says 
here: (1) a section entitled ‘that the species of the necessary existent cannot 
be predicated of many’, p. 374; (2) a section entitled ‘that the necessary 
existent ts one in every way’, p. 3753 (3) a section entitled ‘that there cannot 
be two necessary existents’, p. 375. 

p- 174. 3. This implies that to the First not even existence can be attri- 
buted, and this, indeed, is asserted by Piotinus (Znn. vi. 7. 16), who affirms 
that even the copula éors cannot be attributed to the First ; for nothing at all 
can be attributed to Him, although we can possess Him, without being able 
to name Him, feeling as in divine enthusiasm that we possess something 
god-like in our bosom (cf. Ena. v, 3. 14}. But this conception, which would 
logically imply the very negation of God, is identified with the view that 
God’s being, like His unity, is something sui generis, that God’s existence is a 
supet-existence. 

Aristotle had already affirmed (e.g. Met. F 2. 1003%33) that being is 
attributed analogically, i.e. in relation to one central point, to one single 
nature, spds & xai piav sed Avow (this is the reason why the study of being 
belongs to one single science te. metaphysics), and since this central point 
is substance and substance in its highest form is pure eternal being, i.e. God, 
simply from this.conception the Neoplatonic, the mystical view of reality, 
the dream-view of finite reality, may be deduced. It is only God, the 
Eternal, who in reality exists; it is we, the finite beings, whose very existence 
is already intermingled with not-being, whose stuff is made of dreams. 

p- 174.4. One should not ascribe to the First even a merely logical 
duality, says Plotinus, Ena. vi. 8. 13: 08 zoupréoy a5’ ds eds emivorav S¥o. 

p- 174-5. For the formula, of which the word is a sign, becomes the 
definition of the thing (6 yap Adyos of +d Gvope onpeiov dpopds éorat, 
Arist, Adet. P 7. 101294). 

p- 175. t. Le. they hold that the attributes of God are distinct from His 
essence. 

Pp- 175. 2. What Averroés affirms here is in contradiction with the passage 
in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, discussed in note 174. 3, where he asserts that 
being is attributed analogically and where he expressly denies that it is 
attributed equivocally (épemipeos, I 1. 1003°34). 

P- 175. 3- In his Salvation (p. 375) Avicenna affirms that the First cannot 
be divided either quantitatively, or through constituent principles, or 
through the parts of the definition. Aristotle mentions these three types of 
division at Met. 4 25, where he gives a fivefold definition of xpos, part. 

NOTES 109 

p. 176. 1. ie. attributes which the theologians ascribe to God, but which 
are denied to Him by Plotinus, for whom God has neither will nor thought, 
nor even any action, évépyeca, at all; cf. e.g. Lan. i, 7. 1 and vi. 9, 6: dove 7 
én obdéy dyaflév darw, o¥Se BovaAnors rotuy odderds. However, we find in 
Plotinus the same contradiction as we have already found in Aristotle. For 
Piotinus, too, God, eternally at rest, év qovya, is at the same time the eter- 
nally constant air and passive object of desire to which everything tends, and 
the power of everything, Sivayus ray ardvrw (iil. 8, ro ad init,), essentially 
activity and eternal wakefulness, éypyyopots, (vi. 8. 16), 

p. 176, 2, Quiddity, whatness, 1.2L, 76 ri éorw or 1d +i Fy efvat(generally 
synonymous with cul}, ofeic), is an ambiguous term which in this passage 
means both the definition of a thing and any universal concept. 

p. 176. 3. Le. the universal ‘heaven’ is eternally realized in the indi- 
vidually existent heaven, but the universal ‘man’ has a temporary existence 
in Zaid and Amr. 

p- 176. 4. i.e, every ‘this’ is a ‘what’, a ‘something’, but God’s ‘whatness’ 
is that He is, 

p. 176, 5. Man, tree, heaven are only universals, but God is at the same 
time a universal, a Platonic idea, and an individual existent. 

p. 177. 1. See p. tg2 and note 142. 8. 

p. 178. 1, Its identity or its individuality, ic. what constitutes its true 
being, its very nature (cf. e.g. Arist. Met. 2 4). 

p. 178. 2. Through derivative words, through derivation, qu Yl Slash, 
through paronomaasia (cf. Arist. Cat. 1. 1412): perhaps one might translate 
‘by analogy’, for the meaning of the derivative word bears an analogy to 
that of the primitive (cf. Arist. Adet. FP 2), 

p. 78. 3. ic, we can say of man that he is an animal, for animal is part 
of his essence; we cannot say of him that he is knowledge, because know- 
ledge is a non-essential attribute, although we can ascribe to him knowing 
(whick ts a word derived from knowledge) as an accident. 

p- 178. 4. This subjectivist conception seems to stand in contradiction 
to what he has said before, viz. that in immaterial existents no essential 
attributes can be imagined of which their essence consists, 

p. 178. 5. This interesting passage is a not illegitimate interpretation of 
the theory of certain Greek Fathers—Averroés refers here probably to 
St. John Damascene—who, to avoid the danger of Tritheism and to safe- 
guard the Unity of God, seem sometimes to regard the distinction of the 
persons as a purely logical one. Post-Aristotelian philosophers (and the 
Arabs followed their example, as we have seen}, in order to solve certain 
philosophical difficulties, often employ the argument of subjectivity and 

110 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

relativity, and the Greek Fathers made an abundant use both of it and of 
the term xar’ énivocay (according toa thought, i.e. purely logical), According 
to St. John Damascene there exists between the three divine Persons a 
compenetration (which he calis repiy<ipnors, circumincession) ; the divine 
Persons have but one will and one activity, and the son (fogos) and the Spirit 
(pneuma) are faculties (Suvdpecs) of the Father, the distinction between Them 
resting only on reason, émwola S¢ 7d Sinpnudvov (De fide orthod., Migne, 
xciv. 828}. 

p. «79. 1. Averroés identifies reality and truth, and here gives Aristotle's 
transeunt definition of truth, Afet. I 7. 1011526: 76 pew yap Ayes 46 dv pe} 
elvas 4 76 pn Sv elvae etidos, 7d Sé 1d dy elvar wat rd pot} Se p07} elvas dn bes, 
of which Thomas Aquinas (Conira gent. i. 59) gives the following interpre- 
tation: ‘veritas intellectus est adaequatio intellectus et rei, secundum quod 
intellectus dicit esse quod est, vel non esse qued non est’, 

p. 179. 2. This is scarcely correct, according to Aristotle. When he defines 
truth (De an. I°8. 43291) as a cupmAon? vonpsdrwv he regards it as a relation 
inside the mind, and has abandoned the transeunt conception. 

p- 179. 3. He means: when we ask whether something exists or not, this 
‘something’ must be an entity in the mind, since we are not yet sure that it 
exists in reality. 

p- 179. 4. According to Aristotle (e.g. Met. B 3. 99822) being is not really 
a genus; for ‘being’ as used with reference to the ten categories see, for 
example, Aristotle, Met. @ 10. 1051*34 and Met. d 7. 1017924. 

p- 179. 5- I do not know whether Averroés here has in view the Neo- 
platonic mystical conception that the highese reality in itseifis one, and that 
it is thought that originates multiplicity ; it is through the dialectical process 
of the vois (according to Plotinus, Ean. vi, 7. 13) that all differentiation 
comes into being; it is the nature of the vois to differentiate universally, 
giaw apa éye: emi nav érepocotodat. It may be, however, that Averroés means 
that by regarding existence solely as the true, another aspect of existence is 
negtected. 

p. 179. 6. Entity, 13, and thing, ¢ «gets are translations of the Stoic 
term +, the highest genus of all being, including the existent and the non- 
existent. 

p. 379. 7. CE note 174. 3. 

p- 179. 8 Aristotle dees not clearly distinguish between ‘being’ (‘that 
which is’, +d dy) as a substantive and ‘being’ (‘to be’, 7 efvaz) as a verb. If 
one takes ‘being’ as a verb, it is plausible to regard existence as an accident, 
for in the sentence ‘a thing is’, ‘is’ as an attribute is an accident; taken, 
however, as a substantive, being, +6 dv, is che equivalent of 9 odeia, ic. 
substance. Avicenna takes the former, Averroés the latter view. For Averroés 

NOTES WE 

existence is the existent thing itself or the genus of existing things (though, 
regarded as a genus, it can be predicated and is an accident). See also my 
Ep. d, Met. d. Av. pp. iv-v. 

p. 180, 1. The existents of first intention (J9'J] 4ag)1, mpearrn Odors, prima 
intentio, in scholastic terminology), i.c. first intention of the mind, are the 
individual things in the external world of which the ten categories or 
predicaments are the highest genera; the existents of second intention 
(GW aa,J], Seerépa Oéoig) are the concepts in the mind of which the five 
predicables, genus, species, differentia, property, and accident, are the 
highest genera. As early as Aristotle (Cat. 5. 2914) we find the term Sevrepas 
odveiac for the genera and species, which, however, are regarded in his 
philosophy as having some objective existence, although not an independent, 
separate (ywprords) one. 

p. 180. 2. Since the things in the mind are in conformity with the things 
outside the mind. 

p. 180, 3. There is some confusion here; the ‘true’ means an existent in 
the mind, but this existent in the mind seems to be aware of an existent 
outside the mind and able to compare itself with it. The confusion is based 
on the common error of not distinguishing between thought, the thinking 
as an act, the meaning in an active sense, and thought—the object of 
thought, the thing meant. The former may be said (by a spatial metaphor) 
to be in the mind; to the latter there belongs everything thinkable, existing 
or non-existing, possible or impossible, false or true; it is neither in your 
mind nor in mine, for exactly the same thing may be meant by you and 
by me. 

p- 180. 4. i.e. you cannot know what a thing is before you know that it is; 
cf. Aristotle Anal. Post. B 7. 9254: dvdyen yap rov eSdra 16 ri €or dvOpwros 
q Gro roby, iSdvar xal ore Eore. 

p. 180. 5, This sentence is not found in the Categories. Averroés seers to 
take it as an interpretation of the beginning of Ca?. cap. 5, where it is said 
that the individual cannot be predicated and that it is the universal which 
predicates the individual, 

p. 180. 6. Cf. Aristotle, De an. B 5. 417%22: raév nad" Exacrov Kar’ 
&vépyevav aiobyas, } Sé émoriun réy xabddou, 

p. 180. 7. Aristotle does not say explicitly that the universal exists only 
in the mind (the forms existing in the individuals express a universality ; cf. 
note 180. 1), although according to him knowledge refers always to the 
essential, the universal (cf. e.g. AMfet. Z 6. 1031520: 73 énictagbat Exacrov 
roird dare +6 st hv efvas érigracax) ; Averroés here follows an interpretation 
which is found as early as Alexander of Aphrodisias, De an. (Bruns), p. 90. 5: 

voodpeve S¢ ywpis BAns xowd re Kal xaddAov yiverat, kal tTére dort vous, Srav 

112 TAHAFUT AL TAHAPUT 

vo#rat, et 5é pr) vootro, ofd2 gore ert, wore yaptabdrra rod voobyres avrd vod 
$Oefpercr. Of course this conception destroys the definition of truth as con- 
formity between things inside the mind and things outside it. 

p, 180. 8, ‘by it’: ie. by its existence; existence is not an accident, but 
the essence itself, according to Averroés. 

p. (81. 1. Cf. my 2p. d. Met. d. Av. pp. 8-9. Aristotle himself had seen this 
difficulty, and denied (cf. note 179. 4) that existence or being was a genus; 
however, his own conception that even thé non-existent, since it is a none 
existent, possesses being in a certain way, implies the same infinite regress, 
for if the non-existent is, then the non-existence of the non-existent is, and 
so on. 

p. 18, 2, The theory here expounded, that the plurality of negations and 
relations attributed to God does not destroy His unity, is found in Avicenna, 
Salvation, pp. 408 sqq., and Recovery, Met. viit. 7-8. The basic principe, 
that all determination of God is either negative or relative, is found in 
Plotinus: negative, e.g. Enn. vi. 8. 11 (cf. v. 3. 14): &v ddaspdoe wdvra ta 
wept Tovrov Aeydueva, relative, Ean. vi. 9. 3: eset wat 1d airiov Adyew ov Kar- 
yyopety dare cup feBnnds re alta, GAN jute, dre Exondr te wap’ atrov éxetvou 
ovrog ey abra. 

p. 181. 3. ‘apprehended’, f. gles, xaradnmrds. We are able, says Plotinus 
({Enn. v. 3. 14), to apprehend Him without being able to name Hin, éyew 
3é ob nwdudpeba, xiv ur A€ywpev. This seems more closely in agreement with 
Averroés than with Avicenna, who seems to regard existence as a positive 

determination in God, whereas all the other attributes determine this 
exutence either eases or igre ef, apie, Pp 410s s'il danas l 

sled eer) (he Nanay alal a enh the Grst attribute of the 
necessary eins is that it is (OI) and exists; the other attributes determine 
this existence either relatively or negatively, Compare also Plotinus, Ean. vi. 
4. 38, where it is said that ‘is’, ort, cannot be predicated of God, but points 
to His essence, 70 dé dorw oby as Kar’ Gov dAdo, dn’ cbs onpnivor 6 dar. 

p. 181. 4. This is part of the Aristotelian definition of substance {the 
individual), Cat. 5. 2°11: odata &¢ dor... prjre Kad’ dronerpevov tivds Aéyerae 
pair’ ev droxepeven rut €otw, It is negative, since individuum est ineffabile ; it is 
experienced, but beyond description. 

p. 182. 1, To this negative definition of intellect Averroés objects, as we 
shall see on p, 186. It is, however, in agreement with Avicenna, op. cit. 

P. 4102 ate Lgl dye! laa Ot YE ALL Gay el hie Go lly 
gt hey saltl ahdce jlo, when He is called intellect, this only 

NOTES 113 

means that His existence cannot be mixed with matter and its accompani- 
ments. 

p. 182. 2, Here there is a reference to the problem of self-consciousness as 
set forth by Aristotle (De an. F 2. 425°12~25; I” 4. 430%2-9): if perception 
(or thought) needed another perception (or thought) to become conscious 
of itself, we should have an infinite regress. The difficulty had been seen 
already by Plato, Charmides 168 a, e. The problem is mentioned by Avicenna 
in his Salvation, pp. 399-400, in the chapter in which he sets out to prove 
that the necessary existent is in itself the thought, the thinker, and the object 
of thought. 

p. 182. 3. According to Aristotle (De an. I’ 4. 430%5) there is an inter+ 
mission in the process of our thinking. 

p. (82, 4. For Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. vii. 7. 42, the mark which dis- 
tinguishes God’s action from the action of fire is will: God is not involun- 
tarily good (dewv dyads) as the fire is involuntarily productive of warmth; 
in Him the imparting of good things is voluntary, éxovatos. 

p. 182. 5. This whole passage seems to refer to Plotinus, Enn. vi. 8. 12-13. 
The presence (zepoveta) of the good ts not accidental in God, according to 
Plotinus, Enn. vi. 8. 13. His essence is not externa} to His will. The good in 
Him implies a wiil which does not destroy His unity. In addition God’s act 
cannot be differentiated from His essence, «f pev odbv dori rig evépyera 
atr@, xat dv rf evepyeia adrdv Onodpebe, 008’ dv Sta rodro ety dv Erepov 
atrod (Ena. vi. 8. 12). Each of us, through his body, is far distant from the 
Essence ; through his soul he participates in the Essence, but he is not funda- 
mentally essence {xupiws odoia) and therefore not master of his essence 
(Enn. vi. 8. 12). 

p- 183. 1. ‘in second intention’, xard zapaxorovPyciw, as a necessary con- 
sequence (the term is Stoic), for the Universe in itself is not an end, but a 
consequence. For the theory based on Plato that the visible world has not 
heen created by intention, Aoyopd, but by necessity, avdyxn, see, for 
example, Plotinus, Ena. iii. 2. 2. 

p. 183. 2. Cf. Plotinus, Enn. vi. 4. 3: God remains in Himself, and from 
Him alt powers emanate to everything, Surdjecs S¢ dz’ adrod tévar emi wdvra. 

p. 183. 3. This seems to be based on the Aristotelian distinction between 
the theoretical and the practical Intellect (e.g. De an. Fg. 43226) and the 
commentators’ division of the Aristotelian philosophy into the theoretical 
and the practical, 

p. 183. 4. Cf. the passage in Clemens Alexandrinus, Protr. c. iv, 63, Stahlin, 
i. 48. 18, where he says that God creates merely through His will; the effect 
follows His mere willing immediately, prs 7 BovAcoPar dnprovpye? nai rd 
povoy Bedjaat abrév éreras rd yeyevfabat. 

ig TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 183. 5. It seemed to me, says Plotinus (Ean. v. 8. 7), that if we our- 
selves were the archetypes, the essence, and the forms all together, and if the 
form which produces the sublunary things were our essence, we should 
create without exertion, éddxes S¢ pos, dre Kal, ef qucis dpyéruaa xal oboia ai 
«idy dua, xat 7d eles 76 rovwby évradba Fw jycv obola, expdryve dy dvev 
rove t hyerépa Snysoupyta. 

p. 183.6, Cf. Aristotle, De mot. an. 7. 701°35: 4 doydry alria rod xtvetoPar 
Opefis, atry 58 yiveras ® de” aloPyocws 4H dea Pavracias Kal vorcews. 

p. 184. 1. Life belongs also to God, says Aristotle (Afet. A 7. 1072>26 
xai Lan 5€ ye dadpyes); we say therefore that God is a living being, 
eternal, perfectly good, so that life and timeless eternity, continuous and 
unending, belong to God; gape 5) rdv Oedv efvas Sahov didior dpicrov, Hore 
Len) nal aidw avvexjs nat didtes imdpye 7H 0eH. According to Plotinus, Exn. 
vi, 5. 12, an inexhaustible and infinite life-stream proceeds from God, whose 
nature is as it were boiling over with life, dou .. . ev adri olov dreptéou- 
aay {wi}. 

p. 184, 2. ‘not for an end which refers to Himself”; this is, as Avicenna 
says (Salvation, p, 411), a negative attribute. Cf. Plotinus, for example, Enn. 
vi. g. 6: GAA" dor Srepdyafov wat ard oby aura, rots 8” dros dyabdv, ef 7 
abrot Sévarat peradaySdvew, He is the‘ hypergood’: He is the good not for 
Himself, but for the others who can participate in Him. The doctrine of God's 
generosity (2¢Govia) goes back to the Timaeus-passage 29 d: He was good, 
and the good can never grudge anything to anything. And being generous, 
He desired that ail things should be as like Himself as they could be. 

p- 184. 3. Avicenna gives, for example, i in his Theorems and Notices, Forget, 
p. 159, this definition of generosity: (5. ‘Y est L soll 2 gt. 
Generosity is giving im the right way, not for the sake of reward. In his 
Recovery, Met. vi. 5, he has a long passage about generosity. 

p- 184. 4. For badness as a ordpyocs or droveia (or EMens) dyabod see 
Plotinus, Ena. i. 8. 3. The basic idea that the cause of badness lies in matter 
as non-being is to be found already in Plato, Tim. 46¢, 46, 48a. 

p. 84.5. For the highest good as the order (rdfic) of the universe cf. 
Anistotle, Met. A 10. 1075*11. 

p- 584. 6, ‘the lover and the beloved’ ; cf. Plotinus, Enn. vi. 8. 15 (ad init.) : 
Kai éptiaptoy Kal épws 6 ards xal abrod Epws. 

p- 184. 7. The doctrine of God’s joy as based on His thought goes back to 
the passage of Aristotle, Mef. A 7. 1072514 sqq. 

p. 185. 1. And if God is always in this happy condition in which we some- 
times are, says Aristotle (Afes. A 7. 1072524), this is wonderful, and if in a 
sti]l happier condition, this is still more wonderful. 

NOTES 115 

p. 185. 2, That all the expressions used to describe God are only meta- 
phorically used (odx dpfds), since even for thought He is not a duality 
(083° cis cis énivovav S80), is stated by Plotinus, Ena. vi. 8. 13. 

p. 186, 1. Cf note 182. 1. 

p. 186, 2. i.e. Plato in the interpretation of Plotinus. God is anterior to 
thought, says Plotinus, Zan. vi. 9. 6; zed yap xevijcews Kai mpd vojcews. 

p- 186, 3. The philosophers, however, do not say what this essence is, i.e. 
whe or what the owner is of these ateributes. 

p. 187. 1. As, for instance, the Ash‘arites believe. 

p. 187. 2. The example of the hand is to be found in Aristotle, ¢.g. De 
gen. an, A 1g. 726522: 4 xelp dvev puneags Suvdpews ob« ore yelp Ud pdvov 
ducovupov, without the faculty of the soul a hand is only a hand equivocally; 
another example is the finger, daxrvaAos (cf. especially Afeé. Z 10. 1035525) 
or the eye, ofarpss (De gen. an. B 1. 735°8) and generally 6 vexpos dvOpanes 
épevipws, a corpse is a man equivocally (Meteor. A 12. 38931). 

p. 188. 1, This principle that the cause contains the effect in a superior 
way is found already, with the example of fire, in Aristotle’s Afetaphysics, 
i.e. in Book 2, which was ascribed by many among the ancients to Pasicles: 
éxaorov 82 pddtara adré rdiv Gav, cad’ & cat rats Ades indpyes 7d cure 
cvupov, olov 16 mip Cepudrarov (Met. a 1. 99324). This principle, which 
implies a gradual degradation in the causal process, in the process of 
becoming, or in emanation {in coming from}, became one of the funda- 
mental truths of Neoplatonism. It is the vods mowrsxds, which is for Alex- 
ander of Aphrodisias identical with God, the xvpiws voyrév, which is the 
cause of the intelligibility of everything else: 76 pddsora 54 xai ti abrod duiove 
voyror edAdyws airy «al ris trav daw vorseus (Alex, Aphrod. De az., 

Bruns, 89. 5). 

p. 188. 2. Here he seems to have in view the so-called notiones transcenden- 
fales ; in the following, however, he regards certain attributes as being con- 
stituted through relation. 

p- 188. 3. Cf. Aristotle, De An. A 2. 403>25: 76 Eyeryor 5) rot dxbeyou 
Suety paddvora Staddpe Soxel, curio te xal 7G aiobdveofar, the animate 
seems to differ from the inanimate through two things: motion and per-~ 
ception. 

p. 188. 4. For this theory compare Aristotle, Met. H 6. 

p. 189. t. ie. if the dependent one also were regarded as a necessary 
existent, this necessary existent would be causally related, Of course the 
whole argument in this paragraph is tautological. If the dependence of 
attribute on subject is identified with the dependence of effect on cause, 
every attribute will require a cause. 

p. 189. 2. All this, of course, is 2 pure tautology. 

116 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 189. 3. i.¢. they admit certain attributes in the Creator. 

Pp. 190. 1. i.e. the denial of absolute duality in the proof given above by 
Ghazali is, according to him, a pefitio principit; cf. p. 191. 

p. 190. 2. The receptive cause 76 Sexrexdv (cf. Arist. Met. I 4. 1055429) 
is the matter in which the forms or attributes inhere. That the First cannot 
have a receptive cause seems to be understood in the sense that it cannot 
itself be receptive of attributes (cf, note 190. 4). 

p. 190. 3. Or to call matter a material cause. 

p. 190. 4. ie. the impossibility of an infinite series of receptacles or 
receptive causes does not imply that the First cannot itself be a receptive 
cause, i.e. receptive or in possession of attributes, 

P- 191.1. ic, their argument was an argumentum ad hominem (for the 
argumentum ad haminem cf, Arist. Top. B 5}. 

p- 191.2. Cf. Aristotle, Top. A t. 10027 sqq. : Necessary proof depends on 
our knowledge of the real causes and principles of things; the dialectical 
syllogism—which Aristotle calls also éxtyeipyya—is deduction from opin- 
ions ; daroSeckes peev ody dori, dray éf dAn@av Kai mparrww 6 ovdoyiapes }, 4 €x 
rotovrap & Sed revaw aparrow xal arybav ris wept abrd yodceas Thy dpxty 
ender Starerinds 62 avhoyrapss 6 €& dv8sfuw ovMoyrldpeves. 

Pp- 192. 1. i.e. that which has a cause, 

Pp. 192. 2, ie. the Mu'tazilites deny the existence of any eternal attributes 
as distinct from the nature or essence of God, whereas the Ash‘arites affirm 
them. 

P- 193. 1. A receptive cause, i.e. matter. For the composition of the com- 
pound of matter and attributes an efficient cause is needed, according to the 
philosophers. 

p. 193. 2. This seems to me nothing but 2 fetitio princifit: since the 
Ash‘arites admit exterior or additional attributes, their First Principle is not 
absolutely simple, whereas the First Principle has to be absolutely simple. 
The Christians, i.c. the Alexandrian and Cappadocian Fathers, do indeed 
regard God as of an ineffable simplicity. For Origen, ¢-g. De princtpiis i. 6, 
God is ‘ex omni parte povds et ut ita dicam évds ’, He is a ‘simplex intelle- 
ctualis natura’. St. Augustine (De civ. dei viii. 6), praises the Platonists for 
having understood that God’s attributes are identical with His essence: 
‘quia non aliud illi est esse, aliud vivere, quasi possit esse non vivens; nec 
aliud illi est vivere, aliud intellegere, quasi possit vivere non intellegens; 
nec aliud illi est intellegere, aliud beatum esse, quasi possit intellegere non 
beatus ; sed quod est illi vivere, inteliegere, beatum esse, hoc est iili esse.’ 
This is the Aristotelian conception of God as an eternal, thinking, living, 
blessed existence, in Met, A 7. 

P- 193. 3. ic. whether the First Agent must have matter. 

NOTES any 

Pp. 194. 1. Le. matter is the princtpinm individuationis; cf. Aristotle, Phys. 
A 7. 19024: 6 wey yap dvOpwros Kal 6 xpvads Kai Saws 4 Wry dpBunrh: 1d5_ 
ydp 7+ sGAAov, for man and gold and generally matter are numerable unities, 
and stilt more is the particular individual such, i.e. this man is numerically 
different from that man through his matter. 

P- 194. 2. Le, if the First Agent possessed matter, it would be a matter sui 
generis, not the matter which is common to all material things. 

p. 194. 3. The argument seems to me rather confused: Averroés seems to 
imply that even this matter sug generts would have to be a body, In the theory 
that matter is the principium individuationts the bodily nature of matter is 
always assumed, for it is impossible to understand how matter as the 
absolutely undiflerentiated can be the ground of individual differentiation. 
Of course such a theory can neither explain the individuality of my ‘ego’ 
nor of God’s ‘ego’ which thinks itself. Aristotle, however, also regards the 
form as principium individuationis; cf. e.g. Met. Z 6. 109117. 

p. 194. 4. Such an attribute: i.e. an attribute additional to its essence; 
the argument seems to me fairly plausible, 

P. 195. 1. Aristotle (cf. e.g. Met. d 30. 1025930) distinguishes (a) the 
essential attribute oxpfefnxds xa0” abrd, aj‘ which, although it is not its 
essence, is possessed universally by a thing in virtue of itself, e.g. the posses- 
session by a triangle of angles equal to two right angles, from (6) the mere 
ovpBeBnxds, ga, which happens to a thing only in certain particular 
cases, like the paleness of a musician. There is an ambiguity in the term 
oupfefnxds which in cupPeByxds xa?” abtd means quality generally, whereas 
used absolutely it can mean the accidental in opposition to the essential. 
But the verb ovpBatvew, 54 (or also évdpyew), meaning ‘supervenc’, implies 
@ sequence. 

p- 196. 1. Or possible or transitory ; ‘permissible’, +5 |, means originally 
the morally permissible, permissible according to the religious law. it is a 
curious and significant fact that the classification of actions into five groups 
in Islam was taken over from Stoicism, The dutiful, necessary act, _.>!9, 
ws, corresponds to the Stoic xardpPwye, recte factum ; the commendable act, 
Addins Laeteunss 10 TpoTypévor, commodum ; the morally indifferent act, 
ye, race to ddiddopov, mediunt; the unbecoming act, og nen to dmompo- 
aypévoy, incommodum ; and the sinful act, el |=» 10 dudprnpza, peccatum. Tt may 
be added that the long controversy in Islam whether there is or is not a 
thiddle term between betief and unbelief is inspired by Stoic thought, The 
Stoics originally believed that virtue can neither be increased nor decreased, 
obre émsreivecbar otre dvieobac, that there is no intermediate term between 
virtue and sin, umSév pécoy elvar dperiis xat xaxtas (Diog. Laert. vii. 227), 
and that all sins are equal, ica geri 1a dzeprjyara; for whether a man is 

8 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

a hundred stadia from his aim or only one stadium, he is equally not there 
(cf. Sext. Emp. Adv. fog. i. 422 and Diog. Laert. viii. 120); and those 
theologians who asserted that belief is based only on .j)..05, assent (ic. 
the Stoic svyxardéects ; for faith as a Seovefeias auyxaratests see, for example, 
Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 2. 8}, held that faith can be neither increased aor 
diminished. The term +5 ly takes, then, also the meaning of the logically per- 
missible, i.e. the non-contradictory, the logically possible, and in this way, 
since for them everything is possible but the logically impossible, it hecornes 
synonymous for the theologians with ,X.., the possible. 

p. 196. 2, For according to the theologians only God, the simple, unique 
immaterial efficient cause, who connects the condition and the conditioned 
in a transitory conjunction, is eternal. 

P- 196. 3. ie. the theologians regard God, the efficient cause, as acting in 
time through a prior knowledge and will, as we imagine empirical, rational 
beings to act, but the philosophers assume an eternal unique connexion 
between an eternal unifying principle and an eternal world. 

p- 196. 4, ‘the assumption of the philosophers’ ; the text has ‘their assump- 
tion’, but I presume from the context that the philosophers are meant here. 
Here Averroés, in opposition to Avicenna, seems to regard these attributes 
in God as something positive. But according to Averroés’s conception here— 
which, however, is quite in agreement with Aristotle, for whom, too, the 
essence is the end of the process of becoming, ¢.g. Afet. 4 4, 101510: 3 
obaia.... geri rd réAas THe yeveoews—an essence is not a subject of attributes, 
but is constituted by the attributes, and through this the Aristotelian opposi- 
tion of essence and attributes is destroyed. 

p- 197. 1. Both philosophers and theologians describe God as the self- 
sufficient, sits abrdapxys, cf., for example, Aristotle, Met. N 4. 109118. 
The term _:a){ is an epithet given to God in several places in the Koran. 1 
believe its meaning there is ‘the rich one’, the one, as Muhammad says, ‘to 
whom helongs all that is in the heavens and on earth’, but the word is later 
interpreted under the influence, I think, of Greek philosophy, as meaning 
‘self-sufficient’. 

p. 197.2. This seems in contradiction to the assertion on p. 196 that 
every essence is perfected by attributes. 

p. 198, f. i.e. according to the Asha‘rite (Stoic) doctrine that what can- 
not be free from the temporal is itself temporal. 

p. 198. 2. For this compare Aristotle, Pays. F 5. 200%26: the mover is the 
active, ro oryrexdy, and the moved the passive, 76 vayrixdr, and the moved 
is moved through the action of the mover, ro xanjrov Kivgrér tnd Ted KavyTEKOD, 

p. 198. 5. For this compare Aristotle, Phys. Z 2. 225° 33, where it is proved 
that there is no absolute generation, no generation of the substance, i-¢ of 

- NOTES 119 

the compound que compound, no generation of generation, since absolute 
generation would imply an infinite regress and one could never arrive at a 
first compound. On the other hand, the series of possibles or maved movers 
ends in an eternal necessary existent or unmoved mover, 

p. 198. 4. Le. a cold thing, for example, cannot become warm—cold 
being potentially warm and the privation of warm—without an agent 
which actualizes the warmth, ‘for from the potentially existing the actually 
existing is always produced by an actually existing .. .; there is always a first 
mover and the mover exists already actually’ (cf. Arist. Adet. @ 8. 104924). 

p. 198, §. dav ro xwotpevov dvdyxy Und twos xwetoba. (Arist. Phys. H 
1 ad init.). 

p- 198.6. i.e. the concrete substance {4 odvodes odcia) composed of 
matter and form, cf., for example, Mfet. Z 11. 1037730. 

p- 199. 1. Cf Aristotle, Adet. N 2. 1088614 sqq., where Aristotle asserts 
that what consists of elements must have matter, i.e. potentiality, and that 
the potential can either be actualized or not. 

p. 200. 1. It may be remarked here that the Arabic word for ‘substance’ 
or ‘essence’ is ,m4x, a word which by origin means ‘jewel’. Averrots 
remarks in his &p. d. Met. {see my translation, p. 11) that this name was 
giver to substance because it is the most valuable of the categories. 

p. 200. 2. This problem will be discussed more fully later. The whole 
problem of God's knowledge is clearly stated as early as Plato’s Parmenides, 
134: only God can know the universal, and nothing can be known to God 
but the perfect truth of ideas; there is an unbridgeable chasm between God 
and men; it is impossible for the divine and eternal to know the things of 
men, 7d dvépdireca wpdypara, and equally for our fleeting human knowledge 
to reach the divine truth, Plotinus repeats this idea at Ezn. v. 8, 3: the gods 
eternally possess their wisdom in an impassible, immutable, and pure in- 
tellect (év draBet r@ vai wal ctacip@ xai xaPap®) ; they know everything, 
however, not the things of men, +4 dxOpwrera, but the things divine. But to 
this Plotinus adds, Enn. v. 8. 4, the idea which so strongly influenced 
Leibniz: in the intelligible world everything comprises everything in itself 
and beholds everything in everything else, everything is everywhere, every- 
thing is everything, each thing is anything, and the splendour is infinite (cf. 
Leibniz: ‘chaque monade est un miroir vivant, représentatif de l’Univers 
suivant son point de yue’}. The idea of a difference in value between God’s 
knowledge and man's is found alse in Aristotle. Thinking in its purest form, 
i.e, God’s thought, is concerned with the highest good, ie. with itself (cf. 
Met, A 7. 1972518: a Se vonots 4 Kad" abriv rod Kad” abrd dploray, kat F 
pddwra tod pddtora). There is a parallelism between thinker and thought. 
However, it is one of the disturbing consequences of Aristotle’s theory (or 

120 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

rather of one side of his theory} that, in fact, material, individual things 
cannot be the object of thought at all, since thought is only concerned with 
the universal, i.¢. the unalterable, the eternal. 

p. 204. ©. It seems true enough, indeed, that Zaid’s knowledge of his own 
individuality is not identical with his knowledge of other things, but then 
it cannot be true that man’s knowledge of other things is identical with the 
knowledge of his own essence, i.e. his individuality, This dilemma exists for 
all theories (Hume’s as well as Aristotle’s) which do not distinguish between 
the subject of thought, the Ego, and its object. 

p. 201. 2. According to Aristotle’s theory that thought and the object of 
thought are identical (rabrév vods xal vonrdv), Aristotle even says (De an. 
I 6. 431%16): Sdws $2 6 vods darw 6 xar’ évépyesay ta apdypara vody, the 
intellect when it thinks is the things. But the things exist also when the 
intellect does not think them, and the intellect does not add anything to 
the things by its thinking, since, when it thinks, it is identical with the things. 
Thought therefore is nothing. (Aristotle himselfsays, De an. Iq. 429922, that 
the intellect is nothing at all actually, before it thinks, d vods . . . od8éy dove 
évepyeia trav Gvrwy mpiv voeiv.) The difficulty of conceiving the intellect 
without making it falsify reality by adding something to it through thinking 
caused Aristotle to adopt a theory which annuls thought itself (the same 
view was held by Plotinus even more emphatically, En. v. 3. 5: contempla- 
tion must be identical with the contemplated, the intellect with the intellig- 
ible; without this identity one cannot possess the truth, since instead of 
possessing realities, one would only have an impression, r¥os, of them which 
would be different from the realities and therefore not the truth), However, 
Aristotle also regards the intellect as an existent in which the concepts exist : 
the vois is a Sexrixdy rod efSous. In some passages, too, Aristotle tries to 
express the character of thought as an act, and he conceives it then as a 
touching (@cyydvew) or a participation (peraAnyas): the thinker touches the 
object of thought, cf. Afet. @ 10. 105124 and especially Met. A 7. 107220, 
where this contact is mentioned in connexion with the identification of 
thought and its object : adrop Sé poet ¢ vods Kara perdAnyw rod vontod: voryrés 
yap ylyveras Oryydvwr xai vod, Ware tabrov vods Kal vonrdv, These concep- 
tions are complicated still more by the introduction of his obscure theory of 
an active and a passive intellect. 

p. 201, 3. Cf. Aristotle, Met. Z 7, 1032522: artificial production starts 
from the knowledge in the soul of the artisan. That which produces and from 
which the movement starts in artificial production is the form in the soul, 
#6 di mooi xai dev dpyeras 4 xivnots . . . Cay pév did reyrys, 76 ElSds eore 75 
dv 779 puys. 

p- 201. 4, In second intention, i.e. by way of implication and consequence 
{rapaxoAcvOyats), i.e. not through deliberation (Aoyecpgp), but through logical 

NOTES 12a 

necessity (dvdyen), just as, according to Plotinus, Ean. iii. 2. 2, the sensible 
world emanates from the intelligible. 

p. 202. 1, i.¢. the forms in matter, which are called by Alexander of 
Aphrodisias éwAa ety. 

p. 202. 2, Cf. Aristotle, De an, P 4. 430°2: én pav ydp rap dvev Gdns rd 
atré dor 7d voody Kat td voovpevor. 

p. 203. 1, For Avicenna God cannot know individuals (at least not as 
individuals), but-His knowledge is Limited to unalterable, eternal universals, 
(Porphyry, Senient, xxiii, expressed the difference between the universal in- 
tellect and the particular in this way : in the universal intellect the particular 
existents also exist universally, whereas in the particular intellect both the 
universal and the individual exist individually.) Averroés goes beyond this: 
God knows through a knowledge which is neither the knowledge of universals 
nor the knowledge of individuals, and is superior to the knowledge of men and 
incomprehensible to them, This, of course, makes the term ‘knowledge’ as 
applied to God not only incomprehensible but meaningless, 

p. 203. 2. Although Aristotle regards the individual existent alone as the 
truly real, from which through abstraction the universals are acquired, he 
asserts all the same that the universal, as form and essence of things, by its 
nature and absolutely, is prior to the individual (ef. ¢.g, Anal. Past. A 2. 
1733). Averroés here follows Alexander of Aphrodisias, for whom the 
universal is also by its nature posterior to the individual, since the existence 
of universals depends on the existence of the individuals; cf. Simplicius, Jn 
Arist. Cat, Comm., Kalbfleisch, c. 5, p. 82, 1. 22: 6 pévrot AAdzavdpos evraiba 
xai rf pice Jorepa ra xabddov tav Kad? Exacra eivas Prdovene?... KOWOT yap 
dvros, Prot, dvdyxn wal aropor elvac' év yap rois Kowots ra Groua mepreyerat. 

Pp: 203. 3. ‘in potency’. This is a consequence of the conception that the 
universal is posterior by nature to the individual, and would imply some- 
thing very different from what Aristotle maintained, namely that knowledge 
of the individual is superior to knowledge of the universal. However, 
even Aristotle regards the genus, the more universal, in the definition as 
representing the matter, i.e, the potential, whereas the differentia specifica 
represents the form: cf, Aristotle, Afet. H 6. 1045*94. 

p. 203. 4. ‘the active powers which .. . are called natures’; cf. Aristotle, 
De gen. an. B 4. 740°35: 4 rowdca buvapis . . «4 fdas } éxdoroy, dvundpyovea 
Kai év durois cat ev Lubots race. 

p. 204. 1. C£ Aristotle, Afet. a 1. 99324, 

p. 205. 1, That not even the weight of an atom, either in heaven or on 
earth, escapes God is stated in the Koran, xxxiv. 3 (cf. note 295. 1). 

p. 205, 2, That universals are infinite does not seem to be the opinion of 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, who in a passage transmitted by Averroés (see 

122 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Freudenthal, Die durch Averroese thaltenen Fragmente Alexanders, p. 133.5) argues 
against the Stoics, who assert that the divine Providence is concerned with 
individuals, saying that this would imply a knowledge of the infinite future, 
which is impossible, since the measure of the infinite is impossible, and what 
is impossible is impossible also for the gods (cf. also Alex. Aphr. De fato, Bruns, 
P. 200, 22). (“Infinite’, however, is ambiguous and can mean ‘eternal’). 

p. 206. 1. According to Aristotle (see De dn. I 3, 428>10 sqq.) the repre- 
sentation, ¢avracia, does not occur apart from sensation, dvev aichjcews, 
and is similar to sensation, and in sensation the common properties, like 
movement and size, are preserved. That is why Averroés can say that the 
plurality of representations resembles plurality in space. 

p. 206. 2. ‘which we may call being’: Aristotle himself, as we have seen 
already—see note 179. 4—denies explicitly that being, 7é dv, is a genus, but 
the older Stoics seem to regard being, since it has itself no genus, as the 
highest genus (cf. Dieg. Laert. vii. 61); and in any case the Seoics include 
everything in one highest genus: éai rdvrwr év yévos AapBdvevow (Plotinus, 
Ena. vi. 1. 35)- 

p- 206. 3. i.e. being. 

p. 206. 4. Cf. note 203. 3. 

p. 208. 1. According to Aristotle, Met. 4 15. 1021423, the relation father~ 
gon is one of those which by their very essence are related to something else, 
TD Grep eosiy ddov AdyeoOa atts 6 conv. Cf. also the (tautological) Stoic 
definition of relation, Sext. Emp. Adv, log. ii. 162 : pbs 7+ 8 dort 7a. ead 
as wpds Erepow oxdow vootwera Kai obxére droAchvpevws AapBavdpeva, the 
relative is what is conceived in relation to another thing, neither of them 
being apprehended separately. 

p. 209. !. Since they all fall under the most universal genus of ‘being’ or 
of ‘something’ (zi, 6 gi). 

p. 209. 2. Cf. the passage in Aristotle, fet. A 7. 1072%20 quoted in note 
201. 2: abrdv §€ vor? é vots Kard peradyyw 708 vonro’, ‘the intellect thinks 
itselfthrough partaking of the thing known’, ‘Self-knowledge’ is here ambigu- 
ous; it means both self-consciousness, the fact that tn all cogétare an ‘ego’ is 
implied (cf. note 201. 2} and all the knowledge an individual ‘self* has 
acquired. It is on this very ambiguity that the theory is built that God in 
knowing Himse!f knows all other things. 

p. 209. 3. The logic of facts forces the Aristotetians to establish distinc~ 
tions which—since in their system there is no subject, no ‘ego’, and they 
identify the things known with the knowledge of things—they are not 
entitled to make—i.e. the distinctions between (tr) self-knowledge, (2) the 
knowledge the individual ‘self’ possesses, (3) the things known. By ‘unity of 
knowledge’ is here meant the unity of experience and knowledge in each of 

NOTES 123 

us through the unity and identity of his ‘self. Unity of knowledge, émonjuys 
éudrns, is affirmed by Aristotle in another sense, when he declares (Met. I" 
2. 1003b21) that the study of all species of being gua being belongs to a 
science which is generically one, whereas the study of the several species of 
being belongs to the specific parts of this science. But it is not true that 
knowledge, although the knower is a unity, need not possess plurality, when 
the things known form a plurality, for knowledge is dependent on the things - 
known and has to conform to their nature. What is true, and seems to me a 
primary truth, although it is denied both by the idealist and by the relativist, 
is that the object of knowledge is not affected by the fact of being known. A 
cat may look at a king, and the king is not affected by the cat’s awareness of 
him, Ali knowledge implies being, implies facts that can be known and that 
ar¢ independent of this knowledge. Being is prior to knowledge (and even 
the possibility of beg which enables us to act through knowledge is prior 
to knowledge). If the object of knowledge were affected by its being known, 
nobody could twice perceive an identical thing, nor could the same object 
be perceived by many or the same thought be common to many; and 
however inexplicable it may be, we are aware of living in one unique 
common universe and of communicating our thoughts, and even the relativ- 
ist and the idealist are forced to admit that at least their theories would be 
true, i.e, correspond to the facts, even if no one ever held them. Gad, there- 
fore, ts not affected by our loving Him or our knowing Him, but as to His 
knowledge, either God’s knowledge is dependent on our decisions and acts 
in so far as it follows them ; or God knows them from eternity, and then the 
human drama is but a puppet-show; or the eternal sequence of becoming 
and passing away is eternally beyond His ken. 

p. 210, 5, i.e, ifa man perceives a thing, he is either completely plunged 
in the contemplation of that thing and is unaware that he is the perceiver, 
or if he perceives that he perceives there is a limit to the series, ie. there is 
not an infinite series of his perceiving that he perceives that he perceives.... 

p- 210. 2, ie. God, the Unknowable, the Ineffable, can be understood 
only by His works and His providence. This tendentious tradition is quite 
alien to primitive Islam and is inspired by the study of Greek and Christian 
philosophy. Cf. St. Theophilus, Ad Aufolyc. (Migne, vi. 1032A) ; Just as the 
soul of man cannot be seen, but can be understood through the movement 
of his body, God cannot be seen by the eyes of man, but must be understood 
by His Providence and His works; and St. Gregory of Nyssa, De an. ef 
resurrect. (Migne, xlvi. 28C):+ Just as, through observing the universe, the 
macrocosm, and the omnipotent wisdom (3 mavrodtvayos godia) which 
pervades it, we arrive at an intellect which is above sense-perception, daép 
aioPyow, so in contemplating man, the microcosm, we can infer from the 
visible appearances the hidden and imperceptible intellect ; and Maximus 

124 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Confessor, Ambigua (Migne, xci. 1285-7): Just as our human intellect, 
which is one and invisible in itself, yet manifests itself in words and deeds 
and expresses its thought in letters and figures, so the Divine Essence which is 
far above the reach of our intellect manifests itself in the created universe. 
Compare with this Wisdom of Solomon xiii. 5: ‘For from the greatness of 
the beauty even of created things in like proportion does man form the 
image of their first maker’, and Romans i, 20: ‘For the invisible things of 
Him since the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by 
the things that are made, even His everlasting power and divinity’, in both 
of which Stoic influence is unmistakable. 

Pp. 210, 3. This is the orthodox conception. That miracles by themselves 
are not an absolute proof of the mission of the prophet is not only affirmed 
by the Mu'tazilites, but even by the Ash‘arite Baqillani, who held that 
miracles might also be performed by a sorcerer or a saint (for the whole 
problem cf. Ibn Hazm, op. cit, v. 2-12). Already Celsus (Orig. Contra Cels. 
i. 68) had asked: ‘Since sorcerers can perform the same feats as Jesus, must 
we admit that they toe are “‘sons of God” ?” 

p. 210. 4. Compare with this the passage in St. Gregory of Nyssa, De vita 
St. Greg. Thaumat. (Migne, xtvi, gor), where he speaks of the interna] dis- 
cord, dupvrtos moAcpos, of the Greek philosophers over the Divine, and 
praises the stable word of faith, which in its simplicity is proclaimed to all 
equally and does not find its strength in some logical jugelery and artificial 
constructions of logic, Aoyuj ter weptepyig. Kat rexvixais mAonais, since, 
indeed, the transcendent nature, 4 dnepreepern tors, is inaccessible, 
avenifaros, to human reason, 

p. 211. 1. This seems to imply that even negations have a certain ob- 
jective existence. 

p. 211.2. This is rather badly expressed, for if there are concepts, there 
is already a plurality. The meaning is: ‘The terms of the relation constitute 
with the relation a unity, or the terms of the relation are nothing additional 
to the relation,’ 

p. 211.3, This seems to mean that the father and the son have an exist- 
ence in reality independent of their relation to each other, but that in our 
thoughts fatherhood implies sonhood and the thought fatherhood-sonhood 
constitutes a unity. However, we can think of the father without thinking 
of the son. 

p- 200, 4. ‘the first knowledge’: ie. my knowing a thing includes my 
consciousness of my knowing this thing. This seems to me a sound theory: 
in ali perception and knowledge the consciousness of an ‘ego’ is included. 

p. 212, I. Averroés seems to mean that the series ‘the knowledge that I 
know that I know’ can be infinitely extended, and its infinity is implied in 

NOTES =. 125 

the idea of knowledge. This infinity, however, according to Averroés, is 
only a potential infinity (which is admissible), not an actual infinity (which 
is impossible}. 

p. 212.2. ie. God’s knowledge does not depend on the reality of the 
things known; God does not know things because they exist, but God’s 
knowledge is a creative knowledge, and the things exist because God knows 
them. Of course, if esse = percipi, even our human knowledge does not 
depend on the reality of things; and for Kant the mere possibility of know- 
ledge implies a creative element—which, however, implies that my thought 
that thought is creative is itself creative. 

Pp. 212, 3. Le. by their doctrine of God’s unalterable unity, yo 43. 

p- 212. 4, Ghazali had written three treatises on Logic: The Touchstone of 
Science in Logic, aed of cb pla) jlas, The Touchstone of Speculation in 
Logic, shrotl § 5 wh er The just Balance, preteen plana. 

p. 213. 1. This refers to Ghazali’s curious work, mentioned in the pre- 
ceding note, The Just Balance, in which he extracts the principles of Logic 
from verses of the Koran, and where (p. 20, ed. Kabbani, Cairo, 1g00} he 
bases his belief that the principles of Logic can be deduced from the Koran 
on the verses at the beginning of Sura lv, the Merciful, where it is said that 
God taught man demonstration (or articulate speech), OLJ1, and ‘set the 
balance that in the balance ye should not transgress’. 

p. 214. t. i.e. when he és plunged in the contemplation of something else. 
For Ghazali, therefore, the inference cogito ergo sum would not be valid, since 
according to him thought or consciousness does not imply the self-conscious- 
ness of an ‘ego’. 

p- 274. 2. Since the addition of a non-essential accident does not change 
the individuality of a thing, 

p. 214. 3. i.¢, two individual entities keep their individuality even when 
they are conjoined. The conception of God's attributes as here expressed is 
in agreement with al-Ash‘ari, ¢f. Shahrastani, Relig. end Philos. Sects, 
pp. 66-67, 

p- 214. 4. This criticism is not altogether illegitimate. For Aristotle God 
is pure form, pure being, or pure thought, i.e. a universal existing inde- 
pendently and so individually; ie. God is an individual universal or a 
universal individual, 

p. 215. 1. Since only substances (in which attributes inhere) exist by 
themselves. St. Augustine, De érinit. vii. 5, just because he asserts that no 
attributes can inhere in God, declares that tn deo substantia abusive dicitur. 
Only transient compound things are truly called substances. But since it is 
impious to say that goodness inheres in God instead of saying that God’s 
essence is goodness, God can be in truth only called essence, not substance 

126 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

{‘nefas est autem dicere ut subsistat et subsit Deus bonitate sua, atque ifla 
bonitas non substantia sit vel potius essentia, neque ipse Deus sit bonitas sua, 
sed in illo sit tamquam in subiecto: unde manifestum est Deum abusive 
substantiam vocari’). 

p- 205. 2. That the religious texts of the past (ic. Homer and Hesiod} 
address themselves to the masses in a language intelligible to them, the 
deeper sense of which, drdvoie, can be understood by the philosopher only 
is one of the more general theses of the Greek age of enlightenment. Antis- 
thenes, the father of Cynicism, had declared that Homer had only in part 
spoken the truth; in another part, however, xara Séfev, he had spoken in 
agreement with vulgar opinion, and therefore his words needed philo- 
sophical interpretation (cf. Dio Chrysost. Qrat, litt). Ir was the Stoics who 
more than any others practised the principle of dAAyyopia, allegorical 
exposition. 

p- 215. 3. Koran xix. 43. 

p. 215. 4. Koran xxxvi. 71, 

p- 215. 5. Koran xxxviii. 75. 

p. 246, 1, Cf. Themistius, Orationes, xxvi. 319 b; It was a special charac- 
teristic of Aristotle to believe that the same teachings were not suited for the 
masses and the philosophers, just as the same drugs (¢dppaxa) or provisions 
are not suited both for the perfectly healthy and for those of a precarious 
health, but for the former the really wholesome and for the latter that which 
agrees with their actual bodily state. He therefore called some exoteric 
(4vpacous) and made them generally accessible (dvérous éroujoare), and shut 
some within (eiow dméxAewe) and communicated them only to a few in 
security. We find an analogous conception in Averroés’s great Jewish con- 
temporary, Maimonides, who says (Guide of the Perplexed, i, 33) that the 
Scriptures, since they had to be understood by children, women, and the 
masses, could not be written in philosophical tanguage; this would have 
been like rearing an infant on wheaten bread, meat, and wine, which would 
certainly kill it, Gompare Spinoza, Tract. theol. polit. xii: ‘primis Tudacis 
religio tamquam lex scripta tradita est, nimirum quia tum ‘temporis veluti 
infantes habebantur’. See also 1 Cor. iit. 1-2: ‘And I, brethren, could not 
speak unto you as unto spiritual (rvevparccozs) but as unto carnal (cap«ivoss} 
even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk and not with meat 
(Bpaiua, i.e. solid food), for bitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet 
now are ye able.’ This metaphor is found already in Philo, De agricult. 
(Cohn}, 9, p. 96, 26: det 5é vyrriots per dare yada tpopt}, Tededocs Se ra ek rupdv 
néppata, Kai Yoyis yaraxrwdets nev dv elev spogat card rhy waducy Hataiay 
rd rijs ¢yxuxdloy povotnis mpomassetpara. 

p. 216. 2. For Themistius also the physician is a favourite metaphor for 
the philosopher, see, for example,. Oration. v. 63 b, xxiv. 302 6, and the 

NOTES 127 

roetaphor is ascribed to Antisthenes (Diog. Laert. vi. 1. 4 and 6), In later 
Greek philosophy, and in Roman, the image of philosophy as a medicina 
mentis is a commonplace, eg. Cicero, Tuse. iii. 6: ‘est animi medicina 
(¢éppaxov) philosophia’, and it is found in Plutarch, Seneca, Epictetus, and 
Marcus Aurelius among others. 

p- 216. 3. Cf Aristotle, Met. H 3. 1043>1: 76 ydp ri fy elvar r@ cider Kat 
7H evepyelg dadpye, and Met, A 8, 1074435: 16 S¢ rf fv elvar... dvreddyera, 

P. 217. 1. i.e. nutrition and generation; cf. Aristotle, De gen, an. B 4, 
74034. 

p. 217. 2. i.e. perception; cf. Aristotle, De an. B 2. 413>t. 

p- 217.3. For each substance (even the inorganic) is a kind of actuality 
and nature, évreddyeca nal plow ss éxdory (odoia): Aristotle, Met. H 3. 
To44*g. 

p. 217.4, Cf e.g, Aristotle, Adet. H 1, 10q2*g2: éy mdoms yap rats 
dyricespdvais eraBorals dori re 7d droKeipevor. 

p. 217.5. Cf. Aristotle, Afet, & 8. 1o5nba: 4d eldos evépyad dorw, and 
Aristotle, De gen. et corr. A 4, 320%2: ore 58 HAN. , . 20 Oroxeipevor yeréceus 
xat PBopas Seurucdy. 

p. 217. 6. ‘ultimate basis of existence’: the Arabic is jars, a translation 
of the Greek ororyetov, element (i.e. fire, air, water, earth), but the term 
ororyeiov is also used of matter, e.g. Aristotle, Adet, N 2, 1088527: rd grovyeta, 
Ody ris odciags the elements are the matter of substance. 

p. 27. 7. Cf eg. Aristotle, De an. I 4. 430*7: dvev ydp dys Sivaus 6 
vols rév rovwovrwr (ra&y éxydyrwy VAny), for the intellect is the power to become 
the things possessing matter without their mateer. 

p. 217. 8. Averroés is here referring to Aristotle’s theory (Ade. H 6, 
1045730) that in the definition which consists of the genus and the differentia 
Specifica the genus represents the matter, the differentia specifica the form: 
for: 5é iis BAgs 4} dv vont 7 8° aiabyri, wat dei rod Adyou 74 pév TA 7d be 
évépyert dor, lov 6 xindos oxiua émimedoy, i.e. plane figure is the generic 
element of ‘circle’. 

p. 218. 1. Gf Aristotle, Adet. @ 8. 104955: favepdv Gri wpdrepoy evépyesa 
Surdueds dor, ice. the active element, the form, is prior to the purely 
passive element, matter. 

p- 218. 2. Here Averro#s, in opposition to the general trend of his book, 
drops the pretence that the inner sense (éadvotm) of revealed religion may 
express the highest truths of reason. Here he follows the unalloyed rational- 
isn of classical phitosophy, and professes, as Plato did, that the truech can 
only be attained by the systematic and strenuous thought of the philo- 
sophical few. 

p. 218, 3. According to Aristotle, Met. A 7. 

128 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 219. 1, ie. according to the Ash‘arites the attributes inhere in an 
immaterial substratum which has no characteristic of its own, and one 
might therefore ask : ‘Who or what then is the possessor of these attributes?’ 
But I chink the question cannot be answered ; individuum est ineffabile, descrip- 
tion and definition express only the universal. And if God, like man, is 
conscious, the individuality of His consciousness is as difficult to describe 
and define as the individuality of the human ego, However, al-Ash‘ari gives 
a kind of Neoplatonic solution of this problem, i.e. he affirms that in God 
the opposites are destroyed, for he asserts according to Shahrastani, op. cit., 
p- 67, that one may neither say that God’s attributes are identical with God, 
nor different from Him, nor that they are not God, nor not different from 
Him: ané Y Vy gp VY Vy ond Vy ge ca de Y- 

p. 219. 2. Ch note 195. 3. Perhaps he is here referring to the Ash‘arites 
Ibn Furak and Bagillani, who, according to Ibn Hazm, op. cit. iv. 214, v. 32, 
affirmed that God has but one name, although He has many appellations 
{oleu.3)}—which implies the magical theory that names exist by nature and 
express the essential nature of the object named, or to Abu Ishaq al 
Isfaraini, who held, according to Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 72, 3 that the most 
proper description of God is that His being compels us to differentiate Him 
from all other beings, (instead of o03) ojemad Gangs 9S 9 ivy onl 
Wk OLS YI 2 e- 

p. 219.3. The hidden highest name, ‘the most great name’, of God, 
since it expresses His real essence, would confer unlimited power on the 
man to whom it was revealed. For ‘the most great name of God’ cf. Frazer, 
The Golden Bough, vol. iii, p. 390. 

p. 220. 1. Cf. Origen, De princip. i. 1.6: “Deus... dvds, et mens ac fons 
ex quo initium totius intellectualis naturae vel mentis est’. 

p. 221. 1. Cf Plotinus, Ena, v. 4. 1: It is necessary that above everything 
there must be something simple, different from everything else, independent 
in no communion {od pepeypevov) with what depends on it. 

p. 221, 2, The First is without any conjunction and composition: ovp- 
Bacews fw adons cat owGécews, Plotinus, Enna. v. 4. 1. Plotinus asserts (Znr, 
vi, 2. 17) that even if, in one way, we may Call the First the Good (76 dyadév), 
the Good is not a genus, for it cannot be predicated of anything else, since 
otherwise this would be equally the Good. According to Aristotle the First 
has no contrary, ob ydp don évavrioy 7H amputee obfev (Met. A 10. 1075%22). 

p. 221. 3, Cf. note 195. 1. 

p. 224. 4, That neither ‘the one’ nor ‘being’ can be a genus is asserted 
by Aristotle (Afet. B 3. 998622: oby oldv re 5¢ ray Svrwv ev elvar yévos obre 7d 
& ote 76 Sv) since otherwise unity and being would have to be predicated 
of the differentiae of this genus also. 

NOTES ... 129 

p. 221, §. One may call the First, according to Plotinus, Ean. vi. 8. 8, 
principle, dpy4; from another point of view, however, so far as this would 
imply a constituent of its essence, the First is not a principle. 

p. 222, 1. Description Poe tnoypady; Sroypagy is a technical term of 
Stoicism ; description does not indicate the essence of a thing as the defini- 
tion does, but omits its proprium (cf. Simplicius, in Arist. Cat, Comm., Kalb- 
fleisch, 29, 21: 6 pev Uroypadixds Adyos ri» Ubedryra ris ovoias addopile, 6 5€ 
Spurrixds 76 vt Fy efvac éxdoroy Kat rhv obcigv adr). The categories cannot 
be defined, but only described (cf. Simplicius, op. cit. 75. 36). 

p, 222, 2. This is part of the Aristotelian definition of substance, i.e. 
the individual existent, this man, this horse, Cat. 5. 2411: oveta 3¢ éorw 7 
xupubrard re Kai wpdiruss Kai pddvora Acyopevn, jj pire nad" bronetpevov Teds 
Aéyeras pepre ev Srroxeipevy rat €or. 1t was objected to this definition—says 
Simplicius, op. cit. 81. 5—that it is purely negative, that it is like saying 
that a man is neither a horse nor a dog. But—he answers—first, it is not a 
definition but a description, and where there is a trichotomy, the denial of 
two members affirms the third. 

p. 222. 3. ‘a genus in the accident’: i.e. an accident which would consti- 
tute a genus. 

p. 222. 4, This argument does not seen to me correct. The objection 
against this definition is not that it does not indicate whether the thing 
defined exists, for no definition does indicate this; the objection is that it 
does not indicate what it is that exists (‘Sein ist kein reales Pradikat, d. i. cin 
Begriff von irgend etwas, was zu dem Begriffe eines Dinges hinzukommen 
k6nne’, says Kant), ie. of what the individuality of the individual existent 
consists. There is no answer: individuum est ineffabile. 

p. 222. 5. And ‘being’ cannot have a specific difference; see note 221. 4. 

p- 222.6. Cf. the section in Avicenna’s Salvation, p. 374 nal lg eg al 
wea Vo I fee VSI op tS” be Sl Y ayas)t ee a 
cessary cannot be predicated of a plurality, since it has neither equal nor 
contrary. 

p. 222. 7, That being is predicated analogically is affirmed by Aristotle, 
Met. F2 ad init. Also, according to Plotinus (zn. vi. 2. 17), ‘the good’ can 
be predicated analogically; there is in everything possessing the good a 
gradation per prius et posterius, mpérws nat Seurépws xal torépws, and a 
subordination, and the whole series depends upon the Good beyond (rod 
eméxewva). 

p. 222, 8, According to Averroés this is not a real definition, since it does 
not determine the quiddity of the soul, but only indicates its relation to the 
body. 

p- 223. 1. i.e. if ‘being’ were an essence, a thing could be defined by it, 

130 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

since it is defined by its essence, but a thing is also qualified by its propritn ; 
however, if being were a proprium, this proprium could not qualify a thing, 
since ‘Sein ist kein Begriff von etwas, was zu dem Begriffe eines Dinges 
hinzukommen kénne’, Quiddity, says Avicenna (Salvation, p. 340), is, for 
example, man, horse, soul, intellect, which is then qualified as being existent 
and being one. Therefore understanding the quiddity of anything is different 
from understanding that it is one (the text is corrupt; evidently the word 
¢lag3 has been omitted before clgi9) and therefore unity is neither the 
essence of anything nor a constitutent of the essence, but a necessary attri- 
bute of the essence, 

p. 223. 2. Because, in the example in the preceding note, Avicenna men- 
tions man, horse, soul, and intellect; but man and horse, being sensible 
materia] substances, are essentially different from soul and intellect, which 
are intelligible immaterial substances. But, says Plotinus (Enn. vi. 1. 2), 
there cannot be a common genus for the sensible substance, and for the 
intelligible, since otherwise there would be another substance superior to 
both, which could be predicated of them. 

p. 223. 3. For Farabi’s book about demonstration, i.e. his commentary 
on the Posterior Analytics, compare Prantl, Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande, 
ii, 312 sqq., and Steinschneider, Al-Farabi, Mém. de VAcad. Imp. des 
Sciences de St. Pétersbourg, série VII, ¢. xiii, n. 4, pp. 43 sqq. It seems to 
have been a most important work of this philosopher, of whom Maimonides 
said that, for the understanding of logic, the study of his works alone would 
besufficient. In his commentaries on the Anat. Post. Averroés often quotes this 
work and often attacks it. ft may be that there existed a Latin translation of 
it, and that Albertus Magnus knew it, as js perhaps suggested by his words 
(Prantl, op. cit. gr2. 51): ‘et haec, quae dicta sunt de sciendis Arabum, 
sunt excerpta, quorum commentum super hune posteriorum librium ex 
sententia Alfarabi Arabis ad nos devenit’. The passage in our book is quoted 
by Steinschneider, op. cit., p. 53. Farabi’s conception would be in agree- 
ment with such passages in Aristotle as Mel. Z 1. 1028*91-32: 10 wparwes ov 
Kat OF Th Gy GAN’ dv ddds 4 odola dy eq, mparoy mévray Ady, substance is 
that which exists primarily, not in a qualified sense, but absolutely, and is 
primary in definition, 

p- 223. 4. Tt has really nothing to do with the Arabic language. The term 
2425+ Means ‘existent’ ; a sentence like ‘Socrates is existent’ is of the same 
form as ‘Socrates is a votary of the Muses’, gor: Xwxpdrys poverxds, which, 
according to Aristotle, Met. 4d 7. 1019*33, means that this is tue. In the 
sentence ‘Socrates is existent’, ‘existent’ as a predicate is an accident. 

p. 224, 1. He means that the true is not something in the external world, 
but something existing only in the mind; second predicates refer to some- 
thing in the mind, primary predicates to something in the external world. 

NOTES -: 131 

p. 224.2. The Book of the Letters, i A' sb”: about this treatise see 
Steinschneider, op. cit., p. 168, who quotes this passage (erroneously, how- 
ever, rendering ‘Zufalliges’ instead of ‘accident’). This book is quoted a few 
times by Averroés and by others (see Steinschneider, loc. cit., and Prantl, 
op. cit. ii, 311. 50), The title of this treatise is rather mysterious; perhaps 
the book treated in part of words and language in the same way as the Stoics, 
who regarded phonetics and linguistics as a part of dialectics, and @ passage 
in Maimonides (see Steinschneider, loc. cit.} makes this seem plausible, 
“The book of letters’ is, however, also one of the names by which Aristotle's 
Mataphysics was known among the Arabs, and Farabi himself composed a 
treatise about the intentions of Aristotle in his Book of Letters, ie. his 
Metaphysics. 

p- 224. 3. For Aristotle ‘paronymous’ words, like ‘healthy’ from ‘health’, 
‘medica!’ from ‘medicine’, express a secondary mode of being (see Met, I" 
2 ad init.}. The word 545. ‘existent’ is ‘derived from’, i.e. is the passive 
participle of, the verb 15, ‘to find’, and means originally ‘what is found’, 
ce qui se trouve, was vorgefunden wird. 

Pp. 224. 4. (lita, avpforov. Words, according to Aristotle, are symbols of 
things (De tnterpr. 2. 16428), and primitive words express primary things. 

p- 224. 5. There seems to be some confusion in this sentence through 
Averroés’s ignorance of Greek and of the differences between Greek and 
Arabic. Neither Greck nor Arabic need normally express the connexion 
between subject and predicate. Zwxpdrys povotds ascribes to Socrates his 
being a votary of the Muses, and |.) + 42}, literally ‘Zaid ill’, means that 
Zaid is ill, However, in both tanguages the connexion may be expressed by 
the copula (copula, in Greek ovpmhox#, in Arabic Lyi 31 or dlay| JI). The 
copula is expressed in Greek by elves (and we may say dors Swxpdrys 
povouds), in Arabic by the personal pronoun 4a, he, it (and we may say 

dy ya gh AQ} OF , pA) po ait 4g}, literally, ‘Zaid he ill’). Averroés knows that 

¢ word used as the copula in Greek is related to the words signifying 
substance and existence in that language, but he seems to think that in 
Greek also the copula is expressed by a pronoun, The term 4s ye (literally 
‘it-ness’) which is translated into Latin as Aaeceitas, is used synonymously with 
Synge (sec, for example, Arist. Metaph. A 7 on 7d dv in Bouyges’s edition) ; it 
corresponds to the Aristotelian term réde_ re (aS yL2.J1) which originally 
designates an individual thing existing here and now, and expresses the 
it-ness or this-ness of a thing, i.e. its individuality. For Averroés existence is 
the existent, 76 dv, the individual, +56 71, it is the substance, 7 ovoia, it is the 
subject, 76 troxe{:evov, of a sentence; for Avicenna existence is to exist, 
+6 elvas, it is added to the subject as a predicate in such sentences as ‘Socrates 
exists’, and as a predicate is an accident. 

132 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 224, 6. e.g, in ‘Socrates exists’, ‘exists’ signifies the true, and one may 
know about Socrates without knowing whether he exists, 

p- 224, 7. i.e. one can know of a compound substance, ie. a transient 
individual thing composed of matter and form, without knowing whether it 
exists; but knowledge of a simple, i.e, an immaterial, eternal substance, 
implies its existence. 

p- 224. 8. Aristotle, Phys. 4 2 and A 3, see especially A 3. 186*24, where 
Aristotle reproaches Parmenides with treating ‘being’ as having one mean- 
ing, whereas it has many, amAds AapPdver 7d ov Adyeabar, Aeyopdvov roMayas. 

p. 225.1. That the existent is one is the thesis of Parmenides, which 
asserts something of the existent; but since an accident is always attributed 
to a subject, the subject, if being were exclusively an accident, would have 
no being: the existent would be non-existent (cf. Arist. Phys. A 3. 186434: 
76 ydp oupPefnxds Kat? GroKxercvov tides Adyeraz, Gore h aupPeRywe +d dv 
ob« éorat, erepov ydp Tod Svros). 

p- 225. 2. For an eternal being is simple and the genus is like the sub- 
stratum or matter for the specific differences; e.g. Arist. Afet. dG. 1016%26: 
76 yévos .. . 70 Ustoxetpevoy Tais Siagopais. 

p. 226, 1. Cf. Aristotle, Met.d 3. 1014>12: bi pév yap 4 dragdopa trdpye: wal 
7d yévos axolovOet ; where the differentia exists, there the genus also is 
present. 

p. 226. 2, For all the elements in a definition must form a unity, since the 
definition is a formula which is one and which defines a substance (Arist. 
Met. Z 12. 1037%24: Set 3é ye ev elvar dca ev rH dpropd: 6 ydp dprapds Adyos 
als éorw els xat odatas). 

p. 226. 3. According to Aristotle (e.g. Adet. H 6, 1045294: det rod Adyou 
76 pev try 76 Sé evépyerd ort) part of the definition is always matter (i.e. 
potential), part actuality. 

p. 226, 4, The recipient is the matter, the thing it receives the form; one 
of them, i.e. the matter, e.g. wine or the matter of wine, becomes vinegar 

by receiving acidity, but actually is wine, having received the form, the 
sweetness of wine, 

p. 227, r. This sentence is very confused and as a matter .of fact it is 
contradictory, for it affirms that potency can be accidentally its opposite, 
actuality, The contradiction lies in the theory of Aristotle himself, for whom 
the relation of matter to form expresses both a relation of sequence, i.e. the 
relation of priority and posteriority (the wine turning vinegar is the matter 
of the vinegar} and a static relation, the relation of substance and accidence; 
and Aristotle identifies matter with potentiality and form with actuality. 
Now one has the right to say that the wine is potentially the vinegar, but 

NOTES 133 

there is no sense in saying that the matter exists potentially in the combina- 
tion of matter and form which constitutes the actually existing individual, 
and it is a contradiction to say that the actual existent consists in part of a 
potential existent, or that the actual existent is a combination of the actual 
and the potential. According to Averroés the matter, by existing in the 
actually existing individual, is accidentally actual ; the form, by existing in 
matter, the potential, is accidentally potential. 

p. 227.2. For becoming is found only in substance, and there is no 
generation and destruction of accidents; cf. Aristotle, Met. E 5. 1026b24: _ 
raw $8 card ovpPeBneds ote tore yévecrs Kai PBopd. 

p- 227. 3. For plane, line, and point are units, and units are indivisible 
either in quantity or in form; cf. Aristotle, Met. 4 6. 1016523: ravrayoi 82 
70 &v RTH meow i 7E cider ddiatperov. 

p- 227. 4. ‘this’: ie, that it cannot have receptivity or matter, 

Pp- 227. 5. Since the potential intellect, which is immaterial, receives the 
active intellect. 

p. 227. 6. For this attribute is its essence or its form, since all transient 
individuals consist of matter and form. 

p. 227. 7. The only potentiality that exists in the heavenly body is its 
capacity to change its place, but there is no possibility of change in its sub- 
stance; cf. Aristotle, Met, A 7. 10725, See also p. 142 and notes 142. 4 and 
142. 8. 

p. 227, 8. Whether this substratum be an eternal heavenly body or a 
transient matetial body (man), 

p. 228. 1. CE Aristotle, Met. A 10. 1075517: xat trois So dpyas movodaw 
Any dvdynn dpyhy xupswrépay efvat, those who assume two principles must 
assume a higher principle, i.e. an efficient cause. 

p. 228. 2. According to Aristotle there is no contrary to the First (see 
note 221, 2). 

p. 229. . Cf the end of Aristotle, Met. A 10: those who introduce a 
number of independent principles make the substance of the world episodic 
(éresaoduiSn ry ro0 warrds oboiay mowsow), where he concludes with 
Homer’s words, itiad ii. 204: obx dyabév woAvxotpavin: els xoipavos Eorw, the 
rule of many is not good ; tet one man be the ruler, 

p- 229. 2. Which would have to be its cause. 

Pp. 229. 3. See page 189, 

Pp. 229. 4. This seems to mean that we can have the concept of colour in 
our mind without thinking of black and red; which is certainly true, but 
would seem in contradiction te Ghazali’s own nominalism. 

134 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 229. 5. This seems to mean that any colour in real existence must be 
a definite colour, red or black or yellow, &c., and so far the definite colours 
are a condition for the real existence of colour; they are, however, not 
individually a cause for the real existence of colour. Ghazali repeats here 
what Avicenna says, Salvation, p. 379, that no definite colour is a condition 
for the concept ‘colour’; all definite colours are a condition for colour in 
real existence, but not individually. 

p. 230. 1. This last sentence does not fit in very well here. It is not a part 
of the proof of the philosophers, but part of Ghazali’s arguments against it 
which Averroés repeats in the following passage. 

p- 230. 2. Infinite terms or rather indefinite terms (‘infinite’ is the rather 
unhappy translation of Boethius which has become current in scholastic 
philosophy) are the éyépara ddptera (Arab. iotaet! olew'¥| like non-homo, 
non-albus (cf. Arist. De interpr. 2. 16*92}. Infinite terms are privative {orepy- 
vucds), they are not absolute non-being ; cf. the parallel passages in Aristotle, 
Phys. Po. 201626 and Met. @ 9. 1066°15; af orepyrinai dpyai ddptoror. 

p. 291. 1. Le. if red is the cause of the existence of colour, black cannot 
be the cause of colour, and therefore there cannot be any specific differentia- 
tion between colours ; but this is not true (I take ‘and this is not true’ as the 
words of Ghazali; Averroés, I believe, restricts himself here to repeating 
Ghazali's argument). 

p- 231. 2, i.e, black and red do not enter into the definition of colour, but 
any existing colour has to be a definite colour {the speciousness of the whole 
argument rests on the ambiguity of the term ‘condition’ which can mean a 
physical cause or a logical relation, ic. that genus implies species, that 
without a species there cannot be a genus, that species is a condition for 
genus; here ‘condition’ is taken in a logical sense and is not a ‘cause’). 

p- 231. 3. i.e. sinee, for the First, essence and existence coincide, any 
specific difference in the First would have to be a condition, i.e. a cause both 
for the essence and the existence of the First. 

p. 232. 1, This is not true; Ghazali did not say here that for the philo- 
sophers existence is added as an accident to the quiddity. Their whole 
argument, according to him, is built on the principle that in God alone 
essence, what He is, and existence, that He is, coincide—a theory which 
Averroés also holds, although he affirms also that, since everything is sorne- 
thing, every essence is an existence, and confuses the being of an object of 
thought—what is meant (and what is non-existent may be meant)—-with 
existence, 

P. 232. 2. ie, existence, 

Pp. 232. 3. For it would mean that black and red exist only in reality, but 
not as concepts. 

NOTES .”. 135 

p. 232. 4. Averroés wants to express that colours can also be differentiated 
conceptually, not only when they exist (which nobody wil! deny). Since for 
him every essence is an existence, and he must ail the same distinguish 
between colours only thought of and colours in real existence, he speaks of 
the latter as existing in act; ‘in act’, however, is simply another expression 
for ‘existing’. 

p: 232. 5. The simple and the compound are opposites (see, for example, 
Arist. Phys. P 5. 204611), and once the thesis is accepted that the highest prin- 
ciple is simple (74 aparov xat xupiws dvayxatoy 16 dwAoby carty, Arist. Met. 4 5. 
101572), it follows necessarily that it cannot have any composition. 

p- 232. 6. “Through the term only’, ie. through homonymy. That some 
things are one formally, others generically, others analogically, i.e. through 
a relation to some thing, is asserted by Aristotle, Afet. 4 6. 1016631. 

Pp. 233. 1. The first agent, the ultimate form, the ultimate end, the ulti- 
mate matter are but different names for God, the One. That God is regarded 
as the ultimate matter may seem rather strange, but as early as Aristotle, 
Met. a 2, ad init., it is asserted that there is some first principle, gerw 
dpx# res, and it is proved that none of the four causes can form an infinite 
series but that they ali must end in a first term. 

P- 233- 2. ‘angels’: t.e. the philosophers identify the Aristotelian concept 
of a separate intellect with the Persian~Jewish concept of an angel. The 
identification of angels with concepts taken frome Greek philosophy takes 
place when Judaism comes into contact with Greek philosophy, and is found 
already in Philo Iudaeus, who identifies the angels with the Platonic t8éas 
and the Stoic Adyot (cf. Philo, De somn, 1. 115: dBavdrois Adyors, ods xadeiy 
os dyydAovs), In the scholastic philasophy of the thirteenth century this 
identification of angel and separate intellect by the Arabic philosophers was 
known, but it was often denied, as by Albertus Magnus, 7 Sent, dist, . iii; 
however, Dante, Conv. ii. 5, says: “Li movitori di quello (terzo cielo) sono 
sustanze separate da materia, cioé intelligenze, le quali Ia volgare gente 
chiama angeli . . . ¢ chiamale Plato Idee, che tanto ¢ a dire, quanto forme ¢ 
nature universali. Li Gentili le chiamavano Dei e Dee; avvegnaché non cost 
filosoficamente intendessero quelle, come Plato.’ 

P- 235. 1. «lb ‘consequent’ is a literal translation of ré wapaxoAovboby, a 
constant attribute, inseparably connected (cf. Arist. Cat. 7. 8733, Met. I2. 

1054*14). 

P- 235. 2. ie. it is not impossible for the First to have a necessary attribute. 

Pp. 235. 3. Its impossibility: ic. the impossibility that the First should 
have an essence besides its existence. 

Pp. 236. 1. In this book, which has been edited by Muhyi al-Din Sabri 
al-Kurdi, 4.4. 1331, Ghazali proposes (p. 2} simply to relate the theories of 

136 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the philosophers, since it is necessary to know their theories before refuting 
them, as he proposes to do afterwards {i.e. in his Incoherence of the Philosophers). 
The book consists of three parts, Logic, Metaphysics, and Physics, was 
translated into Latin in the Middle Ages and exercised a considerable - 
influence on medieval Scholasticism. It was published in its entirety in 
Venice in 1506, and there is a new edition by Muckle of the Metaphysics 
and Physics (entitled, however, Algazel’s Adetaphysics) published in 
Toronto, 1933. 

p. 236. 2. This refers to the passage, in the bock mentioned in the pre- 
ceding note (Part EI, section 3, p. 139), where Ghazali gives the following 
proof of the thesis that, for the necessary existent, essence and existence are 
identical (analy ac3] soey Qjl}: existence is an accident of the quiddity, 
and every accident is an effect, for if it were an existent by itself, it would not 
be an accident of something else. Now the cause of the existence of the neces- 
sary existent would have to be either its quiddity or something else: if 
something else, the existence of the necessary existent would be an accident 
and an effect, and would not be a necessary existent ; however, it cannot be 
its quiddity itself, for the non-existent cannot be a cause of existence, and the 
quiddity before its actual existence would have to be a non-existent, since if 
it were already an existent it would not need a second existence, and if we 
admit a second existence, we shall have an infinite regress. Therefore there 
is no cause for its existence, and its essence and existence are identical. 

p. 236. 3. That the existence of a thing is prior to its quiddity is Averroés’s 
own theory, based on the Aristotelian thesis that the copula implies being or 
existence ; since everything is something, it has to de, prior to its being some- 
thing; from which it would follow that the non-existent also is or exists, a 
consequence which Aristotle fully accepts. 

p. 236. 4. ie. it is a concept in the mind, 
p- 236. 5. This refers to Aristotle, Anal. Post. A 2. 71g: éaieracba 52 

oldpe®” Exaotoy GmA@sS ... Grav riy 7’ airiay oladpeba ypwwone Se” Fv 7d 
aptyud ear, Ere exeivov airia dori, Kal yi) evdexeabar tobr’ dAws exew, we 
believe that we know something absolutely when we believe we know the 
cause on which its existence depends, i.e. when we know that this is its cause 
and that it must be so and not otherwise. 

p. 237. t. Ido not think he means asking whether God has a necessary 
attribute which determines His existence, for this would contradict his 
previous denial that God has a necessary attribute; I suppose he means 
asking whether the idea of God (i.e. the concept we have of God, which he 
calls ‘the true’) is such that we must judge that He necessarily exists. But of 
course the whole theory is confused and obscure. 

P- 237. 2. ie, by the Stoic term zi, which signifies anything whatever that 

NOTES 137 

can be meant, the false and the non-existent included: Averroés means that 
‘existent’ is here a concept in the mind. 

p. 237. 3. Analogy according to Aristotle is the nexus between different 
genera; even when things are generically different the same genus can be 
attributed to them by analogy (as an example see ¢.g. Afet. @ 6. 10486), 

Pp. 237. 4. This strange theory is based on Averroés’s denial of being or 
existing as an accident. According to Avicenna, in a sentence like ‘Socrates 
is’ ‘is’ is a predicate and therefore an accident. Averroés sees rightly that 
‘Sein ist kein reales Pradikat, das zu dem Begriff eines Dinges hinzukommt’ 
(Kant), but he identifies essence and existence, from which it follows that 
there is no distinction between an essence that exists and one that does not. 
However, as he has to admit this distinction, he regards ‘is’ in a sentence 
like ‘Socrates is’ (or perhaps the whole sentence) as something in the mind. 
He sees that this something in the mind must have a counterpart outside 
the mind, since things exist in reality, and he regards it as existing poten« 
tially—a dubious kind of reality which he attributes also to universals as 
entities outside the mind. This use of ‘potential’ derives from the ambiguity 
of the term ‘actuality’ in Aristotle, for whom ‘actuality’ may mean really 
existing and being perceived; a colour, for example, as long as it is not 
actually perceived is only potentially perceived, and we have therefore the 
contradiction that although it is actual, i.e. really existing, it is also potential, 
as long as it is net perceived. Cf., however, note 232. 4. 

Pp. 237. 5. Since there would be no cause for its beginning; according to 
Aristotle movement must be eternal and can never be interrupted: det 
xivnow det elvas xat pt) Suxdeinew (Phys. @ 6 ad init.). 

p. 237. 6. ie. the movement of heaven, which is eternal as a whole, but 
temporal in its parts. 

p- 237. 7. Aristotle shows (De caelo Bg, De gen. st carr, B 10, Meteor. A-I) 
how earthly changes proceed from the different positions of the heavenly 
bodies and especially of the sun, 

Pp. 238. 1. Averroés’s objection seems to me purely verbal: Avicenna calls 
the existent necessary through another (i.e. heaven) an existent possible in 
itself (A512; aymghh Kas GU opis Xgmg!l ral gr Ls [54 Salvation, 
p. 367), whereas Averro#s calls heaven necessary in its substance, but 
possible in its local movement, combining in this instance necessity and 
possibility. 

p- 238. 2. The Ash‘arite term 43L.0 lie, ‘mental qualities’, corres- 
ponds toe the Stoic term évvorpere, ie. “universals’, but neither for the 
Ash‘arites nor for the Stoics does this term correspond to the Aristotelian 
term ‘forms’, ciSy, since neither the Ash‘arites nor the Stoics believed that 
universal entities existed outside the mind. 

138 TAHABUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 238. 3. Koran xxi. 31. 

p. 238. 4. Koran xli. 10. 

p. 239. 1. The nature of the possible, ic, matter, 

Pp: 239.2. This refers to the tradition found in the canonical books of 
tradition of Muslim (¢jl3} 211) and Ahmad ibn Hanbal (vi. 106) 23] (Jue 
Ge Yt pares AMT NG Augueg/! 56: they asked the prophet about the 
whisperings of Satan and he said ‘This is an act of pure faith.’ 

P- 239. 3. ‘an existent the non-existence of which can be supposed’: this 
is rather badly expressed ; he ought to have said ‘an essence’ instead of ‘an 
existent’, which would include both Socrates (who does not exist any more) 
and a non-existent golden mountain. 

P- 239. 4. ie. since the First has ne essence, its essence is a non-existent 
whose existence is asserted. 

P- 239. 5. ie. absolute, unrelated existence is but ‘ein leerer Begriff’, an 
empty concept, as Kant would say. 

P. 240. 1. it, since the causeless implies an entity, viz. an essence which 
is causeless, this essence cannot be denied, i.e, represented as non-existent. 

Pp. 240. 2. i.e. the philosophers identify quiddity and existence in the First, 
bute do not deny that it has a quiddity, its quiddity being its existence. 
However, Ghazali is quite right in regarding this as a denial of the quiddity. 

Pp. 241. 1. Ido not know whether he means here to imply that necessity 
is a purely mental attribute. The Stoics define necessity as the true that 
cannot become false, dvaynaiov 5€ dora Saep ddnBes dy obi dor emdeiracdy 
rob yebdos efvar (Diog. Laert. vil. 75). The true, however, is for the Stoics 
incorporeal, dodparov, and unreal, dvurdoraroy (Sext. Emp. Hyp. Pyrrh, 
ii, 81). 

p. 241. 2. This is the Stoic and Ash‘arite argument. 

p- 242. 1. Averroés seems here to be referring to p. 13), where he says 
that since the Ash‘arites accept eternal attributes in God, there muse exist 
an eternal compound of essence and attribute (and according to Averroés 
every compound is material), which contradicts their theory that every 
compound is temporal. Here, however, his argument seems to be that their 
proof that the whole whose parts are temporal is itself temporal is invalid, 
because although the individual accidents are temporal there is in them a 
constant element, namely their being accidents inhering in a substratum 
and forming a compound with it. 

Pp. 243. 1. An eternal composite: ie. an eternal simple body having a 
soul; in other words, heaven. 

p. 243. 2. This is a rather curious statement ; probably he means that this 
argument is valid against the method by which philosophers like Avicenna 

NOTES 139 

try to arrive at an immaterial and transcendent first principle; cf. also | 
below, p. 257. 

P. 243. 3. “that the essence is the cause of its attributes’ is a consequence 
Averroés bimself draws, one which Ghazali denies, and which the Ash‘arites 
would deny also. 

p. 244. 1. The First Principle rust be unique and must possess unity. 

P. 244. 2. Le. the quiddity is only denied because it implies plurality; 
one must, however, admit a quiddity, since its denial is absurd, and there- 
fore a plurality is implied in the First. 

Pp. 244. 3. Cf. Plotinus, Ean. v. 5. 10, where infinite power is ascribed to 
the First, 76 8’ drespov + Sdvajus exer; for the First as che ultimate source of 
movement cf. Plotinus, loc. cit.: dx’ adrof xivnois } apeory. 

p. 245. 1. Everything that comes into being possesses matter, dnavra $é 74 
yryvopeva ,.. €yee TAnu (Arist, Met. Z 7. 103220) ; body cannot come into 
being from the incorporeal (Arist. De caelo I 6, 305416). 

Pp. 245. 2. Generation takes place only within the same species: man 
begets man (Arist. Met. Z 7. 1032%24) ; Aristotle and his school admit also a 
generatte aequivoca, but only for certain primitive organisms, 

P- 245. 3. There is no absolute becoming, for everything must come into 
being out of something and this something must itself be ungenerated, 
dyévyrov, cf. Aristotle, Met. B 4. 990°5. 

p. 245. 4. The doctrine that the principle of the individual is the indi- 
vidual, dpxi) ydp rd xa” Exacrov raiv xab" Exagrov (Arist. Met. A 5. 1071920): 
Peleus is the principle of Achilles. 

Pp. 245. 5. In a univocal way, when the father is regarded as the cause of 
the son, because both belong to the same species; in an analogical way, 
when the cause and effect are not really in the same genus. Aristotle says 
that different things, i.e. things not in the same genus, have identical causes 
and elements only by analogy (Afet. A 5. 1071%24: dAAa dé dAwr aria nat 
orotyeia . . ., WAnY TH avdAoyor). 

p. 245.6, That fire and water have a special corporeality is not an 
Aristotelian theory. There is here a reference to a problem not found in 
Aristotle, Although for Aristotle matter is the absolutely indefinite, he often 
seems unconsciously to regard it as spatial—which is only natural, for how, 
if it were not spatially extended’ could anything enter into it?-—and he 
never asks the question how matter becomes spatially extended. Plotinus, 
whose theory of matter is inspired both by Plato’s Timaeus and by Aristotle, 
regards magnitude, péye@os {Enn. ii. 4. 8), as a form which enters into 
matter, but which itself is incorporeal, dowyarov. For Avicenna the first form 
which enters into matter and is common to all matter is that of corporeality, 

140 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

through which matter receives the three dimensions and continuity and 
divisibility (cf. my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., p. 64). According to Plato (Tim. 
53 ¢8qq.) fire has the shape of a pyramid (tetrahedron), air that of an 
octahedron, water that of an icosahedron, earth that of a cube; and he 
explains the transmutability of water, air, and fire by the fact that their 
surfaces are composed of right-angled scalene triangles; but to an Aris- 
totelian like Averroés such a theory, refuted by his master (see e.g, De caela 
I’8. 30653 sqq.), could not be acceptable, and it is not easy to see what he 
means here by ‘special corporeality’ (cf. also my Ep. d. Met. d. Ae., pp. 
65-66}. 

p- 245. 7. Warmth, @epydv, cold, peypdv, moist, typdr, dry, Enpév are the 
basic qualities of the elements; cf. Aristotle, De gen. et corr. B 2. 929°24. That 
the production of the elements from each other is caused by the movement 
of the heavenly bodies is a doctrine found in Aristotle, Afeteor, A 2. 399°21. 

p- 246. ¢. For this theory of Avicenna cf, for example, his Salvation, p. 461, 
I. 1 sqg., and my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., p. 44, 

p- 246. 2. He refers here, for example, to Themistius, Paraphr. in Arist. 
Met. A, Landauer, 9. 3-10. 5; of. my Ep. d. Met. d. Aa., loc. cit. 

p- 245. 3. The principal argument would seem to be that in matter there 
are realized resemblances, cuowryzes, with the forms of the separate prin- 
ciples. Equivocal generation, therefore, is not in conflict with the thesis that 
omne vitum ex vive (cf. the passages indicated in the two preceding notes). 
For the Necplatonic conception of equivocal generation cf., for example, 
Plotinus, Enn. iv. 3. 8 at the end, and Porphyry, De Antro Nemph. 18 where 
he speaks of the Bovyeveis uyal eis yéveow lodoas. Avicenna depends on this 
Neoplatonic conception, which has in it Platonic and Stoic elements (in 
its theory of Adyoe omeppazxol). 

p. 246. 4. This, with what follows, is in agreement with Aristotle, who 
teaches that proofs are valid only for one and the same genus and may not 
be transferred from one genus to another (cf. Arist. Anal. Post. A 7 ad init.; 
otx dpa for e& addov yévovs peraPdvra Setfar), 

Pp. 247. 1. ie. if the teleological argument is given for God's existence, and 
if it is said that the size of the world was chosen for the sake of the order of 
the world, and that therefore there must be a spiritual principle and the 
material world cannot be the highest principle. 

p. 247. 2. The first effect, i.e. the vots, the first Intellect. 

p. 247. 3. CE with this argument of Ghazali Carneades’ deniai that the 
conventientia consensusque naturae implies the acceptance of a divine spiritual 
principle (Cicero, De nat. deor. tii. 1. 18), This passage, which is a refutation 
of the teleological argument, is contradictory : to say that the special size of 
the universe exists for the sake of the order of the universe, is to admit the 

NOTES *°. 14i 

teleological argument, since ‘for the sake of’ implies an intention. There is 
an ambiguity in the word ‘necessary’, which can mean at the same time a 
necessity in God, a necessary choice for God (who, if He wanted the order 
of the universe, had to choose this special measure), and the natural neces- 
sity of cause and effect without any choice being involved. It is, indeed, one 
of the difficulties of the teleological argument that it has to assume a neces- 
sity of choice in God, since it limits God’s choice to what is best and to the 
means conducive to the best. There is, however, some justification for 
Ghazali’s argument: if, as both Aristotle and Plotinus assert, there is no will 
in God, but all action of spiritual forces takes place through purely natural 
necessity (cf. Plotinus, Zaz. iv. 4. 6), the apparent final causes in this sub- 
Tunary world will not prove the existence of a conscious spiritual force. 
Indeed, both Aristotle and Piotinus are guilty of a contradiction, for one 
cannot admit final causes and at the same time deny conscious intention; 
unconscious intention is a contradiction in terms, There is here an insuper- 
able difficulty; we cannot rid ourselves of final causes in biology; concepts 
ike that of instinct, for example, imply in their definition the idea of design, 
since instinctive actions are those which seem to have a design, although 
they ate regarded as being performed by the animal without conscious 
intention, (According to Cicero, De nat. deor. ii, 49. (25, Aristotle gave the 
various instincts of animals as an argument in his teleological proof for the 
existence of God.) 

Pp. 247. 4. ie. why did the Eternal Will create the world at a certain 
definite moment? (cf. p. 18 and note 18. 3). 

p. 248. 1. There seems to be some confusion in this passage: if the dis- 
tinction between certain sizes is unessential to the order of the Universe, it is 
not possible to answer the question why the actual size was chosen instead 
of an equivalent one, and one might say it has not been chosen, but was 
always there; on the other hand, if the order of the world depends on its 
actual size, this size seems to have been intentionally chosen; it is true that 
for the realization of this order no other size was possible, but ‘not possible’ 
means here that God had necessarily to choose this definite size. What 
Ghazali wants to express is this: for an eternal world there cannot be a 
creator, since creation implies a becoming in time, nor can there have been 
a design, since design, will, and intention imply temporal priority to the 
thing designed, wilied, and intended. 

Pp. 249- I. i.e. must be valuable in itself or more valuable than any other 
thing possible in the same conditions. According to the Ash‘arites God is 
absolutely free, His choice is not determined by anything, and a thing is 
valuable because God willed it. According to the philosophers, God willed 
it because it was yaluable, the Will of God being determined by the value of 
the thing, 

142 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 249. 2. Gf. Plato, Laws X go2 e: pi rob rdv ye Pedy dbudowper wore 
Brnrdv Snusrovpyaw pavrdrepov, let us not, then, deem God inferior to 
human workmen. 

Pp. 249. 3. Since no art or wisdom would be necessary for the artisan. 

Pp. 249. 4. This conception, which implies that nature is the art of God 
and art the nature of man, presents grave difficulties, On the one hand, how 
can man, being stmply God’s creature, himself become 2 creator, or being 
simply an ¢ffect, himself become a cause? Natura non nist parendo vincitur, says 
Francis Bacon paradoxically, but he offers no solution. If man is but a res 
creata and a part of nature, how can he conquer nature? For man will not 
have any more power over nature than the falling stone, as Spinoza believed. 
On the other hand, if God stands to nature as man to his artefact, God’s 
action will be determined by His own nature and the exigencies of His 
material. Aristotle himself was unable to distinguish satisfactorily becween 
art and nature (cf, my Ep. d, Met. d. Av., p. 205), 

p- 259. 1. ie. the theologians following the Stoic argument. 
p. 250. 2. Mixture, cll, pikes, of. Aristotle, De gen. et corr, A 16; 

alteration, (|loxul , dMotuors ; dModmors peraBor} card 76 andes, cf. Aristotle, 
Met. A 2. 106912. 

Pp. 250. 3. He means that we see the temporal body coming into existence 
through a cause (however, its matter is eternal), Averroés does not see that 
he is here accepting Ghazali’s assertion that a cause implies a coming into 
existence, 

p. 250. 4. De Caelo et Mundo, i.e. De Caelo; Averrods is here referring to 
De caclo B 14, where Aristotle explains the spherical shape of the earth by 
asserting that all its parts tend towards their natural place, which is the 
centre of the world, and says at B 14. 297514 sqq.: ‘If the earth has been 
generated . . . it must have come into existence in the shape of a sphere; 
if the earth, however, is ungenerated and everlasting it must have the same 
shape as it would have as a result of generation,’ 

p. 251. t. There is here some confusion ; by ‘the beginning of things’ he 
cannot of course mean a beginning in time, but the beginning of a causal 
series; according to him the materialists admitted as the supreme cause of 
all change and becoming the eternal movement of the heavens. This would 
imply the passivicy of everything else, and so this cause would not he a 
supreme cause and the termination of a causal series, but the only cause and 
a cause simultaneous with its effect. At the same time, however, Ghazali 
regards the movement of the heavens as 4 sequence of causes and effects. 
He seems to have here in mind the theories of such naturalistic Peripatetics 
as Strato of Lampsacus, of whom Cicero declares (Acad. pr. ii. 38, 121): ‘negat 
opera deorum se uti ad fabricandum mundum’. 

NOTES . 143 

p- 251.2. ‘this causal series’, i.e. the series of forms and accidents. 

P- 25!. 3. Koran vi, 75. 

p- 251. 4. Le. the Ash‘arites regarded God as the sole cause, creating and 
re-creating the Universe at every instant, 

p- 252. F. ie, the materialists might say the material world exists by 
itself without 2 cause. 

p. 252. 2. This may mean that it is necessary to inquire whether the body 
of the heavens possesses matter, i.e. the principle of possibility. 

p. 252. 3. Averroés’s objection to this proof seems here to be that it 
cannot be used as an a priori proof—as Avicenna seems to use it, putting it 
at the beginning of his Afetaphysics (in the Recovery)—bdut that it is only valid 
a posteriori, after che study of the physical universe. In the next paragraph 
he is, however, much more sceptical about the value of this argument. 

Pp. 253. 1. Le. it is not proved that it is a spiritual substance possessing 
thought. 

p. 253.2. Since the world as a whole is eternal, and according to 
Aristotle ‘eternal’ and ‘necessary’ are convertible (cf, for example, Arist. 
De gen. et corr. B rt. 938°1: dor’ et dorw ef dvdyuns, diddy dor, xal «i 
di&kov, €€ avdyxns). 

P. 254. 1. i.¢. through procreation the animal also participates in eternity. 

p- 254.2. This passage is not found, so far as I know, in any of the Greek 
texts that have come down to us. It is, however, in harmony with the general 
trend of Alexander’s philosophy (cf., for example, his Quaes?. nat. ii. 3). Inan 
Arabic work ascribed to Alexander On the Principles of the Universe which is 
not known in Greek or mentioned by Greek authors (cf. note 113. 6, p. 245 
in my &p. ¢. Met. d. Av.), but which on the whole agrees with Alexander’s 
Quaestiones naturales i. 1 and it. 3 and which has been edited by ‘Abd ar- 
Rahman Badawi (Cairo, 1947) in a collection of treatises entitled Aristotle 
among the Arabs (pp. 253-77), we find (p. 273, l. 18) the following passage: 
‘just as there is in the one city one leading principle (1. ie. the Stoic 
yepovixdy), so we can say that there is one spiritual force which pervades 
the whole world and unites its parts; and just as there is in a city only one 
leading principle which is either its prince or its law, so the world is a unique 
eternal body unified by an unchanging (read p. 274, 1. 2 7s y¢) principle 
which holds it together and keeps it in its order through a spiritual force 
which pervades alt its parts.’ 

Pp. 254. 3. The Arabs had collected the Hist. an., the De part. an., and the 
De gen. an. into one work, This refers to Aristotle, De part. an., where it is said 
(B to. 6568) that the genus man, among the animals known to us, either 
alone participates in the Divine or participates in it in the highest degree 
(3 yap povor perdyer 100 Oetov ray huiy yup Ledwr } pddcora advrev)} and 

144 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

where it is said (4 10. 686*28), that the fiction of what is most divine is 
intelligence and thought (gpyor rod Bevordrov ré voeiv xal ¢povetr), 

Pp. 254. 4. On this book cf. Nallino, ‘Filosofia “orientale” od iltuminativa’, 
in Riv, degli Studi Orieniali, x. 433-367, and Nallino, Raccalta di scritti editi ¢ 
tnediti, vol. ii, p. 467. The Oriental Philosophy, which seems to have been 
unknown to Averroés, is preserved in manuscript in Constantinople. The 
Theorems and Notices seems to bear the same relation to it as the Salvation to 
the Recovery of the Soul, i.c. to be a compendium of it. Compare also Madkour’s 
Introduction p. 22 to the first volume of ‘Avicenna’s Logic, Cairo 1952. 

Pp. 254.5. On the principles, ic, On the principles of the Universe, The 
argument (op. cit., p. 257, 1. 1) is as follows: that which is the cause in 
everything of the perfection which characterizes its nature must be of a 
greater excellence, and necessarily the cause of the movement of the divine 
body must be its longing for the highest pitch of excellence, Cf. Alexander 
Aphrodisiensis, Quaestiones naturales, ed, Bruns, p. 4, Il. 18 sqq.: padore ydp 
Spexréy rH adrod dice rd rH abrov ducer Kahov uddora .. . (that which is 
most desirable in its own nature is that which has in its own nature the 
greatest excellence). 

Pp: 255. 1. This would imply that it does not need a cause for its bodily 
substance, and so invalidate the idea of an eternal creation which Averroés 
holds also. Of course, strictly speaking, since movement is eternal it will be 
according to Aristotle necessary and therefore in no need of a cause. 

P- 255.2. The meaning is that the world as a whole is eternal, although 
individual sublunary things are liable to change. According to Aristotle the 
world, form, and matter are eternal. But how can matter, the possible, be 
eternal, since everything eternal is necessary? 

p- 255- 3. The actuality of thought is life, says Aristotle, 4 yap vod évépyera 

lor} (Met. A 7. 107228). 

p- 255. 4. According to the Stoic principle that every living being is self- 
conscious, ravri Laie ovverdyats tis atbrod ovardoews (Diog. Laert, vii. 85). 

p- 256. 1. ‘God an eternal man’; there is here an alfusion to Aristotle, 
Met. B 2. 99758, where Aristotle raises against the Platonists the objection 
that by assuming eternal ideas, an eternal ideaf man, an eternal ideal horse, 
an eternal ideal health, they are acting like the anthropomorphizers who 
make of their gods eternal men, dsddavs deOpearovs. Compare also Sext. Emp. 
Adv. phys. i. 46: And again, when the ancients had imagined a long-lived 
man, they prolonged his lifetime to infinity, and reaching the concept of 
eternity by the combination of the present, the past, and the future, they 
declared that God was eternal. 

p- 256. 2. i.e. if God is an eternal man, man is differentiated by eternity 
and temporality. 

NOTES 148 

p- 256. 3. According to Aristotle, De an. Br. 41216 (see also #27), all 
life consists in the power of self-motion. 

p. 256. 4. Averroés here identifies will with non-rational desire, dAoyos 
Speéis, which is found also in animals. 

p. 257. 4. An increase in the desire would only cause the act when the 
desire was an ddoyos gpefis. According to Aristotle, De an, I g ad fin., 
moderate men, although they have desire and appetite, do not follow their 
desire, but obey reason, 

p. 257. 2. i.e. this practice is only an internal act of the soul; it is not 
combined with external actions, ¢.g. movemenis, ag is the case with the 
practical arts. For thought as action cf. Aristotle, De an. B 5. 4.6718 sqq. 

p- 258.1. Analogy L5 (or (fta35 . [ts is example) is regarded by the 
Muhammadan jurists as one of the ‘roots’ of Muhammadaa law. When the 
Koran and the sayings and actions traditionally attributed to Muhammad 
fail to give an indication which legal practice is to be followed, new legal 
prescriptions may be obtained through applying to them reasoning by 
analogy. The Zahirites do not admit the legitimacy of analogical inference. 
The theory of inference by analogy was first formulated by Aristotle in his 
theory of reasoning by example (srapdSeryzza), Anal. Pr. B24: if it was wrong 
that the Thebans should fight their neighbours the Phocians, it is equally 
wrong that the Athenians should fight their neighbours the Thehans, 
because from the antecedent the general principle may be inferred that it is 
wrong to fight one’s neighbour. The term ovMoypiopds xara 76 avdAoyor is 
found in Galen’s Introductto, and the schoolmen speak of a ratiocinatio per 
analogiam; the term ,»l3 ‘analogy’, ‘reasoning by analogy’, comes, in 
Arabic, to mean syllogism in general. According to the Stoics (cf. Sext. Emp. 
Ade. ethic. 250-1) all knowledge transcending the evidence of the senses 
proceeds by way of analogical inference, perdfacs draroytorexy. The 
practice of judging by analogy in law is not confined to the Muhammadan 
jurists, but is generally acknowledged. It consists in inferring from the 
individual case, ie. the precedent (in Roman law, exempium}, the under- 
lying ratio legis; if it can be assumed that a complex ABC has the judiciat 
consequence F because of A as its rafio iuris, the consequence of ADE will 
equally be F. 

p. 259. 1. For the rhetorician tries to convince by stirring the emotions 
(2d0y) of his audience (cf. Arist. Rhet, A 2, 1356210). 

p: 259. 2. Cf e.g, Avicenna’s Salvation, pp. 267 sqq.; this is the Platonic 
(cf. Plato, Phacdo 61 b) and Neoplatonic (cf. Plotinus Ena. i. 2. 3) theory of 
xd@apois : freed from the bodily passions, the soul contemplates the intellig- 
ibles and assimilates itself to the Divine. 

p. 260. 1. It is interesting to note that Ghazali, the theologian, arranges 
ali his syllogisms in a hypothetical form. In this he foliows the Stoic Jogicians, 

146 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

whose examples are always given in hypothetical syllogisms, Ghazali him- 
self, in his Touchstone of Knowledge (Cairo, 1911}, p. 88, declares that the 
hypothetical syllogism is most useful in ail Juridical matters. 

p. 260, 2, Assuming the minor premiss in a mixed hypothetical syilogism 
(ovdoyropes SaoPeruds nord perOapyhw, Glicul re ypc yylg) is called by 
the Arabian logicians .i.1, ie. literally ‘excepting’, ‘excluding’ (the 
conjunction ‘but’ introducing the minor—e.g. ‘but it is not in matter’—is 
called by them . lax. YI V3)», the particle of exception}. The Peripatetics 
call this peraAnyus (the Stoics zpéoAnyxs) and the minor premiss itself ro 
pétadapPardpevor gr). The term clit seems to be a translation of 
didZevEcs and daipects, ‘disjunction’, and indeed a major of the form ‘Ifit 
is not day, it is night’ is equivalent to the disjunction ‘Either it is day or it 
is night’; but when both major and minor are positive it seems somewhat 
iilogica) to regard the minor, as the Arabic logicians seem to, as part of a 
disjunction. (In Greek also the minor in 4 disjunctive syllogism is called 
76 peradapPavdpevor.) The other terms used in describing the hypothetical 
syllogism are all borrowed from the Peripatetics: ré jyovjevov, the ante- 
cedent, is called in Arabic »Jd,J1; 73 dzopevor, the consequent, (ALI); 76 
cuprépaoya, the conclusion, dant. 

p. 260. 3. This refers to p. 88 in the edition quoted in the last note but 
one, Ghazali there gives the same examples as here, and shows that neither 
the assumption of the opposite of the antecedent nor the assumption of the 
positive consequent jeads to a conclusion, 

p- 260. 4. Ch eg. Aristotle, Met. @ 8. 1050%2: 76 efSos evépyerd doru. 
The form is dvépyeca (dvépyesa in its double sense of ‘actuality’, ‘reality’ and 
‘attivity’). 

p. 260. §. Cf e.g. Aristotle, Afet. 4 2. 1013927: 70 eiSos eativ 6 ASyos rod 
ri hy efvac. 

p. 260, 6. For according to Aristotle purpose and form do not differ 
essentially (ef, Afet. H 4. 10441 : Sous 16 eibos xal 76 rédas dudes 76 atird). 

p- 260. 7. Why the active potencies are only particular and not common, 
whercas the passive potencies can be either particular or common, I do not 
know; nor is it clear which potencies are active and which passive—all we 
know is that they are opposites; there is some confusion in this passage, 
since the opposition of active and passive potencies is reduced to that of 
actuality (or activity) and potentiality, or form and matter. 

p.20t.1. Cf Aristotle, Met, H 6. 1045517: 4 eoxdry Gdn wai 4 popdy 
Tatrd Kat &, 7 pev Suvdyet, To S€ evepyeia: the proximate maiter and the 
form are one and the same, the one potentially and the other actually. 

p- 26). 2. According to Aristotle it is only the active intellect which is 
separate fiom matter (ywpiords xat drabgs nai duryys, De an. 5. 43018}. 

NOTES 147 
p. 261.3. Cf Aristotle, De an, B 12, ad init.: 4 pév afobyais don rd 

Sexrixdy rar alobyray cidav dvev ris Ans. 

p. 262. 1. This refers to the passage in De an. I’ 7, 431°4-7, where it is said 
that perception is not a passivity and cannot be compared to the other 
movements in which there is something imperfect, since activity in the 
absolute sense is the activity of that which has reached perfection (rod 
tetedcopévov). Aristotle, does not, however, offer any further explanation. 
The theory of perception expounded in this passage is difficult to under- 
stand. Perception, according to Aristotle, is an activity of the soul, but when 
we ask what this activity is, che only answer is that the percept (aio@nrdv) 
makes (zovez) an actual percipient (eio@yrexdv) of a potential. This would 
imply that perception is a passivity rather than an activity ; but this Aristotle 
denies, The crux of the problem lies in the term afe@yrav, ‘the percept or 
perceived’ (not here to be translated by ‘the perceptible’), for the percept 
(whether we take it to mean the perceived object or the perceived matter- 
fess form—in the latter case the perception of any material object would be 
impossible) is here regarded as the cause of perception ; but it has also to be 
its effect, Le. the perception itself. We find in Aristotle the two tendencies 
which run through the history of philosophy: (i) to regard the thing per- 
eeiyed in perception both as a cause and as an effect of perception; (2) to 
reduce the act of perception to a state (a state of the organ, according to 
Aristotle; the existence of sensations in a consciousness, according to the 
moderns). 

p. 262, 2. Cf. Aristotle, Met. A 7. 1072%14-1073*13: God as pure intellect 
and pure actuality. 

p. 262. 3. Inference, Arabic 495), Greek eufopd (the concept and the 
term: are Stoic). Theophrastus (cf. Alexander of Aphrodisias in Anat. Pr. 
Wallies, 388. 17) had asserted that the minor in the mixed syllogism must 
itself be accepted through induction, or through another hypothesis, 
or from self-evidence (évdpyea}, or through a syllogism. Compare with 
Averroés’s passage Sext. Emp, Adv. log. ii. 329, where the Jatter discusses 
Epicurus’ proof for the existence of the void: If motion exists, the void 
exists; but motion does exist, therefore the void exists. The premisses of this 
syllogism—says Sextus—are not generally accepted; the Peripatetics deny 
the major, and Diodorus Cronus the minor and the conclusion. 

p. 263. 1. The conjunction is that of matter and of absence of thought; 
the disjunction, dicfevéss, is that reality is either material (or attached to 
matter) or thought—the proposition ‘If it does not think, it is in matter’ is 
equivalent to this disjunction (cf, note 260. 2). 

p. 263. 2. ie. the argument in the form of the mixed hypothetical syllo- 
gism should not be as Ghazali gives it, but should mm: ‘If the First dees not 
think, it is in matter; but the First is not in matter, therefore it thinks’. 

148 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 264.1. Cf. e.g. Plotinus, En. ili. 2. 2: yéyove 5€ od AcyiopS rob Seiv 
yeréobar, Daa ducews Sevtépas dvdyxn : i.e, the world has not come into being 
because of God's reasoning that He had to create it, but because of the 
necessity that there should be a secondary nature. 

p- 264. 2. This argument is nothing but a fefitio principiz. It is erue that 
will implies the passibility of choice between opposites, i.c. that I know that 
I can do a thing or refrain from doing it (or, as Aristotle has it, e.g. De an. I 
10. 433829; apaxtév 8” dori 74 evSexduevoy xai dws Exew), but in a world 
in which there was no will there would be no choice of opposites. 

p. 265. 1. Compare the Epicurean argument (e.g. Lucretius, De rertem 
natura, ii, 1695) that the gods are unable to rule all the events in the infinite 
world (regere intmenst summam). Ghazali here means by ‘knowledge’ know- 
ledge of the purpose and of the means te its attainment; and indeed will 
seems to imply such a preliminary knowledge (although there is here a 
difficulty ; e.g. 1 can only will to lift my arm, when I know that I can lift it; 
but how can I know that through my will I can lift my arm, when I have 
never willed it?). There may, however, be foreknowledge, even for human 
beings, of some of the consequences following the attainment of the purpose, 
although these consequences are indifferent to the wilfer. 

p. 266, 1. i.e, when one denies the divine will and temporal creation, one 
has to regard God as a natural cause acting by necessity and through 
mediation, and such a cause cannot know the mediate effects which consti- 
tute the world. 

p. 266.2. Cf. Garneades’ argument inSext. Emp. Ade. phys. i. 130-42, 
and Cicero, De nat. deor. iii. 13. 32, that the senses imply transiency and 
death: omne igttur animal confitendum est esse mortale. 

p. 267. 1. ‘representation’, i.e. favracia; cf. Aristotle, De an. F 10. 
433°28 sq.: dpexrexdy 5é ove dvev farragias: gavracia Sé n&oa 7H Aoywerrent} F 
aigfytixg. As man is concerned, Averroés here means the ¢avracia Joyrorin}. 

p. 267. 2. ie. God’s knowledge, for Ghazali, means God’s purpose, God’s 
intention; and intention implies will. 

p- 268. 1. ‘to every intelligent being’, i.e. both in the temporal world and 
in the eternal. 

p. 268, 2, Asa matter of fact, Ghazali’s assertion that God can only know 
the purpose of His own action, and that He cannct know the consequences 
of these actions through mediate causes, would ascribe to Him ignorance of 
all human actions; and the only way to avoid this consequence would be 
the Ash‘arite doctrine of regarding God as the real cause of all human 
actions also. It is noteworthy that Geulinx in his Afetaphysica vera et ad 
mentem peripateticam propounds a theory which has a certain resemblance to 
Ghazali’s: according to Geulinx nothing acts which does not know what it is 

> NOTES 149 

doing; since man does not know how he moves his hand, he cannot do it 
himself, but God, when a man wills to move his hand, takes this opportunity 
(occasio) to set his hand in motion. All human actions, both for the Ash‘arites 
and for the occasionalists, are performed by God, the difference between the 
two schools being apparently that whereas for the occasionalists the will of 
man, e.g. to move his hand, is dependent on himself, for the Ash‘arites even 
this volition is caused by God, 

p. 268, 3. i.e. the more knowledge an intellect possesses, the nobler it is. 

p- 270. 1. See note 255. 2. 

p- 270, 2. See note 255. 3. 

p 270. 3. This is the well-known argument of Zeno (Sext. Emp, Ade. 
phys. i, 104): 76 Esxdrvyov tod jar} dpafiyou upetrrdy Eorw, 

p. 271. 1. Ghazali follows the same line of reasoning as Alexinus, the 
Megarian (Sext. Emp, Adz, phys, i, 108) in his opposition to Zeno’s argu- 
ment. Alexinus observed: ‘One might in this way argue that the Universe 

was not only animate, but alo poetical, grammatical, and possessed of the 
other arts, since the possession of all these is better than their absence.” 

p- 271.2. This trichotomy is a difficult point in the Aristotelian philo- 
sophy. One of the distinctions between natural and voluntary acts is that in 
inanimate natural things there is a necessity (¢vdyxn) of becoming which 
does not exist for activities based on will (xpoatpeots), where there is a choice 
between two contraries (cf. Arist. Met. @ 5. 1049*1}. On the other hand, 
there is also in nature the accidental, for—says Aristotle, De interpr. 9. 19499 
in what is non-eternal and transient there is always the possibility of being 
and non-being (dr dAws gor év rots pr} det evepyotor 14 Suvardv efvae xat 
#4. For the failure of the Aristotelian philosophy to distinguish between 
nature and art see my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., pp. 204-5. 

p. 272. 1. This is rather a strange theory for a philosopher who regards 
God as the Prime Mover. What Averroés seems to mean here is that God, 
being incorporeal, cannot set things in motion through the movement of his 
body as man does. The Sceptics and Stoics held that the incorporeal was 
incapable of any action (cf. Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. i. 1513 ob8éy Suvdpevov 
evepyety to dodiartov). 

p- 272.2. Ch note 264. 2, We may add here that this conception is 
opposed to Aristotle’s explicit statement (Phys. B 8, 19926) that in nature, 
although it acts according to an end, there is no deliberation (fovAevas), 
i.e. no conscious choice (mpoaipesis). It is the characteristic of nature (see 
note 271. 2) that in it there is no choice between two contraries. 

p- 272, 3. Cf Aristotle, Met, 4 4, 1015914: 4 mpuiry dio Kai xupiws 
Acyouern doriv 4 otoia A Tov exdvray dpyhy Kojocws ev abrois adrd: the 

E50 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

primary and foremost meaning of nature is the essence of those things that 
have in themselves, as such, a principle of motion. 

p- 272. 4. There is more purpose and more beauty in the works of nature 
than in those of art, says Aristotle, De part. an. A 1, 639%19; paMor 5” gor 76 
0d dvexa Kai rd xoddv ev roils rijs ducews Epyats 7 év rots rijs réyrqs. 

p- 272. 5. ¢.g. naturalistic Peripatetics like Strato. 

p. 272. 6. Cf. Aristotle about ‘wonderful automata’, rp davpdrer radrd- 
para, e.g. Met. A 2. 983914; De gen. an. B 1. 734510. 

p- 272. 7, OF Aristotle, Met. A 3. 984>15: vobr . . . eveivar, madrep ev rois 
Ldots nai ev ri Pdoe tév alrov toh Kéopou Kal ris rdfews wdons: ‘that there 
is intellect in nature, just as in animals, and that it is the cause of all order 
and arrangement’. 

p- 273. 1. Cf. p. 266. 

p. 273.2. But Averroés docs not accept the universal maxim : no universal 
: maxim applies to God’s uniqueness. This of course implies that nothing can 
be attributed to God, since every attribute is a universal. 
p- 279. 3. ie. being dead, like being blind, is a privation, a orépyers, of 
that which would naturally be in the possession of the subject: cf, Aristotle, 
Met, A 22. 102224. 

p- 273. 4. Le. the Aristotelian principle chat every individual is generated 
from what is synonymous with it (éedory éx cwantpou yiyverat otala), eg. 
that man begets man, would thereby be violated. 

p. 274. 1. This is the same answer as the Stoics gave to refute Alexinus’ 
argument against Zeno (see note 271. 1) : Zeno had chosen—-they said—the 
absolutely superior, 16 xa@dwat xpetrrov, namely reason (Sext. Emp. Ady. 
phys. i. 109). 

p- 275. 1. Avicenna says in his Salvation (p. 404, |. 4; ef. the parallel 
passage in his Recovery, Met. viii. 6) : “To ascribe to God a plurality of thoughts 
is just as much attributing to Him a deficiency as to ascribe to Him a 
plurality of acts: God knows everything, only in a universal way; still no 
single thing, not even the weight of an atom, is hidden from Him (according 
to the Koran xxiv. 3; x. 62), This is something very wonderful, the under- 
standing of which needs great intellectual subtlety.’ 

Pp. 275. 2. The example of the eclipse is taken from Avicetina (Recovery, 
Met. viii. 6, and Saluaiten, p. 405). 

p. 276. 1. A node is one of two points at which the orbit of a planet 
intersects the ecliptic; the ascending node is that encountered by the 
heavenly body in its northward passage, the descending that encountered 
in its southward passage. 

NOTES =: 15t 

p. 276. 2. ‘in its desire to assimilate itself to God’; for Aristotle the 
heavens move through love for God, and here the Platonic zéAos, ‘assimila- 
tion’, dpotwors 7 Oe xard 76 Svvardr, is added to this conception. For the 
question whether this assimilation can be realized through movement, 
whereas God is the eternally stable, see below. 

p. 276. 3. The whole of this interesting passage is based on Avicenna, 
Recovery, Met. viii.6 and the parallel passage Salvation, pp. 404. 3qq. Avicenna’s 
pssition about God’s knowledge or ignorance of the individual is far from 
clear, and indeed his thesis that God can know every individual thing in a 
universal way, being contradictory, cannot be understood. (On the funda- 
mental problem of the relation between the individual and the universal, 
as an empiricist Aristotle asserts the priority of the individual to the uni- 
versal, as a Platonist the priority of the universal to the individual, and this 
contradiction is still more evident in the Neoplatonic commentators; cf. 
my Ep. d. Met. d. Av., notes 81, 5 and 126. 2). But the conclusion Ghazali, 
following Avicenna, mentions here does not really concern God’s knowledge 
or ignorance of the individual—His knowledge, indeed, is here assumed— 
but is the logical outcome of any theory which ascribes to God a timeless 
eternity, for no actual relation can exist between the timeless and the 
transitory. If we admit in God omniscience, and foreknowledge of all 
future events, He wilf know the sequence of things in an eternal ‘now’, for 
He will know time as a sequence of events which are earlier and Sater (just 
as we know in the present an eternal and stable sequence of past events). 
But there is another aspect of time, the passing of the future through the 
present into the past, ie, the living indefinable experience of the ever- 
fleeting, the ever-new ‘now’. God, not being ia a Aeeting present, can never 
have experience of it. He may know that such-and-such actions are subse- 
quent to my birth, but He cannot know new that I am acting or have acted 
in such-and-such a way, for in God’s stable timetess ‘now’, in God’s stillness, 
there can be no experience of the indefinable fleeting ‘now’ in which we 
live and act and die. This was clearly seen by Avicenna. He says (cf. e.g. 
Salvation, p. 406. 14 sqq.): ‘If you know eclipses in as far as you exist’ (I 
take this to mean: in as far as you exist without any reference to time} ‘or in 
as far as you exist eternally, and if you have knowledge not of the eclipse 
in general, but of any eclipse whatever, then the existence or non-existence of 
any definite eclipse will not produce a change in you or your knowledge, for 
what you know is that one definite eclipse is later than another; and this 
knowledge of yours will be true during, before, and after any eclipse. But 
when you introduce the concept of time, and know at one definite moment 
that the eclipse is not actual and at another that it is, then your knowledge 
is not unalterable. The First, however, who is not in time or subject to its 
rule, can never refer to anything in this or that definite time, since this would 
imply that He Himself was in it and would imply in Him a new judgement 

152 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

and a new knowledge’ (Aristotle had already distinguished, Afet. @ to, 
between two types of truth, eternal and transitory, cf. my Ep. d. Met, d, Av., 
pp. 220-1). 

p. 276. 4. Possibly this is Avicenna’s conception, but his theory (which I 
shall not try to analyse here) in the chapter mentioned in the preceding 
note is both confused and contradictory. In any case Avicenna ascribes to 
God only conceptual knowledge, since for Him there is neither a fic nor a 
nunc, and denies sense-perception to Him; he repeats (e.g. Salvation, 405. 9) 
Aristotle’s assertion that an individual of any species can only be known by 
being a ‘this’, a rébe 71, adt List, by being pointed at, i-c. through direct 
perceptual experience, d..d1 sre Lid! (cf. ¢.g. Cat. 5. 3°40, where Aristotle 
says that every individual substance seems to signify a ‘this’}. However, 
this view cannot be upheld. Ie is true that in perception everything per- 
ceived stands in relation to a ‘here’ (a most mysterious relation, since there’ 
is the place where my body is, and ‘my body’ assumes a relation between 
something non-spatial, i.e. my spiritual self, and a spatial entity). But in 
thought an individual can be completely determined in space and time 
without direct reference to any ‘here’ or ‘now’, although it may be con- 
ceded that without any perception of spatial relations we should not have 
any conception of space. It may be remarked that Ai¢ and mune are not in 
every sense analogous. The ‘now’, the present moment, is involved in the 
concept of time, whereas the ‘here’ does not enter into the definition of 
space, but needs space for its own definition (the place in which my body is), 
and is individually subjective, whereas any interaction between individuals 
assumes the simultaneity of a ‘now’. Another point is that if God is deprived 
of perception of the individual He cannot have knowledge of the universal 
either. It is one of the fundamental cruces of philosophy that perception and 
conception seem to imply each other; there is no individual percept that 
has no qualities (Aristotle knew that there is no ‘that’ which is not a ‘what’), 
and there is no universal which does not stand either directly or indirectly 
in some relation to something perceived. 

p- 277. 1. Conditions, Jly.1, mas cyovra: see note 3. 6, 

p- 278. :. I have not found this tripartite division in Avicenna who, 
however, in his Recovery, Met. iii. 10, has a long discussion about relations 
(the difficult concept of relation was much discussed in later Greek philo- 
sophy, see e.g. the long discussion in Simplicius, Comm. in Cat., Kalbfleisch, 
155. 30 sqq.; the Peripatetic Boethus dedicated a whole bock to the dis- 
cussion of this problem, according to Simplicius, op. cit. 163. 6). Avicenna 
there refutes, for example, the view held by the Greek sceptics, the Muslim 
theologians and some moderns (Bradley, for example—Appearance and 
Reality*, pp. 31 sq.—some of whose negative theories may be found in Sextus 
Empiricus) that relation, since it implies an infinite regress, can have no 

NOTES 153 

reality, and I do not know to which Arabic author Ghazali is here referring. 
The tripartite division which he mentions here is Hogical and confused, for 
there is only room here for two classes of relations, essential (or internal) 
and non-essential (or external), and the example of Ghazali’s second kind 
of condition implies an essential relation: when a man stops moving, 
although his capacity to move has not changed, there is an actual change in 
him from action to rest. This tripartite division seems to refer to the equally 
confused distinction between apds rt me exov, was Exoy, and wapds 7 in 
Stoicism (cf. Simplicius, op. cit. p. 165, 32 and v. Arnim, Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 
132, 21). The first condition would be the apés ts was eyov, Le, an acci- 
dental relation (see loc. cit., 1. 26, where “to the right’, 5efiév, is given as an 
example); the second would be the mds éyor, which is a non-essential 
characteristic of a thing {as an example of such a non-essential character- 
istic Plotinus, Ear. vi. 1. 30, gives acting—7véd moseiv mas Exo}; the third 
would be, when a thing in its distinct existence of its own—i.e. when it is a 
vocdév—implies a relation to something else, and is therefore essentiaily rela- 
tive, like any state, knowledge, and perception (v. Arnim, op. cit. ii. 132. 45 
Grav pay xara, Stagopdy 7+ duaxeipevoy mpds repov vevon, pds Tt wdvov Tore 
Eoras, ws 4 Efis wai } emorijiun Kat 4 aloPnars}. 
p. 278. 2. ‘like a mere relation’, i.¢c. like a mere external relation. 

p. 278. 3. This of course is false; Ghazali has evidently not seen the 
point. If God had created in us an everlasting knowledge that Zaid will 
come tomorrow, this knowledge, iftrue today, would be false tomorrow and 
ever afterwards. On the other hand, if God had created in us an everlasting 
knowledge that Zaid has come, or will come, the former would be false up 
to the moment he has actually come, but true ever afterwards, whereas the 
fatter would be true till he has actually come and false ever afterwards. 

p. 279. 1. This sentence is rather confused, but I am well aware of the 
difficulty of the problern of relations in general and of the problem of 
knowledge in particular. The words ‘whenever che relation becomes differ- 
ent mean ‘whenever the knowledge becomes different’ (because of the 
change in the object of knowledge in reality); again, by ‘the thing which 
has this essential relation’ knowledge is understood ; according to this view 
knowledge both és a relation and Aas an essential relation to the thing known. 

I think knowledge (knowing) can only be conceived as a unique and 
indefinable relation implying two terms, the knower and the objective 
thing known; if it is represented—-as it so often is—as a separate entity 
haying some independent existence in a mind, two new relations will be 
needed, one to a mind and the other to the objective thing. I think it is 
correct to say that when an object known or perceived changes, the per- 
cipient who notices this change changes too through the change in his 
knowing and perceiving. The last part of Ghazali’s sentence—i.e. that 

154 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

whenever this differentiation and this sequence arise there is a change~is a 
tautology. 

P. 279. 2. One might answer: “There might be in God one single cogni- 
tive relation to the whole world, just as in one human act of perception or 
thought a whole consisting of a plurality may be apprehended ; my percep- 
tion of a complex, e.g. the face of a friend, does not consist in my perception 
of all its parts individually—every complex forms a new unity in which the 
individual constituents are merged.’ Indeed, if the act of perception were 
identical with the object perceived, not only would the perception of a 
magnitude be itself a magnitude, but it would consist like the magnitude 
itself of an infinite number of points (ef. Arist. De an. A 3. 407°6 sqq., where 
he rejects the view that thought, rdqais, is a magnitude, péyeBos). 

P- 27g. 3. That universals are infinite is not accepted by the Aristotelians, 
and would not fit easily into their conception of a spatially limited universe. 
They argue, however, against the Stoic theory of a divine providence for all 
individuals, saying that, since time is infinite, this would imply in God 
knowledge of the infinite (cf. my Ep. d. Met. Av., p. 145). Cf. note 205, 2. 

p. 279. 4. Ghazali misses the point: time is a condition of change; a 
timeless knowledge is allowed in God, not a temporal changing knowledge. 

p. 280, 1. Since human knowledge enters into the essence of the knower. 

p. 280. 2. Cf. Aristotle, e.g. De an. B 5. 417%22: raw «a8 Exacrov f xar’ 
evépyavay aicbnors, 4 5” dmoriun rGv xabdrov, 

p. 280. 3. He seems to mean: if the human mind possessed a highest 
genus, ¢.g. ‘being’, or ‘something’ (which are the highest genera according 
to the Stoics) by which ie could comprehend (the word is used equivocally 
and can mean both ‘grasp’ and ‘inchude’) all the genera and species, it 
would also comprehend all the individuals; but one should not compare the 
divine understanding with the human mind, since for the divine intellect 
the opposition between universal and individual is oblicerated. 

p. 280. 4. ‘a passive intellect and an effect’: i.e. our human intellect ; it 
is regarded here as passive and an effect, because in its knowledge it is 
dependent on reality, our knowledge being posterior te reality; whereas 
God’s knowledge, being the cause of reality, either precedes it (as a cause, 
but notin time) or, being identical with the things, coexists with them without 
any priority or posteriority (cf. Enn. v. 9. 5: ob ydp doru oure pd adrod otre 
per’ avrév, viz. ra Sra). 

p. 280. 5. This theory of God’s active or creative knowledge goes back to 
Plotinus (cf. especially Enn. v. 9. 5), whoquotes Parmenides’ important state- 
ment that thought and being are identical, 16 ydp atré vociv dariv re xat 
etvas {Parmenides, Fr, 3 Diels). According to Plotinus the vofs is pure act 
and is eternal ; by its absolute being it thinks and creates (é¢iornow) things, 

NOTES 155 

which cannot exist as something outside itself, drdpw6t. Thinking its own 
self, in its own self it thinks the things, which therefore are identical with it: 
dorw dpa ra Svra. This theory, the so-called theory of intellectual intuition, 
is found also in Christian philosophy and theology. Cf eg. St. Augustine 
{Confess. xiii. 98. 53): ‘nos itaque ista quae fecisti videmus, quia sunt; tu 
autem quia vides ca, sunt’, Kant expresses this in his De mund, sens. atque 
intell. form. e¢ princip, ii, 19; ‘intuitus nempe mentis nostrac semper est 
passivus . . . divinus autem intuitus, qui obiectorum est principium, non 
principiatum, cum sit independens, est Archetypus et propterea perfecte 
intellectualis’, 

p- 281, 1. Of course one might ask how, if intellect can be only attached 
to the existent, the non-existent can form an object of thought, or how the 
intellect can plan the non-existing future, remember the non-existing past, 
be subject to illusion and doubt. We have, however, seen that for Averrots 
even the objectively non-cxisting has some existence, existing subjectively, 
ie. in the mind, as a representation. We have here an example of the fatal 
reification of thought, regarding the act of thought as the existence in the 
mind of some mental atoms, which has so deeply warped philosophical 
speculation, 

p. 281, 2. verttas adaequatio intellectus et rei. 

p. 281, 3. Compare the scholastic principle Esse est Deus, which is Ecke- 
hart’s fundamental principle. Both Sufism, i.e. Muslim mysticism, and 
Western medieval mysticism are based on Neoplatonic conceptions (in 
Sufism there are also Hermetic and Gnostic elements). The resemblance 
between those two schools, which are geographically so far apart, is often 
so great that many affirmations of German medieval mystics like Eckehart, 
Tauler, or Suso might be taken for translations from some Arabian or 
Persian mystic. 

p. 281, 4. Namely, in plants, animals, men, and heaven. 

p. 281. 5. The Mu'tazilites seem to have been aware of the difficulty that 
to attribute to God a knowledge of the changing affairs of the world implies 
a change in Him, According to Shahrastani (Religious and Philosophical Sects, 
p- 60), Jahm said, ‘God cannot know a thing before creating it, for either 
(1) God’s knowledge is unchangeable, and if He knew that it would be 
before He created it, He would be in error (the text has ‘ignorance’, ), 
when it was or had been and He still thought that it would be; or (2) His 
knowledge would be changeable, but only the created can change.’ (Ibn 
Hazm, op. cit. ii. 130, says that the Mu‘tazilites asked: ‘When does God 
know that Zaid has died ? For if God knows it eternally, this implies Zaid’s 
eternal death.’ Ibn Hazm’s answer on this problem runs on the same lines 
as Ghazali’s.) At the same time, according to Shahrastani, Jahm affirmed 
that God had new knowledge, not, however, in a substratum {Je oj Y ie. 

156 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

not in God Himself). It is to this latter assertion that Ghazali is evidently 
referring, but it seers to contradict the other assertion that God’s Imow- 
Jedge cannot change. Probably Jahm regarded God’s knowledge as a 
separate entity emanating from Him (there is here probably some vague 
relation to the Philonic Logos-theory), and used ‘knowledge of God’ in an 
ambiguous way, meaning at one time an attribute of God, at another an 
effect of God. 
p. 281. 6, See note 2. 6. 

p. 281. 7. Cf. 74. 2; and since nothing that changes can be eternal, that 
which is eternal (i.e. God) cannot be subject to change. 

p. 282. 1, i.e. it is impossible that time should have a beginning, although 
the series of causes is limited. We have already shown the fallacy of this view. 

p. 282. 2, i.e. every movement of the spheres is temporal, since all move- 
ment implies time and there is a continual beginning and ending of these 
movements, just as time changes eternally and a new ‘now’ continuaily 
occurs. 

p. 282. 3. i.e. according to their system time arises from the timeless; 
time is the effect of a timeless cause, 

p. 282. 4. i.c., if the temporal can proceed from the timeless, should not 
temporal knowledge, i.e. knowledge of the temporal, proceed from the 
timeless knower? However, the idea of an emanation of knowledge from 
the knower seems to make very little sense, 

p- 282. 5. ‘coloured’, for according to Aristotle it is only colour or that 
which possesses colour that is seen (De an. I’ 2. 42518: dparas 32 ypaipe } 
70 €xov), 

p. 282. 6, For this conception of viston cf. e.g, De sensu 2. 438 "12 sq. 

p. 283. 1. For knowledge as the supreme end of man see, for example, 
Aristotle, Met. A 2; Eth. Nic. K 7. 

p- 283. 2, Since the terms used are equivocal. 

p- 283. 3. ie. since illumination or light is, according to Aristotle (De ax. 
B 7. 419%9), the actuality of the transparent, the substance of the transparent 
is not changed through the illumination. 

p- 285. 1. See note 256. 1. 

p- 285. 2. ‘man a mortal god’, Aonw guast deus mortalis: this refers to the 
beautiful words ascribed to Aristotle in Cicero, De finibus ii. 13. 40 (&. 61 
Rose): man whose destiny is thought and action is like a mortal god: ‘sic 
hominem ad duas res—ut ait Aristoteles—, ad intellegendum et agendum, 
esse natum quasi mortalem deum’, 

p. 285. 3. St. Thomas Aquinas, who regards it as probable that the stars 
are moved hy angels, asserts, Sum. c. gen. it. 70, that from the religious point 

NOTES 157 

of view it is indifferent whether it be declared that heaven is animated or 
not: ‘hoc autem quod dictum est de animatione coeli non diximus quasi 
asserendo secundum fidei doctrinam, ad quam nihil pertinet sive sic sive 
aliter dicitus’. However, among the 219 opinions ascribed to the Latin 
Averroist Siger of Brabant and condemned by the Church in 1277, we find 
this proposition (prop. 92 in Denifle, Chart. Unis. P. i, p. 548): ‘quod 
corpora celestia moventur a principio intrinsece, quod est anima ; et quod 
moventur per animam et per virtutern appetitivam, sicut animal. Sicut 
enim anima! appetens movetur, ita et coelum.’ (St. Thomas Aquinas 
believed that the movement of the stars depended on an external animated 
principle.) 

p. 285. 4. ‘by perception’: gaiverar, as Aristotle says, De caelo B 8. 
289>r ; for another example of an argument based on the evidence of the 
senses, did rv dawoperve, cf. De caelo B 14. 297%1. Although in the following 
Ghazali seems to be referring to Avicenna’s Salvation, pp. 422 sqq. {and the 
parallel passages in the ninth book of the metaphysical part of his Recovery), 
his argument differs considerably from the discussion by Avicenna; but in 
any case its principle is derived from Aristotle’s De philosophia. Aristotle, in 
the passage of this lost dialogue quoted by Cicero, De nat. deor. ii. 16. 44 
(fr. 24 Rose), bases his argument on the disjunction that all movement 
either takes place by nature or is constrained or is voluntary (aut natura aut 
vi aut voluntote}. He rules out the possibility that the stars might be moved 
by nature, since all movement by nature is either downward or upward, 
and the stars have a circular movement; their movement cannot take place 
by constraint, for what could possess a greater force than the stars? It is 
therefore voluntary. 

p. 286. 1. The meaning is: if the fact of being a body implied its move- 
ment, every body would be in motion; there must therefore be a cause of 
motion, i.e. everything moved is necessarily moved by something (Arist. 
Phys. Hs, ad init. 241°94: dray 76 awodpevor bud ros dvdyxn xwetobar). 

p. 286. 2. It is interesting to note that this sentence is a free translation 
{with, however, a slight, but important difference) of one in Aristotle, 
Phys. 8 5. 256414: ef &) dvdyxyn wav 75 xivodpevov bad rwds re xivetoPat, Kal 
3 Sad kewvoundron tx’ dMov 3 py, kai el pty in’ aMov [xtwovpevov), dvdyxy te 
elvan xwotv 3 aby bn’ dddou mpdrov, ef S¢ rocosro 7d ap@rov, obK dudyny 
Sdrepov : if therefore everything moved necessarily must be moved by some- 
thing either moved by another or not by another; and if it is by a thing 
moved, it is necessary that this should be a first mover not moved by some- 
thing else, and if such a mover is found there is no need for another mover. 
We see that the Arabic has substituted for a first mover a voluntary mover 
moving its body by itself, and the argument which Aristotle uses to estab- 
lish the existence of an unmoved first mover, i.e. God, is used here to prove 

158 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the existence of an eternal soul which moves the body of heaven by a first 
movernent, i.e. a movement on which all the other movements of the world 
depend, As a matter of fact there is no reason why Aristotle should have 
made his first mover eranscendent, and why the mover of heaven should 
not be immanent in the world and be the soul of heaven. Of course, if this 
argument is offered to prove the soul of heaven, it can no longer be offered 
to prove the existence of God; and if the existence of Gad is stil accepted, 
He can no longer be the source ofall movement and action, for the soul, even 
the human soul, does not set in motion chrough a mover (although for a 
motive), but by itself, ic. its will and desire. That the soul cannot be 
moved is acknowledged by Aristotle himself, De ax. A 4. 40830. 

p. 286, 3. ic. the universal relation of the world to God cannot explain 
motion: if the fact of being created and a body itself implied movement, 
every body would be in motion, 

p. 286, 4. This example is found in Avicenna, Recovery, Met. ix. 4. 

p. 287. 1. According to Aristotle (De caele A 2), however, the movement 
of the stars is 2 natural one, i.¢. natural to things which possess an element 
more sublime than the four sublunary ones. Avicenna also, in his Saépation, 
Pp. 424, regards the heavenly movement as caused by an inclination (Jee, 
épp% or gowj) which may be called natural; however, he adds ‘This natural 
inclination is inspired by a soul and renewed by its representation.’ (For the 
problem caused hy the contradiction in the Aristotelian texts, cf. my Ep. d. 
Met, d. Av,, note 108. 2; Alexander of Aphrodisias and Averroés deny that 
the celestial bodies can have davracia, ic, any representations.) 

p. 287, 2. This refers to Ghazali’s words: ‘every mover receives its im- 
pulse from the moved itself’; but this is only a verbal quibble, for Ghazali 
means the same as Averroés. 

p. 287. 3. Tn fact this is a tautology; what he wants to say is that it is 
self-evident that things have intrinsic natures by which they are moved. 

p. 287. 4. Le. if things had not an intrinsic nature, and everything de- 
pended solely on the will of God, as the Ash‘arites hold, earth might move 
upward just as easily as fire. 

p- 287. 5. Things which are sometimes at rest, sometimes in motion, can 
rective by constraint a movement opposed to their natural one, and can 
therefore execute two opposite movements, cf. Aristotle, De caele 4 2. 269°7: 
a simple body can receive the motion of another body by constraint (fig), 
granced that a single body has only one natural movement, 

p. 287. 6. Aristotle argued (De caelo A 4) that there can be no movement 
contrary to the circular motion of the stars; heaven cannot be constrained 
te move by another movement than its own; cf. op. cit, A 3. 270". Since, 
according to Averroés—see below in the text—the motion of the stars is not 
natural, a proof of the cause of their movement must be given. 

NOTES 159 

p. 288. 1. That the soul of the heavenly bodies is only equivocally 
(Speaipzes) called a soul is stated by Alexander of Aphrodisias, On the 
Principles of the Ontverse, ed. cit., p. 255- 

p- 288. 2. ‘Nature’ is a most ambiguous word, both in common language 
and in Aristotle. For the meaning intended here of ‘a rational principle’ 
see ¢.g. Aristotle, De gen. an, A 23. 731724: evdAdyws 4 diary Sypeovpyet 
‘nature works rationally’. 

p. 288, 3. In fact heaven is excluded from physics only so far as its 
spiritual elements, the separate intelligibles, are in question, since, according 
to Aristotle (Ate. F 1. 025526), physics theorizes about substances which 
are capable of motion and have forms, but about these forms only so far 
as they are inseparable from matter (cf. also the beginning of De caelo). 

p- 288. 4. That there cannot be a body outside heaven is argued by 
Aristotle, De caelo A g. 278525 sqq. 

p. 28g. 1. ‘without any act he deliberately chose’, since according to 
Ghazali’s theory God’s will is not selective {i.e. it does not choose between 
distinct cases), but creative (i.e. it creates the distinctions themselves}. 

p. 290. i. Although we moderns can explain the fact that fire moves 
upward and stones downward by attributing it to a general characteristic 
of matter, Averroés is right in asserting that the differentiation of individuals 
having their special characteristics cannot be deduced from a general 
principle: there is no answer to the question why this stone is not that stone 
or that flower. Still, both Averroés and Ghazali, when asked why things 
are as they are, would answer that everything depends upon the will of 
God; both would assert that God’s eternal will was not comparable with 
our human will and that God’s action was wholly creative. {It is curious to 
see that, in the matter of God’s knowledge, Averroés reproaches Ghazali 
for not observing that it is wholly creative, whereas in the matter of God’s 
volition he reproaches him for regarding it as wholly creative.) Both would 
assert also that this was the best of all possible worlds, not only implying by 
this a deliberation and choice in God, but fixing a limit for His illimitable 
power, 

p- 290. 2. The Ash‘arite view will be discussed below at length. 

P- 290. 3. This is Aristotle’s own thesis, De caela A 2. 2695-14, where he 
proves that circular motion is natural to the body which has this motion, 
and 26951 4-17, where he proves that there is a fifth element {i.e. the ether), 
superior to the sublunary elements, to which the circular movement is 
natural, If by ‘natural movement of the ether’ is meant that it moves by 
itself (Aristotle derives the word af@fp from dei Setv, ‘to run always’), there is 
no need to accept movers for the spheres, 

Pp. 290. 4. This is based by Aristotle on the principle that a thing can 
have only one contrary, év éi évarriow (cf. De caclo A 2. 269410), and he 

160 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

holds the strange theory (strange, for circular motion implies a movement 
in opposite directions) that circular motion has no opposite and that the 
ether is free from all opposition. Still, according to Aristotle himself the 
heaven of the fixed stars turns from right to left, that of the planets from left 
to right. 

P- 290. §, According to the principle that God moves as does the beloved, 
it would seem that movement gue movernent was the supreme aim; but 
Plutarch, De defect. orac. xxx, emphasizes the variety and changes (je7a- 
fodat) implied in movement, and says that, to judge from the motion of 
the heavens, the Divine really enjoys variety and is glad to survey movement. 

p. 290. 6, The heavy, according to Aristotle, is that whose nature it is 
to move towards the centre, the light that whose nature it is to move away 
from the centre; according to De caelo A 3. 269530, the body whose move- 
ment is circular can have neither weight nor lightness, for neither naturally 
nor unnaturally can it move either towards or away from the centre. 

P. 290. 7. i.e. whether the heavenly bodies have consciousness and which 
kind of consciousness. 

Pp. 2gt. 1. According to Aristotle an external force moving heaven would 
invotve an effort, whereas the movement of heaven is &ovos, effortless ; he 
says that we should not believe the traditional myth about Atlas (cf. De 
coelo By, 28471122). 

p. 291.2, Aristotle in his criticism of Thales’ view that the earth rests on 
water (De caelo B 13. 294928) says that then one would have te ask the same 
question over again: for what supports the water? 

p. 291. 3. Cf. Artstotle, De cacle Ag. 27998: Oly yap fy adzd +6 puorxdy 
odpa xai aicOy7dv: the matter (of the whole universe) is natural perceptible 
body. 

p- 291. 4. That the elements are transitory, yernrd, is argued by Aristotle, 
De caelo F 6. 

P- 291. §. All generation and decay on earth are caused through the 
motion of the sun along the ecliptic; cf. Aristotle, Meteor. A 9. 

p. 291, 6. For Aristotle (cf. e.g. Phys. P° 2. 20298) all motion is based on 
touch; even in thought the thing thought of is touched by the thinker (cf. 
Met, © 10. 1051524 and A 7, 1072520). 

Pp. 291. 7. It is interesting to note that Averrots sees that there is a resem- 
blance between the Stoic theory and the Ash‘arite. We have tried to show 
above that there is, in fact, a relation between these two views. 

Pp. 292. 1. ie, the Ash‘arites, not che Stoics, 
p- 292. 2. ‘accidental’, since it was there only by constraint. 

NOTES 161 

P- 292. 3. ie. movement qua movement, without any reference to a 
special place or time, is a universal; and if the heavenly bodies desire this 
movement, they are moved by a concept, something in the soul, Averroés’s 
argument, however, is not only a felitio princips, i.e. not only is it used to 
prove that the heavenly bodies are animated, but it is also contradictory, 
for it first denies the objective existence of movement absolutely, and then 
admits that a movement exists in the individual moving thing, although not 
permanently (this is in opposition to Arist. Phys. 4 4. 228820, where it is 
asserted that the movement which is absolutely one {and particular] is that 
which is continuous, without any restriction as to time; cf. also Avicenna, 
Salvation, 180. 11). Averroés’s assertion is a reminiscence of the animistic 
view that all movement is based on love or desire, which we discussed above 
in our note on love. It may be added that this view survives in modern 
philosophy in one form or another. Schopenhauer, for example, regards 
movement as the objectivation of will, and at vol. i, p. 119 of his Die Weit als 
Wille und Vorstellung he quotes with approval the passage of St. Augustine, 
De civ. Det xi. 28: ‘si essemus lapides ... non tamen nobis deesset quasi 
quidam nostrorum locorum atque ordinis appetitus, nam velut amores 
corporum momenta sunt ponderum, sive deorsum gravitate, sive sursumn 
levitate nitantur: ita enim corpus pondere, sicut animus amore.” 

p. 292. 4. This would seem to imply that the souls of the heavenly bodies 
possess imagination (gavracia), and indeed Avicenna asserts this. Averroés, 
however, denies it~-see my Zp. d. Met. d. Av., note 10g, 6—and we must 
regard the representation he mentions here as a kind of intellectual act. 
Alexander of Aphrodisias also denied davracia to the intellectual movers; 
see below, 301. 3. 

P- 293. 1. Aristotle did not see this difficulty in ascribing natural motion 
to heaven (see note 290. 4). 

p- 293-2. In the following passage Ghazali refers to the chapter in 
Avicenna’s Salvation (pp. 429 sqq.) about the aim of the movement of 
heaven; cf. also ib., p. 490. 

P- 293.3. The basic idea of this deeply religious assertion, that God 
should be loved for His own sake, not out of hope for reward or fear of 
punishment, is found already in Aristotle, Eth. Eud. H 3 ad init, where he 
Jays down as a condition of love a certain equality, codrns, between the 
jJover and the beloved, and where he says that ie would be ridiculous to 
expect God in His majesty to repay the love with which He is loved (cf. 
Spinoza, Eth. v, prop. xix: ‘qui deum amat, conart non potest, ut deus 
ipsum contra amet’). Plotinus, En. ii. 2. 2, says that the stars, wherever 
they are, rejoice in surrounding God, and this not by reason, but by a 
natural necessity (€xagrov yap ov dort mepietAndos tov Gedy aydAAerar od 
Aoytaph GAAS, GuaiKais dvdyxats). 

162 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 293. 4. “The angels in His proximity’, ie. the Hebrew Cherubim, are 
mentioned in the Koran iv. 170. We have here an example of the identifica- 
tion mentioned above, note 233. 2, of Judaeo~Christian—Muslim concepts 
with the entities of Aristotelian-Neoplatonic philosophy. Avicenna, Salva~ 
hon, p. 490, does not use the term ‘CGherubim’ (he uses the term, however, 
in other writings, for instance, in his Refutation of the Astrologists), but says 
thae the spiritual abstract angels, 32 yea)| Ailey J} SGA, of the highest 
degree are called intellects, whereas the angels of the second degree, the 
active angels, ic. the movers of the stars, are called souls. In Qazwini's 
Cosmography (ed. Wistenfeld, pp. 55 sqq.) there is given a long list of angels 
who are inhabitants of heaven, cul gaaJ| GK, and at p. 59 the Cherubim 
are mentioned, who, according to Kazwini, are continuously, day and 
night, wholly absorbed in adoration of God. He mentions also the movers 
of the stars, of whom (he says) there are seven, but according to him the 
exact number of angels is known only to God. Muslim angelology was in- 
fluenced by Neoplatonism (cf. Plotinus Enn. ili. 5. 6), which regarded the 
stars as gods of a secondary order, subsidiary and related to the intelligible 
gods and dependent on them, @eads Seurdpous per’ éxetvous Kat xar’ exelvous 
rods voyrous, eEnprnpévors exetve. St. Thomas Aquinas, too, distinguishes 
between angels who move stars and those who do not; the former he calls 
intelligentiae, e.g. Contra gent, iii, 23. Like the Muslim philosophers he regards 
the differentiation of individual angels as a differentiation of species, 

p. 294. t. ‘there is no potency in them’ ; since they are eternally absorbed 
in the contemplation and adoration of Gad, there. is no change, no possi- 
bility of change in them, ‘their assimilation to God is made perfect in 
stability’, LG a ag 23 nad (Avicenna, op. cit. p. 431. 15). 

P. 294. 2. When the body of the heavens ts actually in one position in the 
heavenly sphere, it is potentially in another, says Avicenna—op, cit., 
Pp. 432. 10-—in agreement with Aristotle who says, Met. 4 7, 10725, that 
so far as heaven is moved there is a possibility for it of being otherwise, if not 
in substance, at least in place. 

P- 294. 3. ‘specifically’, specifically and successively, WsleJly cgtl, 

says Avicenna, op. cit., p. 432. 13; the term ‘specifically’ according to 
Averroés—see below in the text—is unintelligibte, 

Pp. 294. 4. It is unfortunately not true that the unattainable cannot be 
desired. 

p. 294. 5. This might be thought to be more closely in agreement with 
the words of Aristotle, Met. A 8. 107923: 3 uév ydp dpyR Kai 7d ap@rov ray 
ovrwy axivyrov «ai cad” atrd xal xara ovpPeByxds, xiwotv Se ryv apurqy 
diBtov Kat wav xivyaw: the principle and the first of all beings is immovable 
both essentially and accidentally, setting in motion the eternal and single 

NOTES 163 

movement. And indeed Plotinus, Znn. iv. 4. 8, says that it is not the proper 
function of the stars to contemplate the places they pass, for this is not 
essential to them, since they possess a uniform life, fay tiv adriy eyorra, 
and their movement is vital rather than local, os yx} romudpy Gd Larrixdy 
76 Kimya elvas. 

p. 294. 6. Cf. Aristotle, Afet, 88. 105024, where he says that the heavenly 
bodies suffer no fatigue, since there is not for them, as there is for transitory 
things, that possibility of the opposite which makes continuity of movernent 
laborious, the substance of the latter being matter and potentiality, not 
actuality; cf. also De caclo B 1. 28444. 

Pp: 295. 1. Cf. Plotinus, Enn. vi. 9. 6: doy) 52 od evdeds ray per” adrd, F 
8 dadvrey dpy} dvevdeds dzdvrev: a principle is in no need of what is under 
it, and the principle of everything is in no need of anything. Cf. also Plotinus, 
Enn, iv. 4.6: QW? obdé wept tay dvOpwmrtvwr abrots émivorae kai pyyaval éf 
thy Scouctoove: 7a Hyzerepa: the heavenly bodies do not think about human 
affairs, nor have they the means to administer them. 

p. 295. 2. The conception of this circular movement of the stars as based 
on a desire to assimilate themselves to God, the unmovable, the object of 
this love, is an extremely strange one, and Theophrastus, whose Metaphysics, 
was known to the Arabs, felt its difficulty, Ic is dificult to see, he says (Afet, 
5725), how, having a physical desire, the stars do not pursue rest instead of 
movement, especially when this view is combined with the Platonic theory 
of imitation (pipyors). 

p. 296. 1, The comparison is of course wrong : guarding a city against the 
enemy may be called an approach to God, because the intention of the act 
is praiseworthy ; but then the approach to God is a consequence of the good 
intention of the act; approach to God, i.¢. assimilation to God, is not its 
primary intention. 

p. 296. 2. Koran xvii. 39. 

p. 296. 3. e.g. Phys. E 4. 228%20; see note 292. 3. 

p. 296. 4. Specifically one, ie. so far as they are movements. This, 
however, is by no means what Aristotle understands by ‘a movement 
specifically one’. He says (Pays. E 4. 22873) that when Socrates undergoes 
an alteration (é\Aoiwars) specifically (7@ eiSec) identical, repeated at differ- 
ent times, these alterations (i.e. movements) will be specifically one, but 
numerically different, although similar. 

Pp. 297. 1. Compare Plotinus, who asks (Ean. ili, 3. 3) “Has one to attribute 
the character of every being to its creator, if there is one, or to the creature 
itself, or should one not ask for a reason at ali?” He answers that to ask for a 
reason why plants are created without perception, or why animals do not 
behave like mea, would be like asking why men are not gods, 

164 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p. 298 1. All this is in agreement with Aristotle’s view that the side from 
where movement in animals starts is the right: cf. e.g. De inc. an. 6. 706b25- 
707 "13. 

p- 298. 2. This rather strange conception is based on Aristotle’s view that 
right and left are only to be found in moving living beings, for only living 
beings have in themselves a principle of motion (cf. De caelo B 2. 285°27}, 
and that motion starts from the right and tends towards the right. This 
implies that both the sphere of the fixed stars and the spheres of the planets 
move towards the right, although they move in opposite directions, and 
according to Aristotle the northern hemisphere is the lower in relation to 
the diurnal movement but the upper in relation to the motion of the planets 
(cf. De caelo B 2. 285615). Aristotle and Averroés have it both ways; they 
regard right and left as relative to an observer and as absolutely attributable 
to the uttiverse (cf. Arist. Phys. I 5. 205533). According to the latter view 
Averroés holds that only the heaven of the fixed stars tends to the right, and 
this because the right side is the nobler; according to the former view he 
holds that all the heavens tend to the right. 

p. 298. 3. Since it can only revolve on its axis. 

p- 298.4. Literally: like an ambidextrous foot. According to Aristotle 
(Hist. an. Bt. 497531) only man among the animals is ambidextrous. 

p. 298. §. Contrary, namely in their direction—in their approach to the 
earth and recession from it. 

p. 298. 6. Cf. eg, Aristotle, De caels B 3. 28651 sqq.; generation implies 
more than one revolution of heaven ; if there were only one revolution the 
Telations between the four elements would remain stable, but the four 
elements imply generation by their nature, since none of them is eternal. 

P. 299. 1. ‘Why does the heaven revolve ?’, Plotinus asks at the beginning 
of Extn, ii. 2. 1, and the answer is that it is because it imitates the Intellect, 
Ort voby pupetrar, 

p. 299. 2. This kind of argument, which is very frequent, is used, for 
example, by Favorinus against the astrologers in Aulus Gellius’ Nocf. An. 
xiv. 1: The shortness of human life prevents the perception and interpreta- 
tion of such relations between events as are assumed by the astrologers, 

p. 299. 3. Literally On the particular influences of the spheres, Bur that 
+0. dotpodoy:xd CewpHpara is meant can be seen from the fact that in his 
commentary (comm. 68) on De caefo B 10. 2991+ 29, where Aristotle himself 
seems to refer to this work (other references are found in Meteor, A 3, 
339°7 and 4 8. 34551), Averroés says: ‘Aristoteles autem fecit librum de 
hoe qui dicitur de regiminibus coelestibus’ (regimina corresponds exactly to 
the Arabic wl a3 5 which I have translated by ‘influences’). About the 
astrological meaning of the word @ecipnya Cicero informs us at De fate i. 6. 11 

NOTES 165 

where he translates the word @ewprara by percepta, and where he gives as 
an example of such a perceptum ehe fact that ifso and so is born at the rise of 
the dog-star, he will not be drowned at sea. The correct English translation 
for Pecipnya in its astrological meaning would seem to be ‘judgement’, ‘As 
it is said’ seems to imply that Averroés himself had not seen the book. 

p -299. 4. ‘Chaldaeans’ in Greco-Roman literature is often almost 
synonymous with ‘astrologers’ ; cf. e.g. Cicero, De divin, i, t. 2. 

p. 300.1. Cf. Aristotle, De part. an, A 1, 6g1>12. 

p. 300. 2. For a great number of signs of providence (the ratio naturae 
inlellegentis) indicative of terrestrial things, compare, for example, Cicero, 
De nat. deor. ii. 47. 120 8qq. 

Pp. 300. 3. ‘thousand years’; this number makes it plausible that Averroés 
borrowed the assertion from some Greek author, and indeed Theophrastus, 
as quoted by Ps.-Philo, De aeternitate mund; (145), says that science was 
invented barely a thousand years ago, udrts mpd yAiwy emavray. Compare 
Lactantius, Deira c. 13. 10 (Stote Vet. Fr. ii. 337.2) : ‘{Stoici) aiunt enim multa 
esse in gignentibus et tn numero animalium quorum adhuc lateat utilitas, 
sed cam processu temporum inveniri, sicut iam plura prioribus saeculis 
incognita necessitas et usus invenerit.’ 

p- 300.4. Cf Aristotle, Afet. A 8. 1074238; compare also Cicero, De 
Divin. ad init. ‘Mysterious indication’, 5.) , corresponds to Greek pvoripior, 
‘divine, inspired truth’: cf. e.g. Corp. herm. i. 16. 

Pp: 300. §. This is, of course, a sophism: if rest is taken as the opposite of 
movement, God is not at rest, since He is not spatially determined ; but if 
rest is taken as the opposite of change it will apply also to God (representing 
the universe in spatia] images, man in general, and Aristotle in particular, 
have a tendency to regard all change as motion; a moving in and out). 

p. 300. 6, ‘the indelible tablet’ $ yirc{ cs. The indelible tablet is 

mentioned in the Koran, lxxxv, 21: ‘it is a glorious Koran written on the 
indelible tablet’. It is regarded by the Muhammadans as the depository of 
alt the events decreed by God. The allegorical interpretation of the philo- 
sophers takes the indelible tablet as the symbol of the Universal Soul. 
Jurjani in his Definstions, ed. Flueget, p. 204, distinguishes four tablets: (1) 
the first Intellect ; {2} the Universal Sou! which is identical with the indelible 
tablet; (3) the particular souls of the heavens in which everything which has 
shape or form or magnitude in this world is inscribed ; (4) matter. 

p- 300. 7. There isa passage in Plutarch, De defect. orat. 40 (p. 432¢), in 
which he gives the Posidonian view of prophecy and compares the prophetic 
faculty, 76 pavrendv, with a tablet, not written on, itrational and indeter- 
minate in itself, ypappareiov dypader xat GAoyor xat ddpurrov e& atrod, but 

166 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

capable through the reception of representations and forebodings of grasp- 
ing the future without reasoning, dov-oyicrws. And he says (op. cit. 39) 
that the prophetic faculty should not surprise us, for the sou! possesses also 
its counterpart, memory, which preserves what has been the present, but no 
longer is: in a mysterious way the soul lays hold both on the not yet existing 
and on the no longer existing. Compare also Cicero, De divin. i. 56. 128: it 
is not astonishing that soothsayers can predict things that are nowhere, 
for everything ‘is’, alchough not (really) in time (sunt enim omnia, sed tempore 
absunt). 

p. 300. 8. Cf. Farabi, The Gems of Wisdom (Dicterici), p. 77. Farabi 
asserts that neither the tablet nor the pen—see next note—is a concrete 
thing. 

p- 301. 1. ‘The Pen’ is the name of Sura Lxviii of the Koran. In Muham- 
madan tradition it is affirmed that the first thing God created was the pen 
with which He wrote down all future events, 

p- 301.2. The images in this sentence are rather mixed; the pen, or 
rather the burin, is regarded as the instrument of the divine engraver, but 
is also personified as His knowledge. In any case for the allegorical inter- 
pretation the pen is regarded as the active element, i.e. the First Intellect, 
the tablet as the receptacle or the effect of its action, the Universal Soul. 

p. 301. 3. Cf. Alexander of Aphrodisias, The Principles of the Universe, ed. 
cit., p. 255, where it is stated that the heavenly bodies do not need those 
faculties which serve only for preservation. For Avicenna’s theory that the 
heavenly bodies have representations or imagination cf. my Ep, d. Met. d. 
Ap., pp. 117-18. 

p. 301. 4. According to Aristotle (De an, F 3. 428410) all animals have 
sensations, but not all animals have imagination ; for instance, the ant, the 
bee, and the grub do not possess it, 

Pp. 301.5. i.e. they possess only the intellectual part of the soul. 

p. 301. 6, The will follows the end and not the end the will, says Avicenna, 
Salvation, 446. 2; cf. Aristotle, Rhet, F 16. 1417*18 sy mpoaipears mod ro réAee. 
The opposite was held by Spinoza, for whom the good, or rather the good 
for me, is what is desired by me (£th, iti, prop. 39, schol.). 

p. 302. 1. This is proved by Avicenna, e.g. Salvation, pp. 426 sqq. (cf. the 
paraliel passage, Recovery, ix. 4): the Universal Will, LSU 32 4, cannot 
cause a movement from one definite point to another. 

Pp. 302. 2. Avicenna (Salvation, p. 463) says that the celestial bodies in- 
fluence the terrestrial through the qualities which are proper to them and 
which flow out from them inte this world ; and they also influence the souls 
of this world; through this we know that the nature which leads (jyepover) 
these terrestrial bodies, like their perfection and their form (read § >) great), 

NOTES 167 

receives its existence from the soul which is dispersed over heaven, or 
through its collaboration. 

p- 302. 3. The accidental finding of a treasure, when one is digging for 
another reason, is a standard example among the Peripatetics of an event 
occurring by accident, d7é réyqs and unpredictable; cf. Aristotle, Eth. 
Nic. P5. 1112%27 and Alexander of Aphrodisias, De fato, 172. 25. ‘What 
can be the connexion between the universe and the finding of a treasure?’ 
asks Cicero, De divin. ii. 14. 33. 

p. 302. 4. All this is Stoic determinism; compare, for example, Cicero, 
De divin. i. 56, 127: if there were a man who saw the connexion of ali causes, 
he would never fail in any prediction, for he who knows the causes of future 
events will necessarily know all future events ; but since this is only possible 
for a god, man cannot predict the future except by certain signs, 

p. 303. 1. Avicenna affirms in his Recovery, Met. x, 1, that the souls of the 
heavenly bodies know the particular individual in a way which is not purely 
intellectual. 

P- 303. 2, Muslim dream-interpretation depends largely on Greek prin- 
ciples, espectally on those of the Stoics (Chrysippus, Diogenes of Babylon, 
Antipater, and Posidonius all wrote books on divination and dreams, cf. 
Cicero, De divin. i. 3. 6). The basic idea of prophetic inspiration is found in 
the famous passage of Aristotle’s De philosophia (fr. 10 Rose) quoted by Sext. 
Emp., Ads. phys. i. 20: The conception of gods arose among men from two 
principles, from what befalls the soul and from the aspect of the heavens; it 
arose from what befalls the soul because of inspirations in sleep and pro- 
phecies, For (he says} when the soul retires in sleep to itself it takes on 
its proper nature, and prophesies and predicts the future. ft is also in this 
state when, at the point of death, it is severed from its body. Posidonius— 
cf. Cicero, De divin, t. 30. 63—took over this view from Aristotle, One of 
the three reasons given by Posidonius for the divine inspiration of dreams 
is the kinship of the human soul with the divine (Cic. op. cit. 64), or, as 
Cratippus (ap. Cic. i. 32. 70) says: ‘Outside the human sout there is a divine 
soul from which the human takes its origin.’ Gompare also the passage 
quoted by Cicero (op. cit. 61} from Plato’s Republic ix. §71 sq., where the 
latter says that when, in sleep, the irrational parts of the soul are pacified 
and the rational part shines forth, a man’s dreams will be peaceful and 
reliable (tum ei visa quietis occurrent tranquilla atque veracia). Avicenna’s 
relation to astrology is much the same as Plotinus’, or rather it depends on 
it, Both Plotinus and Avicenna accept the Stoic idea of a natural sympathy 
through which all parts of the Universe stand in relation to each other, and 
changes in one part can give indications of changes in others. But they 
both reject the extravagant claims of the astrologers (cf. Plotinus, Znn. iii. 1. 
5 sqq.; Avicenna, ¢-g., in a short treatise on the question) with arguments 

168 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

derived ultimately from Carneades; and both inconsistently try to safeguard 
frec-will, notwithstanding the dependence of everything on one supreme 
principle and the emanation of everything fromm it. 

P. 303. 3. Aristotle, in De divin. per somn. 2, denies that dreams are divinely 
inspired (@eéreurra), since animals also dream, and otherwise only the 
wisest would be able to foresee the future, whereas common men and even 
the demented and melancholic are capable of doing so. He holds that dreams 
depend on an unconscious and irrational perception of signs which the 
imagination symbolizes. Therefore, says he (op. cit. 2. 464%5), the best 
interpreter (reyvexciraros) of dreams is one who can perceive the similarities, 

p- 303. 4. Gf Plutarch, De gen. Socr. 24, who says that the chosen few are 
sometimes, but rarely, in direct contact with the Divine, whereas the 
common man receives only the signs which form the subject-matter of 
soothsaying (76 Geiov dddyors evruyydver 3c’ abrod xat emavics, tots 52 woMots 
onucta Sdwow), 

Pp. 304. 1. Cf. note 301. 4. 

p. 304.2. CE Aristotle, Met. Z 8. The carpenter gives the form of the 
cupboard, which is always a universal, to the matter, te. all art proceeds 
from universal rules; but such a theory can never explain the individual 
differences in works of art, and the fact that in his work of art the artist 
expresses his individuality. 

P- 304, 3. ‘by nature’, te. by instinct. 

Pp. 904. 4. According to Aristotle, however, animals have ne notion of the 
universal, but only representation of the particular (ray xa@’ fkaora 
govragiay) and memory, cf. Bik. Nie. H 5. 11475. 

Pp. 304. 5. ‘the definition of a thing’, i.e. the concept of it. 

p. 304. 6. This distinction between a universal representation and the 
concept (form) is not found in Aristotle. 

p. 304. 7. The problem of the instinct of animals seems to have interested 
the Stoics especially, ‘How is it,” asks Seneca (Zpist. 121. 19), ‘that the hen 
does not flee from the peacock or the goose, but from the hawk, which is 
much smaller and which it dees not even know ?’ (‘quid est, quare pavonem, 
quare anserem gallina non fugiat, at tanto minorem et ne notum quidem 
sibi accipitrern?’}, and he asks from where the bees get their ingenuity in 
building their cells, and the unity of their collaboration (22): ‘non vides, 
quanta subtilitas apibus ad fingenda domicilia, quanta dividui laboris 
obeundi undique concordia.’ And the answer is that their art is innate, not 
acquired : ‘nascitur ars ista, non discituy’ (cf. n. 434. 3). Origen, De princip. 
iii, 108 (Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 288. 2}, says that some animals have by instinct an 
imagination which Seads them 10 some specified action, the bees, for exampie, 
to the building of cells. 

NOTES 169 

Pp. 304. 8. i.e. the artisan who does not genuinely possess his art, but pro- 
ceeds empirically, 

Pp. 305. 1. He means that the king who arranges his armies for a battle is 
not occupied with the individual men, but only with the armies as a whole. 
Averrots seems here to confound ‘whole’ and ‘universal’. 

Pp. 305. 2. Aristotle says (Ek, Nic. 5. ttt2*21) that there can be no 
deliberation about that which is eternal (since it is eternally fixed, and 
therefore no will can alter it). 

p. 306. 1. Irenaeus (Contra heer. i. g. 4) had protested against the Gnostics 
that they transferred expressions and terms from their natura] sense to an 
unnatural (Aéfes xal dvopara perapépovow éx 700 xara puaww els 76 napa 
pioev), 

p- 306, 2. Both the terms ‘universal aim’ and ‘universal will’ which he 
identifies here have very little sense. If he means, however, that when a man 
has decided to go immediately to Mecca, no movement occurs, this is not 
correct: all his subsequent movements depend on this decision and are 
simply the means to attain his end. 

Pp. 307. 1. Le. the straighe line is perfectly determined, and to follow it 
one neéds no other determination. 

P- 307. 2. This is in fact Anselm’s (and Augustine’s) doctrine of fides quacrens 
tatellectum. It would be negligent, in a person capable of understanding, not 
to proceed from the means 10 the end, from belief to understanding. 

p- 308. 1. The former would be the Stoic view, the latter the Peripatetic. 

p- 308. 2. Averroés seems rather undecided about this question, but per- 
haps he means the same as Cicero, De nat. deor. ii. 65. 164: ‘licet contrahere 
universitatem generis humani eamque gradatim ad pauciores postremo 
deducere ad singulos’, i.e. if the gods care universally for man, one may 
deduce from this that providence extends to every individual man. 

p. 309. 1. ‘inacreated soul’, since, for God, knowledge of the infinite is not 
impossible. For Augustine also (De civ. dei. xii. 19) God can comprehend the 
infinite, and His knowledge transcends number as infinity transcends 
number: ‘infinitas itaque numeri, quamvis infinitorum numerorum nullus 
sit numerus, non est tamen incomprehensibilis ¢?, cuius intelligentiae non 
est numerus’, 

On the other hand, Alexander of Aphrodisias (De fato xxx. 201. g) asserts 
that, since the infinite cannot be measured, the infinite future events cannot 
be known to the gods, For the gods what is impossible remains impossible, 
and they do not seek to overcome it, since this would make any assertion 
meaningless. For this reason it is impossible for the gods to know definitely 
of a thing contingent by nature that it will be or will nat (ap. cit. 200. 23) 

170 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

{Alexander’s thesis against Stoic determinism is that there are things con~ 
tingent by nature and that chance exists). Ie is rather astonishing that 
Ghazali, for whom as an Ash‘arite there is no objective necessity at all, and 
for whom there is no certainty in any foreknowledge, since any future event 
depends solely on God’s pleasure, does not attack (as Alexander does) the 
basic Stoic thesis of the necessary concatenation of all events. 

P- 309. 2. i.e in a body. 

P- 309. 3. i.e. through a body. 

Pp. 309. 4. There is here, perhaps, some reference to the difficult problem 
in Platonic ethics and Greek ethics generally of the dual nature of man, 
divine through his spiritual, intellectual being, profane through his earth- 
bound life. Ifman’s aim lies solely in the perfection of his intellect, in a puri- 
fication from all earthly desire, in a flight of the alone to the Alone (duy} 
HOvov mpds pévov), his relation to his fellow men would seem irrelevant. But 
it would be presumptuous in earth-bound man, says Protarchus (cf. Plato, 
Philebus 62 b), to seek only the eternal and divine; to find his way home 
man should consider alsa the less pure and less perfect particular knowledge. 
It is, according to Greek ethics, in and through society that man, being by 
nature a gregarious animal, will develop his moral character. And since 
kings ought to be philosophers, some philosophers ought to be leaders of 
men, Compare Cicero, De fin, iii. 20. 68: the wise man should desire to 
engage in politics and government, since we see that man fs designed by 
nature to safeguard and perfect his fellows; cf. Spinoza, Eth. iv. 73 (Spineza 
certainly knew the De finidus; compare, e.g., De fin. iv. 1. 14 with Bit. v, 20 
demonstr., and De fin. iv, 7. 16 with Eté, iv. 20 demonstr.). 

Pp. 310, I. ie, the soul is ail the individuals potentially, because on the 
one hand in perception it can become all the individuals actually, and 
on the other it receives from the intellect a knowledge of the permanent 
(stable, orartxés) intelligibles which comprehend potentially alt the 
individuals. 

Pp. 310. 2. According to Plotinus the soul stands in an intermediary 
position between the Intellece and the sublunary world; it is a unity— 
plurality, sAi@os &, and otherwise could not produce a plurality so far 
distant from unity (cf. Han. vi. 2. §). 

p. 310, 3. I think Averroés is here referring to the passage p. 309, 1. 10, 
where Ghazali admits the possibility that the soul of heaven may know 
all particular events, but where he limits this knowledge to the present and 
therefore partially accepts, partially rejects the philosophical theory, and 
where by this arbitrary limitation he refutes the philosophical theory of 
prophecy. OF course Ghazali admits foreknowledge in God of the infinity 
of all particular events. St. Augustine (De civ, Dei v. 9) says that this fore- 
knowledge, according to Cicero, De divin., implies fate (concessa scientia 

- NOTES 17t 

fulurorum tla esse consequens fatum ub negari omnino non possit), and that there- 
fore Cicero rejects it. So did the Peripatetics, as we have seen, and for the 
same reason, The implication seems to me evident, but St. Augustine is not 
of this opinion. 

p- 310. 4. The irascthle soul, @uzds, the concupiscent soul, émBuzia, i.e. 
the two irrational parts of the soul according to Plato (cf. Rep. iv. 436.) ; to 
contemplate the soul in her primordial purity, she should be viewed in her 
immortal yearning for the divine which is akin to her, and as cleansed from 
the incrustation due to her earth-bound state (cf. op. cit. x. 611-12). 

p. 311.1. For an historical view of the division of the sciences from the 
Alexandrian commentators on Aristotle, especially Ammonius Hermiae, 
who is the originator of this type of philosophical literature, to the end of 
the scholastic period, see L. Baur, ‘Gundissalinus, de divisione philosophiae’, 
Beitr. 2. Gesch. d. Philos. d. Mittelalt. iv. 2-3, pp. 325 qq. Both Farabi and 
Avicenna wrote treatises on the division of the sciences, Farabi’s treatise 
being called On the Enumeration of the Sciences and Avicenna’s On the Divisions 
of the Intellectual Sciences. Avicenna’s division is based on Ammonius’ scheme 
of dtaipeois (division) into practical and theoretical sciences; émdiaipecus 
(secondary division), ¢.g. the tripartite division of the theoretical sciences 
into physics, mathematics, and theology ; and brodcalpens, subdivision, ¢.g. 
the subdivision of the physical sciences. The division of physics into eight 
paris, each based on a special treatise of Aristotle, is a common feature of the 
Muslim commentators. The sequence of these parts and the enurneration of 
the books of Aristatie is taken from Philoponus, in Phys. comm. (Vitellii. 1. 20); 
Philoponus, however, subdivides the part that treats of animals into a class 
that treats of them as wholes and a class that treats of their parts. 

Pp. 341, 2. Classes, <j Jol , i.e, literally ‘roots’, radices ; subdivisions, 3. i> 
Le. ramifications, rami. 

p. 381.3. Not only is time, according to Aristotle, a consequence of 
movement (dxodov@e? rH kuvjoer 5 ypdvos, Phys. 4 15.219°16), since time is the 
number of movement, but he seems to regard space as posterior to move- 
ment, and not the reverse, for he says (Phys. 4d 1. 2088); ‘The movements 
of the elements show not only that there is a space, but that it has a certain 
function {xai &yer rd Suvapw).” 

p- 311.4. The same definition is found in Avicenna’s On the Divisions of 
the Intellectual Sciences, which Ghazali in his enumeration of the seven sub- 
divisions follows very closely. The Aristotelian definition of medicine is: 
4 larpuch réxvn 6 Adyos rijs dyretas darix or ris larpucds réyvys téos bylea 
{e.g. Met. A 3. 1070°30; Eth. Nic. A 1. 1094"). By regarding medicine as a 
species of physics, the primary division of the sciences into practica! and 
theoretical is vitiated, as Averroés observes below. Aristotle (Eth. Nic, 
toc. cit.} gives medicine as an example of a practical science. 

172 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Pp. 311. §. The possibility of physiognomy is admitted by Aristotle, Anal. 
Pr. B27. 70°3, when it has first been conceded that body and soul can 
change at the same time : anger and desire, for example, find their expression 
in physical movements. Pythagoras (cf. Hippolytus, Ref. i. 2. 5) was re- 
garded as the inventor of physiognomy (¢ucvoprwpiuciy dfedpe), and 
Alexander of Aphrodisias (De fato 171. 11) tells a story of Zopyrus, the 
physiognomist, who from an examination of Socrates’ exterior attributed 
many vices to him—a story also mentioned by Cicero, Tuse. iv. 37. 80 and 
De fato 5. 40. The treatise on physiognorhy ascribed to Aristotle is not 
genuine. 

p- 311.6. The telesmatic art is the art of charms, amulets, talismans, &c. 
{the word ‘talisman’ is derived, through the Italian talismano, from the 
Arabic pool sitself'a derivative of réAecza, one of the many Greek words for 
‘charm’ or ‘amulet’), The telesmatic art differs from magic in that the 
magician needs no external instrument. Compare the long chapter dedicated 
to this art in Ibn Khaldun, Profegomena, ed, Quatremére, Notices des Manu- 
serits de la Bibl. Imp., vol. xviti, p. 124. Among the Arabs the best known 
authors on magic are Jabir ibn Hayyan and Maslama ibn Ahmad a]-Majriti. 

p. 311. 7. In this art there is only a combination of earthly virtues, 
Averrots—see below—regards it as a kind of conjuring. 

p. 3£2. 1. For alchemy compare also Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., pp. 191 and 
22g. Jabir ibn Hayyan, mentioned in the last note but one, was regarded 
among the Arabs as the greatest authority on alchemy, which is sometimes 
called the science of Jabir. 

p. 412.2. This is not true according to Aristotle, who regards it as purely 
rational and based on a syllogism of the first figure, when the major and 
middie terms are convertible (Anal, Pr. B 277. 70°32). 

p. 312. 3. Ibn Khaldun develops this idea for his refutation of alchemy, 
op. cit., p. 236: Alchemy is the reproduction of nature by art. We should 
have to follow in detail all the processes which nature uses in the formation 
of metals, and know all the particular circumstances of their development 
and all their effects. These, however, are infinite and beyond man’s grasp; 
it would be as if man were to create a man or an animal or a plant. 

P- 343. 1. ‘existing by themselves’ ; this is of course in opposition to the 
Aristotelian theory that the soul is the form of the body, a theory rejected 
by Plotinus in the fragment quoted by Eusebius, Pracp. ev. xv. 10, since accord- 
ing to such a theory the soul could not be separated from the body. Avicenna 
holds both theories, the Aristotelian theory of the soul as the form of the body 
and the Platonic and Plotinian of the soul as a substance and an entity 
separable from the body ; he does not seem to be aware of the contradiction. 

NOTES 173 

P- 313. 2. According to Plotinus (Znn. iv. 7. 9), who follows Plato (Phaedo 
105 ¢-106 d), the principle of movement and life cannot itself be mortal. 
Gompare also, for example, Avicenna, Salvation, p. 302, where it is argued 
‘that the soul does not die through the death of the body’, since body and 
soul are both substances. 

P- 313. 3. In opposition to the Koran, which teaches the resurrection of 
the flesh ; compare, for example, Sura Load. 7, where in speaking of the 
resurrection the phrase is used ‘when souls shall be paired with their bodies’. 

P- 313. 4. Hume (Enquiry concerning Human Understanding, § 10}, who does 
not believe in laws of nature any more than the Ash‘arites do, and who does 
not believe in miracles either, defines a miracle as a violation of the laws of 
nature, He says, however, that it is a miracle that a dead man should come 
to life, because that has never been observed in any age or country; this, of 
course, is not a valid reason—many (in a sense, all} things happen quite 
‘naturally’ that have never been observed before, According to this 
definition, a miracle does not abolish the idea of a law of nature but on the 
contrary assumes it. Nor is it true that a miracle abolishes the concept of 
cause and effect. A miracle is attributed to God as a cause, as an immediate 
interference of God wath the causes and the course of nature. Strictly speak- 
ing there are no miracles for the Ash‘arites, nor has the word ‘nature’ any 
meaning for them; or perhaps one might say that for them all miracles are 
natural, and all nature miraculous. 

p. 313. 5. For the changing of Moses’ rod into a serpent see Koran ii. 21, 

p- 313.6. Cf. Koran, Sura liv, which begins: ‘the hour draws nigh and 
the moon is split asunder’. This is sometimes interpreted later as a miracle 
performed by Muhammad, but it can be explained as one of the signs of the 
resurrection. 

p. 313. 7. Some of the older Mu'tazilites were already regarded as 
thorough-going rationalists, e.g. Hisham ibn Amr al-Futi and Nazzam (see 
e.g. Shahrastani, Relig. and Philos. Sects, i, 5t; 40). For a rationalistic 
exegesis compare also Cl. Huart, ‘Le Rationalisme musulman’, in Revue de 
Phistoire des religions, vot. 1, p. 201. One must distinguish the rationalistic 
interpreters from those numerous mystics who give to the religious text a 
symbolic meaning in accordance with their spiritualistic doctrines, 

p. 313. 8. Compare, for example, Avicenna, Theorems and Notices, p. 213, 
and Farabi, The Gems of Knowledge (Dieterici), p. 76. 

P- 313.9. Intellectual acuteness (| do, dyyévore) : the term is defined by 
Aristotle, Anal. Post. A 34. 8g>10 as the capacity of a man to arrive at the 
middle term quickly; such a man, for example, will quickly understand that 
the moon receives its light from the sun. According to Avicenna, Salvation, 
p. 273, whom Ghazali here follows very closely, intellectual acuteness 

174 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

differs among men qualitatively and quantitatively : on che one hand there 
are men who are absolutely devoid of it, on che other there are those, the 
prophets, in whom it reaches such excellence that the forms of the active 
intellect are immediately imprinted on it, 

P- 314. 1. This is a quotation from the mystical verse of the Koran, 
xxix. 35: ‘God is the light of the heavens and the earth; His light is as a 
niche in which is a lamp, and the lamp is in a glass, the glass is as though it 
were a glittering star, it is lit from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the west 
nor of the east, the oil of which would well-nigh give light though no fire 
* were in contact with it, light upon light ,..”. 

p- 314. 2. This example is found in Plutarch, Quaest. conv. v. 7. 3 (émivowa 
yap ddpodiotwr éyeipovow aidote and again ré ordppara trav dyBpenrwy padrov 
Gnre8a1, Srav dpdvres wAnordlaow ; Thomas Fienus says, De airibus imagi- 
nationis, p. 59: “qui imaginatur Venerem, ei coles excitatur et spiritus 
moventur versus genitalia, et non ad aliam partem’), where ‘fascination’ 
{xaraBacKeiver} and the ‘evil eye’—which is admitted and explained, in 
Theorems and Notices, p. 221, and in the psychological part of his Recovery, 
ivy. 4, by Avicenna in the same way as by Plutarch, by an explanation which 
is, I presume, of Stoic origin—are attributed to the influence of the emotions 
of the soul on the body. 

p- 314. 3. The example of the plank is taken from Avicenna, Theorems 
and Notices, p. 219 and The Recovery, loc, cit. Ibn Khaldun, who reproduces 
as he says the theories of the philosophers, also mentions it, op. cit., p. 132. 
It is interesting to note that the same example is quoted in a well-known 
passage of the Pensées of Pascal (in thesection ‘Imagination’): ‘Le plus grand 
philosophe du monde, sur une planche plus large qu’il ne faut, vil y a au 
dessous un précipice, quoique sa raison le convainque de sa siretdé, son 
imagination prévaudra.” Pascal eook this example from Montaigne, Esiais, 
ii, 12: ‘Qu’on jette une poutre entre deux tours (de Notre Dame de Paris) 
d’une grosseur telle qu'il nous la faut 4 nous promener dessus, il n’y a 
sagesse philosophique de si grande fermeté qui puisse nous donner courage 
d'y marcher comme si elle était 4 terre.’ Emile Coué, De fa suggestion et ses 
applications, Nancy, 1915, p. 5, also has this example. The example is found 
in R. Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, part I, sect. 2, mem. 3, subs. 2, 
who ascribes it to Peter Byarus, He means evidently Petrus Bairus (Pietro 
Bairo), a famous Genoese physician and an elder contemporary of 
Montaigne, who in his book De pestilentia (chapter de cibo et potu) had a 
long quotation from Avicenna’s Psychology with our example. Doubtless 
Montaigne with his great interest for medicine found it there, 
Thomas Aquinas has this example, Contra gentiles iit. 103. He rejects, 
however, the consequence Avicenna draws and declares that a spiritual 
substance cannot make an impression on a body, except by means of 

NOTES 175 

local movement. The examples given in our text all concern the involun- 
tary influence of imagination on our body or behaviour ; but the magician, 
as a performer of miracles, acts voluntarily. The fundamental problem of 
the relation of body and mind, the fact that my immaterial ego is in con- 
tact with the physical universe (and, another mystery, that through physical 
means it can communicate with other immaterial egos), and that through 
its will it can influence my material body and by its intermediation change 
the face of the world—this problem, which has struck moderns since 
Descartes with wonder, was never properly seen by the ancients, although 
St. Augustine (De civ. Dei xxi. 10} said: ‘modus quo corporibus adhaerent 
spiritus omnino mirus est, nec comprehendi ab homine potest; et hoc ipse 
homo est’, Plotinus, on whom Avicenna’s mystical theories largely depend, 
explains all magical influence by the Stoic concept of a ‘sympathy’ which 
all things have for each other (cf. Enn. iv. 4. 40-42). 

Pp. 314. 4. This is the theory of Avicenna, found in The Recovery and in 
Theorems and Notices, p. 220: certain souls may exercise an influence on other 
bodies than their own. It is repeated by Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., pp. 132-3. 
Burton says, loc, cit: ‘Nay more, they (i.e. witches and old women) can 
cause and cure not only diseases, maladies, and several infirmities by this 
means, as Avicenna, De antma libr, iv, sect. 4, supposeth in parties remote, 
but move bodies from their places, cause thunder, lightning, tempests, 
which opinion Alkindus, Paracelsus, and some others approve of’. Burton 
gives in this section a bibliography on the subject of “The Force of 
Imagination’. Fienus, whom Burton calls ‘the pick of the bunch’ (‘instar 
omnium’), says, op. Cit., p. 24, cf. pp. 40 sqq., that Avicenna’s theory was 
held, for instance, by Albertus Magnus, Marsilius Ficinus, Pomponatius, 
and Paracelsus, Compare also H. G. Agrippa, De occulta philosophia, i. 65. 

P: 314. 5. The swallowing up of the earth with its inhabitants as a punish- 
ment is mentioned in the Koran (xxxiv. 19) ; ‘God made the wind subservient 
to Solomon’, ibid. xxxiv. 11 ; “God struck the inhabitants of Ad and Thamud 
with a thunderbole’, ibid., e.g. xli. 12, and ‘ “rained a rain” on the people 
of Lot, ibid, vii. 82. 

p- 314. 6. Warmth, for example, is commonly produced by the soul in its 
body (says Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., p. 132) in a state of pleasure and joy. 
Compare also Thomas Aquinas, loc, cit, 

P. 315.1. That philosophy implies virtue is a Stoic idea: ‘philosophia 
studium virtutis est, sed per ipsam virtutem , . . cohaerent inter se philo- 
sophia virtusque’ (Seneca, Epist. 89. 8), 

P. 305. 2. ie. without physical contact. 

P- 315. 3. ie. which is not logically impossible, dSvvarov dards. 

P. 315.4. ‘that they are of this kind’, ie. not logically impossible. The 
whole sentence is ambiguous, everything depends on what he understands 

376 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

by ‘logically impossible’. From what follows it would seem that he does not 
acmit that prophets can interrupt the course of nature, but is unwilling to 
express it tco clearly. 

p- 315. 5. See note 192, 1, 

p. 315.6, He is doubtless here referring to the chapter in Ghazali’s book 
The Preserver from Error entitled ‘On the reality of prophecy and its necessity 
for all men’, where the prophet is regarded as a man who by his special 
qualities is in contact with the occult, and where it is expressly stated that 
one should not base one’s belief in prophecy on such facts as the changing 
of a rod into a serpent or the cleavage of the moon. 

p. 316. !. te. they are not relative, but cause (say the sceptics) is some- 
thing relative, for it is a cause of something and occurs to something, ¢.g. 
the lancet is the cause of something, i.e. cutting, to something, i.e. flesh ; 
relatives, however, do not exist, but are only subjective (Sext. Emp. Ads, 
phys. i. 207-8). 

p- 316. 2. This, the denial of any logical nexus, is the fundamental thesis 
of Greek empirical] medicine: for we find the consequent through experi- 
ence, but not as implied by the antecedent; and therefore none of the 
empiricists say that one thing implies another, although they will certainly 
assert that certain facts follow or precede other facts or are simultaneous with 
ther (edpioxeras pév Kak Tis meipas 16 andAovboy, GW" aby ods dugarvdpevor 
70 Hyoupevas. nat did robro ray eprerpucdiy obdeis eudaivectal gnat rHde re 
robe Tt. xatrotye dxodoubety A€youar réde THSe xal mpoyyetobas 7d5€ robSe nat 
ovvurdpyew rode THde): Galen, De meth. med. it, 7 (K. x. 126 F; Deichgraber, 
Op. cit. 123. 24). 

p- 316. 3. The example of burning is given by Sext. Emp. Adv. phys. i. 
24t sqq. The argurnent given there is that if fire were the cause of buraing, 
it would either burn by itself or need the co-operation of the burning matter ; 
in the former case, it would burn always and in all circumstances, in the 
latter it would not burn eaclusively through its own nature. 

p. 337. 1. ‘simultaneity’: Hume would have regarded this rather as a 
sequence. 

Pp. 317. 2. According to Stoicism also God is the only active principle and 
matter is passive or, as Ghazali would say, dead, The Stoic God is immanent 
in the world; He does not act voluntarily, but Himself is Law, Fate, and 
Necessity. In a way Aristotelianism also, as we have seen, implies God as 
the Unique Agent; for He is the one principle of movement, the constant 
mover of Heaven, on whom all earthly change depends, and in the next 
sentence in the text Ghazali quite rightly draws this conclusion. 

p. 317. 3. Aristotle’s own theory of procreation is confused and obscure; 
life and soul are not body, but cannot exist without body, which either is 

NOTES 177 

warmth, not fire (Seppdv ov mip), or pneutma, and something more divine than 
the so-called elements (odijta Oerdrepor ray xaroupdévww ororyeiwv) and 
related to the matter of stars (évdAoyor 7G rédv dorpww crorxeig) ; ch. De gen. 
an, B 3. 736%29 sqq. For the theories of Avicenna and Averroés compare 
my £p. d, Met, d, Av., pp. 40 and 44 and notes. 

P- 317.4. This is rather a strange argument in a refutation of the causal 
nexus between phenomena, since it admits and implies such a nexus. The 
arguments seems somehow related to the equally bad argument of Chry- 
sippus quoted in Cicero’s De fato 18. 41-19. 45, by which Chrysippus wanted 
to safeguard free-will without abandoning the idea of a universal causal 
concatenation, and where he distinguishes between causae perfectae et princi~- 
pales and causae adiuvantes et proximae, We cannot, he says, give our consent 
(assensio, ovyxard@eacs) to a thing seen without the form of the visible object 
making an impression on our soul, but this impression ts only a cause 
adiuvans of the consent, which depends on our own nature. Compare also 
Cicero, Tap. 15.58, for the Stoic distinction of two types of causes, the efficient, 
‘unum quod vi sua id quod sub ea subjectum est certo efficit’ (airrav 8.” 3), 
‘alterum quod naturam efficiendi non habet sed sine quo non potest effici’ 
{afriov of obs dvev or aittov mpoxerapxrexdr). In Ghazali’s example the light 
of the sun is a cause of the former type, the opening of the eyelids of the 
latter, For a further classification of causes by the Stoics see, for example, 
Clement of Alexandria, Strom. viii. 9. 25 (Stoic Vet. Fr. it, pp. 119-21). 

P. 317.5. ie, the celestial bodies, 

p. 317. 6, Whom does he mean? In a well-known passage in Book XII of 
his great commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics (Rouyges, p. 1498, quoted 
already by Renan, Averroes et P Averroisme’, p. 109) Averroés distinguishes the 
different opinions held by philosophers on the relation between God and the 
world ; according to him, besides the Muslim theologians only the Christian 
philosophers like John Philoponus professed that all the potentialities of the 
created reside in God. However, according to Neoplatonism and the Neo- 
platonic commentators ail forms derive ultimately from God, and so all the 
Muhammadan Aristotelians may be meant here. But it is strange that 
Ghazali should give them the designation of ‘true philosophers’. 

p- 318. 1, This is perfectly true; if the only function of the human mind 
were the registration of isolated sense-impressions, as the empiricists or 
sénsationalists or positivists have it, or if esse were percipt, there could be no 
investigation, no search for explanation or causes, since nothing could be 
known but the experienced and the given. All search, al? research, all 
questioning, all wonder implies belief in causation. Ail knowledge, as both 
Plato and Aristotle knew, arises from questioning and wonder: 8:4 ydp 76 
Oavyalew of dvOpwroe kai viv Kal 76 atpSrov Wpfavro pirocodpety (Arist. Met. 
Aa. 982>12; cf. Plato, Theaet. 155 d}, and transcends the actually perceived, 

178 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 318. 2. ‘evident’, I think, would be better than ‘self-evident’; the 
evident is that whose cause is known, the unknown that of which the cause 
is not yet perceived. We believe that we know a thing—says Aristotle, Anal. 
post. A 2, 71¢>9—when we believe that we know its cause. (See above, 
note 236. 5.) 

p- 318.3. This is Aristode’s argument against the Heraclicean Aux 
(Phys. A 2. 18519): all things would be one, right and wrong, man and 
horse, would be identical; indeed one would not even speak any more 
about the identity of all things but about their nothingness: ob wepi toh & 
elvat ra Guta... GMA rept tod pyddr. 

p- 348. 4. This also seems to me to be true. All conceptual thought im- 
plies the idea of identity, and all identity in the real implies a conformity to 
Jaw, a sameness of action under the same conditions, i.e. that in such-and- 
such conditions a certain entity will necessarily act in such-and-such a way; 
the concept of fire, for example, implies a fore-knowledge of hypothetical 
necessities; if fire acted in different ways under the same conditions, the 
concept of fire would not convey any meaning. 

p- 318.5. Since ‘one’ and ‘being’ are convertible (cf. e.g. Arist. Met, I 
2, 10§3>25). 

p- 319. 1. In this sentence his belief in absolute causal necessity would 
seem to be shaken, and indeed Averroés holds with Aristotle that there are 
accidental events: i.e. when something does not happen always or ir the 
majority of cases, éni +6 aod (cf. e.g. Met. E 2. 102632}. From the follow- 
ing, however, it appears the he means here only that under different con- 
ditions things may act differently. 

Pp. 319. 2. ie. the body of someone capable of sensation. 

Pp. 319, 3. Condition (or presupposition, drdMcors : the word bzdBeots with 
this sense is found in Theophrast. Hist, Plant. 4. 13. 4, where it is said that 
the root is the presupposition of the tree) is a logical concept ; a substratum 
(troxeézevor) is a real entity, but, as we have seen, ancient philosophy does 
not distinguish clearly between the logical and the rea]. As we have seen, 
too, the theclogians do not accept the Platonic—Aristotelian-Stoic concept 
of matter; they do, however, accept the idea of the inkerence of accidents 
in a substratum (and they accept the Platonic and Aristotelian idea of a 
scala naturee—see below); and in their logic, which is based on Stoic logic 
and which uses hypothetical propositions for preference, relations of in- 
herence can be included, as in the example given in the text: life is the 
condition or presupposition of knowledge, i.e. if there is no life there is no 
knowledge, and there can be knowledge only in the living (from Kant’s 
treatment of the hypothetical judgement, Kr. d. 7. V., tr. An. 9. 8, it has 
often been erroneously assumed that the hypothetical judgement expresses 
a causal relation, the categorical a relation of inherence). 

NOTES 179 

P- 319. 4. Forms, being universals, are not admitted by the theologians; 
for them there are no universal entities in rerum natura, and universals are 
psychological entities, things of the mind (évvoux). 

P- 319. 5. i.¢, they acknowledge that not only is God, who is invisible, a 
cause, but there are also visible causes. 

Pp. 319. 6. ‘sign’ (, Jo, enpetor) is one of the more important concepts of 
Stoic logic (cf. Sexe. Emp. Hyp. Pyrrh. ii. 96 sqq.; Adv. log. ii. 140 sqq., 
149 sqq.). Stoic logic, in opposition to the Platonic and Aristotelian, does 
not try to establish relations between concepts, but contents itself with 
finding an external connexion between certain observed facts, ¢.g. the fact 
that a woman has milk is a sign or indication that she has conceived. The 
empirical physicians do not try to expiain the connexion, i.e. to find a more 
universal law from which it may be deduced, nor do they regard this con- 
nexion as necessary, but only as probable; and the question how often such 
a connexion has to be observed to give a reasonable probability was much 
discussed (the fact that the probability is greater the greater the number of 
observations can, however, only be explained by the fact that a real causal 
connexion becomes more probable), The fact that science tries to explain 
such connexions and does not regard them as a mere expression of empiric- 
ally stated coincidence, but holds them to be invariable and necessary, 
shows that we assume them to be based on a causal relation. 

p. 319. 7. This is a Stoic proof (cf. Sext. Emp. Ade. phys. i, 78 sqq.}5 
instead of ‘harmony’ one might translate ‘sympathy’, i.e. the Stoic evp- 
ad@eva which holds all things together and through which, when a finger is 
cut, the whole body shares in its condition. 

p- 319. 8. This is a well-known dictum; cf: note 16. 5. Sextus Empiricus 
says (Ado, phys. i. 204 and Hyp. Pyrrh, ii, 19; 23} that the man who denies 
cause does so either without a cause or with a cause—but in the former case 
his assertion is worthless. 

p. 320. 1. This is a telling question, and I do not know how, for example, 
Hume would answer it. If causation is really a habit in man, what makes it 
possible that such a habit can be formed, or what is the objective counter- 
part of these habics? Is it simply our good luck that nature repeats the same 
connexions over and over again? The most important question, however, 
that which the Greek dogmatists asked the empiricists, viz. how many 
times such a connexion must be observed, before it can be relied upon (cf. 
eg. Galen, On Medical Experience, Walzer, viii. 8), or before such a habit can 
be formed, is one he does not ask, Besides, how can we act at all, before such 
a habit is formed? For we shall not be able to act, not knowing the conse- 
quences of our actions, or rather not knowing that we can act at all, Have 
we to pass through a period of inertia where we observe and wait till in one 
way or another the habit arises? (see also note 324. 4). Proverbial wisdom, 

180 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

however, has it that once bitten is twice shy, that a burnt childe dreadeth 
the fire, that he that stumbieth twice at one stone is worthy to break his shin. 

p. 320. 2. Koran xxxv. 41-42. 

p- 320. 3. Habit (@os), says Aristotle (Rhef. A 10. 136956) is what one 
does through having done it often. 

p. 320. 4. For nature, according to Aristotle (Rhet, A 11, 1970*7) is con- 
cerned with the invariable, as habit with the frequent, 4 yer pvocs tod ded, 
76 8é £0¢ rot rodAdnis. However, Aristotle often says that things that happen 
by nature happen invariably or in a majority of cases (eg. Phys. B 8. 
198535); and Averroés repeats this below in the text. 

p- 321. 1, Cf. note 317. 3. 

p. 321.2. He is here referring of course to the Stoics, not the Epicureans. 
According to Aristotle colours come into existence from the fundamental 
colours, black and white, through mixture (uigis) ; of. De sensu 3. 43918- 
440525. About the Stoic theory of colours nothing is known except a few 
words ascribed to Zeno (Stoic Vet. Fr. i. 26. 1-3), according to which colours 
are the first configurations (cyjparsiopot) of matter, or colour is the surface- 
stain (émixpwors) of matter. 

p- 321.3. The sun hardens mud and melts wax, says Sext. Emp, 4d», log. 
ii. 194; Adv. phys. i. 247; for this whole passage compare Sext. Emp. Adv, 
phys. 1, 246-9. 

p- 321. 4. This example is also found in Sextus Empiricus, loc, cit.: é 
dos . . . Aeuxadver pty 73, €oOjpara, peraive 58 rv jyyerépay emgdveay: the 
sun whitens clothes, but blackens our complexion, 

p- 322. 1. The elemental fire, ic. the fire which has its natural place 
directly under the heavenly spheres and which surrounds the air (cf. 
Aristotle, De caele B 4. 287°33 ; Meteor, A 4. 34114). For Averroés’s theory 
compare my Ep. d. Met, d. Av., p. 182, 

p. 322.2, Compare, however, what Averroés says himself, p. 288. 

Pp. 323. 1. Koran tii. 5. It is hardly necessary, I think, to draw attention 
to the ambiguity of Averroés’s religious views. 

P- 324. 1. With the whole of this section compare Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. 
i, 202~4, where it is said that if there were no causes anything might come 
from anything at any time and place; a horse might come from a man, a 
plant from a horse, snow might congeal in Egypt, there might be a drought in 
Pontus, things happening in summer might occur in winter and vice versa ; 
and again, Ayp. Pyrrh, iii, 18, where we have again as an example the horse 
which might come from mice, or, as another example, elephants that might 
come from ants. 

p. 324.2. It is to be remembered, however, that for the Ash’arites the 
possible is the realized. 

NOTES 181 

p. 924.3. The conjecturing power, i.¢. ,wta, dyyivora, which we met in 
Avicenna, see note 313. 9. 

Pp. 324. 4. This is of course an absurd theory, and condemns man to 
absolute passivity. Such an absolute passivity, however, is the consequence 
of any sensationalistic theory which reduces causation to a mere sequence of 
events, since for such a theory the words ‘J do’, ‘I act’, ‘I think’ are com- 
pletely devoid of sense. Ghazali admits activity in God, but does not define 
the word; he would hardly be able to hold {as Averroés sees) that God’s 
action is nothing but a habit in Him, i.e. an habitual sequence of events. 

P- 325.1. The formula in itself leaves the question open; if knowledge is 
simply the recording of externa) data, there is no objection to Ghazali’s 
theory ; it belongs, however, to man to foresee, to intend, and to act, which 
implies law and a knowledge of law; and this is what Averroés wishes to 
express, as can he seen from what follows. 

Pp. $25.2. Le. ifthe agent, God, could do anything, and anything could 
be done to the creature, i.e. the substratum. (However, the omnipotence of 
the creator already implies the possibility of omniformity in the creature.) 

p- 325-3. Le. ifanything may happen in the future. 

Pp. 325.4. Ido not think that Averroés’s position is very acceptable from 
a theological point of view, for it does not leave any liberty to God what- 
ever, since God must conform to the law. One might perhaps say that God 
has chosen the law Himself; however, once this law is chosen He can no 
longer infringe it. 

P- 325.5. ‘created’, i.e, revealed or inspired. 

p- 325.6, This seems to mean that even revealed or inspired knowledge 
must be in agreement with what is possible according to the laws of nature. 

P- 325. 7. I think this means that if we know that an event is possible— 
and we may know this either through revelation or through reason or through 
both—there must be in reality potentialities which make this event possible. 

P- 325. 8. This contradicts what he said on p. 320 (see note 320. 4). 

P- 325. 9. Le. knowledge, even divine creative knowledge, implies always 
a thing known with which it is in agreement. 

p. 325. 10. ‘the nature of the actually existent’, i.e. the fact that Zaid is 
coming. 

P- 325. 11. This seems to mean that knowledge can only refer to facts, an 
assertion which is surely false. 

p- 326. 1. i.e, through God’s knowledge, Zaid’s coming (for example) is 
attached to Zaid. This would seem to imply that God’s knowledge is the 
only cause of everything that happens. See, however, the next sentence in 
the text and the next note. The whole passage is of course very confused ; the 

182 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

term ‘nature’ is used in a very vague and indefinite sense and the concept of 
creative knowledge involves in fact a contradictio in adtecto. The general sense 
of the passage, however, seems to be that God cannot infringe natural law. 

p- 326, 2. i.e. through our ignorance of the causal laws which determine 
(for example) Zaid’s coming. 

p- 326.3. It would seem from the next sentence in the text that opposites 
are always in equilibrium in themselves, since the cause of their actualiza- 
tion, i.e. the preponderance given to the one over the other, seems to lie in 
‘the knowledge of the existence of this nature’, ic. God’s knowledge that 
this opposite will be realized. 

p- 326. 4. Koran xxvii, 66. 

p- 326. 5. Cf. note 320, 4, 

p- 326. 6, The consequences mentioned, pp. 323-4. 

p. 326. 7. In this section Ghazali abandons the Ash‘arite theory of the 
denial of causation, and reverts to the rationalistic supernaturalism of the 
Muslim philosophers (i.e. their attempt to justify supernatural facts by 
rational arguments, by theories, for example, of influences emanating from 
the soul or of a universal natural sympathy) which ultimately derives from 
Stoicism. The philosophers limite supernatural possibilities arbitrarily to 
certain categories; but the Ash‘arites, who do not show any logical con- 
sistency, assert that, once philosophical principles are admitted, there is no 
limit to God’s omnipotence but the logically impossible and absurd. The 
whole problem was much discussed in Scholastic philosophy. Leibniz’s 
position on this question is almost identical with the Ash‘arite view. 

P- 327. 1. Compare Leibniz, Theod. 1, ‘Discours de la conformité de Ia foi 
avec la raison’, 3: ‘I] se peut qu'il y ait des miracles que Dieu fait par Ie 
ministére des anges, ott les lois de la nature ne sont point violées, non plus 
que lorsque les hommes aident ja nature par Dart, l’artifice des anges ne 
différant du nétre que par le degré de perfection.” It is interesting to see that 
Newton’s discovery of the law of gravitation was used for the explanation 
of such possibilities; cf. Leibniz, op. cit., 19: ‘. . . le célébre M. Locke a 
déclaré, en répondant 4 M. V’évéque Stillingfleet, qu’aprés avoir vu le livre 
de M. Newton, il rétracte ce qu’il avait dit lui-méme, suivant l’opinion des 
modernes, dans son Essai sur l’entendement, savoir qu’un corps ne peut 
opérer immmédiatement sur un autre qu’en Je touchant par sa superficie et en 
Je poussant par son mouvernent: et i] reconnait que Dieu peut mettre des 
propriétés dans fa matiére qui la fassent opérer dans l’éloignement." 

p- 327.2. For plants as composed of earth, cf. Aristotle, De an. I 19. 
435°. 

P- 327, 3. Blood is the final form of food, doxdry spods} 73 alua, cf. e.g, 
Aristotle, De gen. an. A 19. 7263. 

NOTES 183 

P- 327. 4. For the theory of sperm as coming from blood see Aristode, 
De gen. an. A 17-20. 

p- 327. 5. In the sperm there is the form of the animal; cf. Aristotle, De 
gen. an. B 1. 73332 sqq. 

p- 327.6. The theologians and Ghazali admit a scala naturae, a necessary 
order and succession, 76 é¢ef#s, in all things; cf. Aristotle, Hist. an. H 1, 
588>q sqq. and also De an. B 414628: sensation, for example, is a condition 
of intellect, nutrition of sensation, &c. Compare Thomas Aquinas, Contr, 
gent. ili, c. 99, where he declares that God can produce an effect without 
its proximate causes, 

p. 327.7. C£ Leibniz, op. cit. 2: ‘il est donc vrai que ce n’est pas sans 
raison que Dieu les (i.e. les lois générales) a données, car il ne choisit rien 
par caprice, et comme au sort, ou par une indifférence toute pure; mais Jes 
raisons générales de bien et de l’ordre, qui l’y ont porté, peuvent étre 
vaincues, dans quelques cas, par des raisons plus grandes d’un ordre 
supérieur.’ 

p: 328, 1. According to Aristotle’s principle of synonymity, everything 
comes into existence from the synonymous, e.g. warmth from warmth; cf. 
Me. Z 9. 

p- 328. 2. For the spontaneous generation of worms, the so-called ‘earth- 
guts’, yijs evrepa, see Aristotle, De gen. an. 11. 762>27, and Hist. an. Z 16, 
570415; see also Hist. an. E 19. 55041 for the spontaneous generation of 
grubs, cxdAnees; for the spontaneous generation of mice compare the 
curious passage in Aristotle, Hist. an. Z 37. 580630, and Pliny, x. 85, who 
says that according to Aristotle the generation of mice takes place dambenda, 
non cottz. Scorpions according to Aristotle (fr. 367 Rose} are generated 
from rotten bergamot-mint, €« rév osupfpiuv cardrrwry; as to serpents, 
they are oviparous (see Arist. Hist, an. Z 1. 5581}, and Aristotle nowhere 
says that they might be generated spontaneously. 

p- 328. 3. ‘non pas par caprice, et comme au sort, ou par une indifference 
toute pure’. 

p. 328. 4. Although Aristotle himself does not seem to admit the possi~ 
bility of the generation of men from earth (see Arist. De gen, an. I 11. 
962628), there was an old Greek tradition that such a generation had taken 
place {ecf., for example, Plato, Pit. 269 b and Herodotus viit. 45). 

P- 329. 1. In these two examples, although they are logically impossible, 
something more than the simultaneous affirmation and negation of one 
isolated entity is involved: in the definition of will, for example, a relation 
to knowledge is implied. All definition states a necessary relation between 
two concepts, and to deny the logical implication is logically impossible 
since it destroys the definition. 

184 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 329.2. There is some confusion here. There is no logical impossibility 
in the supposition that God creates purposeful actions in a dead man (or 
in a living animal that acts by instinct). But the Ash‘arites hold that God 
is the sole agent, and that the actions of living men are created by Him, and 
then the question arises what difference there can be between voluntary 
and involuntary action in man (for the distinction between voluntary and 
involuntary action see Galen, De motu muse. ii. 5). The same objection was 
made against the Stoics; if no atom can move without God’s will, if every- 
thing depends on fate, there is no longer any sense in man’s deliberation 
and will (cf. Plat. De comm. not. 34; Alexander Aphrod. De. ¢ fato i, 933 Neme- 
situs, De nat. hom. 3g). Another unavoidable consequence is that vice occurs 
not only of necessity or according to fate, but also in accordance with the 
Reason of God and with what is best (cf, Plut. De Stoic. rep. 34). 

P- 329. 3- Aristatle expresses the principle of contradiction in the same 
way: opposites cannot inhere in the same substratum simultaneously 
(Met. P 3. 100526). 

Pp. 329. 4. Leibniz (op. cit. 19) does not seem to regard this as impossible; 
he thinks the dogma of the real and substantial participation may be 
explained perhaps by the fact that one body can have an immediate influence 
on others; divine omnipotence might perhaps cause one body to be present 
in others, there being no great difference between immediate influence and 
presence. 

p- 329. §. E do not know to whom Ghazali is referring; perhaps it is to 
Ibn Hazm, according to whom God can do also what is logically impossible 
(cf. op. cit. ii. 181); but as a matter of fact it is the theory which ehe Ash‘ar~ 
ites and Ghazali himself hold, since according to them Gad at every moment 
re-creates afresh the whole world, in which there is no stable element nor 
any connexion. For Aristotle, however, whose theory Ghazali (cf. Phys. A 
6~10) is going to reproduce, change implies a substratum, a matter which 
changes and is the underlying stable element to which the changes occur. 

p. $30. 1. He should, of course, say ‘the illusion of power’, for if God acts 
in us we do not act ourselves, although we may in ‘voluntary action’ labour 
under the illusion that we do. ‘Power’ seems here to be a translation of 74 
é¢” qpiv and Ghazali, following al-Ash‘ari, who also distinguishes between 
voluntary action and a reflex action like shivering (see Shahrastani, Relig, and 
Philos. Sects, i. 68), here gives the answer of the Stoics to their critics (see, for 
example, Aulus Gellius, Noct. Att. vii, 2); although everything is determined 
by fate, everything acts according to its nature; if, for example, you throw 
down a stone the impulse is given by you, but the stone rolls according to 
its own nature, and man acts according to his nature when he acts deliber- 
ately and by will. The ultimate dilemma, and that not only for the Stoics 
and the Ash‘arites, is this: I am only responsible for those acts which 1 have 

NOTES 185 

freely chosen, and my choice depends on my character (or nature), But 
there are only two factors which determine my character; the internal 
initial characteristics transmitted to me by my parents, and the external 
conditions in which J find myself; and I have freely chosen neither of these 
factors. The whole problem belongs to that of objective possibility, which I 
have discussed before: My will implies the possibility of doing or not doing, 
but only when all the conditions are fulfilled can the posstble happen ; then, 
however, it is necessary. 

p- 330. 2. I think he means that we attain the knowledge that these 
movements are performed by a living being like ourself, possessing will. 
I do not think he means God here. 

Pp- 331. 1- This is badly expressed; what he means is that certain acts 
which are expected need not necessarily occur, 

P- 331. 2, Since the theologians admit definitions, and in the definition, 
according to Aristotle, the genus takes the place of matter, the specific 
difference the place of form (cf. e.g. Arist, Afet. 4 6. 1016428}. 

P- 33%. 3. i.e. in sublunary living beings. 

p- 331.4. The theologians admit, as we have seen (p. 319), that life is a 
condition of rationality ; i.e. they accept the definition of man as a rational 
animal, but do not regard warmth and moisture, which are the active 
qualities of the elements (cf. De gen. et corr. B 2. 329%24), as a condition of 
life, because these qualities do not enter into the definition of life. For the 
Aristotelians, however, there is a steady progress, an uninterrupted scala 
naturae, from the simple elements through the homogeneous parts (dp,orozepf) 
and the organic towards man, in whom earthly nature finds its highest per- 
fection and its supreme end: the lower is a condition of the higher, which 
is its end (cf. Arist. De part. an. B 1. 646712). It is warmth (or pneuma} 
which generates life according to Aristotle (De gen. an. B 3. 73629 sqq.). 

P- 330.5. Every organ is adapted to its function, whose means it is ; shape 
and function are intimately related (cf. Arist. De an. A 3. 407 °13). 

p- 331.6. For the hand as an organ of the intellect see Aristotle, De part. 
an, & 10, 689% sqq. 

P- 3392. 1. Le. every species has its peculiar qualities, f:a, which do not 
define the species although they characterize it (cf. Arist. Top. A 4. 101519), 

p. 332.2. Koran xxiii. r2~14. 
P. 332. 3. We have seen that some Greek authors also believed this. 

p. 332. 4. Such a theory is in fact akin to those theories (see e.g. J. 8. 
Mill, Syst. of Logic, ii. 7. 5} which derive the laws of thought fram experience. 
Averroés here refers to Ibn Hazm, who (op. cit. ii. 181) distinguishes four 

186 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

classes of the impossible, declares that the third class, that of the logically 
impossible, ¢.g. that a man should at the same time sit and stand, is possible 
for God in another world, although we know necessarily by the actual 
organization of our mind (| JaaJ} 4.) that it is not possible in this. The 
Ash’arites do not assere chat the logically impossible is possible for God (see 
Ibn Hazm’s polemics against ther, op. cit. v. 244). 

Pp. 333-1. It is rather strange that Shahrastant in his Religious and Philo- 
Sophical Sects, pp. yo-7t, reproaches Abu Ma‘ali (i.e. Juwaini, surnamed the 
Imam of the two Holy Towns, an Ash‘arite and the teacher of Ghazali) for 
acknowledging a causa! nexusin nature and coming near to the philosophical 
point of view. 

P. 333, 2. Koran xxxiit. 62; xxxv. 41; xlvili, 23. 

P- 333. 3- CE. note 332. 4, and see also Ibn Hazm (op. cit. ii, 182), where 
he says that what is logically impossible for our understanding is so only 
because God has made it impossible ; if God had wished, it would no longer 
be impossible, and a thing both could be and could not be at the same time, 
or a body could be at the same time in two places or two bodies in the same 
place. 

P- 333. 4. i.e. since the soul has no spatial magnitude it cannot be localized 
anywhere. 

Pp- 333. 5- In the following, Ghazali summarizes Avicenna’s doctrine 
found, for example, in his Salvation, pp. 259 sqq., from which, however, he 
deviates in certain points of terminology, as I shall indicate. 

Pp. 333. 6. It seems contradictory to say that although the soul is not im- 
pressed on a body its faculties are so impressed; the same difficulty exists 
for Aristotle also, but the question will be discussed at length below. It may 
be addect that both in Greek and in Arabic the term for sensatian, aiaPacs, 
icAm, can also mean ‘sense-organ’. 

p- 333. 7+ The term ‘internal sense’ is not found in Aristotle. But Actius 
tells us (Plac, iv. 8. 7; Stotc. Vet. Fr. ii. 39) that the Stoics called Aristotle’s 
‘common sense’ évrés édy}, internal touch (touch, in accordance with their 
general materialistic view), a term translated by Cicero as tactus interior 
(Acad. post. 7. 20); and Alexander of Aphrodisias opposes the objects of 
¢avracia {for the relation of ¢avrasia to common sense see note 334. [} 
as internal percepts, ato@nrd évrds, to the objects of the senses, ataPnra exrds 
(De anima, Bruns, 68. 31), The expression, ‘internal perception’, 7 ato@yrax} 
4 Bor Sdvayus, is used in Neoplatonism (cf. e.g. Plotin. Enn. iv. 8. 8}, and 
Augustine under Neoplatonic influence speaks of an internal sense which is 
conscious of its own perception and in which everything the external senses 
provide is collected (e.g. De tis. arb. ii, 4 and ii. 23). - 

NOTES 187 

" p. 33g. 8. The location of sensation in the brain is based on the discovery 
of the nerves and the anatomical study of the brain by the Greek physicians 
Erasistratus and Herophilus. 

P- 334. t. Aristotle in his theory of the common sense, 7 «owl alodyois, 
made a first and interesting attempt to explain the unity of the percetver 
and the thing perceived, i.e. to explain (1) the fact that the same man (the 
same ego) can perceive sensations of different senses or compare the different 
sensations of one and the same sense (he did not observe the fact that he is 
conscious of his own identity, although he attributes to the common sense 
the faculty of perceiving that we perceive); (2) the fact that, for example, 
when we perceive yellow honey, we are aware that it is sweet, although we 
only see it (ef. De an. I 1. 425"22). On the second point Aristotle confuses 
the unity of the qualities in the external thing (although he does not doubt 
the objectivity of these qualities) with our conviction that the identical thing 
which is seen may be touched and eventually tasted (one must distinguish of 
course between the unity of the external object and our knowledge, or our 
imagining, that it is a unity of such-and-such qualities) and with some 
faculty in our soul of unifying the subjective sensations; if, as a matter of 
fact, the external world were simply a construction out of sensations, there 
ought to be such a unifying faculty (the primitive and irreductible fact that 
the self-same thing which is seen can be touched belies the possibility of such 
@ construction, for a visual] sensation, even if visually extended, can never 
be touched, since by definition it is not in the objective space in which we 
move: heterogeneous sensations cannot be combined). As to farracia 
{representation, imagination), it is primarily, according to Aristotle, a func- 
tion which transcends the actual sensation (cf. De an. FP 3. 4289). Since, 
however, there is also in the sensus communist an awareness of a non-actual 
sensation {as in the example of honey given above), he cannot delimit 
g¢avracia from common sense; and indeed he ascribes to ¢avracia some of 
the functions he attributes to the sensus communis, c.g. awareness that the 
white object actually perceived has such-and-such non-perceived qualities 
{cf. De an. I’ 5. 428428) and also (42822) awareness of the common sensibles 
(which, for instance at De an. P 1. 425*17, he attributes to the common 
sense). The commentatorssaw the difficulty, and, forexampl!e, Ps.-John Philo- 
ponus tries—Comm. in de an. ftbr., Hayduck, 507. 6—to establish a distinction 
between common sense and ¢avracva: common sense is the receptacle of the 
sensible forms through the medium of the particular sense, aloPyars pepur}, 
whereas ¢avraciz receives them both through the common sens. The con- 
fusion in the Aristotelian theory is increased still further in Muslim philosophy 
through certain Stoic developments, as I shall show, and also through ter- 
minological difficulties, the terms used here for the first three internal senses 
being different translations (whose sense js not absolutely fixed) of the Greek 
word ¢avracia; the word, for example, which I translate by ‘representative 

188 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

faculty’ (2)\31 3,33) is used by Avicenna (who calls it also (3, jae] 3 gail) 
for what Ghazali calls the ‘conservative faculty’, whereas Avicenna desig- 
nates the sensus communis by the Greek word (in Arabic transcription, 
Lwlk:3). For the expression judging element’ compare note 334. 6. 

P. 334.2. The estimative faculty (Ajo 451 Sgall): the term is one of the 
different translations of the term garracia, but has acquired a special sense— 
in the Latin translations it is called vis cestimativa, 

P. 334-3. The intentions, jleJ| (in the Latin translation intentiones). 
The word , jleaJ|, as we have seen—note 3. 6—is a translation of the Greek 
7a Aexrd, and instead of ‘intentions’ I might have ¢ranslated it ‘meanings’ 
os ‘significations’. The term shows that here we have Stoic influence, and- 
indeed the Stoics define Aexrév through davravia: Aexrév $2 durdpyew past 74 
Kara Aoyinyy parraciay Sdtorduevov, an intention is what subsists im con- 
formity with a rational presentation (Sext, Emp. Adv. fog. ii. 70). Now the 
Stoics distinguish six classes of farvracias (Diog. Laert. vii, 51; Stoic. Vet. Fr. 
ij. 24, 15) : the sensational (alo@yrixas)}, the non-sensational (ob« aladyrinal), 
the rational (Aeyxaf), the non-rational (dAoyor), the artful (reyrexat), and 
the artless (dreyvoc), i.¢. natural, unmethodical ; the non-sensational appre- 
hend through insight (Sidvoea) the incorporeals and the other conceptual 
notions ; the rational exist only in man and are thoughts (vovjoes), whereas 
the non-rational, which animals possess, have no name (0d reruxdkacw 
dvéparos). It seems to me from this that the later Seoics may have recognized 
a nonerational, but at the same time non-sensational, davracéa on which the 
instinct of animals depends, and that the Arabs may have applied to this 
gavracia, to which the Greeks had not given a distinctive name, the term 
‘estimative faculcy’. In any case, that there is Stoic influence here may be 
seen from Seneca’s epistle 121, where he asserts that animals also have a 
constitutionis stae sensus (constitutionts suae sensus 18 the translation of coveiénors, 
the Stoic counterpart of Aristotle’s sensus communts in so far as sensus coms 
munis means the consciousness of one’s own activity), and to this sensus he 
ascribes all the instinctive actions of animals and, for example, the fact that 
the hen flees from the hawk, but not from the peacock or the goose (I have 
not met in classical literature the example of wolf, sheep, and lamb which 
seems to be a common example among the Arabs and which, ¢.g., is found 
in Farabi’s Gems of Wisdom and in Ghazati’s Vivification of Theology, vol. iii, 
p. 7}. Gf. note 304. 7. 

P- 334.4. The forms, i.e, the individual sensible forms which exist in the 
sensus communis, 

P- 334-5. According to Avicenna this faculty is located at the end of the 
middle ventricle of the brain (Salvation, p. 266). 

NOTES 189 

p. 334.6. Aristotle distinguishes between ¢evragia alofyrue} {or Boviev= 
ruch) and davragia Aopwrucy (De an. I 10. 433°29), sensational and intel- 
lectual or deliberative garragia (a term which in a way is a contradictio in 
adiecto, since davraoia is by definition atoPyriey, an image) ; but he docs not 
indicate how the animals can perform their actions by mere avracia (and 
desire), without any rational element (on the other hand, he regards sensa- 
tion already as having a kind of rational element akin to judgement, De an. 
I’ 7. 4318, and in De memoria 1. 45015 he regards aif dayracia as having a 
conceptual element), and John Philoponus simply says (op. cit. §15. 9): 
“You must know that what in us is the intellect is in an animal the gar 
racia’; from which it would appear that the imaginative faculty can per- 
form what the estimative faculty is supposed to do, and the estimative 
faculty is therefore superfluous, as Averroés asserts [ater (p. 336). 

P. 334. 7- Here, too, there is some Stoic influence. The Stoics (but not 
Aristotle) have the term gavracia ovPeruch, ‘combining garracia ’ (cf. Sext. 
Emp. Ado. fog. ii. 276), and Ps.-John Philoponus (op. cit. 509. 16) distin- 
guishes two kinds of ¢avvacia, one that accepts the forms and one that 
combines at will representations of phantastic beings. 

Pp. 334.8. Avicenna says, loc. cit., that this faculty is located in the middle 
ventricle of the brain near the vermiform process (y+ daw9'Y| wizgncdl 
osgd} Ace Ew). 

P- 334-9. See note 345. 2 

P: 334.10. Galen, De plec. Hippocr. et Plat. vii. 3 (K. v. 605), says that 
anatomical research on the brain has shown that a lesion in the last ven- 
tricle affects the sensibility and motive power of the animal more than a 
lesion of the middle ventricle, and a lesion in the middle ventricle more than 
one in the first. Aristotle himself regarded the heart as the central organ of 
sensation (see e.g. De tuvent. 2, 46911). 

p. 334. 11. This isa very questionable logic, especially in view of the fact 
that representation itself implies memory; but the comparison with water 
is found also in Avicenna, Soc. cit. It is inspired by a passage in Aristotle’s 
De memoria 1. 4501-3, where he says that people in violent emotion do not 
remember well; it is as if a seal were stamped on running water. And 
Plotinus says, Exa. iv. 7. 6, that if one should imagine sense-impressions to 
be impressed on a liquid like water, they would run away and there would 
be no memory. 

P- 334. 12. Avicenna calls the memorative faculty the retentive-memora- 
tive: 3,51! absLL! 3433]. In this distinction of two memories, one for 
sensible affections, one for thoughis, there seems to be some Neopiatonic 
influence, for Plotinus in his subtle and profound discussion of memory 
(Enn. iv. 3. 25-33) distinguishes between them and attributes the former to 

190 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

the lower soul, the latter to the higher (Ena. iv. 9. 15-22). He has, however, a 
Tauch more idealistic view of memory, which, according to him, belongs 
exclusively to the soul, and at Lan. iv. 3. 26 he refutes the Stoic view which 
compares memory with the imprint of a signet-ring on wax (a view which, 
however, Chrysippus did not share, cf. Sext. Emp. Adb. fog. i. 229). 

P- 335: 1. What Ghazali relates here of the motive faculties is almost (see 
note 335. 4) a textual quotation from a passage in Avicenna, Salvation, 
p- 259. It is, although simplified, materially in agreement with Aristotle, cf. 
e.g. De an. I 10. 433 513 sqq. Aristotle has simply the term darvaota; the 
appetitive animal cannot be without dorracia (433528). 

P- 335-2. There is here some terminological confusion. Ghazali here 
copies Avicenna, who understands by ‘representative faculty’ the fourth 
internal sense, whereas Ghazali meant by it the first. According to what 
Ghazali says (p. 334) about the relation between the third internal sense 
and the motive faculty, one would have expected him to have mentioned 
this third faculty here. But I admit that the meaning of ali these terms is 
very evasive. 

P- 335- 3. This is the only sentence Ghazali adds to this passage. 

Pp. 335- 4. CEL Aristotle, De an. P 10. 433525; alt animals move by pushing 
and pulling, dots «ai <Afcs; there must therefore be in them a fixed point 
from which the movement starts (cf. also Arist. Pays. H 2. 243615). 

P- 335- 5. ‘discursive’ from ‘discourse’ (i.e. speech). By this I translate 
MaL6, derived from , 3h; like Aoyrorsxds from Adyos, both the Greek and the 
Arabic word meaning both ‘speech’ and ‘reason’. 

Pp: 335.6, This is also stated by Avicenna, loc. cit. 

P: 335-7. ‘Conditions’ and ‘modes’ are here synonymous; by these terms 
the theologians expressed the unreality of universals, which existed only for 
the mind (cf. note 3. 6). 

p- 335-8. This is a very simplified summary of Avicenna’s chapter ‘On 
the faculty of the speculative soul and its degrees’, op. cit., p. 269. The idea 
that the soul receives its vices by inclining to the body and being subjected 
by it, and its virtue by contemplation of intellectual realities, is derived from 
Neoplatonism ; cf. e.g. Plotinus, Err. i. 6. 5-6. 

p. 336. 1. The soul is not really subsistent by itself for Aristotle {it is so 
for Plotinus), since it is the form of the body ; but although it is incorporeal 
it performs its functions (except the highest, the intellectual) through organs 
in which it is located, and only the active part of the intellect is separable 
from the body (how this is possible, when the soul is regarded as 2 unity, is 
another question), The arguments that will be given try to prove the 

NOTES 191 

intellect’s independence of any bodily organ (the terms ‘intellect’, vois, 
and ‘soul’, Pug}, are often confused). 

p- 336.2. I think Averroés here means by ‘imaginative faculty’ imagina- 
tion in the more general sense of ¢ayracia, common to men and animals, 

Pp. 936. 3. This sentence is rather confusing. Avicenna evidently does not 
think that the estimative faculty in the animal replaces the cogitative in 
man, nor could Avicenna mean (if indeed he said that the ancients called 
the estimative faculty the imaginative) that the estimative faculty and the 
imaginative are identical, as Avervots secms to imply, but only that the 
ancients did not distinguish clearly between them. 

Pp. 336.4. ie. to the sensus communis; shape (oxfua), being a kind of 
magnitude, is one of the common sensibles and is apprehended through 
motion by the seasus communis (Arist. De an. Fi. 42516) which, according to 
the Muslim philosophers, is located in the front part of the brain. 

p. 336. §. ie. the imaginative faculty is not mere imagination, but per- 
etives what happens in the external world. 

p- 336. 6. ie. they are not derived from sensible experience ; this seems 
to contradict the Aristotelian principle ‘nihil in intellectu quod non prius 
in sensu’, 

p- 336. 7, Nothing is found in the De sensu about this question, but 
Averroés is probably referring to De memoria 1. 450°15, where Aristotle says 
that animals possess ¢avracia, because it is primarily a perception and not 
one of the conceptual faculties, although it is accidentally such a faculty 
(it seems to be, like memory, something intermediate between perception 
and thought; cf. ibid. 44926). 

P- 337-1. This is the thesis of Avicenna (Setvation, p. 285) in the chapter 
on the immateriality of the substratum of the intelligibles. See below in the 
text, 

P- 337: 2. Some theologians held that thought was located in an atom in 
the heart. The Stoics also had placed the jyyeyorexdv in the heart (or in the 
brain; according to Plutarch, De comm. not. 45, the Stoics regarded it as a 
mdpos orsypratos, a passage not bigger than a point, in the heart). 

P: 337. 3 The question of the indivisibility or divisibility of time, space, 
and matter was discussed copiously by the Muslim theologians. How well 
the Greck arguments for either point of view were known can be seen from 
the long discussion of this question by Ibn Hazm, and his refutation of 
Ash‘arite atomism, op. cit., vol. v. 92-108 (the arguments for indivisibility 
are mainly based on Aristotle). Curiously enough the older theologians were 
also interested in this question, 

PD. 337.4. i.e. of a plurality in the atom, since this atorn would have two 
sides and would therefore be divisible. This is the argument found in 

192 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Asistotle, Phys. Z 1 (ad init.) . indivisibles could not touch, because they 
would not have parts and therefore their wholes would coincide. It is also 
given by Avicenna, p. 286, in the chapter mentioned in note 337. 1. 

p. 338. &. Throughout this problem perception and ¢avracta are regarded 
as images on an extended substratum, and, of course, Ghazali is right in 
regarding it as impossible, as the philosophers hold in the case of other uni- 
versals, that an abstract entity like hostility should be irnpressed on a surface. 

p. 338. 2, But this is not an argument against the intelligibles, for the 
philosophers do not hold that intelligibles can be impressed on matter, 
although inconsistently they hold this to be possible for hostility, On the 

' contrary it is an argument against the materialism which Ghazali has set 
out to defend. 

p- 338.3. This argument against the philosophers is correct, if by ‘know- 
ledge’ is meant sensible knowledge, i.e. perception and ¢avracia. 

p. 338.4. This is a curious remark, since Ghazali has just argued that 
there can be no relation between hostility and a body. It can only mean 
here: ‘like the relation of hostility to the body according to the philosophers, 
a conception I have shown to be false’. 

P- 339. 1. 1.¢. the colour white, for example, is evenly extended over the 
whole body, and when you take a part of the body you take also a part of 
the white, and the white of the part is the same white as the white of the 
body. 

P- 339-2. Here there is another conception of sensation; i.e. it is con- 
ceived not as an impression, but as a faculty, a capacity for action (and 
reception), and therefore shapeless (‘without a specific shape’, says Averroés, 
but this seems to me a contradictio in adtecto) ; but how can the shapeless be 
extended over the extended? There is here a reference to the theory found 
in Aristotle, De an. A 5. 411426, Gf. note 343. 2. 

P- 339. 3- Le, sight, which is an attribute of the eye, is, like whiteness, 
found in every part of its substratum, i.e. the eye, but some eyes or some 
parts of the eye have a greater receptivity for sight than others, and in old 
age this receptivity of some parts of the eye becomes less and therefore the old 
see less well than the young (Aristotle says, De an. A 4. 408ba1, ifan old man 
could acquire the eye of a young man, he would see as well as a young man), 

P- 339-4. i.e. sight and (the same shade of) white have in all individuals 
the same definition, but they are quantitatively divided, i.e. spatially and 
through being in different individuals. 

Pp. 339. 5. He probably means by ‘that they cannot be divided into any 
particular part whatever’ that, for example, some eyes Jose in part their 
receptivity for sight. 

NOTES rg3 

p. 339. 6. i.e. the part which has vanished acts (or acted) with a greater 
intensity. 

Pp. 339. 7- Even colours cannot be divided absolutely, for they terminate 
in a point at which they cannot be seen any more {namely at a certain 
distance), This refers to Aristotle, De sensu 7. 449*22 sqq. 

P- 339. 8. This refers to De sensu 6. 445%28, where Aristotle says that only 
the continuous fer se (xa8” adr) falls into a finite number of equat parts. 

p. 340. 1. He means that Ghazalt treated estimation as if it were an 
impression, whereas it is a faculty; Averroés, however, has not shown in 
any way how Ghazali’s argument could be refuted by regarding estimation 
as a faculty. 

p- 340.2. In the chapter quoted in note 337. 1. 

p: 349. 3. This completion is given by Avicenna in the chapter indicated 
in note 346. 6, 

p- 341.1. Curiously enough this is nowhere explicitly stated by Aristotle, 
The argument is found in Avicenna (see below), It may be inferred from the 
passage at the beginning of De an. I'4, where Aristotle agrees with Anaxagoras 
that the mind must be unmixed, dey, and asserts that it cannot be mixed 
with the body or have an organ, and cannot have a form of its own, since 
the appearance of such a form would obstruct everything else. This connects 
with the passage (De an. B 5, 447°2) where he asks why the sense-organs 
cannot have a perception of themselves, 

P- 341.2. This is the argument given by Avicenna (Salvation, p. 2go). It 
is based on the argument found in Aristotle, De an. A 3. 4072 sqq., where 
Aristotle attacks Plato’s conception, found in the Timaeus, of the soul as 
implying magnitude. Aristotle says in substance that, the meaning Plato 
gives to ‘soul’ being undoubtedly ‘intellect’, the unity of the intetlect is not 
the unity of a magnitude. If it were a magnitude, with which of its parts 
would it think? And if it thought with some only of its parts, the others 
would be superfluous; besides, if the term ‘parts’ means points, there would 
be an infinity of them and infinity cannot be traversed, and if all che parts 
collectively were in contace with the thing thought, what could be meant by 
this contact? 

Pp. 342.1. Cf. Aristotle, Zth. Nic. Z 1. 11994: 9 spexrixes voids % mpo~ 
alpects 9 Spetis Scavonrixy, kal } Toravryn apy} &Oparros: will is either desiring 
reason or reasoning desire, and such a principle is man (in his totality). 

P: 343-1. This in a way contradicts what he said on p. 339, where he 
regarded this second class as that of things by definition divisible through 
the divisibility of the substratum, although with different degrees of intensity, 

P- 343-2. The problem of the faculties is discussed in De an. A 5. 4114 26 
sqq., where Aristotle asks what it is that holds the soul together if it can be 

194 TAHAFUT AL TAHAPUT 

divided by nature through the different operations of its organs. Should we 
hot rather say that each of the operations of the soul belongs to the soul in 
its entirety? Is not the soul a unity? However, although in this passage he 
seems to regard the soul as a unity, he regards only the intellect as self- 
subsistent and imperishable, for, says he, if there were anything that could 
destroy it, it would be decrepitude (De an. A 4. 408618-20). 

P- 343-3. After the passage where Aristotle asserts that only decrepitude 
could destroy the intellect, he says that the same thing seems to apply to the 
sense-organs; and then the sentence quoted by Averroés follows: 2 yap 
AdBos 6 wpeoPtrns Supa Torovd(, Bréaoe dv Gomep xai é véog (loc, cit., ar), 

Pp: 343. 4. Aristotle says, loc. cit., 'g2: ‘Decrepitude is not due to some 
affection of the soul, but to that in which it resides, just as in drunkenness 
and illnesses.” However, for Aristotle sleep and fainting, Avroyuxia, are not 
due to any affection of any sense-organ, but to the inactivity of the central 
sense, the sensus communis (ch. De some. 2. 45526 sqq.). 

Pp. 343. 5. It is found that plants and certain insects live when they are 
cut in two, and it seems that the same soul resides specifically, although not 
numerically, in the two parts (Arist, De an. A 4. 409°9; cf. B 2. 419%16). 

p. 343.6, Koran xvii. 87. 

P- 343. 7- The parts, ie. the organ and the soul: the organ becomes 
inactive, and the soul remains both in sleep and in death (but can it be 
active after death ?). But this is not the conception of Aristotle, for whom 
both waking and its opposite, sleep, are common to body and soul (cf. De 
soma, 1. t) and due, as we have seen, to the inactivity of the central sense; 
the term ‘common sense’, however, is ambiguous and may mean either the 
central organ (in animals that have blood this is the heart} or its counter- 
part in the soul ; both meanings are intended here. For Aristotle (cf. De gen, 
an, £ 1. 77830) sleep is a borderland (ye@dpuov; 41 is the Arabic term, 
well known in Muslim mysticism) between life and death, becween existence 
and non-existence. Sleep is the first state of the animal, because through it 
it passes from non-existence to existence (the Homeric metaphor of Sleep 
as the brother of Death was well known in Islam, see, for example, Ghazali, 
Vivification of Theology, iv. 291}. 

p. 343.8. Koran xxxix. 43. 

Pp: 344. t. Compare note 342.1; for Aristotle, however, man in his 
totality consists of his body and soul, for Ghazali’s materialism, in his body 
exclusively. 

Pp. 344-2. If the soul is a unity, as Averroés has just asserted, there is 
certainly such an analogy, as Aristotle also holds (see next note). 

p. 344.3. Both Aristotle and Averroés hold at the same time three 
different theories about sensation: (1) that sensation is an impression on a 

NOTES 195 

sense-organ ; (2) that it is a faculty ofa soul in which all faculties are united ; 
(3) that it is a faculty of that (for Aristotle, at least, inseparable) synthesis of 
body and soul which constitutes man. Here Averroés seems to hold that one 
ought really to say that the eye sees, and that ‘a man sees’ is only an idiomatic 
expression. Aristotle, however (De an. A 4. 40853), says: BéArioy yap tows 
By Adyew viv duyqu edectv 7} pavbdvew 4 Stavoeiobaz, GAA rév dvOparrov TH 
yuyR: ‘Tt would perhaps be better not to say that the soul has pity or learns 
or thinks, but that the man does so through his soul.’ 

Pp. 345. 1. ‘Judgement of his sight,’ For Aristotle there is in sensation 
already a cognitive element (De an. B ro, 4245 ; cf. 432716). 

Pp. 345. 2. Such absurdities are a consequence of all materialization of 
mental phenomena ; compare with this section Plutarch, De comm, nol. 45. 
This theory is directed against the materialism, Stoic in origin, of those 
theologians for whom all reality consists only in body, and for whom the soul 
is nothing but the material vital spirit (mvedpa, spiritus, t. 9) which is dis- 
persed through the whole body (cf.¢.g. Alex. Aphr. De an. libr. mant. 115. 6, 
Bruns; Stoic. Vet. Fr. it, 218, 25) although its principle is in the heart (or 
the brain). The origin of the argument is unknown to me, and seems to 
have been so to Averroés, too, but it is based on problems discussed by the 
Stoics; Chrysippus objected to the impression-theory on the ground that, if 
the mind thought at the same time of a triangle and a quadrangle, the same 
body would be at the same time triangular and quadrangular (cf. Sext. 
Emp. Ado. fog. i. 229). It may have been offered either by someone who 
believed the seat of the soul to be an indivisible body, an atom, or by one 
who believed the soul to be an indivisible immaterial substratum (if the 
latter, one should not be shocked by the idea that it is said to be in a place; 
Aristotle himself calls the intellect a réaos elSav, De an. I 4. 429°27, a place 
for universals, and our modern philosophers say that things are in a conscious- 
ness). It asserts that, since we cannot assert two opposite ideas at the same 
time and cannot, for example, possess at the same time ignorance (regarded 
as something positive} and knowledge, there must be room in the soul for 
only one of two oppasite notions, and therefore it must be indivisible. The 
last sentence of the passage means that the theologians might retort that 
in one indivisible place ignorance and knowledge could be opposed, since 
in one place they might form a unity—i.c. the notion that ignorance is not 
knowledge; but their adversary can then object ad hominem that the Stoic 
conception, that the principle of the soul is in the heart or in the brain and 
that at the same time it is a unique vital force extended over the whole body, 
is contradictory. This objection seems fegitimate, but if such a vital force is 
acknowledged it destroys the assailant’s thesis also, (It is curious to see that 
Plotinus argues the other way round. He says, Enn. iv. 7, 8, that if the soul 
were the entelechy of the body and therefore dispersed through the whole 

196 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

body, a human being could have only one sentiment and never be in dis- 
cord with itself. In a little treatise, ‘On Aappiness and on the ten arguments for 
the substantiality of the soul’—published in Seven Treatises by Avicenna, Haid- 
erabad, H. 1353, and where Avicenna follows largely Plotinus—Avicenna 
says, p. 8, that if the intelligible form were in a body, it would be impossible 
to perceive at the same time two opposites. 

P- $45. 3. Compare Chrysippus’ definition : 4 pang} wredpd dort odduror 
Hiv ovveyés wav7l 7@ odpare Sefjxov (Stoic. Vet. Fr. ii. 238. 33). Plants and 
animals are joined through one single és, junction (Seat. Emp. Adv. fog. 
i. 102; Adv. phys. i. 81: three cohesive forces are distinguished, eis for the 
inorganic, ¢voss for the plants, Yuy} for the animals), 

p- 346. 1. Aristotle, e.g, Anal. Pr. Ai, 24221: raw evarriy elvac Thy abr 
dmonjpny. 

p- 346.2, Bodily or in the body; as we have seen, Aristotle also confuses 
a theory of the common sense as a faculty of the soul subsisting in the body 
with a theory of the common sense as corporeal. The intellect distinguishes 
or joins intellectual opposites, the common sense sensible opposites. 

p. 346. 3. ive. this fifth argument. 

P- 946. 4. dAAd xara play Sivapw Kai Eropov ypdvor play dedyny elvar rip 
évépyevay, i.e. a single faculty can have only one activity at the same moment 
(Arist. De sense 7. 447517). 

p. 346, 5. This takes place through the common sense. 

p- 346. 6. This is proved by Avicenna, op. cit., p. 292, cf. note 341. 1. 

p- 347.1. Cf note 260. 2; we have the following mixed hypothetical 
syllogism : if the intellect perceives the intelligibles through a bodily organ, 
it does not know itself; but it knows itself, therefore it does not perceive the 
intelligibles through a bodily organ. 

Pp: 347.2. It would perhaps be better to translate: ‘It does not see the 
eyelid’ (since colour is the condition of sight (dpdra: 8¢ ypapa #76 Exo} 
Arist. De an. P 2. 425518), 

P- 347. 3. What is placed on the sense-organs is not perceived, but what 
is placed on the flesh is (Arist. De an. Bit. 422534). 

p. 347. 4. This would be difficult for Averroés to explain according to 
Aristotelian theory, since for Aristotle the sense-organ receives the form of 
the percept without its matter ; nor is there any duality in the act of seeing, 
for ‘to act’ here means for Aristotle ‘actuatity’ (the verb becomes a sub- 
stantive), and either the percipient becomes the percept or the percept the 
percipient. 

p. 348. 1. Through this theory of identity not only is thought about other 
things abolished, but also self-consciousness itself. It was just because of the 

NOTES 197 

duality in all chought that Plotinus denied it to the First. As was said above, 
the idea that thinking by adding something to reality falsifies it led 
Aristotle to a theory which annuls thought itself. 

p. 348. 2. The sixth proof is identical with the fifth: if the intellect per- 
ceived through a bodily organ, it could know neither itself nor its organ, 
which would be itself or part of itself; it is in this way that the thesis is set 
out by Avicenna, loc. cit. 

p. 348. 3. That of all animals only the crocodile moves the upper jaw 
was a fact already known to Herodotus (ii. 68}. Aristotle mentions the fact 
in different passages, e.g. Hist. an. A it. 49223: awet ¢ ndvra rd La rip 
xdruver pévuv, wAnv rod morapylov xpoKodeiAov: obros 82 ri dvw pdvor. This 
is given as an example against induction by Sextus Empiricus, Hyp. Pyrrh. 
it. 195: since most animals move the lower jaw, only the crocodile the upper, 
the premiss that every animal moves the lower jaw is false, The general 
argument against induction (émaywy7, laut) is given op. cit. ii. 204: 
éxei yap dnd r&v xara pépos muorodoGas PovAovrat &’ atriis (i.e. eraywyis) rd 
xabddov, Yrot mdvra emdvres 74 Kata wépos ToTTo wovjoovaw 7 Ted, GAN’ ef 
pev sud, ABeBaros Eoras | exayery7}, évdexoudvou rob dvarrofabar 7G xalddov 
Twa T&v mapadetopdvor xara peépos év 7 éraywyi ef Sé navra, ddvvara 
poxPhoovaw, areipwr Svray Tay Kara pépos Kal dmepropiorwy: when one tries 
to reach the universal through induction, one can do this by examining 
cither all the instances or some; if the latter, the induction will be unreliable, 
since some of the neglected cases may be in opposition to the universal, if the 
former, one is attempting the impossible, since the particulars are infinite 
and inexhaustible. Curiously enough, Nemesius, De natura hominis, ii 
{Migne, xl, col. 548), uses exactly the same argument to refute Cleanthes’ 
opposite thesis that nothing incorporeal can partake of the corporeal, 
pydtv dowparor odpar oupadoyew. The De natura hominis was known to 
the Arabs. 

p- 348.4. What follows is a free interpretation of Avicenna’s proof (op. 
cit. p. 292) that, if the intellectual facuity thinks through an organ, it must 
always be conscious of that organ (Lots tel his Ob C:). Avicenna, 
however, speaks only of the organ, not of the body (compare Averroés’s 
answer below in the text). 

Pp. 349-1. Compare William James, The Principles of Psychology, vol. i, 
p. 291: ‘In its widest possible sense, however, a man’s Self is the sur total of 
all that he can call his, not only his body and his psychic powers, but his 
clothes and his house . . 

Pp: 349-2. The organ of smell (consisting of the two olfactory nerves) is, 

according to Galen (De ust part. viii. 6, Helmreich, i, 469}, the only one in the 
skull placed in the foremost ventricle of the brain. 

198 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

Pp. 349.3. Of. Aristotle, Top. A 1: induction based on common opinions 
or the opinions of the majority or the wise (Sofa 83 +d. Soxotvra maow 4 
rois nAclorois 3 tois cogets) has only dialectical value, and its conclusions 
provide only probability. 

P- 350. 1. Aristotle, De an. Ft ad init., proves that there cannot be more 
than five senses. 

P. 350. 2. e.g. the sensus communis and ¢avracia are neglected, 

p- 351. t. This argument, which is given by Avicenna, Salvation, p. 294, 
whom Ghazali follows almost verbally, is found in Aristotle, De an. I 4, 
429*29 (cf. I"2. 42690), with the exception that the tiredness of the intellect 
is not discussed and thereiore is not ascribed to the imaginative faculty; in 
fact this addition invalidates the whole argument, for thought is constantly 
accompanied by imagination {obSéwore voet avev payrdoparos 3 yang}, 
De an. I 7. 431*16). 

P- 352. 1. For the Greeks forty years is the dxp7 of a man, both physically 
and mentally; the Arabs, however, ascribe greater wisdom to the old. 

Pp. 352.2. i.e. from ‘if a is, then either 3 is or not-6’ no inference can be 
drawn. But Ghazali does not seem to see that through this exception the 
whole argument is invalidated. Ofcourse, it may be that for different reasons 
the sense-organs and the intellect decline in old age, and that it is this which 
the argument sets out to prove; but this is a new thesis or hypothesis. The 
argument is taken from Avicenna (op. cit. p. 295), who first gives as a proof 
of the immateriality of the intellect that it does not decline with age whereas 
the senses do, and who then makes the objection that the intellect also 
declines through illness and dotage, an objection which he rebuts in the 
way indicated by Ghazali below in the text. (That the objection was made 
can beseen from Galen, Quod animi mores corporis temperamenta sequuntur, where 
he asks, 3 (Mueller 9. 11): ‘Why, if the soul is immorta) as Plato has it, 
does it leave the body when the brain is too cold or too hot, too dry or too 
moist, and why does a great Joss of blood, or the taking of hemlock or a 
high fever, make it leave it? And’, he adds ironically, ‘if Plato were still 
alive, I should be delighted to learn it from him.’} The argument is based 
erroneously on the passage of Aristotle (De an. 4 4. 408 518) discussed above, 
over the interpretation of which the commentators differ; there it is said 
that the senses decline through the decay of the organ, not through the decay 
of the faculey, and Aristotle admits (40824) that the intellect declines in 
old age. 

P- 352. 3. The conception of fear as a disease is Stoic. Any permanent 
disposition to a violent emotion is called by the Stoics réenya, disease (cf. 
Stoic. Vet. Fr. iii, 105. 6}. 

P- 353- 1. According to the Stoics man acquires reasoning power during 
the first seven years of his life (Aét. Plac. iv. 11.4); in the second seven years, 

NOTES 199 

or thereabouts, he acquires the nations of right and wrong (Aét. Plac.v. 23.1). 
According to Varro—see Censorinus, De die nafali, 14—life is divided into 
five equal epochs, each of fifteen years, except the last. The first epoch 
which lasts to the fifteenth year embraces childhood. 

P. 353. 2. Natural heat, ie. wvetpa. 

Pp. 353-3. This passage is closely related to a passage in Plutarch, De 
Ei apud Delphos, 18 (p. 392). I give it here in the translation of Montaigne, 
who quotes it in his Apologie de Raymond Sebond (ad fin.) : ‘De‘facgon que ce 
qui commence a naistre ne parvient jamais jusques 4 perfection d’estre, pour 
autant que ce naistre n’acheve jamais, et jamais n’arreste, comme estant 
4 bout, ains, depuis fa semence, va tousjours se changeant et muant d’un 
4 autre; comme de semence humaine se fait premierement dans le ventre 
de Ia mere un fruict sans forme, puis un enfant formé, puis, estant hors du 
ventre, un enfant de mammetle; aprés il devient garson, puis consequem- 
ment un jouvenceau, aprés un homme faict, puis un homme d’aage; a 
Ja fin decrepité vieillard: de maniere que Vaage et generation subsequence 
va tousjours desfaisant et gastant la precedente.’ The idea of the Heracli- 
tean flux, the constancy of inconstancy, is a favourite subject in later 
Greco-Roman philosophy. Compare also, for example, Seneca, Epist. 58. 
22: ‘nemo nostrum idem est in senectute qui fuit iuvenis, nemo nostrum 
est idem mane qui fuit pridie. corpora nostra rapiuntur fuminum more, 
quicquid vides, currit cum tempore. nihil ex iis quae videmus manet et 
ego ipse, dum toquor mutari ista, mutatus sum’: none of us is in old age 
the same as he was in youth, none of us is in the morning the same as he was 
the previous day. Our bodies are carried away like streams. Everything you 
see hastens away with time. Nothing of what we see remains. And while 
I am saying that all this is changing, I myself am changed. 

P- 353. 4 This proof is Platonic and Neoplatonic. At the end of the 
Cratylus (440 a) Socrates says: ‘Can we truly say that there is knowledge, 
Cratylus, if all things are continually changing and nothing remains? For 
knowledge cannot continue to be knowledge unless it remains and keeps its 
identity. But if knowledge changes its very essence, it will at once lose its 
identity and there will be no knowledge. And if it is for ever changing, 
knowledge will for ever not be and there will be no one to know and nothing 
to be known. But if the knower exists and the known exists and the Beautiful 
and the Good and everything real exist, then I do not think that we can 
truly say what we just asserted, that they are, as it were, in flux and transi- 
tion.’ ‘Every body is in flux and in perpetual movement’—says Plotinus, 
Enn. iv. 7. 3—‘and the world would immediately perish, if everything were 
body’. 

As for Plotinus, we have also the beautiful and important passage in Ean. 
iv. 7. t0: Set 82 rh poow dxdoroy oxoseiotat is 16 Kabapdv altoid ddoparre. 

200 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

éreiep ra mpoorebiv euwddiov del apds ywGaw Tob & xpoveréby ylyverat. 
ondmes 3 adcddv, padXror Sé é adehdw davrdv iSérw, xal moreioe didvaros 
eivat, Sray daursv Oedanrat &v 7G vontd xai dv 7H xadapd yeyernudvor. dperas 
yap voiv Spavra obx aicdyrdv re 0058 ray Pryrdy rovrwv, dia’ didicn 76 diSi0v 
«ayavoodvra: ‘one should contemplate the nature of everything in its purity, 
since what is added is ever an obstacle to its knowledge ; contemplate there- 
fore the soul in its abstraction, or rather let him who makes this abstraction 
contemplate himself in this state, and he will know that he is immortal, 
when he sees himself in the purity of the intellect; for he will see his intellect 
contemplating nothing sensible, nothing mortal, but apprehending the 
eternal through the eternal.’ These words suggested to Avicenna (in the 
psychological part of his Recovery, v. 7) the example ofa man veiled, hanging 
in mid-air without the possibility of any sensation even of his own body, who 
would still be conscious of his ego, his immaterial intellect. (This conception 
sins against the Aristotelian principles that all thought is accompanied by 
¢avrasia and that nihil in intellectu quod non prius in sensu; however, so does 
Aristotle’s own conception of the self-consciousness of God.) I do not know 
whether Avicenna had any direct knowledge of the passage in Plotinus; 
the beginning of chapter iv in the so-called Theology of Aristotle also refers to 
it. ‘He’, it says, ‘who is able to divest himself of his body and to quiet his 
senses and their suggestions and movements, will be able to revert with his 
thought to his own essence and to ascend with his intellect into the intelli- 
gible world.” But the Plotinian and Cartesian principle, that one should 
contemplate things in their purity abstracted from ail extraneous matter, 
though mentioned by Avicenna, is not in the Theology of Aristotle. 

P- 353-5. This is an answer any Stoic would have given, since the Stoics, 
as we have seen, acknowledged three material unifying forces, ts, dvoss, 
¢vyy. Not only is the identity and unity of our Self a mystery, but the unity 
and identity of any reality, be ityerganic or inorganic, is a problem, the 
whole being more than the parts. 

P- 354-1. Le. itis not a réde v1. 

P+ 354-2. OF Aristotle, Anal. Post. A 4. 7926: xabddov 5€ Aéyews 6 Gv ward 
nravrés Te rdpyy xal xaé* abré kal § abré. davepdv dpa Gr: Sea xabcdov ef 
dvaynns brdpye tots apdypacw: I call universal that which is valid of every- 
thing, per se, and so far as it is this thing; it is therefore clear that everything 
that is universal pertains to things necessarily. The intellect is receptive of 
the form and potentially like the form (Aristotle, De an. I 4. 429°15). 

Pp: 354 3. The theory of the theologians which will be expounded here is 
essentially the sarne as the sensationalism of the Stoics (ef. e.g. Sext. Emp. 
Ado, log. ii, 58-60; Adv. phys. i. 393-5). The essence of all nominalistic and 
sensationalistic theories {ancient or modern—plus ga change, plus c’est la 
méme chose) is that thought is reified and regarded as a joining or severing of 

NOTES 201 

mental impressions, that in fact thought and representation are identified; 
and since there are no representations of universal things—you can repre- 
sent a particular hand, but not a universal hand—the existence of universals 
is denied (the theories are mostly so confused—one cannot be a consistent 
nominalist-——that they both do and do not deny the universal). Berkeley’s 
theory in his introduction to the Principles of Human Knowledge, Inte. & 10-12, 
is practically identical with Ghazali’s conception, ‘I can consider’, he says, 
‘the hand , . . separated from the rest of the body, but whatever hand... I 
imagine must have some particular shape. ... 1 believe we shall acknowledge, 
that an idea which, considered in itself, is particular, becomes general, by 
being made to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same 
sort.’ But how can a particular idea represent—whatever the word means— 
all particular ideas of the same sort and become general in this singular 
fashion, and what do ‘the same sort’ and ‘general’ mean on a theory which 
only acknowledges particular ideas? Ghazali, too, both affirms and denies 
universals at the same time ; he asserts that one shape of hand can represent, 
or, as he expresses it, can be related to, both a big white hand and a smalt 
black hand; he too may be asked how this can come about. 

P- 355. t. i.e. the individual impression which is retained in the soul. 

Pp. 355-2. ‘the thing thought of?, this is how I here translate Jgie. 
{which can also mean ‘intelligibte’), since I take it that Ghazali here means 
something outside the mind. 

P- 355-3. The Aristotelian term ‘form’ probably means here both sen- 
sible form and external shape (it is susceptible of both meanings in Aristotle 
himself). 

P- 355-4. Le. the only immaterial being is God. 

p. 356. 1. Cf e.g. Aristotle, Mfet. Z 8. 103355: ofSé 16 elS0s yiyveras ob8” 
forw avrod yevears, Concepts are timeless, every real thing may be inconstant, 
but the concept ‘inconstancy’ is constant. 

p- 356.2. i.e. the absolutely individual cannot be shared, cannot be 
communicated : individuum est inefabile, this is the basic argument against all 
nominalism. 

p- 356.3. As I have said before, this theory of identity rests on the con- 
fusion of the identity of the thing thought with the identity of the thinker, 
Zaid and Amr may have an identical thought just as they may perceive an 
identical thing, for we all live in one common universe; but this does not 
imply that Zaid and Amr, the thinkers, are identical, 

Pp. 346. 4. This would seem to mean that in the soul also there is a pria- 
cipium individuationts through which the soul of Amr, even if it is separated 
from his body, is distinguished from the soul of Zaid. However, such a view 
could not be ascribed to the most famous philosopher of them all, Aristode. 
{Cf however, note 14. 4.) 

202 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

p- 356. 5. i.e. for Ghazali the animality in Zaid is numerically identical 
with the animality in Khalid. It is as if one said that Zaid carried the 
numerically identical book that Khalid carried at the same time, but two 
cannot be one and the same book cannot be in two places at the same time. 
Ghazali, as Averroés rightly observes, confuses the identity of the individual 
with that of the universal. 

p- 356. 6. Averroés omits to mention the second proof, which is (Ghazali, 
Incoherence, Bouyges, 339. 10) that no immaterial substance can perish 
(stall Ade dyed bore we oh gm 8), but of course this second 
proof is a part of the first. Avicenna, op. cit, 302, has two propositions: (1) 
that the soul does not die with the death of the body; (2) that the soul is 
absolutely incorruptible. 

P- 357-1. This is the principal Platonic argument (Phaedo 102 a-to7 b): 
a concept can never change into its opposite, and since life belongs to the 
concept of the soul, it can never be changed into its opposite, death (Plotinus, 
who wrote a special treatise on Immortality, Enn. iv. 7, gives this argument 
at iv. 7. 11}. The argument rests on a confusion between the universal and 
the individual (it belongs to the paradoxes of the history of philosophy 
that Plato, for whom alt individual things are transitory, regards the 
human personality, individuatity par excellence, as eternal), and it cer- 
tainly cannot prove the immortality of the individual soul ; but if it is true 
that the living can only proceed from the living, life itself would seem to 
have no origin—and indeed the origin of life and of consciousness remain 
insuperable cruces for any theory of evolution. 

P- 357-2, This has been shown in Chapter II. 

P- 357-3. Avicenna accepts, as does Plato, the immortality of the soul, 
but denies with Aristotle its pre-existence (which invalidates, of course, all 
his Platonic arguments for the eternity of the soul). There can be no pre- 
existence of the soul, says Avicenna, Salvation, pp. 3003qq. ; for either all souls 
would form a unity before their union with the body, which brings about 
many impossibilities, as Averroés says, or they would be individually 
differentiated ; but they can only be individually differentiated by matter, 
i.e. their bodies. But how, then, can they be individually differentiated after 
death ? This is a question to which Avicenna has no satisfactory answer. 

P. 357-4. Here and throughout this passage Averroés leaves his Aristotle 
and accepts the notions of the Stoics and the Neoplatonists, The passage is 
rather confused, and Averroés does not seem to distinguish clearly between 
the souls of the Satpoves (intermediaries, like the Adyor omepparexot, be~ 
tween God and man} and the disembodied souls of men. According to 
Plotinus the souls of the Sa‘poves have bodies of air or of fire, cwyara déptva } 
mdgva (cf. Enn. iit. 5. 6). According to Sext. Emp. Adv. pays. i. 71-73, the 
Stoics held that souls consist of fine particles not less like fire than like 

NOTES 203 

avedpa. Compare also for the Seiuoves, e.g. Sext. Emp. Ado, phys, i, 87, and 
especially Plutarch, De orac. defectu (cf. G. Soury, Le Démonologie de 
Plutarque, Paris, 1942). 

p. 358. t. See note 127. 6. 

p- 348.2. ‘the soul creates and forms the body’, i.e, it makes its matter a 
living organism. This sentence is not Platonic, but Plotinian, Plato and 
Plotinus seem to have been often confused by the Arabs. The sentence refers 
to Enn, iv. 7. 11: 9 wdBos éxaxrdv 19 GAn Adyovres ri Cunjv, map’ Grou rotro 
76 wdbos édijAuber els rv DAny, adrd exeivo dvayxanbijoovra: cuodoyetv dbavarev 
efvac: if it is said that life is a condition imposed on matter, one is forced to 
admit that the principle which has given this condition to matter must be 
immortal. 

p- 358. 3. The functions attributed by late Greek philosophers to the 
Sacpoves are ascribed by Muslim authors to the Jinn. 

p. 358. 4. The bestower of forms is identified by Avicenna with Aristo- 
tle’s active intellect. 

Pp. 358. 5. Averroés seems to assume here that the idea of a bestower of 
forms implies a temporal creation, a change both in the giver and in the 
recciver ; but the only change permitted in the celestial world according to 
Aristotle is a change of place. However, for the theory of emanation the 
giving is timeless and changeless. What is in the giver is simultaneous in the 
receiver, and emanation is a timeless immutable transaction. This is a self- 
contradictory theory, but Averroés also accepted it. 

p. $58. 6. Icis not clear from this isolated sentence what is meant here by 
‘material intellect’ ; ifthe counterpart of the active intellect is meant (which 
is its usual meaning), Averrots here identifies the active intellect with God, 
as does Alexander of Aphrodisias, But he may understand here by ‘material 
intellect’ simply an intellect in contact with this world, whereas the abso- 
lutely immaterial intellect, God, is free from all earthly contact. However, 
Allah knows best! 

p. 358.7. Cf Aristotle, Met. A 3. 984615. Averroés here identiftes 
Anaxagoras’ vois with the Aristotelian prime mover. 

P- 359. 1. In the last chapter of his Jncoherence Ghazali attacks the argu- 
ments of the philosophers, who in their eschatological theories, taken from 
late Greek philosophy, deny the resurrection of the flesh and interpret the 
materialistic conceptions expressed in the Koran symbolically in accordance 
with their system. According to Ghazali a Siteral interpretation is possible 
(cf. Incoherence, 355. 4), and the philosophers through their denial of the 
express words of the Koran place themselves outside the community of 
Islam. Averroés in his last chapter touches on this problem only slightly, 
but he aims gt defending the philosophers against the accusation of heresy. 

204 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

His approach to religion is pragmatic and utilitarian. He asserts that religion 
has no other aim than philosophy in its search for the suammum bonum and 
the development of those moral qualities upon which the order of society 
depends and which the masses never could attain without the guidance of 
divinely inspired men. His attitude stands midway between the material- 
istic and utilitarian view of religion which sees in it an astute human inven- 
tion, aiming at enforcing moral conduct on the masses through the fear of 
an invisible and omnipresent supervisor {¢acoxoros, see Sext. Emp. Adv. 
phys. i. 54), and the supernatural conception of religion as the revelation of 
the supreme divine truth. With the latter it considers religion as inspired 
and expressing the one fundamental truth of the existence of a supreme 
spiritual deity; with the former it takes the purely pragmatic view of 
regarding religious dogmas, which are amenable to a rational interpretation 
and in which an element of pious fraud seems to be involved, as a means 
of establishing the order and the preservation of society, which forms the 
condition of all human activity. It had not been difficult for an acute 
dogmatist tike Ibn Hazm to confute this line of thought (cf. op. cit. i, 94), 
which is based—as I have shown—on Stoic ideas, was already followed by 
Farabi, and was Jater adopted by Spinoza in his Tractetus theologico-politicus, 

Pp. 359. 2. Indications of a belief in bodily resurrection are few and late 
in the Old Testament; they are found in Daniel and especially 2 Maccabees, 
and there is a suggestion of resurrection in Psalm Ixxxviii. 11. How well the 
Arabs were informed about Judaism and Christianity may be seen from 
the lengthy exposition and criticism of both religions in Ibn Hazm, op. cit. 
i. 116-i1. 75, 

p- 359. 3- Cf. Ibn Hazm, op. cit, t. 35. 5: Opdlall goers ol GBs 
Lil Je Gdlits el aay eo Obs pail, the religion of the 
Sabaeans was the oldest and the most widely accepted. About the Sabaeans 
there was some confusion in Islam. They are mentioned in the Koran (ii, 
59, ¥- 73, xxii. 17}, but there a sect in Mesopotamia seems to be meant, also 
called Mandaeans. The sect whose dogmas are described under this name 
by the Muhammadan authors (e.g. Shahrastani in his Rel. and Philos. Sects 
and Ibn Hazm) was a Gnostic sect in the city of Harran, an ancient city of 
Hellenistic culture ; a strong Neoplatonic influence can be discerned in its 
tenets and it may have contributed to the spread of Neopfatonic ideas in 
Islam. 

P: 359. 4. Le. his eddarpovia. 

p- 359. 5. For the distinction between ethical and dianoetic virtues 
compare Aristotle, Eth. Nic. A 13. 1103*3. 

p. 359. 6, “The practical virtues’, i.e. the moral virtues, 

p. 359. 7. CF e.g. Francis Bacon, Advancement of Learning, i. 5. 1; ‘The 
knowledge of man is as the waters, some descending from above, and some 

Notes 205 

springing from beneath; the one informed by the light of nature, the other 
inspired by divine inspiration,’ 

p- 360. 1. Cf. Spinoza, Tract. theol.-polit. xiv. 14: ‘fidem non per se, sed 
tantum ratione oboedientiae salutiferam esse’. 

p- 360. 2. This is a Stoic doctrine; cf. Seneca, Epist. 5. 4: “hoc primum 
philosophia promittit: sensum communem, humanitatem et congregatio- 
nem.” Cf. aiso Sext. Emp. Ado. phys. i. 1917 9 Sixazoovvn Kard teva Kowartay 
av8pdrray spds ZAAAous Kal avOpwrwv mpds Geovs veronrac: justice is a certain 
brotherhood between men and men, and between men and the gods. 

p. 361. 1. Spinoza, op. cit. ii. 1, is opposed to this view : the prophets were 
not men of special intellectual gifts, but had a strong moral sense and a 
strong ‘imaginatio’ (¢a»7acie}; prophecy has never made prophets learned 
men (op. cit. ii. 3). 

p. 361.2. This well-known saying may possibly come from a Jewish 
source, 

p. 361.3. Koran xiii. 35. 

p. 361.4. There are, however, many traditions giving a realistic descrip- 
tion of Muhammad’s vision of heaven during his ascension (~| 24). Cf. 
Asin y Palacios, Le esetologia musulmana en la Divina Comedia, and ed, 
Apéndice I, p. 425. 

p- 361.5. ie. the words we apply to the other world are meant in a sense 
absolutely different from the ordinary; cf. e.g. Spinoza, Eth. i, prop. xvii 
schol. : ‘intellectus et voluntas, qui Dei essentiam constituerent, a nostro 
intellectu et voluntate toto coelo differre deberent, nec in ulla re, praeter- 
quam in nomine, convenire possent; non aliter scilicet, quam inter se 
conveniunt canis, signum coeleste, et canis, animal latrans.’ Even Spinoza 
does not seem to have seen that this absolutely deprives these words, as 
applied to the Divine, of any sense. Many traditions were attributed to Ibn 
Abbas, a paternal cousin of Muhammad; this one seems to have been 
inspired by an anti-literalist, To the same Ibn Abbas is attributed a tradition 
of a realistic character about Muhammad's ascension. Cf, Asin, op. cit., 
P- 432. 

p. 362. 1. Simulacrum: efSwAov—see for this word and the theory Por- 
Phyry, Sentent. 32. For the theory of the pneumatic or astral body compare 
also Plotinus (Zan. iii. 5.6). Proclus (Jnst. 205) and lamblichus (Adpst. 5. 
12) call this body dyna. 

p. 362.2. He refers here to Ghazali’s Balance of Action, Cairo, H..1328, 
where, p. 5, Ghazali distinguishes four classes of people as to their opinions 
about the life hereafter. The third class to which the Sufis belong declare 
that in death the soul is for ever severed from the body. 

p. 362. 3. Universal consent, glen! in Islam confers the sanction of 

206 TAHAFUT AL TAHAFUT 

legitimacy on a dogma. The idea seems inspired by the Stoic notion of 
universal consent, ‘omnium consensus naturae vox est’ (Cic. Tuse. 1. 15. 35)5 
‘apud nos veritatis argumentum est aliquid omnibus videri’ (Seneca, 
Epist. 117. 6). 

p- 362.4. In his ‘Ignominies of the Allegorists’ (p. r1 of the text in 
Goldziher’s Gazatt’s Streitschrift gegen die Batinigja) Ghazali repeats his attacks 
on the denial of a bodily resurrection. 

p. 363.1. I have not found the exact sentence in Galen, Galen says, 
however, De facult. natur, subst, iii, 10: those who want to know anything 
better than do the masses must far surpass al] others by nature and by early 
training ; such people, however, can be only very few in number, elev & dv 
Odiyos Tavrdracww odor. It was in the Stoic tradition that the wise man was 
rare, as rare as the phoenix which is born once in five hundred years (cf. 
Seneca, Eprst. 42. 1). 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
MENTIONED IN THE INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 

jbn ‘Abbas, 205. 

‘Abd al-Rahman al-Safi, 96. 

Acnesidemus, 63, 79. 

Attius, 186, 198. 

Agathon, 62. 

Agrippa, H. C., xxix, 175. 

Ahmad ibn Hanbal, 138. 

Albertus Magnus, 130, 175- 

Albinus, 25. 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, 3, 38, 39, 45. 745 
82, go, £61, 115, 123, 122, 143, 144, 647, 
158, 16a, 167, 569, 172, 184, 186, 195. 

~— (feom Arabic translations), 85, 89, 122, 
143, 159, 166. 

. Aleximus, 149, 150. 

Ammonius Saccas, xxxii. 

Ammonius, son of Hermias, yo, 75, 76, 

FOO, 17 Ee 
Anaxagoras, 24, 72, §93. 

Anselm, 169. 

Antipater, 167. 

Antphanes, 51- 

Antisthenes, 126, 127, 

Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 124. 

Aquinas, St, Thomas, ix, xviii, xx, soci, 
xxvii, xxix, 3, 19, 23, 54. 65, 95, 92, 91, 
tto, 156, 157, 162, 174, 175, 183. 

Aristotle, Anal. Pr, 41, 145. 072, (96. 

—- Anal. Post., 2, 6, 29, 57, 82, 8g, 99, C14, 
12K, £30, £96, T40, 173, £78, 200. 

— De anima, 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 15, 48, 50, 5% 
6g, 66, 68, 76, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 89, 93, 
99, 100, 102, Og, [05 t10, TTI, 113, 
165, T20, 122, 127, 145, 146, 147, 148, 
154, (96, 158, 166, 182, 185, 185, 187, 
18q, 790, 198, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 
197, 200, 

— Categories, 29, 30, 92, 93. 45, 58, 61, tog, 
IES, ET2, 12g, 152. 

— De. an. incessu, 24, 164. 

— De an, motu, 114. 

— De an. gen., 48, 49, 101, TO2, 105, 115, 
21, 127, 159, 177, 182, 183, 185. 

= De caclo, i, 2, 3, 6,8, t7, 19, 19,21, 22,29, 
24, 26, 32, 34, 37: 40, 42) 43, 44, 571 5% 
60, 76, 84, 92, 94, 137, 139; 140, 142,157, 
158, 149, 160, 163, 164, 180. 

=~ De div. per somn., 168. 

~~ De gen. et corr., 10, 20, 22) 24, 26, 27, 72, 
78, 80, 84, 94, 100, nor, 103, 106, 137, 
140, 142, 143, 185, 

— De interpr., 37+ 45s 82, 13%, 134, 149- 

— De iw., 189. 

— De memoria, 49, 89, 189, t91. 

ee an., 24, 40, 50, 143 [, 150, 165, 
185, 

— De philosophia, xvii, t, 94, 65 (new frag- 
ment), 98, 157, 167. 

— De sensu, 63, 84, 95, 156, 180, 193, 196. 

— De somne, t94- 

— Eth. Eud., 61. 

— Eth. Nic., 4, 62, 103, 656, 167, 168, 169, 
TFT, 193, 204. 

— Hist. An., 28, 6t, 63, 164, 183, 197. 

— Metaphysics: t, 2, 3 §, 6, 9) 10, Et, 12, 
15, 16, £7, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 27, 2g, 32, 
36, 37 ©, 30,40, 40, 42, 43, 44> 46, 47, SD 
57, 54, Ga, 63, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
74. 75; 76, 78, 79,80, 82, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 
93; 93, 94, 96, 98, 99, 101, 102, LOg, 104, 
106, 108, 109, 110, 198, 304, E65, #26, 
Ie}, 148, 16g, 120, 12t, 122, 129, 127, 
128, 529, 130, 133, 192, 133, 834, 1395s 
137s 339s 42, 144, 146, 347, 149, 150, 
152, (56, 159, 260, 162, 169, 165, 168, 
171, 177, £78, 183, 184, 185, 201, 203. 

— Meteor., 23, 261 49, 57+ 69: 78, 83, 115, 
137, 140, 160, 164, 180, 

— Physics, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 17, 20, 22, 
25, 25, 27, 2B, 20, 30, 31, 32> 33. 34s 35> 
36, 38, 43, 44, 47) 48, 52, 53: 55, 61, 62, 
66, 87, 99, 91, 92, 95, 10T, 102, 193, TO4, 
117, 118, 119, 132, 134, 135, 37> 149 
157, 160, 161, 163, 164, 17%, 178, 180, 
184, 190, 192. 

— Politics, 24. 

=~ Rhet., 63; 145, 106, 180. 

— Soph. Et., 19, 92, 66. 

— Topics, 2, 7, 20, 22, 33, 56, 78, 88, 116, 
185, (97. 

— Fragm. 367 R., 183. 

— De mundo, 18, 65, 67, 76, 78. 

— On the particular influences of the spheres, 164. 

~~ Problemata, 9. 

— Theolog:, 76, 200. 

al-Ash‘ari, x, 5, 125, 184. 

Ashtarites, xii, xxil, Xxill, xxix, 3, 17, 37, 40s 
41, 42, 44, 53, 55, 56, 59, 60, 62, 64, Fo, 
85, 86, 87, 8B, 97, 115, 116, 118, 128, 
137, #38, 143, 148, 159, 160, 173, 180, 
182, 184, 186, 191. 

Athanasius, St., 88. 

208 

Atomists, 44. 

Augustine, St., xii, xvii, xx, 3, 5, 1f, 16, 68, 
84, 90, 91, 98, 100, 103, 105, 116, 125, 
155, C61, 169, 170, 175, 186. 

Averroés, 18, 53, 56, 57, 164, 177, and 
passim. 

Avicenna, xii, xiv, xXVil, 13, 25, 26, 40 f, 
49, 66, 69, 83, 86, 92, 95, 97, 118, 12t, 
£37, 138 f., 172. 

~— Diviston of the intellectual sciences, U7. 

=~ On Happiness, 196, (97. 

— On Love, gt. 

— Orientat Philosophy, 83, 144. 

— Recovery (Shifa’), 13, 67, 71, 75, 102, 
104, 196, 112, 114, 143, t44, 090, E5E, 
152, (57, 158, 167, 17§, 200. 

— Refutation of the Astrotogisis, 162, 167. 

— Saloation (Najat), t; 2, 14, U7, 29, 36, 67, 
95, &t, 106, £07, rod, 112, 113, 114, 129, 
130, 134, 137, 140 T4qy 145, 650, E5T, 
152, 157, 198, 161, 162 fF, 166, 173, 686, 
188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 198, 202. 

— Theorems and Notictt, 49, 100, 114, 1445 
173, 1745 175- 

Bacon, Francis, 204. 
al-Baghdadi, 3, 15, 16, $4, 50, 77, 88. 
Bairo, Pietro, 174, 
al-Bagqillani, 60 £,, 124, 128. 
al-Battani, 96. 

Bayle, Dictionnaire, 19. 
Berkeley, xxxiii, 201. 

Bernard of Clairvaux, 5t., 91. 
Boethius, 134. 

Beethus, 152. 

Bradley, 152. 

Brentano, x, xxvii, 

Brunetiére, F., xiii. 

Burton, R., xxix, 92, 174. 75. 

Campanella, 91. 

Gardano, xxix, 90. 

Carncades, x, 77, 86, 140, 143, 168, 

Celsus, 97, 124. 

Censorinus, xvi, 198. 

Cervantes, xiv. 

Chaicidius, 38. 

Chrysippus, 11, 18, 45, 77, 167, 177, 190, 
195, 196- 

Gicero, xvii, 200, #, 4, 13, 16, 39) 65, 76, 
83, 10L, 127, t42, (72, E77, 186, 205. 

— De div., 39, 98, 165, 166, 167, 1790, 

— De fato, 39, 064 £, 172, 177+ 

— De fin., 12, 16, 90, 156, £70. 

— De aat. deor., 8, 34, 65, 775 78) 79; 83, 
140, 141, 148, 1§7, 165. 

Cleanthes, 65, 197. 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

Clement of Alexandria, 1, 16, 65, 113, 18, 
'7} 

Corpus Hermeticum, 165. 

Coué, Emile, xxix, 174. 

Cratippus, 167. 

Critolaus, 31. 

Damascius, 88. 

Dante, 19, 20, 40, 92, 135. 

Democritus, 63, 90, 103, 

Descartes, xxiii, 40, tot, 175, 200, 

Dio Chrysostomus, 126. 

Diodorus Cronus, 36, 39, 147. 

Diogenes of Babylon, 167. 

Diogenes Laertius, t, 18, 56, 67, 8g, Bo, 
Liz, 522, 127, 198, 844, 5 

[Dionysius Areopagita], $8, 89, 91. 

Eckehart, 55, 

Eleatics, xxi, 45, 60, 63. 

Empedoctes, 44, 72, gt. 

Epictetus, 72, 77, [27. 

Epicurus, t, 7@, 83, 101. 

Erasistratus, 187. 

Eryximachus, 91. 

Eusebius, 16, 37, 100, 172, 

Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi, 88, 

al-Fardbi, xiv, 7, 12, 70, 75, 76, 331, 196, 
178; 26, 166, 174, 188, 

Favocinus, t64. 

Ficino, M., 92, 174- 

Fienus, Th, 174, 175- 

Fladd, R., go. - 

Franck, 70. 

Frazer, 128. 

Fredegisus of Tours, 47. 

ibn Furak, 128, 

Galen, 10x, 15, 50, §6, §7, 61, 66, Bg, tags 
175, 179, 184, 18g, 197, 198, 206. 

— De demonstr., 56. 

Geilius, Aulus, 66, 164, 184. 

Geuling, 148. 

al-Ghazali, xxviii, :0cix, »00di, 20cv, and par 
sit, 

— Aims of the Philosophers, 146. 

— Alchemy of Happiness, ory. 

— Balance of Action, 205. 

— Distinction detueen Faith and Heresy, 64. 

— Foundation of Degmatics, x, 53- 

— Golden means in Dogmatics, x, 53- 

— Ignominies of the Allegorists, 206. 

— Just Balance, 125. 

— Niche for Lights, 53, 95. 

— Preservcr from Error, 176. 

~— Touchstone of Knowledge, 146. 

— Touchstone of Science in Logic, 125. 

— Touchstone of Speculation in Logic, 125- 

— Vivification of Theafogy, x, 53, 91, 188, 194. 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

Gibbon, 98. 

Gnosticism, 12, 855. 

Goethe, 90. 

Gregory of Nyssa, St., 123, 124. 
Grotius, 97. 

al-Hallaj, 7. 

abi Hashim, 59, 88. 

ibn Hazm, 7, 8, 13, 37, 38, 40, 54, 551, 
Gof, 82, 85, 100, 124, 128, 155, 184, 
185, 186, 191, 204, 

Heracliteans, 60. 

Heraclitus, 44. 

Hisham b. ‘Amr al-Fuwatt, 1g, 179. 
Hobbes, 90. 

Holstenius, 100. 

Homer, 96, 126, 133, 194 

abu'l Hudhail al-"Allaf, 54. 

Hume, 20, 64, 120, 199, 196, 179. 
Hunain ibn Ishaq, 67. 

abi Ishaq al-Isfara’inI, 128. 
Irenaeus, 169. 

jabir ibn Hayyan, 179. 

Jahm, 155 6 

James, W., 197. 

Jesus, 30, 97- 

John Damascene, St., 109 f 

Jobs Philoponus, xvii, 1, 3, 7, 8, 26, 29, 
30, 35, 56, 171, 177, 167, 389, 

John Scots Eriugena, 64. 

al-Jubbai, 5. 

al-Jurjani, 165. 

al-Juwaini, 18, 186, 

Kant, xvi, xix, 2x, 8, 10, 13, 17, 0, 96, 125, 
129, 137, 138, 155, 178. 

Karramites, 3, 59. 

ibn Khaldan, 772, 74, 175: 

al-Kindi, go. 

Lactantius, 16, 98, 165. 
Leibniz, 13, 18, 28, 40, 49, 119, 182, 183, 
1 

84. 
Leo Hebracus, 92. 
Lucretius, 16, 148. 

Mach, E, xxv, 64. 
al-Maidani, 49, 95. 

Maimonides, t, 97, 126, 

Marcianus, 77. 

Mandacans, 204. 

Marcus Aurelius, 14, 72, 127. 

Maslama ibn Ahmad al-Majriti, 172. 

Maximus Confessor, 123 £. 

Megarians, xxi, xodi, xxix, 87, 37, 98, 30% 
42, 45, 60, 61, 62, 68. 

ong, x. 

Middle Platonism, 48, 88. 

Mill, J. S., 185. 

Montaigne, xxix, 20di, 19, 174, 199. 

Mu‘ammar, 60, 94. 

Mucius Scaevola, 98. 

Muhammad al-Murtada, §5- 

Muslim, 138. 

ai-Muyahhar al-Magqdisi, cf. abi Zaid al- 
Balkhi. 

Muttazilites (oxsoparexot), ix, x, xxii, 
xxii, 7. 47, 48, 54, 59; 62, 77, B6, 88, 94, 
136, 155, 73. 

Mysticism, German, 12. 

ibn an-Nadim, 70. 

an-Nazzam, 30, 38, 48, 54, 173. 

Nemesius of Emesa, xxi, 61, 184, 697. 

Neoplatonism, xi, t, 12, §1, 54. Cf. Plotinus, 
Proclus, &c. 

Neopythagoreanism, 88. 

New Testament, 124, 126. 

Nicholas of Autrecourt, xxx. 

Nietzsche, F., xxiv. 

Numenius, xxxii. 

Old Testament, zor, 
Origen, 8, t2, t4, 97, 98, 116, rag, 128, 
168. 

Panactius, 99. 

Paracelsus, xxix, ga, 17§- 

Parmenides, xx. 17, 19%, 154. 

Pascal, x00x, t74, 

Pasicles, 15. 

Peiagius, 8. 

Philo {of Alexandria}, 18, 22, 72, 76, 98, 
t26, 135, 156. 

— De astern. m., 29, 47, 59, 57s 65, 165, 

Philoponus, ef. John Ph. 

Plato, 5; 6, 13, f45 €5, 19, 9 50, §2, 58, 
68, 72, 82, 93, 105, 106, 119, E42, 145, 
167, 170, 171, 177, 183, 199. 

— Tim., 1, 11, 14, 23, 28, 30, 31, $4) 5% 
56, 64, 72, TT4, 199, 140, 199. 

Piautus, xxiii. 

Pliny, 183. 

Plotinus, xi, xvi, xviii, xocv, xocvi, xxix, 
XxX, xxxli, 5 £, 12, 13, 14, 15, 24, 25, 29, 

210 

34; 49, 52, 09, 64, 65, 72, 73, 74, 78; 79, 
84, 85, 87, 88, 91, 93, 94, 95, 106, 108, 
109, 110, 142, IEG, 114, 115, 119, 120, 
121, 322, 128, 2g, 139, 140, 141, 145, 
148, 153, 154, 161, 162, 163, 164, 167, 
170, 172, 073, 575, 186, 18g, [g0, 195, 
196, 197, 199, 202, 203, 205. 

Plutarch, xxviii, xxxii, 19, 91, 38, 40, 72, 
98, 27, 160, 165, 168, 174, 184, 199, 
aoa. 

[Plutarch], 39- 

Pomponatius, 174. 

Porphyry, xxxiv, 63, 76, 100, 121, 140, 205, 

Posidonius, 165, 167. 

Proclus, xvii, xvi, 1,2 9, 91, 74: 75: 875 
gt, 106, 205. 

Prolemy, 20, 74, 85, 96. 

Polybus, 61, 

Pythagoras, 172. 

Pythagoreans, 20, Cf. Ncopythagoreans. 

a)-Qazwini, 162. 

Qur'an, 18, 23, 24, 535 $4.55, 66, 72, 76, 78, 
79 82, 83, 86, go, 92, 97, 98, 168, 128, 
$25, 126, 138, 149, 190, 162, 169, 165, 
166, 173 174, 175 180, 182, 185, 686, 
194, 204, 205. 

Renan, E., xii. 
Russell, B., xxii. 

Sabacans, 204. 

Sceptics, ix £, 20Gx, 60, 63, 31, 149. 

Schopenhaver, 19, 168. 

Seneca, 14, 16, 72, 77, 127, 168, 175, 188, 
199, 205, 206. 

Sextus Empiricus, 4, 16, 29, 30, 32, 38, 45, 
49, 53, 63, 65, 67, 68, 71, 72, 77, 79, 86, 
87, 89, 99, 102, 118, 122, 138, 144, 147, 
145, 140, £50, 152 £, 167, 176, 179, 180, 
188, 18g, 190, 195, 196, £97, 200, 202, 

205. 
ash-Shahrastanl, 2, 4, 7. 98, 98, 94, ¢25, 
128, 155, 173. 1g, 186, 204, 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

Siger of Brabant, 157. 

Simplicius, xviii, 7, 20, 29, 30, 31, 37; 65, 70, 
74, 84, tan, Tag, Isa, 163. 

Spinoza, xi, xiv, xx, 19, 20, 37, 90; 92, 102, 
106, 126, 161, 166, 170, 204, 205, 

Stobacus, 31. 

State terms, ix f., xvii, xxiii, xxiv, 1, 4, 17 £, 
45; 48, 52, 56 f,, 57£, 81, 85, 87, 89, ge, 
AU7, £22, 126, 097, 198, £49, 150, 154, 
160, 176, 180, 182, 183, 18g, 191, 200, 
02, 

Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, 4, rt, 18, 22, 
9% 31, 32, 97, 38, 3G 40, 45 57, 65, 76, 
89, 90, 153, 165, 168, 177, 180, 186, 188, 
195, tg6, 198. 

Strato, 83, ror, 142, 

Sifism, 12, 60, 155. 

Suidas (Suda), 76. 

Suso, 155. 

Tauler, 12, 155. 

Taurus, 66, 

Telesio, ou. 

Tertullian, 97. 

Thales, 160. 

Themistius, 92, 76, 94, 102, 326, rqgo. 

Theophilus, St., 129. 

Theophrastus, xvii, socviii, 21, 147, 169, 
145, 178. 

ibn Tufail, 12, 73. 

ibn, Uthman al-Khayyat, 7. 
Varro, 98. 
abi Ya'qiib, 73. 

Zacharias of Mitylene, 100. 

Zahirites, 145. 

‘aba Zaid al-Balkhl’, 8, 54, 57, 6a. Cf 
Mutakhar al Maqdisi. 

Zeno of Citium, roa, 180. 

Zeno the Eleatic, i, 63, 149. 

Zopyrus, 72. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS MENTIONED 
IN THE NOTES 

accident as a universal, 33. 

accidental, 22, 

actions, classification of, 117, 

actual, 2. 

actuality, 67, 137. 

actualizer, 1, 

agent, eternal, 1. 

alchemy, 172. 

analogy, 145. 

angels, 23, 135, 162. 

annihilation of the world, 54, 59- 

aporetic, 53. 

apprehension, immediate intuitive, 11; 
_ ef, intuition. 

art, 149, 168, 192, 

artisan, 120, t6g. 

ascension of Muhammad, 205. 

ass, Buridan’s, 19. 

assimilation 10 God, 151, 163. 

astrology, 164 f., 167. 

astronomy, 92. 

atomism, 98, 184, 191; ¢f. matter; 

time. 
attributes, 115.£, 135 f., 1398 f. 
autodidactus, 49. 

badness, 114, 

becoming, to, 48, 58, 62 f. 

being, 80, 89, 110 f,, 122, 129, 137; none 
being, 5, 47; cf. existence. 

blood, 182, 

body, soz; celestial b., 97, 161, 166 
{cf. stars); pneumatic or asiral b., 
205; rectilinear, 22; terrestrial, 166. 

brain, 187, 188 f. 

causation, 60, &4, 67; denial of Coy TO, 
3178, 179, 181, 1B2, 

cause, 74, 79, 106, 177 (stoic); efficient 
., 70; final ¢c., 21; material ¢., 104, 
105; receptive c., 116; timeless c., 
186; see also first cause, 

change, 3, 10, 27, 58, 62, 71, 184. 

circularity, 27. 

colour, 107, 134, 135, 197, 156, 190, 
193. 

command, divine, 7}. 

comumon man, 168. 

— notions, 2, 6 

— sense, 187 f, 194; ef. internal sense, 

compenetration, 110. 

conjecturing power, 173 f, 181. 

consent, universal (ijmd"), 205 £ 

convention, 6. 

copula, 191. 

corruptibility of the world, 56 f. 

creation, eternal, 9, 55, 75, 76, 100; ex 
athilo, 65; temporal, 148. 

treationism and traducianism, 49, 52. 

dator formanun, 25, 8g, 205. 
deliberation, 169. 
demiurge, 1. 
demonstration, 1, £16, 130. 
description, 84, 129. 
desire, 5, 145- 
determinism, 167. 
differentiating principle, 17. 
dimension, 32. 

disposition, 4. 

divination, 167. 

divisible, 15. 

dreams, 167, 168. 

dualisrn, 24. 

eclipse, 150. 

ecliptic, 21. 

effect, 5, 68, 115. 

ego, 12 Ff, 117, 120, 175, 200; ef, self- 
CONSCLOUSTIESS. 

elements, 22, 83. 

emanation, 63, 73, 75, 85, 92, 94, 100, 
115, 203. 

Empirical physicians, 176, 179. 

Empiricism, 16. 

essence and existence, 136 ff.; cf. exis- 
tence. 

estimation (atstimatio), 188, 195. - 

Eternity, 1; of the world, 46, 67; time- 
less, ty 54. 

ethics, 170. 

event, 4. 

evidence, 16, 

212 

existence, 112; potential e., 8; possible 
and actual e., 10; non-e., 10, 46, 47; 
4, 52; cf. being, essence. 

existent, necessary, 106. 

extension, 31. 

faith, 124. 

fallacy, 3. 

falschood, 42. , 

pavracta (cf. imagination, representa- 
tien), 722, 161, 188 £ 

fate, 38. 

fear, 198. 

fire, 180. 

first agent, 135. 

— cause, 9; 95+ 

— effect, 95. 

— principle, 93, 139. 

flux, 60, 199. 

Form; acceptance of, 189. 

— as active element, 127. 

— as thoughts, 68. 

— bestower of (active intellect}, 200, 
tog; cf. dator formarum. 

— change in, 48. 

— different definitions of, 81, gc. 

—— distinctions in, 4. 

— entry inio matter, 23. 

— eternity, immortality of, 
On, 144- 

— God providing, 25, 6g. 

— God the, gi. 

— humanity, 99. 

imperishable, 32. 

— individuality, individual, 
143, 188. 

— in blood, 182. ~ 

— in colouredness, 8g. 

— in sperm, 183. 

— intellect receptive of, 200, 

— intelligible, 196. 

— mind and, 193. 

— non-becoming of, 44. 

— non-self-subsistence of, 52. 

— One through, 12, 14. 

— of objece, 62. 

— of percept, 196. 

— perception of, 84. 

— perfection of, 166, 

— proximate, 146, 

— pure, 81, 125, 

— relation of matter and, 24, 48, 52, 

44 St, 

Si, 86, 

INDEX 

65, 71, 81, 93) 94, 96, 119, T2I, 132, 
£39. 

— soul as, 4g, (20, 172, 

— specific difference in place, 185, 

— substances having, 159. 

— sweetness in wine, 192. 

— transient, 133. 

— unity based on, 5. 

— universal, as universals, 25, §1, 121, 

179- 
formative faculty, 83. 

generation (cf. procreation), 139; spon- 
tancous g., 140, 183. 

generosity, 114, 

God, acts of, 5. 

— attributes of, 4, 108, tag. 

— cause of human actions, 198. 

— efficient cause, 70, 

—— essence and existence coincide, 134. 

— eternal agent, ©. 

— eternal man, 144, 

— generosity, bounty, 64, t14. 

— joy, happy condition, 114. 

— knowledge, 119, 121, 151, 152, 153; 
155) 159, 170, L81; active or creative 
knowledge, 154; self-knowledge, 7; 
his knowledge of the infinite, 169; bis 
knowledge of-individuals, 81, 85, 8g. 

— life of, 114. 

— mercy of, 9. 

— new decisions in the mind of G., t, 3. 

— new volitions in G., 3. 

no composition in G., 88, 

— omnipotence of, 181. 

—~ omniscience of, 86, 151. 

— only active principle (Stoicism), «76. 

— providence of, 82. 

— power and majesty of, 77. 

— power to de one of the contraties, 5. 

— prime mover, 20, 91. 

— self sufficient, 174. 

—simplicity of, 87. 

— supreme end, 20, 91. 

—synectic cause, 65. 

— uniqueness of, 87, 108, 190. 

— unity of, 4, 108, 199 f, C12, 113. 

— will of, 119, 141, 148, 1593 eternal 
will of, 5, 6. 

— words of, 4. 

habit, 179, 180, 

INDEX 

hand, #15, 185. 
heare, 191. 
heaven, 23. 
heresy, 203. 
hypothetical] 
syllogism. 

propositions, 178; cf. 

ideas, Plato’s theory of, 88, 99. 

identity, 12, 14, 60, 178, 199f, 201. 

immortality, 12, 202, 

impossible, 36, 40. 

indestructible, t. 

imagination, 35, 83, 89, 161, 166, 174 f. 
{influence on body), 187, 191. 

impressed, 49. 

inctination, 158. 

individuality, 49. 

induction, 197. 

inference, 147. 

infinite, actual, potential, 8; number, 7; 
time 8, 10; God’s knowledge af, 109 
infinite series, 26 (cf. regress), 13, 14. 

instant, 30. 

instinct of animals, 168. 

intellect, 13, 72, 84, 120; aclive, 3, 15, 
74, 81, 83, 215, 146, 203; first, 74, 
166; inunaterial, 98, 200; material, 
$, 74, 81, 203; passive, 3, 13, 74, 
154; potential, 3, 15, 74; practical, 
119} stparate, 135; theoretical, 113. 

intention, first, 11; second, «10, £19, 
120 f.; intentions, 188. 

interna) sense, internal perception, 186. 

interpretation, allegorical, 165, 166. 

intuition, intellectual, 155; cf. appre- 
henston. 

Jinn, 203. 
judgement, 83. 
jump, 30, 38. 

Kings philosophers, 170. 
knowledge, 153; creative, 84; rela- 

tional, 50; sraditional, 16; seli- 
k., 122f.; unity of, 123; God’s 
knowledge, see. God. 

Kuman, 48, 

law, 4t. 

diberum arbitrium, 18. 
life and death, 68 f. 
light, 15, 49. 

253 

Logic: Aristotelean, 1, 2; Stoic, 178, 179. 
logical and ontological, 103, 104. 

love, 20, gt £, 51, 161. 

fumen naturale, ix, 7. 

macrocosm, go. 

magic, «72, 175. 

man a mortal God, 156. 

materialists, 105, 142. 

matter, 3, 95, 106, 116 £, 119, 1399, 178, 
191; proximate, 25, 146. 

meaning, 4. 

measure, 35. 

mediation, 71, 97. 

medicine, 82, 171- 

memory, 89, 166, 18g f. 

microcosm, 90. 

miracles, 97, (24, 173, §75. 

motion, 160; circular, 158 f.; essential 
and accidental, 26; seli-m., 145. 

motive faculties, (go. 

movement, 157, 161; principle of, 2; 
two definitions of, 42. 

Mover, eternal, 79, 93; prime, 26, 149; 
unmoved, 2, 75. 

mystical, intuitive apprehension, 11. 

nature, 83, 142, 149 f, 159, 180, 182; 
atomic structure of n., 38. 

necessity, 198; objective, 45; logical 
and factual, 40, 103, 

negative theology, 88. 

nominalism, 5, 51. 

nothingness, 58, §9. 

noliones transcendentales, 80. 

optimism, Aristotelean, 20. 
organ, 185. 

paradox of continuity, 33, 

paronomasia, 109, 131, 

particular, 168. 

Pen, 166, 

perception, 39, 84, 8g, 147, (54. 

physiognomy, 172. 

plants, 19. 

plurality, 23, 71, 106. 

pluralization, 63. 

pneuma, go. 

possibility, 16, 95; objective, 37, 38, 39, 
45, 185; subjective, 10; coextensive 
with reality, 38, 44. 

214 

possible, 2, 10, 36, 40, 180, 

potency, active, 146; passive, 146; as a 
dormancy, 39. 

potentiality, 1, 2, 10f. 

principium continut, 28. 

principium ideniitatis indiscernibilium, 13. 

principium indjutduationis, 117, 201. 

principium metioris, 16, 

principle of contradiction, 7, 184; of 
movement, 2; of synonymity,183; de- 
termining p., 2, t7; first principles, 6. 

priority and posteriority, 29. 

Privation, 32, 48, 63, 150. 

Process and result, 66. 

Procreation, 83, 105, 143; cf. genera- 
tion, 

progress, 165. 

prophets, 124, 165, 167, 74, 176, 205. 

providence, 22, 82, 123, 154, 165; cf. 
God. 

Purpose, 5. 

quality, 69. 
quiddity, 10g, 130, 

ratio tecla (6p06s Adyos), 7, 49- 

reality, 110; dichotomy of nr, 103; 
trichotomy of r., 66, 104. 

recipient, 46. 

regress, infinite, 60, 97. 

relation, 60, 81, 115, 122, 124, 152 f. 

religion, 98, 180, 209 f. 

representation, 148, 
purracée. 

resurrection of the body, 179, 203, 204, 
206. : 

rhetorician, 145. 

right and jeft, 23. 

166, 168; cf. 

stata naturae, 183, 185. 

sciences, 97, 171; division of, 171. 

self-consciousness, 12 f., 73, 113, T20, 
122, t44, 200; cf ego, 

sensation, 122, 187, 194 f 

sensationalism, 191, 

shape, 191. 

sign, 199. 

simultancity of cause and effect, 29. 

sleep, 194. 

something, 4, 46. 

sophistry, 15. 

soul, 12 ff, 50, 102, 159, 171, 172, 186, 

INDEX 

190; universal, world, s, of heaven, 93, 
84, 165, 166, 170; pre-existence of, 
Td, 202, 

Space; 35, t7t, 190. 

sperm, 183. 

sphere, 20, 21, g2. 

. Spirit, 195. 

stars, 22, 78, 96, 157, 158 ff.; cf. body, 
celestial. 

state, world as, 72, 70. 

Stoic philosophy, and Ghazali, #29. 

— — and ima‘, 205 f. 

— — classification of actions, 117. 

— -- divine command, 77. 

— — middle terms between belief and 
unbelief, 117, 

—-— pheuma, go. 

— — self-preservation, 89. 

— —synectic cause, 65. 

— — ti (entity, thing), 116, 

— —- universal divine Law, 76. 

— — universe a unified body, Bg. 

— — world as a state, 76. 

cf. cause. 

substance, 112, 

substratum, 25, 

sun, 20, 57- 

supernaturalism, 182, 

syltogism, dialectical, 116; disjunctive, 
57, 146; hypothetical, 57, 145 ff. 

symapathy, 167, 175. 

tablet, indelible, 165. 

teleological argument, 140 f. 

telesmatic art, 172. 

theology, negative, 88, 89; per ana. 
logtam, per eminentiam, 89. 

time, 8, 11, 28, 91 {subjeclive), 94 
(definition), 35 (and movement), 62 
(time atorn), 150, 154, 156, t7r, rgt. 

treasure, 167. 

truth, 15, 45; 103, J To. 

ungenerated, ¢. 

universal, 4, 50, 52, 109, rat, 154, 168, 
179, tgo, 200, 202. 

virtue, 17, 204, 

vision, 156. 

whole and part, 27. 

will, 5, 6, 18, 20, 63, 145, 148, 166, 169; 
God's will, see God. 

World, ungenerated, 1. 

INDEX 

SOME CONTRADICTIONS 

Systema teleological and denial of God’s 
will, 6. 

Common notions as probable and as a 
exiterion of truth, 6. 

The potential infinite can never be 
actualized, whereas the potential is 
what can be or has to be actuatized, 8. 

The potential as what can be actualized 
and as what has to be actualized, 
36, 37-40. 

Theory of a first cause and the accep- 
tance of an infinite series of causes, 9. 

Time as what has no beginning nor end, 
whereas there are finite times, 10. 

The dubious nature of time, 8, 14. 

Soul as possessing and not possessing 
individuality, 12. 

God as the supreme Agent and the 
supreme £nd, 20. 

Mater as the principle of plurality, 
and the plurality of the immaterial 
heavens, 24. 

Forms and matter as ungencrated, 
whereas only the individual exists, 
25. 

The transitory individual as composed 
of two non-existing eternal elements, 
form and matter, 25. 

Matier as the possible and eternal, 
whereas everything eternal is neces- 
sary, 26, bd 

God's existence as timeless and as 
simultaneous with the world, 29. 

The denial of an intermediary between 
being and non-being, and the theory 
of the potential, 38, 

The potential as identical with the 
actual, 6, ¢0. 

Monistic and pluralistic views, 75, 93- 

Matter regarded as something corpo- 
real, 93, 117, 139- 

Identification of action (évépyera) and 
end (érreAdyera)}, 43. 

Privation as a negation and a positive 

215 

IN ARISTOTLE’S SYSTEM 

existent, 47. 

The contradiction in Aristotle’s theory 
of becoming, 48. 

All reality is individual, alt knowledge 
universal, 65. 

Relation of individual and universal, 

99. 

Confusion of logical and ontological 
necessity, 103. 

Dubious nature of che universal, tit, 
121, 

The difficulty in the assertion that the 
non-existent is, 1t2, 

Identification of knowledge and things 
known, 122. 

God as an individual universal or a 
universal individual, 125. 

The ambiguous relation of matter to 
form, 132. 

The difficulty of the distinction between 
art and nature, 142. 

Difficulties in Aristotle's theory of per- 
ception, 147. 

Difficulty in the cichotomy of things 
becoming, 149. 

Different conceptions of the cause of 
movement of the stars, 158, 

Right and jeft as retative 10 the observer 
and as absolutely attributable to the 
universe, 164. 

Confusion in the theory of the common 
sense, 187, 

Contradiction in the conception of 
darracia, 187. 

Difficulttes in regarding the soul as a 
unity, 193. 

Ambiguity of the term ‘comman sense’, 
194, 196. 

Three different conceptions of sensa- 
tion, 194. 

That alt thought is accompanied with 
darracia is in contradiction to the 
concept of pure self-consciousness, 
200. 

ARABIC/GREEK INDEX TO THE NOTES 

abadi dpbaprov, t. 

a'dé pipea, 48. 

‘adam ordpnors, 32. 

ahdatha causative of ylyveota:, 54. 
” ahkém vowpara, 4. 

al-ajrdm af-basita 7a dead owpara, 85. 

‘ald-t-akthart ént +6 nodvd, 2. 
+ Samm wowdy, 2. 

al-dn 76 viv, TO. 

‘ald-l-agalli éni 1a EXarray, 2. 

‘agl hayulant pois ihixds, 9. 

agfal Karu, 22. 

at-aslah ro PéArsaroy, 18, 22 

atmd ma‘dila dvdpara dépwre, 134. 
| azalé aydvyroy, 1, 

bu'd Scdotnua, 31. 
buthan anddaés, 60. 

dafira mréuapos, 96. 
dak aishv, 54, 105. 
dalil enpetov, 179. 
dhat ovgia, 109. 

— wi, 110, 

dhaug yeios, 11. 

fa'it qarit éyydrarov ainor, 83. 
ford xaropJwya, 117, 

Jfaug dv, 22. 

Sl evépyea, 43. 

Jitra lumen naturale, 3. 

fra fa'iga spies Adyos, 7. 
bi-lfpa don, 7. 

ghd’ td dvatoPgrov, 35. 

ghaw ma'him dxardlymros, 44. 
phair ma'riif dxardAnnros, §4- 
ghani atrdpxys, 118. 

ghaya rédvs, 24, 

hads éyyivova, 373, C81. 
bal was Exov, 4. 

— biddeas, 4. 

hala mis Exov, 79. 
hardm dudproye, 117. 
hassa aioPqas, 186. 
Mifz awrnpia, 28, 78. 

imtizdy wikis, 142, 

istihal dAAoiuwars, t42. 

astikmal cureAdyeva, 43+ 

utigrd’ draywyd, 197. 

istithna’ Sidtcvgss, Seatpeors, 146. 

itisal ovdecpos, 28. 

J@iz dbagopov, 117. 
juz’ pdpos, 27. 
jur’t pennss, 28, 

kulli dtnds, 28. 

fdlig avy Befignss, 117. 

fatuga eupBaivew, ELF. 

fdzim ovpPeByxds nnd adré, 117, 
Inziom émipopd, 147. 

ma‘ dni Xexrd, 4, 60. 

mafhiim xarddynros, 45- 

mahiyya 16 ri darw, 76 71 Fy alvac, LOQ. 

mail dpi, pow}, 158. 

makrah dronpopyndvov, 117. 

mataka tés, 4. 

ma'‘tim cardAgmros, (14. 

mandib, mpuyypevor, 117. 

magdir cipappevor, 48. 

mashhir évbogov, 2. 

mithdl ovpBoror, t31. 

mizdy updaus, 50. 

mubah dbuipopor, 117. 

mudabbir syycproriady, 143. 

muhal dronop, 43. 

al-raukiasad 76 €$! Huiv, 3B. 

munshar nmplwv, 24. 

muntabi' tuwoupevor, 49. 

— dvappayitdpevor, 4g, 

mugaddanm yyovpevor, 146. 

murajjih emeadivor, 2. 

musddara’ ald-t-maplid dareoas ris foriceur 
ef doxzs (petitio principii), 55. 

al-mushdr ilaifl 76 1356 4H, 0314 

mustahibs aporyydvor, 137, 

mustaihnt peradapfovoserov, ¢46, 

mutakaitimin Siatextimol, 4, 

mutalihigan dua xard xpdvor, 54. 

mutasdwigan épefts, 54 

muwdti'a ayduvia, 16. 

ndmus vonos, 41. 

rag! peragopa, 19. 

natija cupnépaopa, 146, 

hatija md yurdmu +d €€ dpyfs atretoPan, 10%, 

al-galil 76 mdoxor, 25. 

gidam dibisrns, 1. 

Giyds shas tt munfasil &levypiver dfiupe, §9- 
ginds sharti muttasit curnppdvor afiwua, 57+ 

ARABIC/GREEK INDEX TO THE NOTES 

al-guwiwa al-mudabbita 12 yyycpovxdv, £2. 
al-guutca al-musawwira 4 Sivas 3 Sin- 
rAgorin}, 83, 

rabit, rddita ovamdony, 31. 

rasm tmoypagy, 84, 129. 

rift mea, 195. 

ar-rutiba al-jatidiysa min al-'gin +3 Sadondds 
dypsv roi dpPadnod, 63. 

sailin vé getr, 60. 

shay’ vi, 4, Ub0, 123. 

sifat nafsdnivya dyvorsara, 137- 
as-suwar al-hissiyga ra aie@yra adn, 99) 

Hab" vos, 6, 7, 77. 

abi‘ wapaxohoyfoty, 145. 
tabi‘a ducsmew, 50. 

fafra diya, $0. 

tahgig avynardbeas, 1. 

taklif mpocrantindy, vopos, 77. 
at-talf 76 dnduavov, 146. 

tanzih dgaipec:s, 88, 
‘ald-ietasdwi dri rd Toor, 2. 
tasdig ovynard@eors, 1. 

filasm ré\capa, 172. 

min iiigd dnd radropdroy, 4. 

fy peBsprov, 194. 
“unyur orocyeiov, (27. 

wad* Géous, 6, 77. 

iwdhib ap-sutear yopyyas ray déywv 
formarum), 25. 

al-wajh al-aunoal mpary Béeis, LET. 

ab-wajh ath-thani Seurdpa Odois, 112. 

wale xardpfupea, 617. 

64-44 wast dyeaoor, 14. 

27 

(dator 

GREEK/ARABIC INDEX TO THE NOTES 

dydvgrov azali, 1. 

dyyivava hads, 173, 181. 

d&cdpopor mubdh, 117. 

Sdrdgogos ja'tz, 117. 

aidiorgs gidam, 1. 

aiabnens hdssa, 186, 

aicOnra ein, rd— as-putwar alfissivya, 94, 

aireiobas, 13 df dpyiis natija md yurdmy, 105, 

atrav, 73 eyyvraror al-fa'il al-garlb, 8g. 

adv dahy, §4, (05. 

dxardAnrros ghair ma'ldm, $4. 

~~ ghair ma'réf, 54. 

dMoiwors istihdl, 142, 

EAua fasta, 40, 

dpa xatd xpdvoy mucaléhigan, 54. 

dudprypa hardm, 017, 

dpcooy bild wart, 13. 

Sraictyror gha'tb, 35. 

due faug, 22. 

dkinna, delevyycvor— gipds shar}t munfasil, 
57. 

d., aurnppevor— gipds shartt muttasil, 57, 

awd oipara, Ta— abojram al-bastia, 83, 

drddudes burhin, 60. 

dtonponypevoy makrith, tt. 

Enreabar ris Inrijcews €& doyas musadare 
“ala-t-mattlab, 55. 

dromyv mubdl, 43. 

attopdroy, dnd rab— min tilkd..., 5+ 

dpaipears tanzth, 88. 

EGGapror abadi, 1. 

abrdpans ghond, 118. 

pémoror, 76-— al-azlah, 18, 22. 

yedars dhaug, 1. 
yiyrradas (causative of...) ahdathe, 54. 

BidLevdrs istithnd', 146, 

Sid@enrs Aa, 4. 

Scaipeors sstithnd', 146. 

Swrerrino’ mutakallimint, 4. 

Sidorypa bu'd, 4. 

Sunny sadi*a, 50. 

— dtamAaoriny ab-guevtoc ebmusamird, 
5, 

tipappévor magdar, 38, 
Darroy, dn’ ‘ata't-agalli, 2. 
wSofov masiitin, 2, 

dudpyan fi'l, 43. 

ewojpara pifit nafsdniyya, 197. 
tvodpaystduevoy muttfadi’, 50. 

dvreddxera istikmal, 43. 

fis maiaka, 4. 

érayuryy} istigr3’, 197. 
énixdivov, ro—~ al-murajjih, 2. 
tredopd tuziim, 147, 
éadpevor, 7o— at-tali, 146. 
£6’ quir, ro— al-mukiasab, 38. 
edetijs muiasdwiyan, 54. 

Exor, 76 wos fidl, 4. 

— — hile, 79. 

Spytuovnde mudabbir, 143. 
Hyeporindy, TO— ab-guawtwed al-mudabbira, 12 
tyotpevoy, 76—- al-mugaddam, 146. 

Béens wad, 6, 77. 
Blois, mpworg— at-wash al-cunwal, 111. 
6., Sevrépa— al-wajh ath-thani, 110. 

touv, én’—= ‘ald-téasdiel, 2. 

aaTddnsrros ina‘lim, U2. 
on mafhiim, 45. 
xarepbaysa fard, v1}. 

— wdfib, 117 

xdtw asfal, 22. 

ower “drm, 2. 

wpacts mizd}, 50. 

Aexrd madni, 4, 60. 
Adyos, Sphos— fitra fF’tga, 7. 
lumen naturale fijra, 7. 

weBdpice uf, 194. 

gepinds “juz, 28, 

gepos jut’, 27, 

KeTAGusarducrov, To— alemustathal, 146. 
peTagopd nagl, 19. 

pikes imtizdy, 142. 

popra a’ da, 48. 

vofara ahkdm, 4. 

vopos ndnnis, 41, 

— daklif, 77. 

nods thucdés dgt haysalant, 3, 

viv, TO— alan, 10, 

cakes knli, 28. 

sucpara déprava asmnd’ ma'dild, 134. 
Sppy mail, 158. 

ovata dhdt, 109. 

TapaKolovsadr tabi’, 135. 

GREEK/ARABiG INDEX TO THE NOTES 219 

wdoxor, 76— al-gabil, 25. supmhous rabit, a 1g1. 
petitie principit musddara ‘ald-Lmoples, 55. | oveBecpos ittisal, 28 
mhixapos daftra, 96. ouppuvia muwak' a, 16. 
aveiua nih, 195. oorgple hifz, 28, 78. 
woat, éxit ro— ‘ala-bakthart, 2, 
apow munshér, 24. tecopa filesm, 172. 
Rponpypdvor mandi, (17. tédos ghaya, 24. 
— mustahabh, 117. wih dhat, 110, 
mpooraxniady taklif, 77, — shay, 4, 110, 123. 
. ri fy elvas, ro— mahizga, 509. 
ftir, ro— saildn, 60. rl ons, rd— mdhiyya, 109. 
gow} matt, 158, rode 1, ro— abinushdr ilaiki, 151. 
= TvRotperor muntabi’, 49. 
onasiov dalil, 179. 
orépnors “adam, 32. tgdoudés typce 70d dffaluct, oe a 
@rovyetow ‘rmpur, £27. fupiba al-jatidiyya min al-*ain, 64, 
ovyxardtens takgtg, t. twoypagpit rasm, Bg, 129. 
~— tasdig, 1. 
ovpfaiverr lakiga, 117. F déon bi-Lfifra, 1. 
ouppefgnds takig, 217. dios jab", 6, 7, 77- 
ouppeBgeds nob" abrd ldzim, 127. ; 
aépflodow mithat, 13. xopyyes séiv Adyew (dator formarum) 

oupmipacpe nafija, 146, WARIS as-svar, 25.