CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

Cornell University 
Library 

The original of tinis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028974479 

3 

4 EL-MAAREF PRINTING OFFICE, CAIRO »• 

4 PPOP. MEGUIB MITPI » 

THE IMPROVEMENT OP 

HUMAN REASON, 

EXHIBITED IN THE LIFE OF 

Hayy IIdii Yakzan : 

Written in ARABIC above 600 Years ago, 

BY 

Abu Ja'afar Ibn Tufayl 

l!SI \A/M1CM IS DEBVIONSTRA-TED 

By what Methods one may, by the mere light of nature, attain 
the Knowledge of thingi NAxaRAL and SLTPERNATaaAL ; more particularly 
the Knowledge of God, and the Affairs of another Life. 

Translated from the Original Arabic by Simon Ockley, A. M., Vicar 
of Swavesey in Carabridgshire, and Pfiuted by lEdin. Powell in Black- 
friars. 

L.0^JD0^4 170S 

Beprinted, with slight changes, by 

Edward A. van Dyck, 

For the Use of his Pupils, at 

CAIRO, Egypt: 1905 

Tiie Bedieatioii 

To the Reverend 

Mr- Edward Pococke, 

Rector of MINAL, 

in Wiltshire. 

Reverend Sir . 

Hayy Ibn Yaqzan returns to you again, in a dress different from 
that which you sent him out in. Wherever he comes, he acknowledges 
you for his first and best master ; and confesses that his being put in a 
capacity to travel through Europe is owing to your hand. I could not 
in equity send him to any other person, you being Lhe sole proprietor. 
And as your learning enables you to do him justice, so your candor 
will incline you to pardon what is by me done amiss. Both which 
qualifications you enjoy, as a Paternal Inheritance, descending from the 
reverend and learned Dr. Pococke, the glory and ornament of our age 
and nalion. Whose memory I much reverence, and liow much I acknow- 
ledge myself indebted to him for his learned works, I thought I could 
no way express better than by taking some opportunity to pay my res- 
pects to you, Sir, the worthy sim of so great a father. And no fitter 
bearer than Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, with whose character and language you 
are so well acquainted, and to whom you have long ago shown so great 
a respect that I have no reason to fear but he will be welcome. 

I am. 

Sir, 
Your most Humble Servant, 

Simon Ockley 

PREFACE 

When Mr. Pococke first published this Arabic Author with his accu- 
rate Latin version, A)iiio 1671, Dr. Poo.jcke his father, that late eminent 
professor of tbe oriental languages in the university of Oxford, prefixed 
a Preface to it ; in which he tells us that he has good reason to think 
that this author M-as contemporary with Ibn Rushd, who died very an- 
cient in the Year of the Ilijrah 595, which is coincident with the Year 
1198 of our Lord ; according to which account the Author lived some- 
thing above 500 Years ago. 

He lived in Spain, as appeals from one or two passages in this 
book. He wrote some other pieces, which are not come to our hands. 
This has been very well received in the E.ist ; one argument of which 
is that it has baen tra-rslated by R ibbi Misas Narbonensis into Hebrew, 
and illustrat<>d with a large coniQU'iilary. The design of t])o authoi- is to 
show how human capacilv, unaided by any exlei-nal help, may, by due 
apphcation, attain to Ihe Knowledge of natural tilings, and so by degrees 
find oat its dependani:-o upon a Superior Being, the immortality of the 
soul, and all things necessary to salvation. 

How well he has succeeded in this attempt, I leave to the reader 
to judge. It is certain that he was a nun ef parts and very good learn- 
ing, considering the ago he lived in, and the way of studying in those 
times. There are a great many lively strokes in it ; and I doubt not but 
a judicious reader will find his account in the perusal of it. 
l^ I was not willing (though importuned) to undertake the translating 
into English, because I was informed that it had been done twice alre- 
ady ; once by Dr. Ashwell, another time by the (Jiipkers, who imagined 
that there was something in it that favored their enthusiastic notionsTlHow- 
ever, taking it for granted that both these transhitions were not nlTiae out 
of the original Arabic, bat out of the Latin, I did not question but they 
had mistaken the sense of the author in many places. Besides, oliserving 
that a great many of my frieuds whom I had a desire to oblige, and 
other persons whom I would vi-iUiugly incline to a more favorable opin- 
ion of Arab Learning, had not seen this book ; and withal, hoping that 
I might add something by way of annotation or appendix, which would 
not be allogetlier useless ; I at last ventured to translate it anew. 

I have here and there added a note, in which there is an account 
given of some great man, some custom of the Mushms explained, or some- 
thing of that nature, which I hope will not be unacceptable. And lest 
any person should, through mistake, make any ill use of ii, I have sub- 
joined an appendix, the design of which the readei- may see in its 
proper place. 

Simon Ockley. 

The Bookseller to the Reader 

When I first undertook the publication of this Enghsh Translation, 
1 thought it would not be amiss to present the world with a specimen 
of it first. But, since the introduction is such that the reader can no 
more by it give a guess at what is contained in the book itself, than a 
man can judge of his entertainment by seeing the cloth laid ; I have 
thought it necessary to give him a Bill of Fai'e. 

The design of the author, who was a Muslim philosopher, is to 
show how human reason may, by observation and experience, arrive at 
the knowledge of natural things, and from thence to supernatural ; par- 
ticularly the knowledce of God and a future state. And in order to this, 
ho supposes a person brought up by himself, where he was altogether 
destitute of any instruction, but what he could get from his own obser- 
vation. 

He lays the scene in some Fortunate Island, situate under the 
Equinoctial ; where he supposes the philosopher, either to have been 
bred (according to Ibn Sina's hypothesis, who conceived a possibility of 
a man's being formed by the influence of the planets upon Matter right- 
ly disposed) without either father or mother ; or else exposed in his 
infancy, and providentially suckled by a roe. Not that our author believed 
any such matter, but only having designed to contrive a convenient place 
for his philosopher, so as to leave him to reason by himself, and make 
his observations without any guide. In which relation he proposes both 
these ways, without speaking one word in favor of either. 

Then he shows by what steps and degrees he advanced in the knowledge 
of natural things, till at last he perceived the necessity of acknowledging 
an infinite, eternal, wise Creator, and also the immateriality and immor- 
tality of his own soul, and that its happiness consisted only in a continued 
conjunction with this supreme Being. 

The matter of this book is curious, and full of useful theorems ; he 
makes most use of the Peripatetic Philosophy, which he seems to have 
well understood; it must be confessed indeed that when he comes to talk 
of the union with God, etc., (as in the introduclion), there are some 
enthusiastic notions, which are particulary considered and refuted by the 
editor in his appendix. 

Whose design in publishing this translation was to give those who 
are as yet unacquainted with it, a taste of the acumen and genius of the 
Arab philosophers, and to excite young scholars to the reading of those 
authors which, through a groundless conceit of their impertinence and 
ignorance, have been too long neglected. 

And though wo do not pretend to any discoveries in this book, es- 
pecially at this time of day, when all parts of learning are cultivated 
with so much exactness; yet we hope that it will not be altogether unac- 
ceptable to the curious reader, to know what the state of learning was among 
the Arabs five hundred years since. And if what we shall here communi- 
cate shall seem little in respect of the discoveries of this discerning 
age ; yet we are confident that any European, who shall compare the 
learning in Ibis book with what was published by any of his own coun- 
trymen at that time, will find himself obliged in conscience to give our 
Author fair quarter. 

Abu-Ja'afar Ibn Tufayl's 
INTRODUCTION 

to tiae LIFE of 

Hajry Ibn Yaqzan 

In the Name of the most Merciful God 

Blessed be the almighty and etenial, the infinitely wise and merciful 
God, . who hath taught (1) u. the use of the pen; .. who, out of his great 
goodness to mankind, « has made him undristand things which he did 
not (2) know.. I praise him !oi- his excellent gifts, and give him thanks 
for his continued benehls, a.nd I testify that there is hut One 'God, and 
that he has no partmT; and that iluirAJLMAD is his servant and apostle, 
endued with an excellent spirit, and master of convincing demonstration^ 
and a victorious sword: the blessing of God be upon him, and his compan- 
ions, (men of great thoughts and vast understandings), and upon all his 
followers, to the end of the world. 

You asked me, Dear Friend, (God preserve you for ever, and make 
you partaker of everlasting happiness) to communicate to you what I 
know of the mysteries of the eastern philosophy, mentioned by the Learned 
Ibn Sina(3): Now you must understand that whoever designs to attain to 
a clear and distinct knowledge must be diligent in the search of it. Indeed 
your request gave me a noble turn of thought, and brought me to the 
understanding of what I never knew before; nay, il advanced me to 
such an elevation as no tongue, how eloquent soever, is able to express; 
and the reason is, because it is of a quite different nature and kind from 
the things of this world; only this there is in it, that whoever has attain- 
ed to any degree of it, is so mightily affected with joy, pleasure, and 
exultation that it is impossible for him to conceal his sense of it, but he 
is forced to utter some general expressions, since he cannot be particular. 
i\ow if a man, who has not been polished by good education, happens to 
attain to that state, he runs out into strange expressi(jns, and speaks he 
knows not what; so that one of this soii of men, when in that state, cried 
out: «Praise be to me ! How wonderful am I !» j\not!ier said: «I am Truth!* 
Another, That he was God. Abu-Hamed (i-l al-Gaz;di, when he had 

/ '(3) Thi; 

(1) Surah 96, 'Alaq. (2i Snrah (3) This great man was born 

in Buehara, a city famous for the birth of many learned men, and still one 
of the centers of religion, leai-ning, and trade in Central Asia. He was 
born in 375 H., 984 A.D., and was for a time Hie wazir of the Buyid Sultan 
Shams-ul-Daulah, and died iu 4-28 H., IU.^7 A.D. near Hamadhan, aged 
only 58 years. (i) Born 451 H., I(i58 A.D., died at Ttis in Khurasan 
505, H., 1111 A.D., aged 54 years. What he thought of those men who 
were so wild and enthusiastic as to use such extravagant expressions, ap- 
pears plainly from those words of his quoted by Dr. Pococke in his ^AS^^e- 
cimen » , p. 267, where he says : « People ran on to such a degree (of 

— 8 — 

atLained to it, expressed himself thus : 

'T was what it was, 't is not to be express'd; 
Enquire no furlhe.-, but conceive the best. 

But he was a man that had good leaining, and was well versed in 
the sciences. What Ibn Baja(l) says at the end of his discourse concerning 
the Ukion is worth observing; there he says that it tt'ill appear plainly to 
any one that understands the design of his book that that degree is 
not attainable by the means of those sciences which were then in use; 
but that he attained to what he knew by being altogether abstracted from 
anything which he had been acquainted with before; and that he was 
furnished with other notions altogether independent upon matter, and of 
too noble a nature to be any way atlributcd to the natural life, but were 
pecuhar to the Blessed, and which upon that account v/e may call 
Divine Proprieties, which God, whose Name be praised, bestows upon 
such of his servants as he pleases. 

Now this degree which this author mentions is attainable by Specu- 
lative Knowledge, (nor is it to be doubted but that he had reached it 
himself); but not that which we have just now mentioned, which notwith- 
standing is not so much different from it in kind as in degree : for in 
that which I mentioned there are no discoveries made which contradict 
those which this author means; but the difference consists in this, viz. 
that in our way there is a greater degree of clearness and perspicuity 
than there is in the other; for in this we apprehend things by the help 
of something which we cannot properly call a Power; nor indeed will 

madness) as to pretend to a Union with God, and a sight of him without 
the interposition of any veil, and familiarly discourse with him. » And a 
little after he continues thus : « which sort of speeches have occasioned 
great mischiefs among the common people ; so that some country fellows, 
laying aside their husbandry, have pretended to the same things : for men 
are naturally pleased with such discourses as give them a liberty to neg- 
lect their business, and withal promise them purity of mind, and the at- 
tainment of strange degrees and proprieties. Now the most stupid wretches 
in Nature may pretend to this, and have in theii- mouths such false and 
deceitful expressions. And if any one denies what Ihcv say, they imme- 
diately tell you thai this Unbelief of yours pi-oceedi from Learning and 
Logic: and that Learing is a Veil, and Logic, labor of the brain, but 
that these things which they affirm ai-e discovered onlv inwardly by the 
Light of the TiiuTH. And this which thi-y iitfirm has spread itself through 
a great many countries, and produced a great deal of mischief.. Thus far 
al-Gazali. How exactly this answers the wild extravagancies of our enthu- 
siasts, let them themselves judge. And withal I would have them from 
hence learn the modesty not to pretend to be the first after the Apostles 
who had endeavored to turn men from Darkness to Light, since they 
see so many worthy persons among the Muslims gone before them 

(1) Surnamed also Ibn al/a-igh, born at Saragossa in Spain towards 
the close of the Xlth Century of the Christian Era; died at Fez in 633 H., 
1138 A. D., a great interpreter of Ihe Peripatetic Philosophv of Aristotle.' 
Maiinonides, in his r;))i.,llc to Rabbi Samuel Aben Ivbhon^ gives him a 
great charactei-. Abu-I-Hasan V\h, who collected his works,' and reduced 
them into one volume, prefers him before all Jluslim philosoiihers what- 
soever. Most of his works are imperfect. See Dr. Pococke's Elenchos 
fiQyljjiovnin prefixed to the Arabic Edition of that one reduced volume 

any of those words, which arc eillior used in common discourse, or occuf 
in the writings of the Loarnod, serve lo express That by which Ihis sort 
of porce[ilion does apprehend. 

This degree, which I have already mentioned, (and wliich perhaps 
I shouhl never liave had any La-le of, if your leqnest had not put me 
upon a farther search) is the very same thing which Ibn Sina means where 
he says; « Then when a man's desires are raised Lo a good pitch, and 
! e is competently well exercised in Hiat way, theje v.-iU appear lo him 
some small glimmerings of the Truth, as it were flashes of lightning, very 
delightful, which just sliine upon him, and then go oat; then the more 
he exercises himself, the oftener he will perceive Ihein, till at last he will 
become so well acquainted with them that they will occur to him s[)onta- 
neously, without any exercise at all; and then, as soon as he perceives 
anything, he ajjplies himsell' to the Divine Essence, so ns to retain some 
impression of it ; then something occurs to him on a sadden, whereby lie 
begins to discern the Trulh in everything ; till, through frequent exercise, 
he at last attains to a perfect tranquility ; and that which used to appear 
to him only by fits and starts, becomes liabitual; and that wliich was only 
a glimmering before, a constant light ; and he obtains a constant and 
steady knowledge. » Thus far Ibn Sina. I'.esides, he has given an account 
of those several steps and degrees by which a man is brought to this 
perfection ; till liis soul is like a polished looking-glass, in which he beholds 
the Truth : and then he swims in pleasure, and rejoices exceedingly in 
his mind, because of the impressions of Truth which he perceives in it. 
When he is once attained tlius far, the next thing which employs him is, 
that he sometimes looks towards Truth, and sometimes towards himself; 
and thus he fluctuates between both, till he retires from himself wholly, 
and looks only toward the Divine Essence ; and if he does at any time 
look towards his own soul, the only reason is, because that looks towards 
God ; and from thence arises a perfect conjunction (with God). 

And, according to this manner which he has described, he does by 
no means allow that this Taste is attained by way of speculation or 
deduction of consequences. And, that you may the more clearly apprehend 
the difference between the perception of these sort of men, and those 
other, I shall propose you a familiar instance. Suppose a man born blind, 
but of quick parts, and a good capacity, a tenacious memory, and solid 
judgment, who had lived in the place of his nativity till he had, by the 
help of the rest of his senses, contracted an accpiaintance with a great 
many in tiie neighborhood, and learned the several kinds of animals, and 
things inanimate, and the streets and houses of the town, so as to go 
any where about it without a guide, and to know such people as he met, 
and call them by tlieir names; and knew the names of colors, (1) and 
the difference of them by their descriptions and definitions ; and after he 

(1) Although this instance will serve to explain the meaning of the 
author, yet it is quite inadequate, because there is no possible way by 
which to convey to a man that is born blind the least notion or idea of 
light or colors, 

2 

— 10 — 

had learned all this, should have hin pyos opened : Why, this man, when 
he walked about the town, would find overytlnng to be exactly agreeable 
to those nolions which lu' had before ; and Lliat colors were such as he 
had before conceived them to be, by those desci'iptions he had received : 
so that the difference between his apprehensions when blind, and those 
which ho would have now that his eyes were opened, would consist only 
in these two great things, one of which is a consequent of the other, viz. 
a greater clearness, and extreme delight. P>oni whence it is plain that the 
condition of those contemplators, who have not yet attained to the Union 
(with God), is exactly hke that of the bhnd man; and the notion which 
a blind man has of colors, by their description, answers to those things 
which Ibn Baja said were « of too noble a nature to be anyways attributed 
to the natural hfe, » and « which God bestows upon such of his servants 
as he pleases. » But the condition of those who have attained to the 
Union, to whom God has given that which I told you could not be proper- 
ly expressed by the word Power, is that second slate of the bhnd man 
cured. Take notice by tlie way that our simihtude is not exactly applicable 
in every case ; for there is very seldom any one found that is born with 
his eyes open, that can attain to those things without any help of 
contemplation. 

Now, my Dear Friend, I do not here, when I speak of the Ideas of 
the Contemplative, mean what they learn from the study of Physics ; nor 
by the notions of those who have attained to the Union, what they learn 
from the study of Metaphysics (for these two ways of learning are vastly 
different, and must by no means be confounded). But what I mean by 
the Ideas of the Contemplative is what is attained by the study of Meta- 
physics of which kind is that which Ibn Baja understood ; and in the 
apprehension of these things this condition is necessarily required, viz. 
that it be manifestly and clearly true;, and then there is a middle sort 
of speculation, between that, and those who have attained 1o the Union, 
who employ themselves in these things 'with greater perspicuity and 
delight. 

Now Ibn Baja blames all those that make any mention of this plea- 
sure, which is enjoyed in the Union, before the Vulgar ; besides, he says 
that it belongs to llie imaginative Faculty, and he promised to write a 
book about it in v.-liich he designed to give an account of the v.-hole 
matter, and describe the condition of those who were so happy as to 
attain it clearly and perspicuously ; but we may answer him with the old 
proverb, viz. < Do not say a thing is sweet before you taste of it ; » for 
he never was so good as his word, nor performed anything like it. But it 
is probable that the reason why he did not, was either because he was 
straitened for time, being taken up with his journey to Wahran ; or else, 
because he was sensible that, if he should undertake to give a description 
of that state, the nature of such a kind of discourse would unavoidably 
have put him upon a necessity of speaking some things which would ma- 
nifestly have reproached his own manner of Uving, and contradicted those 
principles which he himself had e'-c where laid down ; in which he en- 

- 11 ~ 

courages men to heap up riches, and proposes several ways and means 
in order to the acquiring them. 

We have in this discourse, as necessity required, digressed somewhat 
from the main design of what you desired; it appears from what has been 
already said that you must either mean, 1. That I should describe to you 
what they see and lasle, who are so happy as Lo enjoy the Union, (which 
is impossible to be described as it really is ; and when any one goes about 
to express it, either by speech or writing, he quite alters the thing, and 
siiiks into the speculative way. For when you once come to clothe it with 
letters and words, it comes nearer to the corporeal world, and does by no 
means remain in the same state that it was in before ; and the significa- 
tions of these words, which are used in explaining it, are quite altered ; 
so that it occasions a great many real mislakes to some, and makes others 
believe that they are mistaken, wlion indeed they are not ; and the reason 
of this is, beranse it is a thing of infinite extent, cooiprelionding all 
things in itself, but not comprehended by any). Or else, 2. The meaning 
of your request must be this, that I should show you after what manner 
they proceed, who give themselves up to contemplation. And this, my 
Good Friend, is a thing which is capable of being expressed both by 
speech and writing ; but it is as scarce as old gold, especially in this 
part of the world v.'here we live; for it is so rare that there is hardly 
one of a thousand gets so much as a smattering of it ; and of those few, 
scarce any have communicated anything of what they knew in that kind, 
but only by obscure hints and innnendos. Indeed the Hanafile School, 
and the Muslim Law, do both forbid men to dive too far into this matter. 
Nor would I have you think that the philosophy which we find in the 
books of Aristotle, and al-Farabi, (1) and in Ibn Sina's book which he calls 
« al-Shifa », does answer the end which you aim at, nor have any of 
the Spanish philosophers written fully and satisfactorily about it. Because 
those scholars who were bred in Spain, before the knowledge of logic and 
philosophy was broached amongst them, spent their whole lives in ma- 
thematics, in which it must be allowed they made great progress, but 
went no farther. After them came a generation of men who applied 
themselves more to the Art of Reasoning, in which they excelled their 
predecessors, yet not so far as to attain to true perfection. So that one of 
them said : 

(1) Without exception the greatest of all the Muslim philosophers 
deemed by some very nearly equal to Aristotle himself. Maimonides, in 
the Epistle which I just now mentioned, commends him highly ; and al- 
though he allows to Ibu Sina a great share of learning and acumen, yet 
he prefers ai-Farabi before him. Nay, Ibn Sina hinif elt confesses that when 
he had read over Aristotle's Metaphysics forty times, and learnt them by 
heart, that hi.' never understood them till he hapi)ened upon al-Farabi's 
exposition of them. He wrote books of Rhetoric, Music, Logic, and all parts 
of philoso,)liy ; and his writings liavo been much esteeniel, not only by 
Muslims but by Jews and Chri.stia'is too. He was a person of singular 
abstinence and continence, and a des[)iser of the things of this world. He 
was born at Farab, in Bukhara, and died at Da;na,;ca-. in the Year 330 II., 
950 A. D., when about eighty years old. 

— 12 — 

'Tis hard, the kinds of knowledge are but two : 
The One, erroneous ; the Other, true. 

The former profits nothing when 't is gained ; 
The other's difficult to be attained. 
After these came others, who advanced still further, and made near- 
er approaches to the Truth ; among whom there was^ne that had a 
sharper wit, or truer notions of things than Ibn Baja, but he was too 
much taken up with worldly business, and died before he had time to 
open out the treasury of his knowledge, so that most of those pieces of 
his which are extant, are imperfect ; particularly his book about the 
Soul, and his Tadbiru-1-Mutawahhid, i. e. How a Man ought to man- 
age himself that leads a Solitary Life. So are his Logics and Physics. 
Those pieces of his which are complr'te are only short tracts and some 
occasional letters. Nay, in his Epistle concerning the Union, he himself 
confesses that he had written nothing complete, where he says, « That it 
would require a great deal of trouble and pains to express that clearly 
which he had undertaken to prove » ; and, < that the method which he 
had iriade use of in explaining himself, was not in many places so exact 
as it might have been » ; and, « that he designed, if he had time, to alter 
it. » So much for Ibn Baja. I, for my part, never saw him; and as for 
his contemporaries, they were far inferior to him, nor did I ever see any 
of their works. Those who are now alive are either such as are still 
advancing forwards, or else such as have left off, -without attaining to 
perfection ; if there are any others, 1 know nothing of them. 

As to those works of al-Farabi which are extant, they are most of 
them Logic. There are a great many things very dubious in his philo- 
sophical works ; for in his Millatu-1-Fadhilah, i. e. The Most Excel- 
lent Sect, he asserts expressly, «that the souls of wicked men shall suffer 
everlasting punishment ; » and yet he says as positively, in his Pohtics, 
that they shall be dissolved and annihilated, and that the souls of the 
Perfect shall remain for ever. And then, in his Ethics, speaking concer- 
ning the happiness of man, he says that « it is only in this life,» and 
then adds that « whatsoever people talk of besides, is more whimsy and 
old wives' tales [ fables ] . > A principle which, if believed, would make 
all men despair of the mercy of God, and puts the Good and the Evil 
both upon the same level, in that it makes annihilation the common 
end to them both. This is an error not to be pardoned by any means, 
or made amends for. Besides all this, he had a mean opinion of the gift 
of pi'ophecy, and said that, in his judgment, it did belong to the faculty 
of imagination, and that he preferred philosophy before it ; wilh many 
other things of the like nature, not necessary to be mentioned here. 

As for the books of Aristotle, Ibn Sina's exposition of them in his 
botk «al-Shifa» [i.e. Health or Healing] supplies their room ; for he 
trod in the same stops and was of the same sect and School. In the 
beginning of that book ho says that the Tiuth was in his opinion differ- 
ent from what he bad there delivered, Uiat he had written that book 
according to the philosophy of the Peripatetics ; but those who would 

— 13 — 

know the Truth clearly and wilhont ohscuvily, he refers to his book 
«0f the Eastern Philosophy.!' Now, he that takes the pains to compare 
his «al-Shifa» with what Arislolle has wiiUen, will find that they agree 
in most things, though in al-Shifa there are many things, which are not 
extant in any of those pieces which we have of Aristotle. Bat if the 
reader take the literal sense only, either of al-Shifa or jVrisfoLle, without 
penetrating into the hidden sense, he will never attain to [)erfection, as 
Ibn Sina himself observes in al-Shifa. 

As for al-Ghazali, (t) he often contradicts himself, denying in 
one place what he affirms in anothei'. He taxes the philosophers with 
heresy, (2) in liis book entitled « al-Tahafut," i. e. Destruction or Down- 
fall, beciuse tliey deny the i'psm-i-(?clion of the bodv, and hold that re- 
wards and punishments in a Future Slate belong to the soul only. Then in 
the beginning of his book <!al-Mi:',an,» i.e. the Balrnee, he affirms posi- 
tively that this is the do::lrine of the <'.niis, (3) and that he was convinced 
of the truth of it, after much study and search. Tliere are many such 
contradictions as these interspersed in his writings; which he himself begs 
- pardon for at the end of his « Mizan-ul-A'amal, » ( The Balance of Men's 
Actions,) where he says that there are Three Sorts of Opinions: 1. Such 
as are common to the Vulgar, and agreeable to their notions of things; 
2. Such as we commonly make use of in answering questions proposed 
to us; and, 3. Such private views as a man has and keeps to himself, 
which none understand but those who think just as he does. And then 
he adds that although there were no more in what he had written than 
only this, viz.. That it made a man doubt of those things which he had 
imbibed at first, and helped him to remove the prejudices of education, 
that even that were sufficient; because, he that never doubts will never 
weigh things aright; and he that does not do this will never see, but will 
remain in bhndness and confusion: — 

(1) An eminent and extremely Orthodox Muslim Sunnite philosopher 
and theologian, born at Tin; , a famous city in Khurasan, in the Year 
450 H., about 1058 A.D. ; died, 505 H., 1111 A. D. 'See Dr. Pococke's 
Elenchos Scriptorum. (2) In Arabic the word Knfurc. signifies to be 

an infidel, but they use it commonly as we do the word heresy, vis, 
when a person holds anything erroneous in Fundamentals, though orthodox 
in other points. (3) The (^ufis are an enthus^tic sect of mystics among 
the Muslims, something like tlio Qnielists and" (Jualfis. These set up a 
stricter sort of discipline, and pretended to great abstinence and contempt 
of tlie world, and also to a greater familiarity and closer union with God 
than other sects. They used many strange and extravagant actions, and 
uttered blasphemous exiiressions. Al-Husayn al-Hallag was eminent amongst 
them about the year 300 11 II was he that wrote in one of his epistles: 
« Blessed is he that possesses the shining light, » etc., and pretended that 
God dwelt in him. The Learned among the Arabs are not agreed about 
the derivations of the ward (JInfi. It seoms not to have been knowji among 
them till about the year 200 of the H. The most probable interpretation 
of it is from the Greek Sofif:i, w'sdom; or from the Arabic QuF, meaning 
v:(:ol, because these that followed this sect refused to wear silk, and 
clothed themselves with wool only. Dr. Pococlre and the learned Golius 
follow this interpretat'un; although the Inlter in his Lcx'con seems to doubt 
whether it is derived from the Greek adjective sophos or from the Arabic Cuf. 

- 14 — 

Believe your eyes, but still suspect your ears; 

You'll need no star-light, (1) when the day appears. 
This is the account of his way of philosophizing, the greatest part 
of which is enigmatical and full of obscurity, and for that reason of no 
use to any but such as thoroughly perceive and understand the matter 
before, and then afterwards hear it from him again, or at least such as 
are of an excellent capacity, and can apprehend a thing from the least 
intimation. The same author says, in his « al-Jawahir » (i. e. The Jewels), 
that he had books not fit to be communicated but to such only as were 
qualified to road them, and that in them he had laid down the Naked 
Truth. But none of them have ever come into Spain thai we know of. 
We have indeed had books which some have imagined to be those 
•incommunicable* ones he speaks of ; but it is a mistake, for those are 
« al-xMa'arif-ul-'Aqliyah » [Intellectual Notions], and the « al-Xafkh wal- 
Taswiyahs [Inflation and Equation], and besides tliese, a « Collection of 
Several Qae,3tions. » But as for these, although there are some hints in 
them, yet they contain nothing of particular use to the clearing of things 
but what you may meet with in his other books. There are, it is true, 
in his «al-Maq5ad-ul-Asma», some things which are deeper than what we 
meet with in the rest of his books, but he expressly says that that book 
is not « in communicable »; from whence it follows that those books which 
are come to our hands are not those incommunicable ones which he 
means. Some have fancied that there were some great matters contained 
in that discourse of his, which is at the end of his tMishkat» [i. e. Case- 
ment] — which belief of theirs has plunged them into inextricable diffi- 
culties — where, speaking of the several sorts of those who are kept 
from nearer Approaches, by the brightness of the radiation of the Divine 
Light, and then of those who had attained to the ILxiON, he says of these 
latter that « they apprehended sucli attributes to belong to the Divine 
Essence as were destructive of its Unity; » from whence it appeared to 
them that he too behoved a sort of Mulliplicit-y in the Godhead, which is 
horrid blasphemy. Now, I make no question but that the worthy Doctor 
al-Gazali was one of those which attained to the utmost degree of happi- 
ness, and to those heights which are proper to those who enjoy the 
Union ; but as for his secret of incommunicable books, which contain the 
manner of the Revelation, they never came to my hands: and that pitch 
of Knowledge which 1 have attained to, is owing to his other works and 
to Ibn Sina, whicli I read aad compared with the opinions of the present 
philosophers, till at length 1 came to the Knowledge of the Truth. At first 
indeed, by way of enquiry and contomplatiou ; but aflorwards I came to 

(1) The word here rendered « Star-light, - is in Arabic Z»;/o/, mean- 
ing Saturn. It i,s a common way with Arab authors, when they intend 
to show a vast disproportion between things, to conqjare the greater to 
the sun and the lesser to Saturn. The meaning of this dislieh is Hint Ihere 
is as much difference belweon what a man knows bv hoarsav, or what 
notions he imbibes in his edncalion, and wiiat he knows when' he comes 
to examine things to the iwttoni, and know them experimentally, as tliere 
is between twilight and noonday. 

— 15 — 

have a perfect sense, and tlioii T fcind tliat I could say something which 
1 could call my own. 

Now, I was resolved that you should bo the first to whom I would 
communicate what I knew about these matters, both upon the account 
of the intimacy of our friendship, and your candor and inte.i,a-ity. Only 
observe, that my discovering to you the ends which I attained in this 
way, without proving the principles to you fnst, by which those ends 
are attained, will do you no more service than any other story which 
you receive by tradition, or anything told you in general, of which you 
do not know how to make a particular iipplication. Presuming that you 
will accept it kindly, not for any merit of the author, but on account of 
our good friendship and acquaintance; and I heartily desire ttiat you may 
not stop here, but aspire to a loftier degree : for this is so far from being 
able to bring you to those heights, that [it] is not sufficient to save you. 
Now I would lead you by the same paths which I have v.-alked in be- 
fore you, and make yon sleer by the same compass, till you arrive at 
the same point, and see with your ov.qi eyes what I have seen before 
you, so as not to take it on tiust any longer from me, but to experience 
it yourself. But this is a matter which will not only require considera- 
ble time, but also that yon be free and disengaged from all manner of 
business, and follow it close with great application. And if you are really 
in earnest, and set about it heartily, you will rejoice as one that has 
travelled all night does when the sun rises upon him, and will receive 
a blessing for your labor, and take delight in your Lord, and He will 
delight in you. And for my own part, -you will find me according to 
your own ln^art's desire, just such an one as you could wish ; and I hope 
that I shall lead yon in the right way, free from evils and dangers : and 
really I perceive some glimmerings now, by the help of which I -shall 
inflame your desire, and put you upon entering this way, by telling you 
the story of Hayy ibn Yaqzan, and Asal, and Salaman, as Ibn Sina calls 
them, in which those that understand themselves right will find matter 
of improvement, and worthy their imitation. 

THE 

HISTORY 

OF 

Hayy IM Yakzan 

R 

Quick- Alive son of Wide -Awake. 

1. Our ancestors, of happy memory, tell us that there was an island 
in the Indian Ocean, situate under the Equinoctial, where men come 
into the world spontaneously without the help of father and mother. 
This island, it seems, is blest with such a due influence of the sun, as 

— 16 — 

to be the most temperate and perfect of all places in the Creation ; 
though iL mnsl be confessed that sucii an assertion is contrary to Lhe 
opinion of the most eclebraled pliiiosophei's and pliytician-^, who affirm 
that lhe fourth Climate is the most temperate. Now, it the reason which 
they give for this assertion, viz. « That those parts situate under the 
Equinoctial are not habitable^, were drawn from any impediment frora 
the Earth, it is allowed that it would appear more probable ; but if the 
reason be, because of the intense heat — which is that which most of 
them assign — it is absolutely false, and the contrary is proved by un- 
deniable demonstration. For' it is demonstrated in A'alural Philosophy that 
there, is no other cause of heat than JVIotion, or else the Contact and 
Light of Hot Bodies. It is also proved that the sun, in itself, is not hot, 
nor partakes of any mixed quality : it is proved moreover, that the thick- 
est and smoothest bodies receive light in the greatest degree of perfec- 
tion ; and next to them, the thicker which are not smooth ; and those 
which are very thin receive no hght at all. (This was first; demonstrated 
by Ibn Sina, never mentioned before by any of the Ancients ) . From 
these premisses, this consequence will necessarily follow, namely : That 
the sun does not communicate his heat to the Earth after the same 
manner as hot bodies heat those other bodies which are near them ; be- 
cause the sun is not hot in itself. Nor can it be said that the Earth is 
heated by motion, because it stands slill, and remains in the same pos- 
ture both when the sun shines upon it and when it does not ; and yet it 
is evident to sense that there is a vast difference in it, in respect of heat and 
cold, at those several times. Nor does the sun first heat the air, and so 
the Earth; because we may observe, in hot weather, that the air which 
is nearest the Earth is hotter by much than that wdiich is higher and 
more remote. It remains therefore that the sun has no other way of heat- 
ing the Earth but by its light; for heat always follows light; so that 
when its beams are collected, as in burning-glasses for instance, it fires 
all before it. Now, it is demonstrated in Mathematics that the sun is a 
spherical body, and so is the Earth; and that the sun is much greater 
than the Earth; and that the part of the Earth which is at all times illumi- 
nated by the sun is above half of it; and that in that half which is illu- 
minated, the light is most intense in the midst; both because that part 
is lhe most remote from darkness, whicii is at the circujnlerencc of the 
ciicle, as also because it hes opposile to more paiis of Lhe sun : and 
that those parts, which are nearest the circumference of the circle, have 
less light; and so gradually, till the circumference of the circle, which en- 
compasses the iUumuialed part of lhe Earlh,^ends in darkness. 

2. Now, that is the center of the circle of light, where the sun is 
vertical to the inhabilanls, and then in that place the heat is most extreme- 
ly intense; and so those countries are the coldest, whei'o the sun is 
farthest from being vertical. And if there were any such place where the 
sun was always vertical, it must needs be extreme hot. Now, it is de- 
monstrated in Astronomy that the sun is vertical twice a year only, to 
those which live under the Equinoctial, viz. when he enters into Aries 

— 17 — 

and Libra; and all the rest of the y^T he declines from them, six months 
northward, and six months southwaid ; and Tor that reason they are neither 
too hot nor too cold, but of a moderate temper between both. There is 
much more lo be said about this argument, in order to explain it fully ; 
but it is not suitable to our purpose ; I have only hinted it lo you, 
because it helps the story a litlle, and makes it somewhat more probable 
that a man may be formed without the help of father and mother ; and 
there are some which affirm positively that Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, i. e. Quick- 
AUve son of Wide-Awake, was so ; others deny it, and tell the story 
thus : 

3. They say that there lay, not far from this our island, another 
great island, very fertile and well peopled ; which was then governed by 
a prince of a proud and jealous disposition : he had a sister of exquisite 
beauty, whom he confined and restrained from marriage ; because he 
could not match her to one suitable to her quality. He had a near 
relation whose name was Yaqzan, that courted this princess, and married 
her privately, according to the rites of matrimony in use among them : 
it was not long before she proved with child, and was brought to bed of 
a son; and being ahaid that it should bo discovered, she took him in 
the evening, and when she had suckled him she put him into a little 
ark which she closed up fast, and so conveyed him lo the seashore, 
with some of her servants and friends as she could trust ; and there 
with a heart equally affected with love and fear, she took her last leave 
of him in these words : « God, thou formedst this child out of nothing, 
and didst cherish him in the dark recesses of my womb, till he was 
complete in all his parts ; I, fearing the cruelty of a proud and unjust 
king, commit him to thy goodness, hoping that thou who art infinitely 
merciful wilt be pleased by thy gracious providence to protect him, and 
never leave him destitute of thy care ». 

i. Then she set him afloat, and that very night the tide carried 
him ashore on that island we just now mentioned. It fortuned thai the 
water, being high, carried the ark a great way on shore, farther than it 
would have done at another time, for it rises so high but once a year, and 
cast the ark into a small shady grove, thick set with trees, a pleasant 
place, where he was secured both from wind and sun ; when the tide 
ebbed, the ark was left there, and the wind rising blew a heap of sand 
together between the ark and the sea, sufficient lo secure him from any 
future danger of such another flood. 

5. The violence of the wa\es had loosened the joints of the ark; 
the boy was hungry and cried. It happened fortunately at that juncture 
of time, that a roe wandering about the island in search of her fawn, 
which straying was devoured by an eagle, heard the boy cry, and following 
the voice (imagining it to have been her fawn) came up to the ark, which 
she immediately attacked, and what with her beating it with her hoofs 
from without, and the boy's struggling within, at last between them both 
they loosened a board : as soon as she saw him she showed the same 
natural affection to him as if he had been her own, suckled him, and 

3 

-^ 18 — 
Look cure of him. This is the acccnnt which they give who are not 
wilhiiy to l^eheve that a man can Le prodaced without father or mother. 
6. On the other hand, those who (1) affirm that ITayy Ibn Yaqzan was 
produced in that island without father and jother, toll us that on that 
island, in a piece of low ground, it chanced that a certain mass of earth 
was so fermented in some period of years that the four qualities — hot, 
cold, dry, moist — woie so equally mixed that none of them prevailed 
over the other; and that this mass was of great bulk, in wliich some 
parts were better and more equally tempered than others, and consequently 
filter for generation; the middle part especially, which came nearest to 
the temper of man's body. This matter being in fermentation, there arose 
some bubbles by reason of its viscousncss, and it chanced that in the 
midst of it there was a viscous substance witli a very small bubble in it, 
which wa;i divided into two with a thin partition, full of spirituous and 
aerial substance, and of the most exact temperature imaginable; that the 
matter being thus disposed, there was, by the command of God, a spirit 
infused into it, which was joined so closely to it that it can scarce be 
separated from it even so much as in thought; which did as constantly 
influence this mass- of matter as the sun does the world. Now, there are 
some bodies from whence we perceive no reflection of hght, such as thin 
air; others from which we do but imperfectly, such are thick bodies which 
are not smooth (.but there is a difference in these, and the difference of 
their colors arises from the different manner of their reception of the 
rays;) and from others v/e receive the reflection in the highest degree, as from 
bodies which are smooth and polished, such as looking-glasses and the like; 
so that those glasses, when ground after a particular manner, will coUect 
so much light as to kindle a fire. So that spirit, which comes by the 
command of God, does at all times act upon all creatures, in some of 
which notwithstanding there appears no impression of it, but the reason 
of that is, because of their incapacity into whom it is infused ; of which 
kind are things inanimate which are fitly represented in this similitude 
by thin air. There are another sort again, in which there docs appeal' 
something of it, as vegetables and the like, which are represented by the 

(1) Having the boy hatched after this manner, is a contrivance of 
Ibn Sina's, who wrote this story first, and from whom Ibn Tufayl has taken 
a great part of it. He was of opinion that such a formation was possible; 
though there never having been any such thing is a sufficient demonstration 
of the irapossibihty of it; for since the creation of the world the celestial 
bodies have had time enough to exert the utmost of their powei', and 
shed their influence in order to bring about such a production, which they 
having never so much as attempted yet, amongst all the variety of their 
operations, plainly show us that il is not in their power. But we must 
give philosophei-s leave sometimes to go beyond demonstration. It is 
observable that our Author says nothing of the matter, but leaves it as 
he found it. — The peasants of Eg^^pt firmly believe and stoutly affirm 
that the hundreds of field-rats all along the dykes and embankments, 
during the season of the high Nile whose waters flood the land, are 
generated out of the clods of earth by the action of the stars upon the 
wet soil; this is the popular behef which Ibn Sina also shared, Ed, 

— 19 — 

thick bodies m-c mentioned, whieli are not polished. And then lastly, 
there are others — represented by those glasses, in our last comparison 
— in which the impressions of this spirit arc visible, and such we reckon 
all sorts of animals. But then, as those smooth and polished bodies 
which are of the same figure with the sun (i. e. spherical) do receive 
the rays in a more plentiful manner Lhan any other whatsoever, so also 
do some animals receive the influi'ncc of that spirit more than others, 
because they ai-e more like to that spirit, and are formed after his 
image : such is Man particulariy, which is hinted before where it is said 
that « God made i\Ian after His own image. » (1) 

7. Now, when Ibis form ])fovi-ls to such a degree that all othcis 
are nothing before it, but it remains alone, so as lo consume, with the 
glory of its light, wbalsocver stands in its way ; Ibcii it is properiy 
compared lo those glasse- or mirrors which reflect light upon themselves, 
and burn everything else. But this is a degree which is peculiar hi 
prophets. 

8. But, to return and speak more fully of the opinion of those who 
account for this kind of generation. They tell us that as soon as this 
spirit was joined to the receptacle, all the other powers immediately, by 
the command of God, submitted to it. Now opposite to this receptacle, 
there arose another bubble divided into thiee recejilacles by thin membranes, 
with passages from one "to the other, which were filled with an aerial 
substance, not much unlike that which was in the first receptacle, only 
the first was somewhat finer ; and in each nf llicse three ventricles, which 
were all taken out of one, were placed some of those faculties, which were 
subject to this governing spiiit, and were appointed to take care of their 
respective stations, and to communicate everything, both great and small, 
to that spirit, which we told you before was placed in the first reee[)tacle. 
Right against this receptacle, opposite to the second, there arose another 
third bubble, filled with an aerial substance, which was grosser than that 
which was in the other two ; this was made for the entertainment and 
preservation of sojne other of the inferior faculties. 

9. Thus these three reci-ptacles were made in the same order which 
we have described, and these were the first part of that great mass which 

|was formed. Now they stood in need of one another's help : the first 
wanted the other two as servants, and they again the help and guidance 
of the first, as their master and director; but both these receptacles, 
though inferior to the first, were nevertheless superior to all those members 
which were formed afterwards. The first receptacle, by the power of that 
spirit which was joined to it and its continual flaming heat, was formed 
into a conical figure, like that of fire, and by this means that thick body, 
which was about it, became of the ^ame figure, being solid flesh cov(>red 

(1) These woids are (juoted by Ibn Tufavl for the words of .Muhammad 
the Prophet, though thoy in hislory belong lo Moses. But we know that 
the Arabian Apostle was well acquainted \\ith many .Jews, from whom he 
learned not only some LXpiessions occurring in the Hel>r(>w Books, but a 
great part of their history, which he has condensed, not lo say mangled, 
after a confused manner into some of the chapters of his jevealed book. 

— 20 — 

with a thick membrane. This is what wc call the heart. Now, considering 
the great expense of moisture, which must needs be where there is so 
much heat, it was absolutely nocessary that there should be some part 
formed whose office it should be continually to supply this de''ect; other- 
wise it would have been impossilsle to have subsisted long. It was also 
necessary that [this forming spirit] should have a sense both of what 
was convenient for him, and what was hurtful, and accordingly attract 
the one and repel the other. For these services there were two parts 
formed, with their respective faculties, namely the brain and the liver : 
the first of these presided over all things relating to sense ; the latter, 
over such things as belonged to nutrition : both of these depended upon 
the heart for a .supplv of heat, and the recruiting of their proper faculties. 
To establish a good correspondence between all these, there were ducts 
and passages interwoven, some bigger, some lesser, according as necessity 
required; and these are the arteries and veins. — Thus much for a taste. 
They that tell the story go on farther, and give a particular account 
of the whole organism and of the formation of all the parts, members 
and organs, as physicians (1) do of the formation of the fcetus in the 
womb, omitting nothing, till the whole organism was completely and 
perfectly formed, and had become just like an embryo that is ready for 
birth. In this account they are forced to be beholden to and have recourse 
to that vast mass of earth, which you are to suppose was of a most exact 
mixture, and contained in it all manner of materials proper for making 
man's body, and those skins, etc., which cover it; till at last, when he was 
complete in all his parts, as if the mass had been in labor, those coverings 
which he was v/rapped up in burst asunder, and the rest of the dirt mmd 
dried and cracked in pieces. The infant being thus brought into the world, 
and finding his nourishment fail him, cried for want of victuals, till the Roe 
which had lost her fawn heard him. Now, both those who are of the 
other opinion and those who are for this kind of generation, agree in all 
the other particulars of his education : and what they tell us is this. 

10. They say that this Roe lived in good pasture, so that she was 
fat, and had such plenty of milk that she was very well able to maintain 
ihe child ; she took gi-eat care of him, and never left him, but when 
hunger forced her : and he grew so well acquainted with her that if at 
any time she staid away from him a liltle longer than ordinary, he would 
ciy pitifully ; and she, as soon as she licard him, came running instantly. 
Besides all this, he enjoyed this happiness — that there was no beast of 
prey in the whole island. 

11. Thus he went on, living only upon what he sucked till he was 
Two years old, and then he began to step a little and breed his teeth. 
He always followed the Roe ; and she showed all the tenderness to him 
imaginable, and used to carry him to places where fruil-trees grew, and 
fed him with the ripest and sweetest fruits which fell from the trees ; and 
as for nuts or such like, she used to break the shell with her teeth, and 
give him the kernel ; still sn<kliug him as often as he pleased; and 

(1) In the sense of physiologists. 

— 21 - 

when he was thirsty, she showed him the way to the water. If the sun 
shined too hot and scorched him, dia shaded him ; if he was cold, she 
cherished him and kept him warm ; and when night came on, she bronglit 
him home to his old place, and covered him partly ^c-hieh her own body, 
and partly with some feathers which were left in the ark, which had been 
put in with him when he was first exposed. Now, when they went out in 
the morning, and when they came home again at night, there always went 
with them a herd of deor, which lay in the same place as they did ; so that 
the boy, being always amongst them, learned their voice by degrees, and 
imitated it so exactly that there was scarce any sensible [appreciable] 
difference; nay, when he hoard the voice of anv bird or beast, he would 
come up very near to it, being of a most excellent apprehension [ he would 
very nearly reproduce it]. But of all the voices which he imitated, he made 
most use of the deer's, which he was master of, and could express himself 
as they do, either when they want help, call their mates, when they would 
have them come nearer, or go farther off (For you must know that the 
brute beasts have different sounds to express these different things). Thus 
he contracted such an acquaintance with the wild beasts that they were 
not afraid of him, nor he of them. 

12. By this time he began to have the ideas of a great many 
things fixed in his mind, so as to have a desire to some, and an aversion 
to others, even when they were absent. In the mean while he considered 
all the several sorts of animals, and saw that they were all clothed either 
with hair, wool, or several sorts of feathers : he considered their great 
swiftness and strength, and that they were all armed with weapons 
defensive, such as horns, teeth, hoofs, spurs, nails, and the like. But that 
he himself was naked and defenceless, slow^ and weak, in respect of them. 
For, whenever there happened any controversy about gathering of such 
ripe fruits as fell from the trees, he always came off by the worst ; for 
they could both keep their own, and take away his ; and he could neither 
beat them off, nor run away from them. 

13. He observed besides, that his fellow-fawns, though their foreheads 
were smooth at first, yet afterwards had horns bud out ; and though they 
v.'ere feeble at first, yet afterwards grew very vigorous and swift. All 
these things he perceived in them, which were not in himself ; and when 
he had considered the matter, he could not imagine what should be the 
reason of this difference ; then he considered such animals as had any 
defect or natural imperfection ; but amongst them all, he could find none 
like himself. He took notice that the passages of the excrements wore 
covered in all other creatures besides himself : that by which they voided 
their grosser excrements, with a tail; and that which served for the voiding 
of their urine, with hair or some such hke thing. Besides, he observed 
that their privy parts were more concealed than his own were. 

1-i. All these things were matter of great grief to him ; and when 
he had perplexed himself wery much with the thoughts of them, and vi'as 
now near seven years old, he despaired utterly of liaving those things 
grow upon him, the want of which made him so uneasy. He therefore 

— 23 — 

resolved to help himself, and thereupon got him some broad leaves of 
trees, of which he made two eo\'prings, one to wear behind, the other 
before ; and made a girdle of palm-leaves and rushes twisted to-gether, 
to hang his coverings upon, and tied it about his waist, and so wore it. 
But alas, it would not last long ; for the leaves withered and dropped 
away ; so that he was forced to get more, which he doubled and put 
together as well as he could, plaiting the leaves one upon another, which 
made it a little more durable, but not much. Then, having briken a 
bough from a tree, and fitted the ends of it to his mind, he stripped off 
the twigs and made it smooth ; with this he began to attack the wild 
beasts, assaulting the weaker, and defending himself against the stronger. 
By this means he began a little to know his own strength, and perceived 
that his hands were better than their feet ; because, by the help of them, 
he had provided wherewithal to cover his nakedness, and also gotten him 
a defensive weapon ; so that now he had no need of a tail, nor of those 
natural weapons which he had so wished for at first. 

15. He was now above seven years old ; and because the repairing 
of his covering of leaves so often was very troublesome to him, he had 
a design of taking the tail of some dead beast, and wearing it himself; 
but when he perceived that all beasts did constantly avoid those which 
were dead of the same kind, it made him doubt whether it might be safe 
or not ; at last, by chance he found a dead eagle, and observing that 
none of the beasts shewed any aversion to that carcass, he concluded that 
this would suit his purpose : and in the first place, he cut off the wings, 
and the tail whole, and spread the feathers open ; then he drew off the 
skin, and divided it into two equal parts, one of which he wore upon his 
back ; with the other he covered his navel and secrets ; the tail he wore 
behind, and the wings were placed upon each arm. This dress of his 
answered several ends ; for in the first place it covered his nakedness, 
and helped to keep him warm ; and then it made him so frightful to the 
beasts, that none of them cared to mo Idle wilh him, or come near him ; 
only the Roe his nurse, which never left him, nor ho, her ; and when 
she grew old and feeble, he used to lead her whither there was the best 
food, and pluck the best fruits for her, and give her them to eat. 

16. Notwithstanding this she grew lean and weak, and continued a 
while in a languishing condition, till at last she died, and then all her 
motions and actions ceased. When the boy perceived her in this con- 
dition, he was ready to die for grief. He called her with the same voice 
which she used to answer to, and made wdiat noise he could ; but there 
was no motioil, no alteration. Then he began to peep into her eyes and 
ears, but could perceive no visible defect in either ; in like manner he 
examined all the parts of her body, and found nothing amiss, but every 
thing as it should be. He had a vehement desire to find, if possible, that 
part where the defect was, that he might remove it, and she return to 
her former state of life and vigor. But he was altogether at a loss how 
to compass his design, nor could he possibly bring it about. 

17. That which put him upon this search, was what he observed 

— 23 — 

in himself. He took notice tliat wlioi he shut his eyes, or held any 
thing before them, he could see nolhing at all, till that obstacle was 
removed ; and so, when he put his fingers into his ears, that he could 
not hear, till he took them out again ; and, when he closed his nostrils 
together, he smelL nothing, till he opened Lhem ; from whence he 
concluded that all his senses and actions were liable to obstacles and 
impediments, upon the removal of which the same operations returned 
to their former course. Therefore, when he had e.xamined every external 
part of her, and found no visijjle defect, and yet at the same time 
perceived a universal cessation of motion in the whole body, not peculiar 
to one member, but common to them all, he began to imagine that the 
hurt was in some part which was most remote from sight, and hidden 
in the inward part of the body ; and t at this part was of such nature 
and u.-^o that, without its help, none of the other external parts could 
exorcise their proper functions ; and that, if this part suffer any hurt, 
the damage was universal, and a cessation of the whole ensued. 

18. This made him very desirous to find that part, if possible, that 
he might remove the defect from it, that so it might be as it used to 
be, and the whole body might enjoy the benefit of it, and the same 
course of actions follow as before. He had before observed, in the bodies 
of wild beasts and other animals, that all their members were solid, and 
that there were only three cavities, viz : the skull, the breast, and the 
belly ; he imagined, therefore, that this part, which he wanted, must [of] 
needs be in one of these cavities ; and, above all, he had a strong 
persuasion that it was in the middlemost of them. He verily beheved 
that all the members stood in need of this part, and that from thence it 
must necessarily follow that the seat of it must be in the center. And 
when he reflected upon his own body, he felt such a part in his breast, 
of which he had this notion, viz : That it was impossible for him to 
subsist without it, so much as the twinkling of an eye, though he could 
at the same time conceive a possibility of subsisting without his other 
parts, viz : his hands, feet, ears, nose, eyes, or even his head. And 
upon this account, whenever he fought with any wild beast, he always 
took particular care to guard his breast ; because of the apprehension 
which he had of that part which was contained in it. 

19. Having, by this way of reasoning, assured himself that the 
disaffected part lay in the breast, he was resolved to make a search, in 
order to find it out, so that, what so ever the impediment was, he might 
remove it if possible ; but then again, he was afraid on the other side lest 
his undertaking should be woise than the disease, and prove prejudicial. 
He began to consider, next, whether or not he had ever remembered 
any beasts, or other animals, which he had seen in that condition, recover 
again, and return to the same slate which they were in before : but he 
could call to mind no such instance ; from whence he concluded that, if she 
were let alone, there would be no hopes at all ; but, if he should be so 
fortunate as to find that part, and find the impediment, there might be 
some hope. Upon this he resolved to open her breast and make enquiry ; 

— u — 

in order to do which he provided li^mself wiQi sharp flints, and splinters 
of dr^' cane, almost like knives, with v,'liich he made an incision between 
the ribs ; and, culling through the flesh, came to the diaphragm ; which 
he finding very tough and not easily broken, assured himself that such 
a covering must needs belong to that part which he was looking for, 
and that if he could once get through that, he should find it. He met 
with some difficulty in his work, because his instruments were none of 
the best ; for he had none but such as were made cither of flint or cane. 

20. However, ho sharpened them again and renewed his attempt . 
with all the skill he was master of. At last he broke through, and the 
first part he met with were the lungs, which he at first sight mistook for 
that part, which he was searching for, and turned them about this way 
and that way, to see if he could find in them the cause of the disease. 
He first happened upon that lobe which lay next the side which he had 
opened, and when he perceived that it did lean sideways, he was satisfied 
that it was not the part he looked for, because he was fully persuaded 
that that must needs be in the midst of the body, as well in regard of 
latitude as longitude. He proceeded in his search till at last he found 
the heart, which when he saw closed with a very strong cover, and 
fastened with strong ligaments, and covered by the lungs on that side 
which he had opened, he began to say to himself : — « If this part be so 
on the other side as it is on this which I have opened, then it is 
certainly in the midst, and without doubt the same I look for, especially 
considering the conveniency of the situation, the comehness and regularity 
of its figure, the firmness and solidity of the flesh, and besides, its being 
guarded with such a membrane as I have not observed in any other 
part. » Upon this he searched the other side ; and, finding the same 
membrane on the inside of the ribs, and the lungs in the same posture 
which he had observed on that side which he had opened first, he 
concluded the heart to be the part which he looked for. 

21. Therefore he first attacked the pericardium which, after a long 
trial and a great deal of pains, he made shift to tear ; and when he had 
laid the heart bare, and perceived that it was solid on every side, he 
began to examine it, to see if he could find any hurt in it ; but finding 
none, he squeezed it with his hands, and perceived that it was hollow. 
He began then to think that what he looked for might possibly be 
contained in that cavity. When he came to open it, he found in it two 
cavities, one on the right side, the other on the left. That on the right 
side was full of clotted blood, that on the left quite empty. « Then, 
(says he,) without all doubt, one of those two cavities must needs be the 
receptacle of what I look for ; as for that on this side, there is nothing 
in it but congealed blood, which was not so, be sure, till the whole body 
was in that condition in which it now is, » (for he had observed that all 
blood congeals when it flows from the body, and that this blood did not 
differ in the least from any other,) « and therefore what I look for cannot 
by any means be such a matter as this ; for that which I mean is 
something which is pecuhar to this place, which I tind I could not. 

— 25 — 

subsist without, so much r.s the iwinlding of an eye. And this is that 
which I looked for at firsl. For, us for this blood, how often have I 
lost a great deal of it in my skirniishcs with the wild beasis, and yet it 
never did me any considerable harm, nor rendered me incapable of 
performing any action of life ; and therefore what I look for is not in 
this cavity. Now, as for the cavity on the left side, I find it is altogether 
empty ; and I have no reason in the world to think that it was made 
in vain, because I find every part appointed for such and such particular 
functions. How then can this ventricle of the heart, which 1 see is of 
so excellent a frame, serve for no use at all ? I cannot but think that 
the same thing, which I am in search of, once dwelt here, but has now 
deserted his [its] habitation, and left it empty, and that the absence of 
that thing has occasioned this privation of sense and cessation of motion, 
which happened to the body. » — Now, when he perceived that the being 
which had inhabited there before, had left its house before it fell to ruin, 
and forsaken it when as yet it continued whole and entire, he concluded 
that it was highly probable that it would never return to it any more, 
after its being so cut and mangled. 

22. Upon this the whole body seemed to him a very inconsiderable 
thing, and worth nothing in respect of that being which he believed had 
once inhabited and had now left it. Therefore he apphed himself wholly 
to the consideration of that Being : What it was, and how it subsisted — ■ 
what joined it to the body ? — Whether it went, and by what passage, 
when it left the body ? What was the cause of its departure ; whether it 
were forced to leave its mansion, or had left the body of its own 
accord? And, in case it went away voluntarily, what it was that rendered 
the body so disagreeable to it as to make it forsake it ? And whilst his 
mind was perplexed with such variety of thoughts, he laid aside all 
concern for the carcass, and threw it away ; for now he perceived that 
his mother, which had nursed him so tenderly and had suckled him, 
was that Something which was departed . and from it proceeded all those 
actions by which she showed her care of him, and affection to him, and 
not from this inactive body ; but that the body was to it only as an 
instrument or tool, like his cudgel which he had made for himself, with 
which he used to fight with the wild beasts. So that now, all his regard 
to the body was removed and transferred to that by which the body is 
governed, and by whose power it moves. Nor had he any other desire 
but to make enquiry after that. 

23. In the mean time the carcass of the Roe began to putrify and 
emit noisome vapors, which slill increased his aversion to it, so that he 
did not care to see it. It was not long after, that he chanced to see 
two ravens engaged so furiously that one of them struck down the 
other stark dead; and when he had done, he began to scrape with his 
claws till he had digged a pit in v/hich he buried the carcass of his 
adversary. Our philosopher observing this, said to himself : « How well 
has this raven done in burying the body of his companion, though he 
did ill in killing him I How much greater reason was there for me to 

— 26 — 

have been forward in performing this office to my mother ! > Upon this 
he made a grave, and laid his mother into it, and buried her. He 
proceeded in his enquiry concerning what that should be by which the body 
was governed, but could not apprehend what it was ; when he looked 
upon the rest of the roes, and perceived that they wore of the same 
form and figure with his mother, he believed that there was in every 
one of them something which governed and actuated them, like that 
which had actuated and governed his mother formerly ; and for the sake 
of that likeness he used to keep in their company, and show affection 
towards them. He continued a while in this condition, contemplating 
the various kinds of animals and plants, and walking about the coast of 
his island, to see if he could find any thing like himself; (as he observed 
that every individual animal and plant had a great many more like it.) 
But all his search was in vain. And when he perceived that his island 
was encompassed by the sea, he thought that there was no other land 
in the world but only that island. 

24. It happened that by coUision a fire was kindled among a parcel 
of reeds or canes ; which scared him at first, as being a sight which he 
was altogether a stranger to ; so that he stood at a distance a good 
while, strangely surprised ; at last he came nearer and nearer by degrees, 
still observing the brightness of its light, and its marvellous efficacy in 
consuming every thing it touched, and changing it into its own nature ; 
till at last, his admiration of it, and that innate boldness and fortitude, 
wliich God had implanted in his nature, prompted him on, so that he 
ventured to come near it, and stretched out his hand to take some of 
it. But when it burnt his fingers and he found there was no deahng 
with it that way, he endeavoured to take a stick, which the fire had not 
as yet wholly seized upon ; so, taking hold on that part which was 
untouched, he easily gained his purpose, and carried it home to his 
lodging (for he had contrived for himself a convenient place). There he 
kept this fire, and added fuel to it, admired it wonderfully, and tended it 
night and day ; at night especially, because its light and heat supphed 
the absence of the sun ; so that he was extermely delighted with it, and 
reckoned it the most excellent of all those things which he had about 
him. And when he observed that it always moved upwards, he persuaded 
himself that it was one of those celestial substances which he saw shining 
in the firmament, and ho was continually trying of its power by throwing 
things into it, which he perceived it operated upon and consumed, 
sometimes sooner, sometimes slower, according as the bodies which he 
put into it were more or less combustible. 

25. Amongst other things which he put in, to try its strength, he 
once flung in some fish which had been cast ashore by the water, and 
as soon as ever he had smell the steam, it raised his appetite, so that 
he had a mind to taste of them; which he did, and found them very 
agreeable ; and from that time he began to use himself to the eating of 
flesh, and apphed himself to fishing and hunting till he understood those 
sports very well ; upon this account he admired his fire more and more, 

— 27 — 

because it helped him to several sorts of provision which he was 
altogether unacquainted with before. 

26 And now, when his affection towards it was increased to the 
highest degree, both on account of its beneficial effects and its extraordi- 
nary power, he began to think that the substance which was departed 
from the heart of his mother the roe, was, if not the very same with it, 
yet at least of a nature very much like it. He was confirmed in his 
opinion, because he had observed in all animals that, as long as they 
lived, they were always warm without any intermission, and as constantly 
cold after death. Besides, he found in himself that there was a greater 
degree of heat by much in his breast,' near that place where he had 
made the incision in the roe. This made him think that, if he could 
dissect any animal alive, and look into that ventricle which lip had found 
empty when he dissected his dam the roe, he might possibly find it full 
of that substance which inhabited it, and so inform himself whether it were 
of the same substance with fire, and whether it had any light or heat in 
it or not. In order to this, he took a wild beast and tied him down, so 
that he could not stir, and dissected him after the same manner he had 
dissected the roe, till he came to the heart ; and essaying the left ventricle 
first, and opening it, he perceived it was full of an airy vapor which 
looked like a little mist or white cloud, and putting in his finger, he found 
it hotter than he could well endure it, and immediately the creature died. 
From whence he assuredly concluded that it was that moist vapor which 
communicated motion to that animal, and that there was accordingly in 
every animal of what kind soever something like it, upon the departure 
of which death followed. 

27. He had then a great desire to enquire into the other parts of 
animals, to find out their order and situation, their quantity and the 
manner of their connection one with another, and by what means of 
communication they enjoy the benefit of that moist vapor, so as to five 
by it. How that vapor is continued the time it remains, from whence 
it has its supplies, and by what means its heat is preserved. The way 
which he used in this enquiry was the dissection of all sorts of animals, 
as well living as dead ; neither did he leave off to make an accurate 
enquiry into them till at length he arrived to the highest degree of 
knowledge in this kind which the most learned naturalists ever attained to. 

28. And now he apprehended plainly that every particular animal, 
though it had a great many hmbs, and variety of senses and motions, 
was nevertheless One in respect of that spirit, whose original was from 
one firm mansion, viz., the Heart, from whence its influence was diffused 
rmong all the members. And that all the members were subservient to 
it, or informed and supported by it, and that this spirit made use of 
those members, in the same manner as a soldier does of his weapons, or 
a huntsman or fisherman of his tackling, who makes use of different 
ways and things, according to the difference of the creatures he intends 
to catch. Now, the soldier's weapons are some of them defensive and 
some offensive, and the sportsman's too are some for land, and some for 

- 28 — 
water. So the anatomist's instruine.i-s are some for Scission, others for 
Fraction, and others for Perforation. And lliu?, though the body was 
One, yet that governing spirit made use of it in several ways, according 
to tlie [several and] respective uses of each member, and the several 
ends which it proposed to obtain. 

29. Thus he perceived that there was all this while but One Animal 
Spirit, whose action, when he made use of the Eye, was Sight; when of 
the Ear, Hearing ; when of the Nose, SmeUing ; when of the Tongue, 
Tasting ; and when of the Skin and Flesh, Feeling. When it employed 
any limb, tlion its operation was iVIotion ; and when it made use of the 
liver. Nutrition and Concoction. ' And that, though there were members 
fitted to every one of these uses, yet none of them could perform their 
respective offices without having correspondence with that spirit by mearis 
of the nerves ; and that if, at any time, it clianced that their passages 
were either broken off or obstructed, such a member would be altogether 
useless. Now these nerves derive this spirit from the brain, which has 
it from the heart (and contains abundance of spirit, because it is divided 
into a great many partitions) and by what means soever any limb is 
deprived of his spirit, its action ceases, and it is like to a cast-off tool, 
not fit for use. And if this spirit depart wholly from the body, or is 
consumed or dissolved by any means whatsoever, then the whole body is 
deprived of motion all at once, and reduced to a state of death. 

30 Thus far had his observations brought him about the end of 
the Third Seventh Year of his age, viz., when he was one and twenty 
years old. In which time he had made abundance of pretty contrivances. 
He made himself both clothes and shoes of the skins of such wild beasts 
as he had dissected. His thread was made of hair, and of the bark of 
the stalks of Althaea, mallows or any other plants, which afforded such 
strings as were fit for that purpose. He learned the making of these 
threads from the use he had made of the rushes before. He made awls 
of sharp thorns, and sphnters of cane, sharpened with flints. He learned 
the art of building from the observations ho made upon the swallows' 
ne,sts. He built himself a store-house and a pantry, to lay up the 
remainder of his provision in : and made a door to it of canes twisted 
together, to prevent any of the beasts getting in during his absence. He 
took birds of prey and brought them up for hawking ; and kept tame 
poultry for their eggs and chickens. He took the tips of the buffalo's 
horns and fastened them upon the strongest canes that he could get, and 
staves of the tree «al-zan» and others; and so, partly by the help of 
fire, and partly of sharp-edged stones, he so fitted them that they served 
him instead of so many spears. He made him a shield of hides folded 
together. All this pains he took to furnish himself with artificial weapons, 
because he found himself destitute of natural ones. 

31. Now, wlien he perceived that his hand supplied all these defects 
very well, and that none of all the various kinds of wild beasts durst 
stand against him, but ran away from him, and were too nimble for him, 
he began to contrive how to be even with them, and thought there 

-= 29 = 

would be no way so proper as lo choooe out some of the strongest and 
swiftest beasts of the island, and bring them up tame, and feed them 
■with proper food, till tliey would let him back them, and then he might 
pursue the other kinds of wild beasts. There were in that island both wild 
horses and asses ; he chose of both sorts such as seemed fittest for his 
purpose, and by exercise he made them so gentle and tractable that he was 
complete master of his wishes. And when he had made out of the skins of 
beasts such things as served him competently well, instead of bridles and 
saddles, he could very easily then overtake such beasts as he could scarce 
ever have been able to have caught by any other manner of way. He made 
all these discoveries whilst he was employed in the study of anat(m:y, and 
the .searching out of the properties peculiar to each part, and the difference 
between them; and all this about that time I speak of, viz., the age of 2lyears. 

32. He then proceeded further to examine the nature of bodies in 
this sublunary world, viz. : — The different kinds of animals, plants, 
minerals, and several sorts of slones, earth, water, exhalations, ice, snow, 
hail, smoke, hoar-frost, flame, and heat. In which he observed different 
qualities, and different actions, and that their motions agreed in some 
respects, and differed in others : and considering these things with great 
application, he perceived that their qualities also agreed in some things, 
and differed in others ; and that, so far as they agreed, they were One ; 
but, when considered with relation to their differences, a great many : 
so that, when he came to consider the properties of things, by which 
they were distinguished one from another, he found that they multiplied 
so fast upon him that it was impossible for him to comprehend them. 
Nay, when he considered the difference of his own limbs, which he 
perceived were all distinct one from the other, by some property and 
action peculiar to each, it seemed to him that there was a Plurality in 
his own essence. And, when he looked upon any one member by itself, 
he found that it might be divided into a great many parts ; from whence 
he concluded that there m.ust needs be a Plurality in his own essence, 
and not only in his own but in every other also. 

33. Then he entered upon another sort of speculation of the second 
kind, by which he perceived that, though the [different] parts of his body 
were many, yet they were conjoined and compacted together so as to 
make one body, and that what difference there was between them 
consisted only in the difference of their actions, — which diversity 
proceeded from that animal spirit, the nature of which he had before 
searched into and found out. Now he knew that his spirit was One in 
essence, and was really the substance of his being, and that all the rest 
of the members serve that spirit as instruments ;' and in this respect he 
perceived his own essence to be One. 

34. He proceeded from hence to the consideration of all the species 
of animals, and found that every individual of them wa.5 One. Next he 
considered them with regard to their different species, viz., as Roes, 
Horses, Asses, and all sorts of birds according to their kinds, and he 
perceived that all the individuals of every species were exactly like one 

- so - 

another, in the shape of their parts, Loth within and without ; that their 
apprehensions, motions, and inclinations were alike ; and that those little 
differences, which were visible amongst them, were inconsiderable in 
respect of those many things in which they agreed. From whence he 
concluded that the spirit which actuated any species was one and the 
same ; only distributed among so many hearts as there were individuals 
in that species, so that, if it were possible for all that spirit, which is so 
divided among so many hearts, to be collected into one receptacle, it 
would be all the same thing, — just as if any one hquor should be poured 
out into several dishes and afterwards put all together again in one 
vessel ; this liquor would still be the same, as well when it was divided, 
as when it was all together, only in respect of that division it may be 
said in some sort or sense to be multiplied. By this way of contemplation 
he perceived that a whole species was one and the same thing, and that 
the mullipUcity of individuals in the same species is like the multiphcity 
of parts in the same person, which indeed are not many, i. e., are 
only One. 

35. Then he represented in his mind all the several kinds of animals, 
and perceived that sensation, and nutrition, and the power of moving 
freely where they pleased, was common to them all ; which actions, he 
was assured before, were all very proper to the animal spirit, and that 
those lesser things in which they differed (notwithstanding their agreement 
in these greater) were not so proper to that spirit. From this considera- 
tion he concluded that it was only one and the same animal spirit which 
actuated all living creatures whatsoever, though there was in it a little 
difference which each species claimed as peculiar to itself. For instance 
suppose the same water be poured out into different vessels, that which 
is in this vessel may possibly be somewhat warmer than that which is 
in another, though it is the same water still, and so every degree of heat 
and cold, in this water in the several vessels, will represent the specific 
difference which there is in animals : And, as that water is all one and 
the same, so is that animal spirit One, though in some respect there is a 
sort of multiplicity. And so under this notion he looked upon the whole 
species of living creatures to be all One. 

36. Afterwards contemplating the different species of plants, as he 
had done before of animals, he perceived that the individuals of every 
species were alike, both in their boughs, leaves, flowers, fruits, and man- 
ner of growing. And, comparing them with animals, he found that there 
must needs be some one thing which they did all of them partake of, 
which was the same to them that the animal spirit was to the living 
creature, and that in respect of that they were all One. Whereupon, 
taking a view of all the several kinds of plants, he concluded that they 
were all One and the same, by reason of that agreement which he found 
in their actions, viz, their nourishment and growing. 

37. Then he comprehended, in one single conception, the whole 
kinds of animals and plants together, and found that they were both alike 
in their nutrition and growing, only that the animals excelled the plants 

— 31 — 

in sensation and apprehension ; and . yet lie had sometimes observed 
something lilte it in plants, viz., that some flowers do turn themselves 
towards the sun, and that plants extend their roots in that way whence 
their nourishment comes, and some other such like things, from whence 
it appeared to him that plants and animals were One and the same, in 
respect of tliat One Thing which was common to them both ; which 
was indeed more perfect in the one, and more obstructed and restrained 
in the other; like water that is partly running and partly frozen. So 
that he concluded that plants and animals were all One. 

38. He next considered those bodies which have neither sense, 
nutrition nor growth, such as stones, earth, air and flame, which he 
perceived had all of them three dimensions, viz., Length, Breadth, and 
Thickness, and that their differences consisted only in this, that some of 
them were coloured, others not ; some were warm, others cold, and the 
like. lie observed that those bodies which were warm, grew cold ; and on 
the contrary that those which were cold, grew warm. He saw that water 
was rarified into vapors, and vapors again condensed into water ; and that 
such things as were burnt, were turned into coals, ashes, flame, and 
smoke ; and if in its ascent it were intercepted by an arch of stone or 
the like, it thickened there and was like other gross, earthly substances. 
From whence it appeared to him that all things were in reahty One, 
though multiplied and diversified in some certain respects, as the plants 
and animals were. 

39. Then, considering with himself what that common thing must 
be, in which the Sameness of the animals and plants did consist; he saw 
that it must be some Body, like those bodies, which had a threefold 
dimension, viz., length, breadth, and thickness ; and that, whether it 
were hot or cold, it was like one of those other bodies which have neither 
sense nor nutrition, and differed from them only in those operations which 
arise from the organical parts of plants and animals. And that, in all 
likelihood, those operations were not essential, but derived from something 
else. So that, if those operations were to be communicated to those 
other bodies, they would be like this. Considering it therefore abstractedly, 
with regard to its essence only, as stripped of those operations which, 
at first sight, seemed to flow from it, he perceived that it was a Body, 
of the same kind with those other bodies ; upon which contemplation it 
appeared to him that all bodies, as weU those that had hfe, as those 
that had it not, as weU those that moved, as those that rested in their 
natural places, were One ; only there were some actions in some of them 
which proceeded from their organical parts ; concerning which actions he 
could not yet determine whether they were essential, or derived from 
something without. Thus he continued, considering nothing but the 
nature of bodies ; and by this means he perceived that, whereas, at first 
sio-ht. Things had appeared to him innumerable and not to be compre- 
hended, — Now, he discovered the whole mass and bulk of creatures 
were in reality only One. 

4:0, He continued in this opinion a considerable time. Then he 

— 32 — 

considered all sorts of bodies, both rnimate and inanimate, which at one 
■while seemed to him to be one, and at another to be a great many. And 
he found that all of them had a tendency either upward, as smoke, 
flame and air, when detained mider water ; or else downward, as 
water, pieces of earth, or parts of animals and plants; and that none of 
these bodies were free from one or other of these tendencies, or would 
ever lie still, unless hindered by some other body, and interrupted in 
their course ; as when, for instance, a stone in its fall is stopped by the 
soHdity and hardness of the earth, when it is plain that it would otherwise 
fall to the ground, or rather continue still descending ; so smoke still 
continues going upwards ; and if it should be intercepted by a solid arch, 
it would divide both to the right and left, and so soon as it was freed 
from the arch, would still continue ascending, and pass through the air, 
which is not solid enough to restrain it. So when a leathern bottle is 
filled with air and stopped up close, if you hold it under water, it will 
still strive to get up, till it returns to its place of air ; and then it rests, 
and its reluctancy and propensity to ascend ceases. 

41. He then enquired whether or no he could find any body that 
was at any time destitute of both these motions, or a tendency toward 
them ; but he could find none such among all bodies which he had about 
him. The reason of this enquiry was, because he was very desirous to 
know the nature of Body, as such, abstracted from all manner of qualities 
from whence arises multiphcity or diversity of kinds. But when he found 
this too difficult a task for him, and he had examined those bodies which 
had the fewest qualities, and could find none of them void of one of 
these two, — Heaviness or Lightness — he proceeded to consider the 
nature of these two properties, and to examine whether they did belong 
to body quatenus Body, or else to so^ie other quality superadded to 
body. Now it seemed plain to him that Gravity and Levity did not belong 
to body as such; for, if so, then no Body could subsist without them 
both : whereas, on the contrary, we find Heavy Bodies which are void of 
all Lightness, and also some hght bodies which are void of all Heaviness, 
and yet without doubt they both are Bodies ; in each of which there 
is something superadded to Corporeity, by which they are distinguished 
one from the other, and that makes the difference between them ; other- 
wise they both would be one and the same thing in every respect. From 
whence it appeared plainly that the Essence both of a heavy and of a 
light body was composed of two things : one which was common to them 
both, namely Corporeity, the other, by which they are distinguished one 
from they other, viz., Gravity in the one, and Levity in the other, which 
were superadded to the essence of corporeity. 

42. In like manner he considered other bodies, both animate and 
inanimate, and found their essence consisted in Corporeity, and in some 
one thing or more superadded to it. And thus he attained a notion of 
the forms of bodies, according to their differences. These were the first 
things he found out, belonging to the Spiritual World ; for these forms 
are not the objects of sense, but are apprehended by intellectual speculation, 

— 33 — 

Now, among other things of this kind which he discovered, it appeared 
to him th;xt the animal spirit which is sealed in the heart (as wo have 
mentioned before) must necessarily have some quality superadded to its 
corporeity, which rendered it capable of those wonderful actions, different 
sensations and ways of apprehending things, and various sorts of motions; 
and that this quality must be its form by which it is distinguished from 
other bodies (which is the same that the philosophers call the sensitive 
soul); and so in plants, that which was in them the same that radical 
moisture was in beasts, was something proper to them, which was their 
form, which the philosophers call the vegetative soul. And that there 
was also in inanimate things (namely all bodies, besides plants and 
animals, which are in this sublunary world) something pecuhar to them 
by the power of which every one of them performed such actions as 
were proper to it; namely various sorts of motion, and different kinds of 
sensible qualities, and that thing was the form of every one of them; 
and this is the saure which the philosophers call Nature. 

43. And when, by this contemplation, it appeared to him plainly 
that the true Essence of that Animal Spirit, on which he had been so 
intent, was compounded of Corporeity and of some other quality super- 
added to that corporeity, and that it had its corporeity in common with 
other bodies; but that this other quality which was superadded was 
peculiar to it : immediately he shghted and despised the notion of 
corporeity, and applied himself wholly to that other superadded quahty 
(which is the same that we call the soul), the nature of which he 
earnestly desired to know. Therefore he fixed all his thoughts upon it, 
and began his contemplation mth considering all bodies, not as bodies, 
but as endued with forms from whence necessarily flow these properties 
by which they are distinguished one from another. 

44. Now, by following up this notion and comprehending it in his 
mind, he perceived that all bodies had one Form in common from whence 
one or more actions did proceed. And that there were some of these 
bodies and actions which, although they agreed with all the rest in that 
one common form, had another form besides superadded to it, from 
whence some actions proceeded. And furthei-, that there was another 
sort which, agreeing with the rest in those two forms which they had, 
was still distinguished from them by a third form, superadded to those 
other two, from whence also proceeded some actions. For instance, all 
terrestrial bodies, such as earth, stones, minerals, plants, animals, and all 
other heavy bodies, do make up one in number, which agree in the same 
form from whence flows the property of descending- continually, whilst 
there is nothing to hinder their descent : and whensoever they are forced 
to move upwards, if they are left to themselves, they immediately, by 
the power of their form, tend downwards again. Now, some part of this 
number, viz., plants and animals, though they do agree with all that 
multitude before mentioned in that form, yet still have another form 
superadded to it, from whence flow Nutrition and Accretion. Now the 
meaning of nutrition is, when the body that is nourished substitutes, in 

& 

— 34 — 

the room of that which is consumed and wasted from itself, something 
of the hke kind, which it draws to itself, and then converts into its own 
substance. Accretion, or growing, is a motion according to the three 
dimensions, viz., length, breadth, and thickness, in a due proportion. 
And these two actions are common to plants and animals, and do, without 
doubt, spring from that form which is common to them both, which is 
what we call the Vegetative Soul. Now, part of this multitude, viz., 
animals, though [whilst] they have the first and second forms in common 
with the rest, have still a third form superadded, from with arise Sensa- 
tion and Local Motion. Besides, he perceived that every particular 
Species of animals had some property which distinguished it, and made 
it quite different from the rest; and he knew that this difference must 
arise from some form, pecuhar to that species, which was superadded to 
the notion of that form which it had in common with the rest of animals. 
And the like he saw happened to the several kinds of plants. 

45. Also it was evident to him that the essences of those sensible 
bodies, which are in this sublunary world, had some of them more 
qualities superadded to their corporeity, and others, fewer. Now, he knew 
that the Understanding of the fewer must needs be more easy to him 
than the understanding of those which were more in number. And 
therefore he endeavoured to get a true notion of the form of some one 
thing whose essence was the most simple and uncompounded. Now, he 
perceived that the essence of animals and plants consisted of a great 
many properties, because of the great variety of their operations ; for 
which reason he deferred enquiring into their forms. As for the parts of 
the Earth, he saw that some of them were more simple than others ; 
and therefore he resolved to begin his enquiry with the most simple of all. 
So he perceived that water was a thing whose essence was not compounded 
of many qualities, which appeared from the paucity of those actions which 
arise from its form. The same he likewise observed in fire and air. 

46. Now, he had a notion before that all these four might be 
changed one into another ; and therefore there must be some one thing 
which they jointly participated of, and that this thing was corporeity. 
Now, it was necessary that this one thing which was common to them 
all should be altogether free from those qualities by which these four were 
distinguished one from the other ; and be neither heavy nor light ; hot 
nor cold ; moist nor dry ; because none of these qualities were common 
to all bodies, and therefore could not appertain to Body as such. And 
that, if it were possible to find any such body in which there was no 
other form superadded to corporeity, it would have none of these qualities, 
nor indeed any other but what were common to all bodies, with what 
form soever endued. He considered therefore with himself, to see if he 
could find any one adjunct or property which was common to all bodies, 
both animate and inanimate ; but he found nothing of that nature, but 
only the notion of Extension, and that he perceived was common to all 
bodies, viz., that they had, one and all of them, length, breadth, and 
thickness, Whence he gathered that this property belonged to Body as 

- 86 - 

Body. However, his sense could not represent to him any body existent 
in Nature which had this only adjunct, and was void of all other forms : 
for he saw that every one of them had some other quality superadded 
to the said Extension. 

47. Then he considered, further, whether this Three-fold Extension 
was the very essence of Body or not ; and he quickly found that, besides 
this Extension, there was another in which this Extension did exist, and 
that this Extension could not subsist by itself, as also the body which 
was extended could not subsist by itself without extension. This he 
experimented in some of those sensible bodies which are endued with 
forms; for example, in clay: Which he perceived, when moulded into 
any figure — spherical suppose — had in it a certain proportion of length, 
breadth, and thickness. But then, if you took that very same ball, and 
reduced in into a cubical or oval figure, the dimensions were changed, 
and did not retain the same Proportion which they had before ; and yet 
the clay still remained the same, without any change, only that it was 
necessary for it to be extended into Length, Breadth, and Thickness, in 
some proportion or other, and not be deprived of its dimensions : Yet it 
was plain to him from the successive alterations of them in the same body 
that they were distinct from the clay itself; as also that, because the 
clay could not be altogether without them, it appeared to him that it 
belonged to its essence. And thus from this experiment it appeared to 
him that Body considered as Body was compounded of two properties : 
The one of which represents the clay of which the sphere was made ; 
the other, the three-fold expression of it, when formed into a sphere, a 
cube, or what other figure soever. Nor was it possible to conceive Body 
but as consisting of these two properties, neither one of which could 
subsist without the other. But that one, namely that of extension, which 
was hable to change, and could successively put on different figures, did 
represent the form in all those bodies which had forms ; and that other 
which still abode in the same state (which was the clay, in our last 
instance) did represent corporeity, which is in all bodies of what forms 
soever. Now, that which we call clay in the foregoing instance, is the 
same which the philosophers call Materia prima [the first matter] and 
which is wholly destitute of all manner of forms, (huly = J^l ) 

48. When his contemplation had proceeded thus far, and he was 
got to some distance from sensible objects, and was now just upon the 
confines of the intellectual world, he became diffident, and inclined 
rather to the sensible world, which he was more used to. Therefore he 
retired from the consideration of abstracted Body, (.since he found that 
his senses could by no means reach it, neither could he comprehend it) 
and applied himself to the consideration of the most simple sensible 
bodies he could find, which were those four about which he had been 
exercised. And first of all he considered Water, which he found, if let 
alone in that conditon which its form required, had these two things in 
it, viz. sensible cold, and a propension to move downwards : But if heated 
by the fire or the sun, its coldness was removed, but its propension to 

move downwards still remained : But afterwards, when it came to be 
more vehemently heated, it lost its tendency downwards, and mounted 
upwards ; and so it was wholly deprived of both those properties which 
used constantly to proceed from it, and from its form. Nor did he know 
anything more of its form, but only that these two actions proceeded 
from thence ; and when these two ceased, the nature of the form was 
altered, and the watery form was removed from that body, since there 
appeared in it actions which must needs owe their origin to another 
form. Therefore it must have received another form, which had not been 
there before, from which arose those actions, which never used to appear 
in it whilst it had the other form. 

49. Now he knew that eve]'ything that was produced anew must 
needs have some producer. And from this contemplation there arose in 
his mind a sort of impression of the Maker of that form, though his 
notion of him was as yet general and indistinct. Then he paused on the 
examining of these forms which he knew before, one by one, and found 
that they were produced anew, and that they must of necessity be be- 
holden to some efficient cause. Then he considered the essences of forms, 
and found that they were nothing else, but only a Disposition of Body 
to produce such or such actions. For instance. Water, when very much 
heated, is disposed to rise upwards, and that Disposition is its form. For 
there is nothing present in this motion but Body, and some things which 
are observed to arise from it which were not in it before (such as qua- 
lities and motions) and the Efficients which produce them. Now, the fitness 
of Body for one motion rather than for another is its Disposition and 
Form. The same he concluded of all other forms, and it appeared to 
him that those actions which arose from them were not in reaUty owing 
to them, but to the tlie Efficient Cause, who made use of these forms to 
produce those actions which are attributed to them (i. e. the forms). 
Which notion of his is exactly the same with what God's Apostle says : 
«I am his hearing by which he hears, and his seeing by which he sees*. 
And in the Qur-an : «You did not kill them, but God kiUed them; when 
thou threwest the darts, it was not thou that threwest them, but God». 
Surah K . ,v J!^.^ . ^J^X^uO ^\ iiy^ 

50. Now, when he had attained thus far, so as to have a general 
and indistinct notion of this Agent, he had a most earnest desire to know 
him distinctly. And because he had not as yet withdrawn himsetf from 
the sensible world, he began to look for this Voluntary Agent among 
sensible things ; nor did he as yet know wliother it was one Agent or 
many. Therefore he enquired strictly into all such bodies as he had about 
him, viz. those which he had been employed about all along, and he 
found that they were all liable to Generalion and Corruption : and if 
there were any which did not suffer a total corruption, yet they were 
liable to a partial one, as Water and Earth, the parts of which are 
consumed by fire. Likewise he perceived that Air was by extremity of 
cold changed into snow, and then again into water ; and among all the 
rest of the bodies which he had been conversant with, he could find none 

— 37 — 

which had not its existence anew, and required some Voluntary Agent 
to give it being. Upon which acconnt he laid them all aside, and trans- 
ferred his thoughts to the consideration of the heavenly bodies. And thus 
far he reached in his contemplations about the end of the fourth septenary 
of his age, viz., when he was eight and twenty years old. 

51. Now lie knew very well that the heavens, and all the luminaries 
in them, were bodies ; because they were all extended according to the 
three dimensions length, breadth, and thickness, without any exception ; 
and that everything that was so extended was Body ; ergo, they were 
all bodies. Then he considered next, whether they were extended infinitely, 
so as to stret •!! themselves to an endless length, breadth and thickness ; 
or whether they were circumscribed by any limits, and terminated by some 
certam bounds, beyond which there could be no extension. But here he 
stopped a while, as in a kind of amazement. 

52. At last, by the strength of his apprehension, and sagacity of 
his understanding, he perceived that the notion of infinite body was 'ab- 
surd and impossible, and a notion wholly uninteUigible. He confirmed 
himself in this judgment of his, by a great many arguments which occur- 
red to him, when he thus argued with himself: «That this heavenly body 
«is terminated on this side which is next to me, is evident to my sight : 
« And that it cannot be infinitely extended on that opposite side, which 
«raised this scruple in me, I prove thus : Suppose two hues drawn, from 
«the extremity of this heavenly body, on that terminated side which is 
«next to me, which lines should be produced quite through this body, 
«in infinitum, according to the extension of the body ; then suppose a 
«long part of one of these lines cut off at this end which is next to me; 

• then take the remainder of what was cut off, and draw down that end 
«of it where it was cut off, and lay it even with the end of the other 
«line from which there was nothing cut off ; and let that hne which was 

• shortened he parallel with the other ; then suppose them passing through 
«this body, till you come to that side which we supposed to be infinite ; 
•Either you will find both these lines infinitely extended, and then one 

• of them cannot be shorter than the other, but that which had a part of 
•it cut off wll be as long as that which was not, which is absurd : Or 

• else the line which was cut will not be so long as that other, and conse- 

• quently finite : Therefore if you add that part to it which was cut off 

• from it at first, which was finite, the whole will be finite ; and then it 

• will be no longer or shorter than that line which had nothing cut off 

• from it, therefore equal to it : But this is finite, therefore the other is 

• finite. Therefore the body in which such lines are or were drawn is 

• finite, and all bodies in which such lines may be drawn, are finite : But 

• such fines may be drawn in all bodies. Therefore if we suppose an in- 
•finife body, we suppose an absurdity and impossibihty.* 

62. (bis) When, by the singular strength of his genius (which he exerted 
in finding out such a demonstration), he had satisfied himself that the 
Body of Heaven was finite ; he desired, in the next place, to know what 
figure it was of, and how it was linaited by the circumambient super- 

- 38 - 
ficies. And first he observed the sun, moon, and stars, and saw that they 
all rose in the East, and set in the West ; and those which went right 
over his head described a great [er] circle, but those at a greater dis- 
tance from the vertical point, whether northward or southward, described 
a lesser circle. So that the least circles which were described by any of 
the stars were those two which went round the two Poles, the one north, 
the other south ; the last of which is the circle of Suhayl (Canopus- J-«-.); 
the first, the circle of those two stars which are called in Arabic al- 
Farqadan. Now because he Hved under the Equinoctial Line (as we have 
showed before), all those circles did cut the horizon at right angles, and 
both North and South were alike to him, and he could see both Pole- 
Stars : He observed that if a star arose at any time in a great circle, 
and another star at the same time in a lesser circle, yet nevertheless, as 
they rose together, so they set together : and he observed it of all the 
stars, and at all times. From whence he concluded that the heaven was 
of a spherical figure ; in which opinion he was confirmed by observing 
the return of the sun, moon, and stars to the east, after their setting; 
and also, because they always appeared to him of the same bigness, both 
when they rose, and when they were in the midst of heaven, and at 
the time of their setting ; whereas, if their motions had not been circular, 
they must have been nearer to sight at some times than at others ; and 
consequently their dimensions would have appeared proportionably greater 
or lesser ; but since there was no such appearance, he concluded that 
their motions were circular. Then he considered the motion of the moon 
and the planets from West to East, till at last he understood a great part 
of astronomy. Besides, he apprehended that their motions were in dif- 
ferent spheres, all which were comprehended in another sphere which was 
above them all, and which turned about all the rest in the space of a 
day and a night. But it would be too tedious to explain particularly 
how he advanced in this science ; besides, it is taught in other books ; 
and what we have already said is as' much as is requisite for our present 
purpose. 

63. When he had attained to this degree of knowledge, he found 
that the whole orb of the heavens, and whatsoever was contained in it, 
was as one thing compacted and joined together ; and that all those 
bodies which he used to consider before, such as earth, water, air, plants, 
animals and the like, were all of them so contained in it as never to go 
out of its bounds : and that the whole was like One Animal, in which 
the luminaries represented the senses ; the spheres so joined and com- 
pacted together, answered to the limbs ; and the sublunary world, to the 
belly, in which the excrements and humors are contained, and which 
oftentimes breeds animals, as does the Greater World. 

64. Now, when it appeared to him that the whole world was only 
One Substance, depending upon a Voluntary Agent, and he had united 
all the parts of it, by the same way of thinking which he had before 
made use of in considering the sublunary world, he proposed to his con- 
sideration the World in General, and debated with himself whether it did 

— 39 — 

exist in Time, after it had not been ; and came to be, out of nothing ; 
or whether it had been from eternity, without any privation preceding 
it. Concerning this matter, he had very many and great doubts ; so that 
neither of these two opinions did prevail over the other. For when he 
proposed to himself the behef of its eternity, there arose many objections 
in his mind ; because he thought that the notion of infinite existence 
was pressed with no less difficulties than that of infinite extension : and 
that such a being as was not free from accidents produced anew, must 
also itself be produced anew, because it cannot be said to be more 
ancient than those accidents : and that which cannot exist before accidents 
produced in Time, must needs itself be produced in Time. Then on the 
other hand, when he proposed to himself the behef of its being produced 
anew, other objections occurred to him ; for he perceived that it was 
impossible to conceive any notion of its being produced anew, unless it 
was supposed that there was Time before it ; whereas Time was one of 
those things which belonged to the world, and was inseparable from it ; 
and therefore the world could not be supposed to be later than Time. 
Then he considered that a thing created must needs have a Creator : 
and if so. Why did this Creator make the world now, and not as well 
before ? Was it because of any new chance, which happened to him ? 
That could not be ; for there was nothing existent besides himself. Was 
it then upon account of any change in his own nature ? But what 
should cause that change ? Thus he continued for several years, arguing 
pro and con about this matter ; and many arguments offered themselves 
on both sides, so that neither of these two opinions in his judg^nent over- 
balanced the other. 

55. This put him to a great deal of trouble, which made him begin 
to consider with himself what were the consequences which did follow 
from each of these opinions, and that perhaps they might be both alike. 
And he perceived that if he held that the world was created in Time, 
and existed after a total privation, it would necessarily follow from thence 
that it could not exist of itself without the help of some agent to produce 
it. And that this agent must needs be such an one as cannot be 
apprehended by our senses ; for if he should be the object of sense, he 
must be Body, and if Body, then a part of the world, and consequently 
a created being ; such an one as would have stood in need of some 
other cause to create him : and if that second creator was Body, he too 
would depend upon a third, and that third upon a fourth, and so ad 
infinitum, which is absurd. Since therefore the world stands in need 
of an incorporeal creator ; And since the creator thereof is really incor- 
poreal, it is impossible for us to apprehend him by any of our senses ; 
for we perceive nothing by the help of them but Body, or such accidents 
as adhere to bodies : And because he cannot be perceived by the senses, 
it is impossible he should be apprehended by the imagination ; for the 
imagination does only represent to us the forms of things in their absence, 
which we have before learned by our senses. And since he is not Body, 
we must not attribute to him any of the properties of Body ; the first of 

— 40 — 

■wbich is extension, from which he is ftoe, as also from all those properties 
of bodies which flow from it. And seeing that he is the Maljer of the 
World, doubtless he has the sovereign command over it. « Shall not he 
know it, that created it? He is wise, omniscient ! » Surah tJ.i?-. v.../^. 

50. On the other side, he saw that if he held the Eternity of the 
world, and that it always was as it now is, without any privation before 
it ; then it would follow that its motion must be eternal too ; because 
there could be no rest before it, from whence it might commence its 
motion. Now, all motion necessarily requires a mover ; and this mover 
must be either a power diffused through the body moved, or else through 
some other body witjiout it, or else a certain power, not diffused or dis- 
persed through any body at all. Now, every power which passeth, or is 
diffused, through any body, is divided or doubled. For instance : — The 
Gravity in a stone, by which it tends downwards, if you divide the stone 
into two parts, is divided into two parts also ; and if you add to it 
another Uke it, the gravity is doubled. And if it were possible to add 
stones ad infinitum, the gravity would increase ad infinitum too. 
And if it were possible that that stone should grow stiU bigger, till it 
reached to an infinite extension, the weight would increase also in the 
same proportion ; and if on the other side, a stone should grow to a 
certain size, and stop there, the gravity would also increase to such a 
pitch, and no farther. Now it is demonstrated that all Body must neces- 
sarily be finite ; and, consequently, that power which is in Body is finite 
too. If therefore we can find any power which produces an infinite 
effect, it is plain that it is not in Body. Now we find that the heaven 
is moved about with a perpetual motion, without any cessation. Therefore 
if we affirm the eternity of the world, it necessarily follows that the 
power which moves it is not in its own body, nor in the other exterior 
body ; but proceeds from something altogether abstracted from Body, and 
which cannot be described by corporeal adjuncts or properties. Now he 
had learned from his first contemplation of the sublunary world that the 
true essence of Body consisted in its form, which is its disposition to 
several sorts of motion ; but that part of its essence which consisted in 
matter was very mean, and scarce possible to be conceived; therefore 
the, existence of the whole world consists in its disposition to be moved 
by this mover, who is free from matter, and from the properties of 
Body ; abstracted from every thing which we can either perceive by our 
senses, or reach by our imagination. And since he is the efficient cause 
of the motions of the heavens, in which (notwithstanding their several 
kinds ) there is no difference, no confusion, no cessation ; without doubt 
he has a power over it, and a perfect knowledge of it. 

57. Thus his contemplation this way, brought him to the same 
conclusion it did the other way. So that doubting concerning the eternity 
of the world, and its existence de novo, did him no harm at all. For 
it was plain to him both ways that there was a Being, which was not 
Body, nor joined to Body, nor separated from it; nor within it, nor without 
it ; because conjunction and separation, and being within any thing, or 

— 41 — 

without it, are all properties of Bo Jy, from which that Being is altogether 
abstracted. And because all bodies sland in need of a form to be added to 
their mailer, as nol being able lo subsist wilhoul it, nor exist really; and 
the form ilself cannot exist, but by this Voluntary Agent, it appeared lo him 
that all things owed their existence to this Agent ; and that none of them 
could subsist but through him : and consequently that he was the Cause, 
and they the Effects, (whether they were newly created after a privation, 
or whether they had no beginning, in respect of him, it was all one ) and 
creatures whose existence depended upon that Being ; and that without 
his continuance they could not continue, nor exist without his existing, 
nor have been eternal without his being eternal ; but that he was essen- 
tially independent of them, and free from them. And how should it be 
otherwise, when it is demonstrated that his power and might are infinite, 
and that all bodies and whatsoever belongs to them are finite ? Conse- 
quently, that the whole world and whatsoever was in it, the heavens, 
the earth, the stars, and whalsoever was between them, above them, or 
beneath them, was all his work and creation, and posterior to him in nature, 
if not in Time. As, if you take any body whatsoever in your hand, and 
then move your hand, the body wiU without doubt follow the motion of 
your hand, with such a motion as shall be posterior to it in nature, 
though not in Time, because they both began together : So all this world 
is caused and created by this Agent out of time, « whose command 
is, -when he would have any thing done, B E, and it is » . 
Surah ^^vr;^//^- h v£uA-,.X /<^ 't)WA; ■ n r.v. a/:3fe.;^- 

58. And when he perceived that all things which did exist were his 
workmanship, he looked them over again, considering attentively the 
power of the Efficient Cause, and admiring the wonderfulness of the 
workmanship, and such accurate wisdom, and subtile knowledge. And 
there appeared to him in the most minute creatures (much more in the 
greater) such footsteps of wisdom, and wonders of the work of creation, 
that he was swallowed up with admiration, and fully assured that these 
things could not proceed from any other, than a voluntary Agent of infinite 
perfection, nay, that was above all perfection ; such an one j^o whom the 
weight of the least atom was not unknown, whether in heaven or earth; 
no, nor any other thing, whether lesser or greater than it.] ^f i 

59. Then he considered all the kinds of animals, and how this 
Agent had given such a fabric of body to every one of them, and then 
taught them how to use it. For if he had not directed them to apply 
those hmbs, which he had given them, to those respective uses for which 
they were designed, they would have been so far from being of any 
service that they would rather have been a burden. From whence he 
knew that the creator of the world was supereminently bountiful, and 
exceedingly gracious. And then when he perceived among the creatures 
any that had beauty, perfection, strength, or excellence of any kind 
whatever, he considered with himself, and knew that it all flowed from 
that voluntary agent, (whose name be praised) and from his essence and 
operation. And he knew that what the Agent had in his own nature 

— 42 — 

*as greater than that which he saw in the creatures, more perfect and 
complete, more beautiful and glorious, and more lasting ; and that there 
was no proportion between the one and the other. Neither did he cease 
to prosecute this search till he had run through all the attributes of 
perfection, and found that they were all in this Agent, and all flowed 
from him ; and that he was most worthy to have them all ascribed to 
him, above all the creatures which wore described by them. 

60. In like manner he enquired into all the attributes of Imperfec- 
tion, and perceived that the maker of the world was free from them all : 
And how was it possible for him to be otherwise, since the notion of 
Imperfection is nothing but mere privation, or what depends upon it? 
And how can he in any way partake of privation, who is very 
essence, [and cannot but exist] ; who gives Being to every thing that 
exists, and besides whom there is no existence? But He is the being, 
He is the Absolute, He the beauty. He the glory. He the power. He the 
knowledge, « He is He, and besides him all things are subject to perish- 

' ing »7(Surahlal-Qa9a(;) /y^ ff ,V' . 

61. Thus far his knowledge had brought him towards the end of 
the fifth septenary from his birth, to wit when he was 35 years old. 
And the consideration of this Supreme Agent was then so rooted in his 
heart that it diverted him from thinking upon anything else : and he so 
far forgot the consideration of the creatures, and the enquiring into their 
natures, that as soon as ever he cast his eyes upon any thing of what 
kind soever, he immediately perceived in it the footsteps of this Agent ; 
and in an instant his thoughts were taken off from the Creature, and trans- 
ferred to the Creator. So that he was inflamed with the desire of him, 
and his heart was altogether withdrawn from thinking upon this inferior 
world, which contains the objects of sense, and wholly taken up with the 
contemplation of the upper, intellectual world. 

62. Having now attained to the knowledge of this Supreme Being, 
of permanent existence, which has no cause of his own existence, but is the 
cause why all things else exist ; he was desirous to know by what means 
he had attained this knowledge, and by which of his faculties he had 
apprehended this Being. And first he examined all his senses, viz., his 
Hearing, Sight, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling, and perceived that all these 
apprehended nothing but body, or what was in body. For the Hearing 
apprehended nothing but sounds, and these came from the undulations 
of the air, when bodies are struck one against another. The Sight appre- 
hends colours. The Smelhng, odours. The Taste, savours. And the 
Touch, the temperatures and dispositions of bodies, such as hardness, 
softness, roughness, and smoothness. Nor does the imagination apprehend 
any thing but in so far as it has length, breadth, and thickness. Now 
all these things which are thus apprehended are the adjuncts of bodies ; 
nor can these senses apprehend any thing else, because they are faculties 
diffused through bodies, and divided according to the division of bodies, 
and for that reason cannot apprehend anything else but divisible body. 
For, since this faculty is diffused through the visible body, it is impossible 

— 43 — 

but that when it apprehends any Lhing whatsoever, that thing so appre- 
hended must be divided as the faculty is divided. For which reason no 
faculty which is seated in body can apprehend any thing but what is 
body, or in it. Now, we have already demonstrated that this necessarily 
Existent Being is free in every respect from all properties of body ; and 
consequently not to be apprehended but by something which is neither 
body, nor any faculty inherent in body, nor has any manner of depen- 
dence upon it, nor is either within it or without it, nor joined to it, nor 
separated from it. From whence it appeared to him that he had appre- 
hended this Being by that which was his essence, and gained a certain 
knowledge of him. And from hence he concluded that this essence was 
incorporeal, and free from all the piopcrties of body. And that all his 
external part which he saw was not in reality his essence ; but that his 
true essence was That by which he apprehended that Absolute Being of 
necessary existence. 

63. Having thus learned that this essence was not that Corporeal 
Mass which he perceived with his senses and was clothed with his skin, 
he began to entertain mean thoughts of his body, and set himself to 
contemplate that Noble Being by which he had reached the knowledge 
of that Superexcellent and Necessarily Existent Being ; and began to 
consider mth himself, by means of that noble essence of his, wheth er this 
noble essence of his could possibly be dissolved or die or be annihilated ; 
or whether it were of perpetual duration. Now he knew that corruption 
and dissolution were properties of Body, and consisted in putting off one 
form and putting on an other. As for instance, when water is changed 
into air or steam, and steam into water; or when plants are turned into 
earth or ashes, and earth again into plants (for this is the true notion 
of corruption). But an incorporeal being, which has no dependance upon 
Body, but is altogether free from the accidents proper to Body, cannot 
be supposed to be liable to corruption. 

64. Having thus secured himself in this behef that his Real Essence 
could not be dissolved, he had a mind to know what condition it should 
be in when he had laid aside the body and was separated from it ; which 
he persuaded himself would not be, till the body ceased to continue a 
fit instrument for its use. Therefore he considered all his apprehensive 
faculties, and perceived that every one of them did sometimes apprehend 
potentially, and sometimes actually; as the eye, when it is shut, or 
turned away from the object, sees potentially. (For the meaning of 
apprehending potentially is, when it does not apprehend now, yet can 
do it for the time to cornel And when the eye is open, and turned 
toward the object, it sees actually, (for that is called actual, which is 
present), and so every one of these faculties is sometimes in Power, 
and sometimes in Act ; and if any of them did never actually apprehend 
its proper object, so long as it remains in power, it has no desire to any 
particular object; because it knows nothing of any, (as a man that is 
born blind ). But if it did ever actually apprehend, and then be reduced 
to the power only : so long as it remains in that condition, it will desire 

__ 44 - 

to apprehend in act ; because it has been acquainted with the object, and 
is intent upon it, and lingers after it ; as a man who could once see, and 
afterwards is blind, continually desires visible objects : And according as 
the object which he has seen is more perfect and glorious and beautiful, 
his desire towards it is proportionably increased, and his grief for the 
loss of it so much the greater. Hence it is that the grief of him who 
is deprived of that sight which he once had, is greater than his who is 
deprived of smelling ; because the objects of sight are more perfect and 
beautiful than those of smelling. And if there be any thing of boundless 
perfection, infinite beauty, glory and splendor, that is above all splendor 
and beauty; so that there is no perfection, beauty, brightness or come- 
liness but flows from it, — then certainly he that shall be deprived of 
the sight and knowledge of that thing, after he has once been acquainted 
with it, must necessarily, so long as he continues in that state, suffer 
inexpressible anguish ; as on the contrary, he that continually has it 
present to him, must needs enjoy uninterrupted delight, perpetual felicity, 
and infinite joy and gladness. 

66. Now it had been already made plain to' him that all the attri- 
butes of perfection belonged to that Being which did necessarily self- 
exist, and that he was far from all manner of imperfection. He was 
certain withal that the faculty by which he attained to the apprehension 
of this Being was not like to bodies, nor subject to corruption, as they 
are. And from hence it appeared to him that whosoever had such an 
essence as was capable of apprehending this Noble Being must, when he 
put off the body at the time of his death, have been formerly, during 
his conversation in the body, first, either one who was not acquainted 
with this necessarily self-existent essence, nor ever was joined to him, 
nor ever heard anything of him ; and so would, at the separating with 
the body, never desire to be joined to him, nor [to] be concerned at the 
want of him. Because all the corporeal faculties cease when the body 
dies, nor do they any longer desire or linger after their proper objects ; 
nor are in any trouble or pain for their absence ; (which is the condition 
of all brutes, of what shape soever they are). Or else, secondly, such an 
one who, while he continued in the body, did converse with this Being, 
and had a sense of his perfection, greatness, dominion, and power; but 
afterwards dechned from him, and followed his vicious inclinations, till 
at length death oveitook him whilst in this state ; he shall be deprived 
of that vision, and yet be afflicted with the desire of enjoying it, and so 
remain in lasting punishment and inexpressible torture ; whether he be to 
be delivered from his misery after a long time, and enjoy that vision 
which he so earnestly desires ; or, everlastingly to abide in the same 
torments, according as he was fitted and disposed for either of these two, 
during his continuance in the body. Or lastly, were such an one who 
conversed with this necessarily self-oxi.stcnt Being, and applied himself to 
it, with the utmost of his ability, and has all his thoughts continually 
intent upon his glory, beauty, and splendov, and never turns from him, 
nor forsakes him, till death seizes him in the act of contemplation and 

— 45 — 

intuition: Such a man as this shall, when separated from Body, remain 
m everlasting pleasure, and delight, and joy, and gladness, by reason of 
the uninterrupted vision of that self-existent Being, and its entire freedom 
from all impurity and mixture ; and because all those sensible things 
shall be removed from him, which are the proper objects of the corporeal 
faculties ; and which, in regard of his present state, are no better than 
torments, evils, and hinderances. 

66. Being thus satisfied that the perfection and happiness of his 
own being consisted in actually beholding that necessarily self-existent 
Being perpetually, so as not to be diverted from it so much as the 
twirlding of an eye, that death might find him actually employed in that 
vision, and so his pleasure might , be continued, without being interrupted 
by any pain; (which al-JunaYd,'^i doctor and imam of the sect of the 
Sufis, alluded to when at the point of death he said to his friends about 
him : . This is the time when men ought to glorify God and be instant 
in their prayers, ■:. ) he began to consider with himself, by what means this 
vision might actually be continued, without interruption. So he was very 
intent for a time upon that Being'; but he could not stay there long, 
before some sensible object or other would present itself, either the voice 
of some wild beast would reach his ears, or some phantasy affected his 
imagination ; or he was touched with some pain in some part or other ; 
or he was hungry, or dry, or too cold, or too hot, or was forced to 
rise to ease nature. So that his contemplation was interrupted, and he 
removed from that state of mind : And then he could not, without a 
great deal of difficulty, recover himself to that state which he was in 
before ; and he was afraid that death should overtake him at such a 
time as his thoughts were diverted from the vision, and so should fall 
into everlasting misery, and the pain of separation. 

67. This put him into a great deal of anxiety, and when he could 
find no remedy, he began to consider all the several sorts of animals, 
and observe their actions, and what they were employed about ; in hopes 
of finding some of them that might possibly have a notion of this Being, 
and endeavour after him ; that so he might learn of them which way to 
be saved. But he was altogether disappointed in his search ; for he 
found that they were all wholly taken up in getting their provision, and 
satisfying their desires of eating, and drinking, and copulation, and 
choosing the shady places in hot weather, and the sunny ones in cold: 
And that all their life-time, both day and night, till they died, was spent 
after this manner, without any variation or minding anything else at any 
time. From whence it appeared to him that they knew nothing of this 
Being, nor had any desire to^^•ards it, nor became acquainted with it by 
any means whatsoever; and that they all went into a stale of privation, 
or something very near akin to it. Having passed this judgment upon 
the animals, he knew that it was much more reasonable to conclude so 
of vegetables, which had but few of those apprehensions which the 
animals hud ; and if that whose apprehension was more perfect did not 
attain to this knowledge, much less could it be expected from that whose 

— 46 — 

apprehension was less perfect; especially when he saw that all the 
actions of plants reached no further than nutrition and generation. 

68. He next considered the stars and spheres, and saw that they 
had all regular motions, and went round in a due order ; and that they 
were pellucid and shining, and remote from any approach to change or 
dissolution: which made him have a strong suspicion that they had 
essences, distinct from their bodies, which were acquainted with this 
necessarily self-existent essence. And that these understanding 
essences were hke his understanding essence. And why might it not be 
supposed that they might have incorporeal essences, when he himself 
had, notwithstanding his weakness and extreme want of sensible things? 
That he consisted of a corruptible body, and yet nevertheless all these 
defects did not hinder him from having an incorporeal incorruptible 
essence : From whence he concluded that the celestial bodies were much 
more likely to have it ; and he perceived that they had a knowledge of 
the necessarily self-existent Being-, and did actually behold it at 
all times ; because they were not at all encumbered with those hinderances, 
arising from the intervention of sensible things, which debarred him from 
enjoying the Vision, without interruption. 

69. Then he began to consider with himself what should be the 
reason why he alone, above all the rest of living creatures, should he 
endued with such an essence as made him like the heavenly bodies. 
Now he had understood before the nature of the Elements, and how one 
of them used to be changed into another ; and that there was nothing 
upon the face of the earth which always remained in the same form, but 
that generation and corruption followed one another perpetually in a 
mutual succession ; and that the greatest part of these bodies were mixed 
and compounded of contrai'y things, and were for that reason the more 
disposed to dissolution : And that there could not be found among them 
all any thing pure and free from mixture, but that such bodies as came 
nearest to it, and had least mixture, such as gold and jacinth, are of 
longest duration, and less subject to dissolution ; and that the heavenly 
bodies were most simple and pure, and for that reason more free from 
dissolution, and not subject to a succession of forms. And here it ap- 
peared to him that the real essence of those bodies which are in this 
sublunary world consisted in some of them of one simple notion added to 
corporeity, as the four elements; in others of more, as animals and plants. 
And that those, whose essence consisted of the fewest forms, had the fewest 
actions, and were farther distant from life. And that if there were any body 
to be found that was destitute of all form, it was impossible that it should 
live, but was next to nothing at all; also that those things which were 
endued with most forms had the most operations, and had more ready 
and easy entrance to the state of life. And if this form were so disposed 
that there were no way of separating it from the matter to which it 
properly belonged, then the life of it would be manifest, permanent and 
vigorous to the utmost degree. But on the contrary, whatsoever body 
was altogether destitute of a form, was huly = J>^« (a Greek word), 

— 47 — 

i. e. matter without life, and near akin to nothing. And that the four 
Elements subsisted with one single form only, and are of the first rank 
of beings in the sublunary world, out of which other things endued with 
more forms are compounded : And that the Ufe of these elements is 
very weak, both because they have no variety of motion, but always 
tend the same way, and because every one of them has an adversary 
which manifestly opposes the tendency of its nature, and endeavours to 
deprive it of its form ; and therefore its essence is of short duration 
(continuance), and its life weak ; But that plants had a stronger life, and 
animals a life more manifest than the plants. The reason of which is, 
because that whenever it happened that in any of these compound bodies 
the nature of one element prevailed, that predominant element would 
overcome the natures of the rest, and destroy their power ; so that the 
compounded body would be of the same nature with that prevailing 
element, and consequently partake but of a small portion of life, because 
the element itself does so. 

70. On the contrary, if there were any of these compounded bodies, 
in which the nature of one element did not prevail over the rest, but 
they were all equally mixed, and a match one for the other ; — then one 
of them would not abate the force of the other, any more than its own 
force is abated by it, but they would work upon one another with equal 
power, and the operation of any one of them would not be more con- 
spicuous than that of the rest ; and this body would be far from being 
like to any one of the elements, but would be as if it had nothing 
contrary to its form, and consequently the more disposed for life ; and 
the greater this equality of temperature was, and by how much the more 
perfect and further distant from inclining one way or other, by so much 
the further (farther) it is distant from having any contrary to it, and its 
life is the more perfect. Now, since that Animal Spirit which is seated 
in the heart is of a most exact temperature, as being finer than earth 
and water, and grosser than fire and air, it has the nature of a mean 
between them all, and which has no manifest opposition to any of the 
elements, and by this means is fitted to become that form which constitutes 
an animal. And he saw that it followed from hence that those animal 
spirits, which were of the most even temperature, were the best disposed 
for the most perfect Ufe in this world of generation and corruption, and 
that this spirit was very near having no opposite to its forms, and did 
in this respect resemble the heavenly bodies which have no opposite to 
their forms ; and was therefore the spirit of the animal, because it was 
a mean between all the elements, and had no absolute tendency, either 
upwards or downwards ; but that, if it were possible it should be placed 
in the middle space, between the center and the highest bounds of the 
region of fire, and not be destroyed, it would continue in the same place, 
and move neither upwards nor downwards ; but if it should be locally 
moved, it would move in a round, as the heavenly bodies do ; and if it 
moved in its place, it would be round its own center, and that it was 
impossible for it to be of any other figure but spherical, and for that 

reason it is very mneh like to the hp;;.vcnly bodies. 

71. And when he had considered the properties of animals, and 
could not see any one among them, concerning which he could in the 
least suspect that it had any knowledge of this necessarily self- 
existent being-; but he knew that his own essence had the knowledge 
of it : He concluded from hence that he was an animal, endued with a 
spirit of an equal temperature, as all the heavenly bodies are, and that 
he was of a distinct species from the rest of animals, and that he was 
created for another end, and designed for something greater than what 
they were capable of. And this was enough to statisfy him of the nobility 
of his nature ; namely, that his viler part, i. e. the corporeal, was most like 
of all to the heavenly substances, which are without this world of 
generation and corruption, and free from all accidents that cause any 
defect, change, or alteration : And that his noble part, viz., that part by 
which he attained the knowledge of the necessarily self-existent 
being was something heroical and divine, not subject to change or 
dissolution, nor (capable) admitting of being described by any of the prop- 
erties or attributes of bodies : Not to be apprehended by any of the senses, 
or by the imagination; nor to be known by means of any other instrument 
but itself alone, and that it attains the knowledge of itself by itself, and 
is at once the knower, the knowledge, and the thing known, the faculty 
and the object. Neither was there any difference between any of these, 
because diversity and separation are properties and adjuncts of bodies; 
but body was in no way concerned here, nor any property or adjunct 
of body. 

72. Having apprehended the manner by which being like the 
heavenly bodies was peculiar to him above all other kinds of animals 
whatever, he perceived that it was a duty necessarily incumbent upon 
him to resemble them, and imitate their actions, and endeavour to the 
utmost to become like them : He perceived also that in respect of his 
nobler part, by which he had attained the knowlege of that necessarily 
self-existent being-, he did in some measure resemble it, because ho 
was separated from the attributes of bodies, as the necessarily self- 
existent being is himself separated from them. He saw also that it 
was his duty to endeavour to make himself master of the properties of 
that being by all possible means, and put on his qualities, and imitate 
his actions, and labor in doing his will, and resign himself wholly to him, 
and submit to his dispensations heartily and unfeignedly, so as to rejoice 
in him, though he should lay afflictions upon his body, and hurt or 
totally destroy it. 

73. He also perceived that he resembled the beasts in his viler 
part, which belonged to this generable and corruptible world, viz., 
this dark, gross body, which sollicited him with the desire of variety of 
sensible objects, and excited him to eating, drinking, and copulation ; and 
he knew that his body was not created and joined to him in vain, but 
that he was obliged to preserve it and take care of it, wliich he saw 
could not be done without some of those actions which are common to 

— 49 — 

the rest of animals. Thus it was plain to him that there were three 
sorts of actions which he was obliged to, viz., 1. Either Lhose by which 
he resembled the irrational animals ; or, 2. those by which he resembled 
the heavenly bodie.=; ; or, 3. those ])y wliich he resembled the necessarily 
self-existent being : And that he was obliged to the first, as having 
a gross body, consisting of several parts, and different faculties, and 
variety of motions. To the second, as having an animal spirit, which 
had its seat in the heart, and was the first beginning of the body and 
all its faculties. To the third, as he was what he was, viz., as he was 
that being by which he knew the necessarily self-existent being. 
And he was very well assured before that his happiness and freedom 
from misery consisted in the perpetual vision of that necessarily self- 
existent being, without being averted from it so much as the twinkhng 
of an eye. 

74. Then he weighed with himself by what means a continuation 
of this vision might be attained; and the result of his contemplation was 
this, viz. — that he was obliged to keep himself constantly exercised in 
these three kinds of resemblance. Not that the first of them did in any 
way contribute to helping him to the vision (but was rather an impediment 
and hindrance, because it was concerned only in sensible objects, which 
are all of them a sort of veil or curtain interposed between us and it) ; 
but because it was necessary for the preservation of the animal spirit, 
whereby the second resemblance which he had with the heavenly bodies 
was acquired, and was for this reason necessary, though encumbered with 
hindrances and inconveniences. But as to the second conformity, he saw 
indeed that a great share of tliat continued vision was attained by it, but 
that it was not free from mixture ; because, whatsoever contemplates the 
vision after this manner continually, does, together with it, have regard 
to, and east a look upon his own essence, as shall be shown hereafter. 
But that the third conformity was that by which he obtained the pure 
and entire vision, so as to be wholly taken up v/ith it, without being 
diverted from it one way or the other, by any means whatsoever, but 
being still intent upon that necessarily self-existent being; which 
whosoever enjoys, has no regard to anything else, and his own essence 
is altogether neglected, and vanished out of sight, and become as nothing; 
and so are aU other essences both great and small, except only the 
essence of that One, True, Necessarily Self-existent, High, and 
Po-werful Being. 

75. Now, when he was assured that the utmost bound of all his 
desires consisted in this Third Conformity, and that it was not to be 
attained without being a long time exercised and practised in the Second; 
and that there was no continuing so long as was necessary for that 
purpose but by means of the First; (which, how necessary soever, he 
knew was an hindrance in itself, and an help only by accident); he 
resolved to allow himself no more of that first conformity than needs 
must, which was only just so much as would keep the animal spirit alive. 
Now, in order to this, he found there were two things necessary : The 

7 

- 50- 

former, to help it inwardly, and supply the defect of thai nourishment 
■which was wasted; the latter, to preserve it from without, against the 
extremes of heat and cold, rain and sun, hurtful animals and suchlike ; 
and he perceived that if he should allow himself to use these things, 
though necessary, unadvisedly and at adventure, it might chance to ex- 
pose him to excess, and by that means he might do himself an injury 
unawares ; whereupon he concluded it the safest way to set bounds to 
himself, which he resolved not to pass, both as to the kind of meat 
[food] which the was to eat, and the quantity and quality of it, and the 
times of returning to it. 

70. And first he considered the several kinds of those things which 
were fit to eat; and found that there were three sorts, viz., either such 
plants as were not yet come to their full growth, nor had attained to 
perfection, such as are several sorts of green herbs which are fit to eat : 
Or secondly, the fruits of trees which were fully ripe, and had seed fit 
for the production of more of the same kind (and such were the kinds 
of fruits that were newly gathered and dry) : Or lastly, living creatures, 
both fish and flesh. Now he knew very well that all these things were 
created by that necessarily self-existent Being, in approaching to whom 
he was assured that his happiness did consist, and in desiring to resemble 
him. Now the eating of these things must needs hinder their attaining 
to their perfection, and deprive them of that end for which they were 
designed ; and this would be an opposition to the working of the Supreme 
Agent, and such an opposition would hinder that nearness and conformity 
to him which he so much desired. Upon this, he thought it the best 
way to abstain from eating altogether, if possible ; but when he saw that 
this would not do, and that such an abstinence tended to the dissolution 
of his own body, which was a so much greater opposition to the Agent 
than the former, by how much he was of a more excellent nature than 
those things, whose destruction was the cause of his preservation : Of 
two evils he resolved to choose the less, and do that which contained in 
it the least opposition to the Creator ; and resolved to partake of any of 
these sorts, if those he had most mind to were not at hand, in such 
quantity as he should conclude upon hereafter ; and if it so happened 
that he had them all at hand, then he would consider with himself, and 
choose that, in the partaking of which there would be the least opposition 
to the work of the Creator : Such as the pulp of those fruits which were 
fully ripe, and had seeds in them fit to produce others of the like kind, 
always taking care to preserve the seeds, and neither cut them, nor spoil 
them, nor throw them in such places as were not fit for plants to grow 
in, as smooth stones, salt earth, and the like. And if such pulpy fruits, 
as apples, pears, plums, etc., could not easily be come at, he would then 
take such as had nothing in them fit to eat but only the seed, as almonds 
and chestnuts, or such green herbs as were young and tender ; always 
observing this rule that, let him take of which sort he would, he still 
chose those that there was greatest plenty of, and which increased fastest, 
but so as to pull up nothing by the roots, nor spoil the seed : And if 

— 51 — 

none of these things could be had, he would then take some living 
creature, or eat eggs ; but when he took any animal, he chose that sort 
of which there was the greatest plenty, so as not to totally destroy any 
species. 

77. These were the rules which he prescribed to himself as to the 
kmds of his provision ; as to the quantity, his rule was to eat no more 
than just what would satisfy his hunger ; and as for the time of his 
meals, he designed, when he was once satisfied, not to eat any more till 
he found some disabihty in himself which hindered his exercise in the 
Second Conformity, (of which we are now going to speak) ; and as for 
those things which necessity required of him towards the conservation of 
his animal spirit, in regard of defending it from external injuries, he was 
not much troubled about them, for he was clothed with skins, and had 
a house sufficient to secure him from those inconveniences from without, 
which was enough for him; and he thought it superfluous to take any 
further care about those things ; and as for his diet, he observed those 
rules which he had prescribed to himself, namely, those which we have 
just now set down. 

78. After this he applied himself to the second operation, namely 
the imitation of the heavenly bodies, and expressing their proper quahties 
in himself; which when he had considered, he found to be of three sorts. 
The first, were such as had relation to those inferior bodies which are 
placed in this world of generation and corruption, as heat, which they 
impart to those of their own nature, and cold by accident, illumination, 
rarefaction, and condensation, , and all those other things by which they 
influence these inferior bodies, whereby they are disposed for the reception 
of spiritual forms from the Necessarily Self-Existent Agent. — The second 
sort of properties which they had, were such as concerned their own 
being, as that they were clear, bright and pure, free from all manner of 
feculent matter, and whatsoever kinds of impurity : that their motion was 
circular, some of them moving round their own center, and some again 
round the center of other planets. — The third kind of their properties, 
were such as had relation to the Necessarily Self-Existent Agent, as their 
continually beholding him without any interruption, and their having a 
desire towards him, being busied in his service, and moving agreeably 
to his will, and not otherwise, but as he pleased, and by his power. So 
he began to resemble them in every one of these three kinds, to the 
utmost of his power. 

79. And as for his first conformity, his imitation of them consisted 
in removing all things that were hurtful, either from animals or plants, if 
they could be removed : So that if he saw any plant which was deprived 
of the benefit of the sun, by the interposition of any other body ; or that 
its growth was hindered by its being twisted with, or standing too near 
any other plant, he would if possible remove that which hindered it, yet 
so as not to hurt either; or if it was in danger of dying for want of 
moisture, he took what care he could to water it constantly. Or if he 
saw any creature- pursued by any wild beast, or entangled in a snare, or 

— 52 — 

pricked with thorns, or that had gotten anything hurtful fallen into its 
eyes or ears, or was hungry or thirsty, he took all possible care to relieve 
it. And when he saw any water-course stopped by any stone, or anything 
brought down by the strenm, so that any plant or animal was hindered 
of it, he tcok care to remove it. And thus he continued in this first 
kind of imitation of the heavenly bodies, till he had attained it to the 
very heighth of perfection. 

80. The second sort of imitation consisted in his continually obliging 
himself to keep himself clean from all manner of dirt and nastiness, and 
washing himself often, keeping his nails and his teeth clean, and the 
secret parts of his body, which he used to rub sometimes with sweet- 
smelling herbs and perfume with good odors. He used frequently to 
make clean his clothes, and perfume them, so that he was all over 
extremely clean and fragrant. Besides this, he used a great many sorts 
of circular motion, (1) sometimes walking round the island, compassing 
the shore, and going round the utmost bounds of it ; sometimes walking 
or running a great many times round about his house or some stone, at 
other times turning himself round so often that he was -dizzy. 

81. His imitation of the third sort of attributes, consisted in confining 
his thoughts to the contemplation of the necessarily self-existent Being. 
And in order to this, he removed all his affections from sensible things, 
shut his eyes, stopped his ears, and refrained himself as much as possible 
from following his imagination, endeavoring to the utmost to think of 
nothing besides Him ; nor to admit together with Him any other object 
of contemplation. And he used to help himself in this by violently 
turning himself round, in which performance, when ho was very violently 
exercised, all manner of sensible objects vanished out of his sight, and 

(1) Imitating the heavenly bodies in their circular motion would 
seem indeed quite puerile, but that we are to remember that Muslims 
have an ancient rite of going several times round the Cubic House when 
they go thither on pilgrimage, and it is a necessary part of the ceremony. 
Now, Ibn Tufayl having undertaken to bring his philosopher as far at 
least as was possible for one in his circumstances, in the knowledge and 
practise of all those things which Mushms account necessary, he would 
not let him be ignorant of this practice of moving round ; but has brought 
it under this second sort of imitation of the heavenly bodies. Now, 
although our philosopher may be excused for not going to the temple at 
Makkah, yet so great a stress is laid upon it by Muslims, that al-Husayn 
al-Hallaj ibn Manijur was in the year 309 H., 921 A. D., condemned to die 
by the wazir al-Humayd, who pronounced sentence upon him, having first 
consulted the imams and doctors, for having asserted. That in case a 
man had a desire to go on the pilgrimage to Makkah, and could not ; it 
would be sufficient, if he set apart any clean room of his house for that 
purpose, and went round about it, and performed in it, at the same time 
when the pilgrims are at Makkah, the same rites which they do there, 
and theu fed and clothed thirty orphans, and gave to each of them seven 
pieces of silver. For which heterodox view he received .a thousand 
stripes, without so much as sighing or groaning, and had first one hand 
cut off, and then both his feet, and then the other hand ; then he was 
killed and burned, and his ashes were thrown into the river Tigris, and 
hie head set upon a pole in Bagdad. See Abu-l-Faraj, p. 287. 

— 53 — 

the imagination and all the other faculties which make any use of the 
organs of the body grew weak : and on the other side, the operations of 
his essence which depended not on the body grew strong, so that at 
some times his meditation was pure and free from any mixture, and he 
beheld by it the nccessnrily self-existent Being : But then again the 
corporeal faculties would return upon him, and spoil his contemplation, 
and bring him down to the lowest degree where he was before. Now, 
when he had any infirmity upon him which interrupted his design, he 
took some kind of meat (food), but still according to the aforementioned 
rules ; and then removed again to that state of imitation of the heavenly 
bodies, in these three respects which we have mentioned ; and thus he 
continued for some time opposing liis corporeal faculties, and they 
opposing him, and mutually struggling one against another ; and at such 
times as he got the better of them, and his thoughts were free from 
mixture, he did apprehend something of the condition of those who have 
attained to the third resemblance. 

82. Then he began to seek after this third assimulation, and took 
pains in attaining it. And first, he considered the attributes of the 
necessarily self-existent Being. Now, it had appeared to him, during the 
time of his theoretical speculation, before he entered upon the practical 
part, that there were two sorts of them, to wit. Affirmative, as knowledge, 
power, wisdom and so forth, and Negative, as immateriality : not only 
such as consisted in not being Body, but in being altogether removed from 
anything that had the least relation to Body, though at never so great a 
distance. And that this was a condition, not only required in the negative 
attributes, but in the affirmative too, viz., that they should be free from 
all properties of Body, of vduch Multiphcity is one. Now the divine 
essence is not multiplied by these affirmative attributes, but all of them 
together are one and the same thing, viz., his real essence. Then he 
began to consider how he might imitate him in both these kinds; and 
as for the affirmative attributes, when he considered that they were 
nothing else but his real essence, and that by no means it could be said 
of them that they are Many (because multiplicity is a property of Body) 
and that the knowledge of his own essence was not a notion superadded 
to his essence, but that his essence was the knowledge of his essence ; 
and so vice versa, it appeared to him that if he would know his being, 
tl-is knowledge by which he knew his being would not be a notion 
superadded to his being, but be the very being itself. And he perceived 
that his way to make himself like to Him, as to what concerned His 
affirmative attributes, would be to know Him alone, abstracted wholly 
from all properties of Body. 

83. This he apphed himself to ; and as for the negative attributes, 
they all consisted in separation from bodily things. He began therefore 
to strip himself of aU bodily properties, which he had made some 
progi-ess in before, during the time of the former exercise, when he was 
employed in the imitation of the heavenly bodies ; but there stiU remained 
a great many relics, as his circular motion, — motion being one of the 

— 54 — 

most proper attributes of Body, — and his care of animals and plants, 
compassion upon them, and industry in removing whatever inconvenienced 
them. Now, all these things belong to corporeal attributes, for he could 
not see these things at first, but by corporeal faculties ; and he was 
obliged to make use of the same faculties in preserving them. Therefore 
he began to reject and remove all those things from himself, as being 
in no wise consistent with that state which he was now in search of. 
So he continued, confining himself to rest in the bottom of his cave, 
with his head bowed down, and his eyes shut, and turning himself away 
altogether from all sensible things and the corporeal faculties, and bending 
all his thoughts and meditations upon the Necessarily Self-Existent Being, 
without admitting anything else besides him ; and if any other object 
presented itself to his imagination, he rejected it with his utmost force ; 
and exercised himself in this, and persisted in it to that degree that 
sometimes he did neither eat nor stir for a great many days together. 
And whilst he was thus earnestly taken up in contemplation, sometimes 
all manner of beings whatsoever would be quite out of his mind and 
thoughts, except his own being only. 

84. But he found that his own being was not excluded from his 
thoughts, no not even at such times when he was most deeply immersed 
in the contemplation of the First, True, Necessarily Self-Existent Being; 
Which concerned him greatly, for he knew that even this was a mixture 
in this simple Vision, and the admission of an extraneous object in that 
contemplation. Upon which he endeavored to disappear from himself, 
and be wholly taken up in the Vision of that True Being ; till at last he 
attained it; and then both the Heavens and the Earth, and whatsoever 
is between them, and all spiritual forms, and corporeal faculties ; and 
all those powers which are separate from Matter, and are those beings 
which know the Necessarily Self-Exislent Being, all disappeared and 
vanished, and were as if they had never been, and amongst these his own 
being disappeared too, and there remained nothing but this One, True, 
Perpetually Self-Existent Being, who spoke thus in that Saying of his — 
which is not a notion superadded to his essence — 'To whom now 

) belongs the kingdom ? To this One, Almighty God, » which words of his 
our self-taught philosopher, Quick-Alive son of Wide-Awake, understood, 
and heard his voice ; nor was his being unacquainted with words, and 
not being able to speak, any hindrance at all to understanding Him. 
Wherefore he deeply immersed himself into this state, and witnessed that 
which neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard; nor hath it ever entered 
into the heart of man to conceive. 

85. And now, do not expect that I should give thee a description 
of that which the heart of man cannot conceive. For, if many of those 
things which we do conceive are nevertheless hard to be explained, how 
much more difficult must those be which cannot be conceived by the 
heart, nor are circumscribed in the limits of that world in which it 
converses. Now, when I say « the heart, » I do not mean the substance 
of it, nor that spirit which is contained in the cavity of it ; but I mean 

^55- 

by it the form of that spirit which is diffused by its faculties throughout 
the whole body of man. Now, every one of these three is sometimes 
called, the Heart ; but it is impossible that this thing which I mean should 
be comprehended by any of these three ; neither can we express anything 
by words, which is not first conceived in the heart. And whosoever asks 
to have it explained, asks an impossibility; for it is just as if a man 
should have a mind to taste colors, quatenus colors, and desire that 
Black should be either sweet or sour. However, I shall not dismiss you 
without some limits, whereby I shall point out to you in some measure 
what wonderful things he saw when in this condition, but all figuratively 
and by way of parable ; not pretending to give a literal description of 
that which is impossible to be known but by coming thither. Attend 
therefore with the ears of thy heart, and look sharply with the eyes of 
thy understanding, upon that which I Shall show thee ; it may be thou 
mayest find so much in it as may serve to lead thee into the right way. 
But I make this bargain, that thou shalt not at present require any 
further explanation of it by word of mouth, but rest thyself contented 
with what I shall commit to these papers (leaves). For it is a narrow 
field, and it is dangerous to attempt the explaining of that with words, 
the nature of which admits no explication. 

86. I say then, when he had abstracted himself from his own and 
all other essences, and beheld nothing in Nature, but only that One, 
Living and Permanent Being : when he saw what he saw, and then afterwards 
returned to the beholding of other things : upon his coming to himself from 
that state — which was like drunkenness — he began to think that his owji 
essence did not at all differ from the essence of that True Being, but 
that they were both one and the same thing ; and that the thing which 
he had taken before for his own essence, distinct from that True Essence, 
was in reality nothing at all, and that there was nothing in him but this 
True Essence. And that this was like the light of the sun which, when 
it falls upon solid bodies, shines there ; and though it be attributed to, 
or may seem to belong to that body upon which it appears, yet it is 
nothing else in reality but the hght of the sun. And if that body be 
removed, its hght also is removed; but the hght of the sun remains still 
after the same manner, and is neither increased by the presence of that 
body, nor diminished by its absence. Now, when there happens to be a 
body which is fitted for such a reception of light, it receives it ; if such 
a body be absent, then there is no such reception, and it signifies nothing 
at all. 

87. He was the more confirmed in this opinion, because it appeared 
to him before, that this True, Powerful, and Glorious Being was not by 
any means capable of Multiphcity, and that his knowledge of His Essence 
was his very essence, from whence he argued thus : 

. He that has the knowledge of this essence, has the essence itself ; 
« but I have the knowledge of this essence. Ergo, I have the essence 
* itself. » 

Now, this essence can be present nowhere but with itself, and its 

— 56 — 

very presence is essence ; and therefore he concluded that he was that 
very essence. And as to all other essences, which were separate from 
Matter, which had the knowledge of that True Essence, though before he 
had looked upon them as many, by this way of thinking, appeared to 
him to be only one thing. And this misgrounded conceit of his had hke 
to have firmly rooted itself in his mind, unless God had purified him 
with his mercy, and directed him by his gracious guidance ; and then he 
perceived that it arose from the relics of that obscurity which is natural 
to Body, and tlxe dregs of sensible objects. Because that Much and Little, 
Unity and Multiplicity, Collection and Separation, are all of them properties 
of Body. But we cannot say of these separate essences, which know 
this Teue BEiiN'G (whose name be praised) that they are many or one, 
because they are immaterial. Now, Multiplicity is because of the difference 
Of one Being from another, and there can be no Unity but by Conjunction, 
and none of these can be understood without conipound notions which 
are, mixed with Matter. Besides that, the explication of things in this 
place is very strait and difficult ; because, if you go about to express 
what belongs to these separate essences by way of muUitude, or in the 
plural according to our way of speaking, this insinuates a notion of 
Multiplicity, whereas they are far from being many ; and if you speak 
of them by way of separation, or in the singular, this insinuates a notion 
of Unity, whereas they are far from being one. 

88. And here methinks I see one of those bats, whose eyes the sun 
dazzles, moving himself in the chain of his folly and saying : « This 
subtilty of yours exceeds all bounds, for you have withdrawn yourself 
from the state and condition of understanding men, and indeed thrown 
away the nature of intelligible things ; for this is a certain axiom, that a 
thing must be either one, or more than one». Soft and fair; let that 
Gentleman be pleased to consider with himself, and contemplate this vile, 
sensible world, after the same manner which Hayy ibn Yaqzan did who, 
when he considered it one way, found such a multiplicity in it as was 
incomprehensible ; and then again, considering it anotlier way, perceived 
that it was only one thing; and thus he continued fluctuating, and could not 
determine on one side more than another. Now, if it were so in this sen.sible 
world, which is the proper place of MultipUcity aud Singularity, and the place 
where the true nature of them is understood, and in which are Separation 
and Union, Division into Parts, and Distinction, Agreement and Difference, 
what would he think of the Divine World, in or concerning which we cannot 
justly say all nor some, nor express anything belonging to it by such 
words as our ears are used to, without in.sinuating some notion which is 
contrary to the truth of the thing, which no man knows but he that has 
seen it, nor understands but he that has attained to it. 

89. And as for his saying that I have « withdrawn myself from the 
state and condition of understanding men, and thrown away the nature 
of intelligible tilings » : I grant it, and leave him to his Understanding, 
and to his understanding men he speaks of. For that Understanding 
which he and such as he mean, is nothing else but that Rational Faxjulcy 

- hi - 

which examines the individuals of sensible things, and from thence gets 
a Universal Notion ; and those understanding men he means, are those 
which make use of this sort of Separation. But that kind, which we are 
now speaking of, is above all this ; and therefore let every one that 
knows nothing but sensible things and their universals, shut his ears, and 
pack away to his Company, who know the outside of the things of this 
world, but take no care of the next. But if thou art one of them to 
whom these limits and signs by which we describe the divine world are 
sufficient, and dost (1) not put that sense upon my words in which they 
are commonly used, I shall give thee some further account of what 
Hayy ibn Yaqzan saw when he was in the state of those who have attained 
to the Truth, of which we have made mention before, and it is thus : 

90. After he was wholly immersed in the speculation of these 
things, and perfectly abstracted from all other objects, and in the nearest 
Approach [ to God ] ; he saw in the highest sphere, beyond which there 
in no Body, a Being free from Matter, which was not the being of that 
One, True One, nor the sphere itself, nor yet any thing different from 
them both ; but was hke the image of the sun which appears in a well- 
polished looking-glass, which is neither the sun nor the looking-glass, 
and yet not distinct from them. And he saw, in the essence of that 
separate sphere, such perfection, splendor and beauty as is too great to 
be expressed by any tongue, and too subtile to be clothed in words; 
and he perceired that it was in the utmost perfection of delight and joy, 
exultation and gladness, by reason of its beholding that True Essence, 
whose glory be exalted. 

91. He saw also that the next sphere to it, which is that of the 
fixed stars, had an immaterial essence, which was not the essence of that 
True One, nor the essence of that highest, separated sphere, nor the 
sphere itself, and yet not different from these ; but is like the image of 
the sun which is reflected upon a looking-glass, from another glass [mirror] 
placed opposite to the sun ; and he observed in this essence also the like 
splendor, beauty, loveliness and pleasure, which he had observed in the essence 
of the other highest sphere. He saw likewise that the next sphere, which 
is the sphere of Saturn, had an immaterial essence, which was none of 
those essences he had seen before, nor yet different from them ; but was 
like the image of the sun, which appears in a glass [mirror], upon whi<;h 
it is reflected from a glass which received that reflection from another 
glass placed opposite to the sun. And he saw, in this essence too, the 
same splendor and delight which he had observed in the former. And 
so in all the spheres he observed distinct, immaterial essences, every one 
of which was not any of those which went before it, nor yet different 
from them ; but was Hke the image of the sun reflected from one glass 
[mirror] to another, according to the order of the spheres. And he saw, 
in every one of these essences, such beauty, splendor, pleasure, and joy 

(1) Because words borrowed from and used about sensible and 
material things, w^ould lead men into mistakes, when used to explain 
things spiritual, if they be taken in a literal sense. See Section 85, 

— 58 — 

as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart 
of man to conceive ; and so downwards, till he came to the lower world, 
subject to generation and corruption, which comprehends all that which 
is contained within the sphere of the moon. 

92. Which he perceived had an immaterial essence, as well as the 
rest; not the same with any of those which he had seen before, nor 
different from them ; and that this essence had seventy thousand faces, 
and every face seventy thousand mouths, and every mouth seventy 
thousand tongues with which it praised, sanctified and glorified incessantly 
the essence of that One, True BErNG. And he saw that this essence 
(which he had supposed to be many, though it was not) had the same 
perfection and pleasure which he had seen in the other ; and that this 
essence was like the image of the sun, which appears in fluctuating 
water, which has that image reflected upon it from the last and lowermost 
of those glasses to which the reflection came, according to the afore- 
mentioned order, from the first glass which was set opposite to the sun. 
Then he perceived that he himself had a separate essence, which one 
might call a part of that essence which had seventy thousand faces, if 
that essence had been capable of division ; and, if that essence had not 
been created in time, one might say it was the very same ; and had it 
not been joined to the body so soon as it was created, we should have 
thought that it had not been created. And in this order he saw other 
essences also, like his own which had necessarily been heretofore, then 
were dissolved, and afterwards necessarily existed together with himself; 
and that they were so many as could not be numbered, if we might caU 
them many; or that they were all one, if we might call them one. 
And he perceived both in his own essence, and in those other essences 
wliich were in the same rank with him, infinite beauty, brightness and 
pleasure, such as neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it 
entered into the heart of man ; and which none can describe nor under- 
stand but those which have attained to it and experimentally know it. 

93. Then he saw many other immaterial essences (1) which resembled 
rusty looking-glasses, covered over with filth and besides turned their 
backs upon, and had their faces averted from those polished looking- 
glasses that had the image of the sun imprinted upon them ; and he saw 
that these essences had so much filthiness adhering to them, and such 
manifold defects as he could not have conceived. And he saw that they 
were afflicted with infinite pains which caused incessant sighs and groans ; 
and that they were compassed about with torments, as those who lie in a 
bed are with curtains ; and that they were scorched with the fiery Veil 
of Separation. [1 have omitted the following passage, because I could 
not well tell how to make it intelligible ; the meaning of it, in gross, is 
still to express the miserable condition and horrible confusion of those 

(1) Even as the Author has in the three foregoing sections described 
the condition of those glorified spirits who continually enjoy the Beatific 
Vision, so in this he describes the miserable state of those who are 
deprived of it, i. e. the Damned. 

spirits which are separated from the Vision of God. However, I shall set 
it down in Latin, out of Mr. Pocock's translation, thus:—] Et ferris 
discindi inter repellendum et attrahendum ; vidit etiam hie ahas Essentias, 
praeter istas, quae cruciabantur, quae apparebant et deinde evaneseebant, 
et eonnexae erant et turn dissolvebantur ; et hie se cohibuit illasque 
bene perpendit, et vidit ingentes terrores, et negotia magna, et turbam 
occupatam, et operaLionem, efficaeem, et complanationem, et inflationem, 
et productionem, et destructionem. [The particulars of this passage 
would be best explained by the commentators upon the Qur-an, which 
each one may consult for himself]. But after a very little while his 
senses returned to him again, and he came (o himself out of this state, 
as out of an extasy ; and his foot .-^hding out of this place, he came 
within sight of this sensible world, and lost the sight of the Divine World, 
for there is no joining them both together in the same state. « For this 
world in which we live, and that other, are like two wives belonging to 
the same husband: if you please one, you displease the other*, which 
is a Hadith Nabawi. 

94. Now, if you should object tliat it appears, from what I have 
said concerning this vision, that these separated essences, if they chance 
to be in bodies of perpetual duration, such as the heavenly bodies are, 
shall also remain perpetually, but if they be in a body which is liable 
to corruption (such an one as belongs to us reasonable creatures) that 
then they must perish too, and vanish away, as appears from the simi- 
litude of the looking-glasses which I have used to explain it ; because the 
image there has no duration of itself, but what depends upon the duration 
of the looking-glass ; • and if you break the glass, the image is most 
certainly destroyed and vanishes. In answer to this I must tell you that 
you have soon forgotten the Bargain I made with you. For did not I 
tell you before that it was a narrow field, and that we had but little 
room for explication ; and that words, however used, would most 
certainly occasion men to think otherwise of the thing than really it was ? 
Now that which has made you imagine this, is because you thought that 
the similitude must answer to the thing represented in every respect. 
But that will not hold in any common discourse; how much less in this, 
where the sun and its light, and its image, and the representation of it, 
and the glasses, and the forms which appear in them, are all of them 
things which are inseparable from Body, and which cannot subsist but by 
it and in it, and therefore the very essences of them depend upon Body, 
and they perish together with it. 

9.5. But as for the divine essences and heroic spirits, Ihey are all 
free from Body and all its adherents, and removed from them at the 
utmost distance, nor have they any connection with or dependanee upon 
them. And the existence or non-existence of Body is all one to them, 
for their sole connection ■ and dependanee is with and upon that One 
True Necessary Self-Existent Being, who is the first of them, and the 
beginning of them, and the cause of their existence, and he perpetuates 
them and continues them for ever ; nor do they want the bodies, but the 

— '80 - 

bodies want them ; for if they should perish, the bodies would perish, 
because these essences are the principles of thBse bodies. In like manner, 
as if a privation of that One True Being could be supposed (far be it 
from Him, for there is no God but Him), all these essences would be 
removed together with Him, and the bodies too, and all the sensible 
world, because all these have a mutual connection. 

90. Now, although the sensible world follows the divine world, as 
a shadow does the body, and the divine world stands in no need of it, 
but is free from it, and independent of.it, yet notwithstanding this, it is 
absurd to suppose a possibility of its being annihilated, because it follows 
the divine world : But the corruption of this world consists in its being 
changed, not annihilated. And that glorious Book (1) spake, where there 
is no mention made of moving the mountains, and making them 
like the world, and men like fire-flies, and darkening the sun 
and moon; and eruption of the sea, in that day when the 
Earth shall be changed into another earth, and the heavens 
likewise. This is the substance of what I can hint to you at present 
concerning what Quick-Alive son of Wide-Awake saw, when in that 
glorious state. Do not expect that I should explain it any farther with 
words, for that is even impossible. 

97. But as for the finishing of his history, I shall tell it you, God 
willing. After his return to the sensible world, when he had been where 
we have told you, he loathed this present life, and most earnestly longed 
for the life to come ; and he endeavored to return to the same state, by 
the same means he had sought it at first, till he attained to it with less 
trouble than he did at first, and continued in it the second time longer 
than at the first. Then he returned to the sensible world; and then again 
endeavored to recover his station, which he found easier than at the first 
and second time, and that he continued in it longer ; and thus it grew 
easier and easier, and his continuance in it longer and longer, time after 
time, till at last he could attain it when he pleased, and stay in it as 
long as he pleased. In this state he firmly kept himself, and never 
retired from it, but when the necessities of his body required it, which 
he had brought into as narrow a compass as was possible. And whilst 
he was thus exercised, he used to wish that it would please God to 
dehver him altogether from this body of his, which detained him from 
that state ; that he might have nothing to do but to give himself up 
wholly to his dehght, and be freed from all that torment with which he 
was afflicted, as often as he was forced to avert his mind from that state, 
by attending on the necessities of nature. And thus he continued, until 
he was past the seventh Septenary of his age ; that is, till he was about 
fifty years old, and then he happened to become acquainted with Asal, the 
narrative of which meeting of theirs I shall now, God willing, relate. 

98. They say that there was an island not far from that where 
Hayy ibn Yaqzan was born (no matter according to which of those two 
different ac^ojnts they give of his birth, see sections 3, 4, 7, 8) into 

a) 

Surahs 8b/, and iOl/-^ AC-lljiJ^ 

-- 61 -^ 

which one of those good sects, which had some one of the ancient prophets 
(of pious memory) for its author and founder, had retired. A sect wliich 
used to discourse of all things in Nature, by way of parable and simiUlude, 
and by that means represent the images of them to the imagination, and 
fix the nnpressions of them in men's minds, as is customary in such 
discourses as are made to the Vulgar. This sect so spread itself in this 
island, and prevailed and grew so eminent, that at last the king not only 
embraced it himself, but obhged his subjects to do so too. 

99. Now, there were born in this island two men of extraordinary 
endowments, and lovers of that which is gocd ; the name of the one was 
Asa!, and the other Salamln who, meeting with this sect, embraced it 
heartily, and obliged themselves to the punctual observance of all its 
ordinances, and the daily exercise of what was practised in it ; and to 
this end they entered into a league of friendship with each other. Now, 
among other passages, or expressions and words, contained in the law of 
that sect, they sometimes made enquiry into these words, wherein it 
treats of the description of the most high and glorious God, and his 
angels, and the resurrection, and the rewards and punishments of a future 
state. Now Asal used to make a deeper search into the inside of things, 
and was more inclined to study mystical meanings and interpretations. 
But as for his friend Salftman, he kept close to the literal sense, and never 
troubled himself with such interpretations, but refrained from such curious 
examination and speculation of things. Notwithstanding this difference, 
however, they both were constant in performing those rites and ceremonies 
required, and in calhng themselves to an account, and in opposing their 
affections. 

too. Now there were in this law some passages which seemed to 
exhort men to retirement and a solitary life, intimating that happiness 
and salvation were to be attained by it ; and others which seemed to 
encourage men to conversation, and embracing Human Society. Asal gave 
himself up wholly to retirement; and those expressions which favored it 
were of most weight with him, because he was naturally inclined to 
contemplation, and searching into the meanings of things ; and his greatest 
hope was that he should best attain his end by a solitary life. Salaman, 
on the other side, applied himself to conversation ; and those savings of 
the law which tended that way went the farthest with him, because he 
had a natural aversion to contemplation, and nice sifting of things. And 
he thought that conversation did drive away evil thoughts, and banished 
that diversity of opinions which offered themselves to his mind, and kept 
him from the suggestions of evil thoughts. In short, their disagreement 
in this particular was the occasion of their parting. 

101 . Now Asal had heard of that island in which we have told you 
that Hayy ibn Yaqzan had his breeding. He knew also its fertility and 
conveniences, and the healthful temper of the air, so that it would afford 
him such a commodious retirement as he had in his wishes. Thither he 
resolved to go, and withdraw himself from all manner of conversation, 
the remaining part of his days. So he took what substance he had, and 

— 62 — 

Vith part of it he hired a ship to convey him thither, the rest he 
distributed among the poor people, and took his leave of his friend 
Salaman, and went aboard. The mariners transported him to the island, 
and set him ashore and left him. There he continued serving God, and 
magnifying him, and sanctifying him, and meditating upon his glorious 
names and attributes, without any interruption or disturbance. And when 
he was hungry, he took what he had occasion for, to satisfy his hunger, 
of such fruits as the island afforded, or what he could hunt. In this 
state he continued a while, in the mean lime enjoying the greatest pleasure 
imaginable, and the most entire tranquility of mind, arising from the 
converse and communication which he had with his Lord ; and every day 
experiencing His benefits and precious gifts, and His bringing easily to his 
hand such things as he wanted, and were necessary for his support, 
which confirmed his belief in Him, and was a great refreshment to him. 

102. Quick-Alive son of Wide-Awake, in the mean time, was 
wholly immersed in his sublime speculations, and never stirred out of 
his cell but once a week, to take such provision as first came to hand. 
So that Asftl did not hght upon him at first, but walked round the island, 
and compassed the extremities of it, without seeing any man, or so much 
as the footsteps of any : Upon which account his joy was increased, and 
his mind exceedingly pleased, in regard of his compassing that which he 
had proposed to himself, namely, to lead the most retired life that was 
possible. 

103. At last it happened one time that Hayy ibn Yaqzan, coming 
out to look for provision in the same place whither Asal was retired, 
they spied one another. Asal, for his part, did not question but that it 
was some religious person who, for the sake of a solitary life, had retired 
into that island, as he had done himself, and was afraid lest, if he should 
come up to him and make himself known, it might spoil his meditation, 
and hinder his attaining what he hoped for. Hayy ibn Yaqzan, on the 
other side, could not imagine what it was ; for of all the creatures he 
had ever beheld in his whole life, he had never seen anything hke it. 
Now Asal had a black coat on, made of hair and wool, which Hayy ibn 
Yaqzan fancied was natural, and stood wondering at it a long lime. Asil 
ran away as hard as he could, for fear he should disturb his meditation; 
Hayy ibn Yaqzan ran after him, out of an innate desire he had to know 
the truth of things. But when he perceived Asal make so much haste, 
he retired a little and hid himself from him ; so that Asal thought he 
had been quite gone off, and then he fell to his prayers, and reading, 
and invocation, and weeping, and supplication, and complaining, till he 
was altogether taken up, so as to mind nothing else. 

104. In the mean time Hayy ibn Yaqzan stole upon him by degrees, 
and Asal took no notice of him, till he came so near as to hear him 
read and praise God, and observed his humble behavior, and his weeping, 
and heard a pleasant voice and distinct words, such as he had never 
observed before in any kind of animals : Then he looked upon his shape 
and lineaments, and perceived that he was of the same form with himself, 

— 63 — 

and was satisfied that the coat he had on, was not a natural skin, but 
an artificial gown like his own. And when he observed the decency of 
his humble behavior, and his suppbcalion and weeping, he did not at all 
question but that he was one of those essences which had the knowledge 
of the True One; and for that reason he had a desire to be acquainted 
with him, and to know what was the matter with him, and what caused 
this weeping and supplication. Whereupon he drew nearer to him, till 
Asal perceiving it, betook himself to his heels again, and Hayy ibn Yaqzan 
(answerably to bis vigor and power, both of knowledge and body, which 
God had bestowed upon him) pursued him wilh all his might, till at 
last he overtook him and seized on him, and held him fast, so that he 
could not get away. 

105. When Asal looked upon him, and saw him clothed with the 
skins of wild beasts with the hair on, and his own hair so long as to 
cover a great part of his body, and observed his great swiftness and 
strength, he was very much afraid of him, and began to pacify him with 
stroking him, and entreating him, but Hayy ibn Yaqzan did not under- 
stand one word he said, nor knew anything of his meaning, only he 
perceived that he was afraid, and endeavored to allay his fear with such 
voices as he had learned of some of the beasts, and stroked his head, 
and both sides of his neck, and showed kindness to him, and expressed 
a great deal of gladness and joy; till at last Asal's fear was laid aside, 
and he knew that he meant him no harm. 

106. Now Asal long before, out of his earnest desire of searching 
into the meaning of things, had studied most languages, and was well 
skilled in them. So he began to speak to Hayy ibn Yaqzan in all the 
languages which he understood, and ask him questions concerning his 
way of life, and took pains to make him understand him ; but all in 
vain, for Hayy ibn Yaqzan stood all the while wondering at what he 
heard, and did not know what was the meaning of it, only he perceived 
that Asftl was pleased, and well-affected towards him. Thus they stood 
wondering one at the other. 

107. Now Asal had by him some remainder of the provision which he 
had brought along with him from the inhabited island whence he came; and 
he offered it to Hayy ibn Yaqzan, who did not know what to make of 
it, for he had never seen any such before. Then Asal ate some of it 
himself, and invited Hayy ibn Yaqzan by signs to eat too. But the latter 
bethought himself of those rules which he had prescribed to himself, as 
to matter of diet; and not knowing the nature of that which the former 
offered him, nor whether it was lawful for him to partake of it or not, 
he refused it. Asal still continued urgent, and invited him kindly. Now 
Hayy ibn Yaqzan had a great desire to be acquainted with him, and was 
afraid that his continuing too stiff in his refusal might alienate the affec- 
tions of Asal from him ; so he ventured upon it, and ate some. When 
he had tasted of it, and liked it, he perceived that he had done amiss in 
breaking those promises which he had made to himself concerning diet ; 
and he repented himself of what he bad done, and had thoughts of 

— 64 — 

withdrawing himself from Asal, and retreating to his former state of 
conLemplation. 

108. But the Vision did not easily appear to him at first, upon 
which he resolved to continue with Asal in the sensible world, till he had 
thoroughly satisfied himself concerning him, that so when he had no 
further desire towards him, he might apply himself to his former contem- 
plations without any interruption. Wherefore he applied himself to the 
society of Asal, who perceiving that he could not speak, was secure of 
any damage that might come to his religion by keeping company with 
him ; and, besides, had hopes of teaching him speech, knowledge and 
rehgion, and, by that means, of obtaining a great reward and near 
approach to God. He began therefore to teach him how to speak ; first, 
by showing him particular things, and pronouncing their names, and 
repeating them often, and persuading him to speak them; which he did, 
applying every word to the thing by it signified and denoted, till he had 
taught him all the nouns, and so improved him by degrees that he 
could speak in a very short time. 

109. Then Asal began to enquire of him concerning his way of 
living, and from whence he came into that island? Hayy ibn Yaqzan 
told him that he knew nothing of his own origin, nor any father or 
mother that he had, but only that roe which brought him up. Then he 
described to him his manner of living, from first to last, and by what 
degrees he had advanced in knowledge till he attained [the] Union with 
God. When Asal heard him give an account of those truths, and those 
essences which are separate from the sensible world, and which have the 
knowledge of that True One, whose name be praised ; and heard him 
give an account of the essence of that True One, and describe, as far 
as was possible, what he had witnessed — when he had attained to that 
Union — of the joys of those who are near [close] united to God, and 
the torments of those who are separated from Him ; he made no doubt 
but that all those things which are contained in the law of God [i. e. the 
Quran] concerning His command, His angels, books, and messengers, the 
day of judgment, paradise and hell, were resemblances of what Hayy ibn 
Yaqzan had seen ; and the eyes of his understanding were opened, and 
he found that the Original and the Copy (1) did exactly agree together. 
And the methods of mystical interpretation became easy to him, and 
there appeared nothing difficult to him, in those precepts which he had 

(1). Or, and that which he had conceived by his mind and reason 
coincided with that which had been handed down by revelation and 
inspiration. The sense is, that Hayy ibn Yaqzan having no advantages 
of education, had acquired all his knowledge by singular industry and 
apphcation, till at last he attained to the Vision of God himself, by which 
means he saw all things relating to a future state, viz., by beholding in 
God the Architypal Ideas, of which all things created, and whatsoever is 
revealed to us, are supposed to be copies. Now Asal, by conversing with 
him, found that the «maqfll», i. e. what Hayy b. YaqzSn saw by this 
sort of speculation , and the « manqul », i. e. what Asal had learned out 
of the revealed Quran, and the tradition of the prophets, did exactly 
answer to and coincide one with the other, as a copy does its orifiaai- 

— 66 — 
received, bat all was clear; nor anything shut up, but all was open; 
nor anything profound, but all was phiin. By this moans his intellectual 
faculty grew strong and vigorous, and ho looked npon Hayy ibn Yaqzan 
with admiration and respect, and assured himself that he was one of the 
Saints of God, « which have no fear upon them, neither shall they suffer 
pain.. Upon which he addressed himself to wait upon him, and imitate 
him, and to follow follow his direction in the performance of such works 
as he had occasion to make use of, namely, those legal ones which he 
had formerly learned from his own sect. 

110. Then II. b. Yaqzan began to enquire of him concerning his 
condition and manner of living, and Asal gave him an account of the 
i.'>land from whence he came, and what manner of people inhabited it, 
and what sort of life they led before that religious sect, which we men- 
tioned, came among them, and how it was now, since the coming of that 
sect. He also gave him an account of what was delivered in the Law 
[Quran] relating to the description of the divine world, paradise, and 
hell, and the awakening and resurrection of mankind, and their gathering 
together to judgment, and the balance and the way. All which things 
Hayy b. Yaqzan understood very well, and did not find any of them 
disagreeable to what be had seen, when in that noble station ; and he 
knew that he who (1) had described these things, and given an account 
of them, had given a true account, and was a messenger sent from his 
Lord; and he believed him, and affirmed his veracity, and bore witness 
to his message. 

111. Then he began to ask him concerning the precepts which the 
Messenger of God had delivered, and the rites of worship which he had 
ordained. And Asal told him of Prayer, Alms, Fasting, and Pilgrimage, 
and such other external observances, which he received and practised, 
and took upon himself, in obedience to his command, of whose veracity 
he was very v/ell a.3Surod. Only there were two things stuck in his mind, 
which he wondered at, and could not comprehend wherein the wisdom 
of them did consist : The one was, why this messenger of God, in 
describing most things which relate to the divine v\orld, used to express 
them to men by parables or similitudes, and waived a perspicuous 
explication of them ; by which he occasioned men in a great measure to 
fall into that error of asserting a corporeity in God, and believing things 
of that True Being, from which he is absolutely free ; and so, in Hke 
manner, concerning those things which relate to the rewards and punish- 
ments of a future state. — The other was, why he went no farther than 
these precepts and rites of worship, but gave men leave to gather riches, 
and allowed them a liberty as to matter of food ; by which means they 
employed themselves about vain things, and turned away from the truth. 
Whereas his judgment was, that nobody ought to eat anything, but only 
just [enough] to keep him alive; and as for riches, he had no opinion 
of them at all. And when he saw what was set down and prescribed in 
the Law, with relation to wealth, as A lms and the Distribution of them , 

(1) The Apostle Mnhammed, 

— 66 — 

and Trading and Usury, Mulcts and Punishments ; these things seemed 
all very odd to him, and he judged them superfluous ; and said that, if men 
understood things aright, they would lay aside all these vain things, and 
follow the truth, and content themselves without anything of all this ; 
and that no man would challenge such a propriety in riches as to have 
Alms asked of him, or to cause his hands to be cut off who privily stole 
them ; or their lives to be taken away who had openly robbed him. 

112. Now that which prompted him to this persuasion was this, 
that he thought all men were indued with an ingenuous temper, and 
penetrating understanding, and a mind constant to itself; and was not 
aware how blockish and stupid they were, how ill-advised, and inconstant 
in their resolutions; insomuch that they are like brute beasts, nay more 
apt to wander out of the way. Since therefore he was greatly affected 
with pity towards mankind, and desired that he might be an instrument 
of their salvation ; a resolution came into his mind of going over to them, 
to declare and lay before them the truth. This intention of his he 
communicated to his friend As&l, and asked him if there could possibly 
be any way contrived to come at them. 

113. But Asal told him what sort of people they were, and how 
far from an ingenuous temper, and how averse from obeying the commands 
of God ; but he had no notion of that, but still his mind was intent upon 
that which he hoped to compass. And Asal desired that it would please 
God, by his means, to direct some persons of his acquaintance which were 
were of a more pliable temper than the rest, and had more sincerity in 
them, into the right way. So then he was ready to further the design 
and endeavor of Hayy ibn Yaqzan. Upon which they resolved to keep 
close to the sea-shore, without stirring from it either day or night, till 
God should please to afford them an opportunity of crossing the sea. 
And all the while they were intent upon this, they continued praying to 
God to direct them in this their business, and bring it to a happy issue. 

114. At last, as God — whose name be praised ^ would have it, 
it happened that a ship which had lost her course, was driven by the 
wind and water upon the shore of that island, and as it drew nearer to 
land, they who were in it, seeing two men upon the shore, made towards 
them. Then Asal spoke to them, and desired them to carry him and his 
companion along with them in the ship ; to which they consented, and 
took them into the ship, and it pleased God to send them a fair wind 
which in a short time carried them to the isle which they desired. There 
they landed, and went into the city ; and Asal's friends came all about 
him, and he gave them an account of Quick-Alive son of Wide-Awake, 
and his manner of living ; so that people flocked to him from every side, 
and admired and reverenced him. Then Asal told him that this sect 
was superior to all other sorts of men in knowledge and sagacity ; and 
that, if he could not work upon them, there were much lesser hopes of 
doing any good upon the Vulgar. 

115. Now Salaman — Asal's friend who, we told you, chose eon- 
rersation rather than solitude and retirement, which be judged unlaw W — 

— 67 — 
was prince and sovereign of this inland. So Hayy b. Yaqzan began to 
teach them, and explain the mysteries of wisdom to them ; bat so soon 
as ever he began to raise his discourse above external things a little, and 
to inculcate that the contrary whereof had been settled and deeply 
rooted in their minds ; they began to withdraw themselves from him, and 
their minds had an abhorrence for what he spake. And, although they 
carried themselves civilly to him, both because he was a stranger, and 
out of the observance which they thought due to their friend Asal, yet 
they were angry with him inwardly in their hearts. However, he 
continued reasoning with them mildly night and day, and teacliing them the 
Truth, both in private and public, which only increased their hatred towards 
him, and made them avoid his company, though otherwise they were 
lovers of goodness, and desirous of truth. However, through the defect 
of their nature, they did not search for it after the right manner, nor 
apprehend it as they should do; but sought the knowledge of it after the 
common way, like the rest of the world. So that he despaired of doing 
any good upon them, and all his hopes of amending them were defeated, 
because they were not willing to receive what he taught them. 

116. And afterw^ards, taking a view of the several ranks and orders 
of men, he perceived that eveiy sort of them placed their delight in 
those things which they possessed at present, and that their appetites 
were their God[s], and that they lest themselves in gathering up the little 
things of this world; and that the desire of getting more, kept them 
employed till they came to their graves; and that all good counsel was 
lost upon them ; and that disputing with them had only this effect, that 
it made them all the more obstinate. And as for Wisdom, there was no 
way for them to attain it, neither had they any share in it. « For folly 
has overwhelmed them, and what they have sought after has covered 
their hearts Hke rust ; God has sealed up their hearts and their ears, and ' 
their eyes arc dim, and they shall have sore punishment ». (Surahs 2 
and 83). ^C- ^t^^tbutj'.. t^^ x' /^, 

117. When therefore he saw them compassed about with the 
curtains of punishment, and covered with the darkness of the veil ; and 
that all of them — a few only excepted — minded their religion no 
otherwise, but with regard to this present world ; and cast the observance 
of religious performances behind their backs, notwithstanding the easiness 
of them, and sold them for a small price; and that their merchandize 
and trading diverted them from thinking upon God, so that they had no 
fear of « that Day (1) in which both their hearts and eyes shall be turned 
round » ; he was fully satisfied that it was to no purpose to speak to them 
plainly, neither that it was expedient any works should be enjoined 
[upon] them beyond this measure ; and that the greatest benefit which 
accrued to the common sort of men by the Law, was wholly placed in 
relation to things of this world, viz., that they might be in a comfortable 
way of living, and that no man might invade another's property ; and 

(1) Also a quotation from the Quran, and designed to express the 
confusion which the Wicked shall be in at the Day of Judgment. *< 

- 68 — 
that there was but here and thoie one that attained to happiness here- 
after ; namely, such an one as made it his business in this world to 
provide for another, and Look due care about it, and' was a believer; 
But that hell was the place for him that erred from the truth, and 
preferred the life of this present v^'orld before it. And What labor can 
be greater, or what misery more coiiiplele than his, who works, if you 
observe, from the time he awakes, till he goes to sleep again, you will 
find that he does nothing but what lends to the attaining of some one 
or other Of these vile sensible things ; namely, either riches, to heap them 
up ; or pleasure, which he may take ; or lust, which he may satisfy ; or 
revenge, whereby he may pacify his mind; or power, to defend himself; 
or some outward work commanded by the Law, whereof he may make a 
vain-glorious show ; or whereby he may save his own neck ? « Now, all 
these things are darkness upon darkness in the depth of the sea, neither 
is ihere any of you that doth not enter in thither, for such is the un- 
changeable decree of the Lord » . (Surahs 24; 19). 

118. And when he understood the condition of mankind, and that 
the greatest part of them were like brute boasts, he knew that all wisdom, 
direction, and good success, consisted in what the messengers of God had 
spoken, and the Law delivered ; and that there was no other way besides 
this, and that there could be nothing added to it; and that there were 
men appointed to every work, and that every one was best capable of 
doing that unto which he was appointed by [his] nature. That this was 
God's way of dealing with those which were gone before, and that there 
is no change in His way. Whereupon returning to Salaman and his 
friends, he begged their pardon for what he had said to them, and desired 
to be excused, and told them that he was of the same opinion with them, 
and went on in the same way, and persuaded them to stick firmly to 
their resolution of keeping within the bounds of the Law, and the per- 
formance of the external rites, and that they should not much dive into 
the things that did not concern them : and that in doubtful things they 
should give credit, and yield their assent readily ; and that they should 
abstain from novel opinions, and from their appetites, and follow the 
examples of their pious ancestors, and forsake novelties, and that they 
should avoid that neglect of religious performances which was seen in 
the vulgar sort of men, and the love of the woiid, which he principally 
cautioned them against. For both he and his friend Asal knew that this 
tractable, but defective sort of men, had no other way in the world to 
escape, but only by this means ; and that if they should be raised above 
this to curious speculations, it would be worse with them, and they 
would not be able to attain to the degree of the Blessed, but would 
fluctuate and be tossed up and down, and make a bad end. But on the 
contrary, if they continued in that state in which they were till death 
overtook them, they should be happy, and stand on the right hand : 
But as for those that out-went them, they should also take place of 
them, and that they should be the next. 

119. So Ihey took thieir. leave and' left them, and" soTiglit ior an 

opportunity of returning to their is'and, till it pleased God to help them 
to a conveniency of passing. And Hayy b. Yaqzftn endeavored to attain 
to his lofty station, by the s;inif mi'uns he had sought it at first, till he 
recovered it ; and Asal followed his steps, till he came near him, or 
wanted but very httle of it ; and thus they continued serving God in this 
island till they died. 

120. This is that — God help thee and us by His Spirit — which 
we have received of the history of Quick-Alive son of Wide-Awake, Asal, 
and Salaman ; which comprehends such choice of words as are not found 
in any other book, nor heard in common discourse. It is a piece of 
hidden knowledge which none can receive but those which have the 
knowledge of God, nor can any be ignorant of it but those which have 
not. Now we have taken a contrary method to our pious ancestors, as 
to their reservedness in this matter, and sparingness of speech. The 
reason which did the more easily persuade me to divulge this secret, and 
tear the veil, whs because of the false and corrupt notions which some 
pretenders to philosophy in our Age have broached and scattered 
[disseminated], so that they are diffused throughout several countries, 
and the mischief which aii,=cs from thence is become epidemic. Fearing 
therefore lest those weak ones, who reject the Tradition of the prophets, 
of blessed memory, and make choice of that which is delivered them by 
fools, should imagine that these opinions are that Secret which ought to 
be with-held from those who are not worthy or capable of it, and so 
their desire and study of these opinions should be increased, I have 
thought good to give them a giimpse of this secret of secrets, that I 
might draw them into the right way, and avert them from this other. 
Nevertheless, I have not so delivered the secrets, which are comprehended 
in these few leaves, as to leave them without a thin veil or cover over 
them, which will be easily rent by those who are worthy of it; but will 
be so thick to him that is unworthy to pass beyond it, that he shall not 
be able to get through it. And I desire of those of my brethren who 
shall aee this discourse that they would excuse me for being so easily 
induced to explain it, and so free in the description of it ; seeing I had 
not done so, if I had not been elevated to such heights as transcend the 
reach of human sight. And I was willing to express it in easy terms, 
that I might dispose men, and raise a desire in them to enter mto the 
right way" And I beg of God pardon and forgiveness, and that He would 
please to bring us to the true aud certain knowledge of Himself, for he 
is gracious and liberal of His favors. 

.Peace be to thee, my Brother, whose promotion is decreed, and the 
mercy and blessing of God be upon thee. 

Praise be to God alone >. 

WHAT IS A gUFY? 

[Extract froni T. H. Weir's --The Shaikhs ol Morocco In the XVIth 
Century », Edinburgh, George A. Morton, 1904: Introduction, pp. 32 — 35J. 

A Soofee is one who seeks to know God directly, not through a 
third person nor through a book. No person who is content with the ' 
theology of the shoolmen, or who is satisfied to accept his faith on the 
authority of others, wll feel the need of anything higher. He who refuses 
to accept the popular faith on mere credit, and demands a personal 
knowledge of religious matters, before they are anything to him, is called 
a «murid», which is the equivalent of the Latin «studens», i.e. one who 
wishes to know, an enquirer ; or else a « talib », or seeker, student. He 
is represented as having set out upon a journey or path, the goal of 
which is the knowledge of the Truth — that is, of God. 

The first care of the seeker after truth, who is setting out upon this 
journey, is to find a shaykh who will act as guide. Having found his 
shaykh, the disciple or « companion » must cease to have any will or 
initiative of his own , becoming in the hands of his shaykh — to use the 
grim formula — « like a corps in the hands of the washer », [sicut 
cadaver]. His obedience must be absolute, and he must be able to 
endure any test to which his shaykh chooses Lo subject him. The in- 
struction of the shaykh is given by means of text-books, or orally, or by 
a sort of hypnotism. The object aimed at is not to impart information, 
although that is implied, but to produce an elevated and semi-ecstatic 
condition of mind ; and the knowledge of God which is hoped for is not 
so much a mental or sensuous perception as a sense of union of soul 
with God. Union with God (wical) is the highest aim of the Mystic, and 
he who attains to a sense of it is said to «kno\v God -, or simply to 
Know. 

In Soofee parlance phenomenal existence is conceived of as a veil, 
which conceals the Truth from man's view. What Ibn 'Askar saw when 
the veil was rent was that Archetypal Beauty, of which every impression 
of the beautiful which the mind experiences in this life is only a remi- 
niscence. In the realm of dreams, too, it is possible for the soul to cast 
off this veil of existence, and to behold reality with unclouded eyes. 
According to a traditional saying of the Prophet Muhammad, the only 
revelation vouclisafed to men after his time was to take the form of 
« true dreams*. And, accordingly, certain kinds of dreams are accepted 
as equivalent to visions or revelations. 

The highest station on the mystic path is named "poiehood', and 
he who attains to il is called a « pole » or «axis». Many mystics are 
recognized in different countries as having reached this station. 

APPENDIX, 

in which the 

Author's Notion concerning the Possibility of a Man's Attaining 

to the True Knowledge of God, and Things Necessary 

to Salvation, without the Use of External Means, 

is briefly considered : 

by Simon Ockley, M. A., Vicar of Swavesey in Cambridgshire, 

Reprinted, from the LONDON Edition 
of 1708, 

with slight changes, 

BY 

Edward A. van Dyck, 

For the Use of his Pupils, at 

CAIRO, Egypt: 1905 

GOWTEHTS 

1, 2. The Occasion and Design of this Discourse. 

3, 4, 5. God's Way of Teaching His People was by Prophets. 
6, 7. Prophecy not attained by any Application or Industry, but 

depended upon the Positive Will of God. 

8. And consequently the Vision of God, cr beholding the Divine 

Being, which is superior to Prophesying, cannot be so at- • 
tained. 

9. That it was never mentioned as attainable, nor the Search of 

it recommended by the Prophet Moses, 

10. Nor any other Prophets that succeeded him. 

11. What was not enjoyed in the early times of Christianity, when 

Gifts of the Spirit were more plentifully poured out, cannot 
be expected now. 

12. But such a Power, whereby a man might, without External 

Helps, attain to the true knowledge of God, and things 
necessary to Salvation was nowhere promised by Jesus 
Christ our Saviour, 

13. Nor enjoyed by devout persons in the first times of the Gospel 

Dispensation ; which is proved from the example of the 
Eunuch , 

14. And Cornelius. 

16. The whole Tenor of the Apostles' Doctrine forbids us to expect 

the Vision of God in this life ; 

16. From all which is inferred that those Scriplureis, which speak 

of the plentiful Effusion of the Spirit in the Gospel times, 
are misunderstood by enthusiasts. 

17. Why we are not to expect Prophets now. 

18. If these things are denied to Christians, they are not to be 

found amongst Heathens, nor even amongst Muslims. 
19,20,21, The enthusiasm of our Author, Ibn Tufayl, and others censured. 
22, Conclusion. 

APPENDIX &c. 

1. Though the preceding history, upon the acconnt of the hvely'^ 
image and representation which it gives of unspotted virLue, unfeigned ' 
love of God, and contempt of the things of this Ufe, does very well deserve 
to be read : So, as it contains several things co-incident with the errors 
of some enthusiasts of these present times, it deserves to be considered 
Upon which account, I hr.d no sooner suffered myself to be persuaded 
ta undertake the translation of this book, than I determined to subjoin 
some reflections upon such part of it as seemed to me most worthy of 
consideration. Lest otherwise, that book which was by me designed for the 
innocent, and not altogether unprofitable diversion of the reader, might 
accidentally prove a means of leading some into error, who 'are not 
capable of judging aright ; and of confirming others in their mistakes, 
who through their own weakness, or the prejudice of a bad education', 
have the misfortune to be led out of the way. And I was the more 
willing to do it, because there has been a bad use made of this book 
before, 

^ 2. There are a great many errors both in his Philosophy and~\ 
Divinity : And it was impossible it should be otherwise, the one being *- 
altogether Aristotelian, the other Muhammadan. I shall pass over the 
greatest part of them, as not being likely to do any harm ; and confine 
myself chiefly to the examination of this Fundamental Error of my Author, 
namely, (*) That God has given such a power or faculty to man, whereby 
he may, without any external means, attain to the knowledge of all things 
necessary to Salvation, and even to the Beatific Vision itself, whilst in 
this (1) state : In doing which I shall still have regard to the errors 1 
received concerning these things in the present Age. -^ 

3. In order to this I shall examine the ways and means by which 
the People of God, in all Ages, came to the understanding of His Will. Now 
it is evident, from the absurd notions which the ancient heathens had of 
the Deity, and their idolatry, that mankind was so far degenerated and 
depraved, that they had lost the true knowledge of God, and of His 
attributes, and consequently were ignorant of their duty towards Him ; 
for which reason God was pleased, out of His infinite love and mercy 
towards mankind, to send at sundry times Prophets ; that is, men who 
were inspired by the Holy Spirit, and had the Will of God immediately- 
revealed to them ; to the end that they might instruct otherd how to 
serve Him (the ancient Tradition received from our First Parents, and 
those good men which succeeded them, being now almost worn out and 
over-grown by the increasing wickedness of the world) and thereby 
avoid those judgments which would otherwise infallibly overtake them, if 
they continued in impenitence and disobedience [to His Holy Will]. 

4. This was the means which the Generality of the People of God 

(*) Note : See 84, 85, etc. " ~~~ 

(1) This state of our life here on earth before death of body. 

10 

- 74 - 

had to know His Will. They received it from the Prophets, who had 
it immediately from God. So that the difference of their knowledge 
consisted in the manner of their receiving of it, not in the things received, 
which were the same both to the Prophets and the People. Only the 
Prophets received it immediately, but not the People : for then 
consequently they would all have been prophets, which it is plain they 
were not. 

5. And when it had pleased God to give a clearer and fuller Revelation 
of His Will to the prophet Moses; what was delivered to him was 
committed to the care of the priests, of whom both king and people were 
obliged to learn their duty. Deuteronomy, chap. 17, v. 18: « And it 
shall be when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall 
write him a copy of ttiis Law in a book, out of that which is before the 
priests the Levites, and it shall be with hiin, and he shall read therein 
all the days of his Hfe, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to 
keep all the words of this Law, and these statutes, to do them ». And in the 
book of the prophet Malachi, chap. 11, v. 7 : « The priests' lips should 
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he 
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts ». So that they were not to seek 
after any other more perfect manner of worship than what was delivered 
in that Book, nor to expect that those truths or precepts, which were 
contained in it, should be revealed to them anew, either by any prophet 
living in their time, or by Immediate Revelation ; but to draw all their 
instructions from the aforesaid helps. And accordingly, we never find 
any of the prophets making any alteration in the Law, or calling the 
people to a more perfect way of worship. From whence it is plain that 
they were well assured of its sufficiency, till the Messiah, who was to 
complete it, should come ; and their never bidding the people to look for 
any other way of teaching than what was to be had from that Book and 
the mouth of the priests, proves evidently that they knew those means 
to be sufficient. 

6. Thus we have seen which way the generality of the people of 
God were taught ; let us now examine by what means the prophets attained 
their faculty of prophesying, and wherein it did consist. Now it is most 
certain that the faculty of prophesying cannot be nttained by any Appli- 
cation or Improvement of our [natural] Abihties whatsoever, but depends 
wholly and entirely upon the Positive Will of God, who upon important 
and weighty occasions, in his own due time, and to such persons as 
seem best in his infinite wisdom, does send such as he is pleased to set 
apart and qualify for that service, by the Inspiration of His Holy Spirit. 
Second Epistle of Peter, chap. 1, v. 21 : «For Prophecy came not in 
old time by the will of man ; but holy men of God spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost ». It must not be denied but that a sober, 
righteous and godly life, a heavenly conversation, and a keeping of 
ourselves pure both in body and spirit, are excellent means to invite the 
Holy Spirit to dwell in and abide with us. And this is agreeable to^ right 
notions of the Purity of God, and his love of that which is Good, and 

— 7S — 
abhorrence of that which is Evil : It is confirmed by right Reason, the 
testimony of ancient Churches, and Holy Scripture itself. But then the 
question is. How does God dwell in those that are His ? Certainly not 
so as to make Prophets of them, but to strengthen them in their Holy 
Resolutions, and enable them to perform such things as tend most to His 
Glory, and their own Salvation. And upon a due examination, we shall 
find that this IS all which the greatest number by far of godly men ever 
attained ; who notwithstanding must by no means be accused of sloth- 
fulness in not approving their talent, nor of being wanting in their 
endeavors to make the nearest Approaches to God that they were 
capable of. 

7. This will appear further, if we consider that those means which 
were used by holy persons of Old, in order to the improvement of 
themselves or others, in the exercise of piety and religion, cannot upon 
any account be reckoned as means of their becoming prophets. Though 
Samuel was dedicated to the service of God from his birLh, and it pleased 
God to choose him for a prophet; yet there is no question to be made, 
but that there were several others so dedicated, which did never prophesy. 
Though Daniel (1) was heard < from the first day that he did set his 
heart to understand, and to chasten himself before God», and had an 
angel sent to him with a revelation, yet cannot that discipUning of himself 
be in any wise accounted a Cause of that revelation ; for if it were, the 
same method would produce the same effect in another man. And 
although there were particular advantages in being a member of the 
College of Prophets ; as the Prophet Amos intimates in cha. 7, v. 14, 
where he says, «I was no prophet, nor a prophet's son> — which must 
be interpreted The Scholar of a prophet, for the scholars of the prophets 
are. always called Sons of the Prophets in Scripture — yet none of these 
means were sufficient to help men to the Gift of Prophecy. The pious 
parents thought it a very good way of improving their children in the 
fear and love of God, and the knowledge of His Will, to have them 
brought up under those holy and exemplary men the prophets ; and 
accordingly they waited upon them, went on errands, and did their 
service ; at the same time enjoying the great advantage of their example 
and discourse. And according to their example, even after Prophesy had 
ceased among the Jews, the eminent men and chief Doctors of the Law 
had their scholars and disciples, more or fewer, according to the credit 
and esteem of the master. So that our Blessed Savior's choosing his 
twelve disciples, was no new thing among the Jews, but had been 
practised all along, since those Schools of the Prophets. But never did 
any one imagine that these means of disciphne, or any other, were steps 
to the attaining the Gift of Prophecy, which always depended, not upon 
men's acquirements or improvements in that which is good, but upon the 
Positive Will of God. 

8. Now if, as appears from what is already said, God has not 
afforded to man any means whereby he can attain to the more inferior 

(1) Daniel, chap. 10, v. 12. 

— 76 — 

^degree of pTophecy, whicli consists in having only some part of his Will 
revealed,; and that not constantly or habitually, but as occasion serves : 
How vain and fond is it then for any one to imagine that He has given 
him a Capacity of enjoying His Presence as He is, and of Seeing (1) all 
things in Him ? Which is as much above the attainments of the greatest 
prophets as theirs is above the weakest of men. For, if we consider, 
we shall find that the prophets' business consisted in delivering a 
particular message to one or more ; the contents of which sometimes they 
received by day (2), which sort of vision is called in Hebrew 'j^ 
machazeh, or '^y march, or else by night in a dream, and this sort was 
called fjl=- halOm, a dream, or ■^L.UU j^j^ hazyon hallayelah, a nocturnal 
vision. But what is either or both these to the Intuition of the Divine 
Presence ? There is as much difference as there is between a great 
Courtier and a Favorite who, when he pleases, enjoys the presence of his 
Prince, and one who is only now and then sent by him on an errand. 
And yet to such a degree of enthusiasm have some gone, as our Author 
here in particular, and several more of the same strain in those fortiier 
Ages, and the Quietists and other mystics and enthusiasts in our times, 
that nothing will down with him less than the Intuition of the Divine 
Being, and they despise Meditation (3) as a mean thing, and too much 
below one that aspires to Perfection. And this, it seems, is attainable 
by apphcation and continued exercise ; whereby they have at once set 
all mankind in a capacity of out-doing infinitely the ancient prophets 
who, if they had known anything of this way, would certainly not have 
been so sparing of it in their Writings, especially when their business 
was to labor for the benefit and instruction of mankind. But there is 
not one word in all their writings which favors this opinion, from whence 
we may safely conclude that they had no such notion ; and yet it must 
not be in the least doubted but that they were thoroughly -acquainted 
with the Will of God, and knew more of His secret counsel than any 
other men in the world whatsoever. 

9. It must needs be acknowledged by us Christians, as well as by 
the Jews, that Moses was without' controversy the greatest prophet that 
ever appeared upon earth before our Savior's time, and had the most 
frequent and greatest revelations of the Divine Will. For although it 
was a singular favor which God vouchsafed the other prophets, in com- 
municating to them some of the secrets of His purposes ; yet Moses was 
the man whom God chose to be the instrument of the deliverance Of 
His people Israel, by such convincing signs and wonders as were 
undeniable evidences ef the Divine Power by which they were wrought, 
and who was not only to be God's messenger to His people in some few 
particulars, but the immediate receiver of that Law and all the Economy, 
both ecclesiastical and civil, by which God's people were to be governed, 
without any addition or dim^nulioil, so many hundred years, till the 

(1) See sections 90 etc. (2) Muimonides in Pococldi Porta Mosis, 
p. 171. (3) See the Letter concerning the Quietists, printed with the B. 
of Sarum's Letters, 

— 77 — 

Coming of the promised Messiau. God Himself bears witness to this, in 
the Book of Numbers chap. 12, v. 6 : .If there be a prophet among 
you, ] the Lord will make J'lyself known unto him in a vision, and will 
speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful 
in all mine House. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even ap- 
parently, and not in dark speeches, and the Similitude of the Lord shall 
he behold*. Now Moses had not been faithful in God's House, if he had 
not revealed the whole Will of God to His people, as it was deUvered to 
him; which most certainly he did. But how? Why, he commands the 
people thus : Deuteronomy chap. 6, v. 17 : . You shall diligently keep 
the commandments of the Lord your God, and His testimonies and His 
statutes which He hath commanded thee » ; which were no doubt the very 
same which he had received upon Mount Sinai. Nor did this holy man, 
this « faithful servant in God's House ~ , ever recommend or so much as 
hint any such service of God as is dreamed of by our Mystics, or give 
the least encouragement for any to hope for the the Gift of Prophecy, 
or an Intuition or Beholding the Divine Being in this state [of our life 
this side the grave]. And yet it is certain that both Moses himself, and 
multitudes of others after him, were heavenly-minded men, and did that 
■which was acceptable in the sight of God, and shall be partakers of 
Everlasting Glory. 

10. Nor did any of the prophets which came after him ever advance 
any such refined way of worship ; but constantly blamed the people for 
not observing the law of Moses, and neglecting the statutes and ordinances 
which he had left them. And the sum of their prophecies consists eithel' 
in Exhorting, Reproving, Promising, or Threatening, and some Hints of 
the Messiah. But not one syhable coT^cerning any such abstracted 
worship, nor any mention made of men's attaining the Beatific Vision. 
Notwithstanding which, there have been, and still are, many deluded souls 
who imagine that the warm conceptions of distempered brains are a great 
measure of that Holy Spirit by which the old prophets spake ; and pretend 
to such a familiarity and intimate conversation with God ; to such an 
entire communication and intercourse, that they might, if what they said 
were true, seem to be glorified spirits, rather than prophets subject to 
the like infirmities with other men ; and to have left the Church Mihtant 
to take their place in the Triumphant. Not considering that all this is 
only a pleasing sort of an amusement, a fool's paradise, and grounded 
upon no better reason or foundation than the man that was distracted 
had to fancy himself an emperor, and all that came about him his 
subjects. These men do not consider that we live in such an A^e of the 
world as we are not to expect such extraordinary Effusions of the Spirit : 
All that we can reasonably expect, or that God has promised, is to give 
His Holy Spirit to those that ask it of Him ; that is, so to guide them by 
His gracious assistance as that they may overcome their spiritual enemies, 
and be crowned hereafter with glory • and immortality ; which certainly 
ought to content any reasonable man, without aspiring to Immediate 
Revelation, Prophecy, obtaining the Vision of God, and such hke things, 

— 78 — 
which God has denied to us whilst in this state [of life before death]. 

11, Indeed, if it were in Religion, as in Arts and Sciences, it might 
with much more reason have been expected, that considering the vast 
distance of time since the first planting of the Christian Rehgion to this 
present Age, we might have been improved to a Degree of Prophecy. 
For Arts and Sciences receive their beginnings from very small hints at 
first, and are afterwards improved proportionably to the industry and 
capacity of those who cultivate them ; and therefore we may reasonably 
expect that the longer they continue, the more they will be advanced. 
But the case is vastly different in Religion, which is always best and 
purest at its fl^st setting out. And there is a very good reason to be 
given why it should be so ; for after the first Covenant made by God 
witli mankind in the person of Adam, every other Dispensation has found 
men under a state of corruption, and in the actual profession of errors 
diametrically opposite to those truths which it came to instruct them in; ^ 
and therefore it was requisite that the means to remove these at first 
should bear proportion with the difficulties they were to encounter. Upon 
which account, at the beginning of any new Dispensation, those persons 
whom God was pleased to employ to publish it to mankind, have been 
endued with more zeal and greater abililies than the professors of the 
same rehgion in after Ages. And as no person can doubt but that the 
Jewish religion was much more perfect in the days of Moses, and those 
which immediately succeeded him, than in after times, when it was 
obscured and mudded by Pharisaical inventions and traditions : So must 
it also be confessed that the Christian religion was much more perfect 
in the davs of the Apostles, and the ages immediately succeeding them, 
than since it has been obscured by the interest of the designing on the 
one hand, and the prejudice and ignorance of the Unlearned on the 
other. And this is what is plainly confessed by the practice of most . 
contending Parties amongst the professors of Christianity; who constantly 
make their appeals to the earliest Writers of the Primitive Christian 
Church, and use all means to bring them over to their own side ; which 
is an evident concession that they value their authority, and look upon 
them as the most competent judges of their controversies. Now, if I 
shall make it appear that there was no such thing as is contended for 
by our enthusiasts, in those early times, Avhen the Holy Spirit must be 
confessed on all hands to be more plentifully poured out than in the 
succeeding Ages; I hope it will appear. evidently to any unprejudiced 
person that it is not at all to be expected under the Christian 
Dispensation. 

12. To begin therefore with our Blessed Savior himself. It is evi- 
dent that he never recommended any such way of worshipping God as 
is contended for by the Mystics, nor promised to reward the most sincere 
of his followers with the Vision of God whilst in this state (of sinfulness). 
As for his own hfe, which is certainly the most perfect pattern, it was 
Active to the greatest degree ; and bating some times of retirement, to 
pray or the like, was wholly spent in conversation and doing good to 

— 79 — 

others. Then as to the substance of his doctrine, it consisted in acquain- 
ting the Jews that he himself was the Messiah, whose Coming was so 
long ago, and so often foretold by the ancient prophets. He also acquain- 
ted them with the nature of his office and mediatorship, and showed them 
how mightily they were mistaken in their interpretations of the prophets 
concerning him. He let them know that, contrary to their expectation, 
his kingdom was not of this world ; but that his business was to bring 
men out of darkness to light, and from the bondage and slavery of sin, 
to the liberty of the sons of God. Ho taught them to abandon all ungodly 
lusts, and to set their hearts upon things above ; assuring them that, if 
they continued in his love, they should be rewarded with everlasting 
happiness. And lest his Disciples, and those Churches which should be 
planted by their ministry, should be destitute of necessary encouragement 
and help, he assures them, in mo.st endearing terms, of his love towards 
and care over them, and promises speedily to send them the Comforter, 
the Spirit of Troth (John's Gospel, chapters 13 to 18) which should not 
only assure them of his own and the Father's love towards them, but 
also enable them to work such miracles as should be sufficient to confirm 
the truth of their mission. But nowhere promises the enjoyment of the 
Beatific Vision here ; but bids them to expect their rev/ard hereafter ; as- 
suring them that «whither he went they could not follow him now, but 
should follow him afterwards*; and that "he went to prepare a place 
for them». Nor did he even mention his having purchased for mankind 
such a privilege as that they might, by diligently improving what was 
given them, come to God without any other means, but ratiier quite the 
contrary : for he says, John's Gospel eh. 14, v. 7, and Epistle to the 
Romans ch. 10, v. 17, 18 : « No man cometh to the Father but by me». 
Now certainly the way to come to Clirist is to believe in him ; which, 
according to the Apostle Saiat Paul, presupposes hearing him preached. 

13. And as our Blessed Saviour did never promise to reward the 
endeavors of sincere persons with such a pov.'er whereby they might 
attain, without any External Means, all things necessary to salvation, much 
less the Intuition or Beholding the Divine Presence whilst in this life ; 
so neither do we find that they either expected or enjoyed it. The me- 
thod of God in teaching his people was still the same as it ever had been, 
viz. by revealing His will to some few, in order to having it communi- 
cated by their ministry to others. And I desire any one that thinks 
otherwise to produce me one single instance of any person that came to 
the true knowledge of God and the necessary means of salvation, but by 
this way. The contrary is evident from the example of the Eunuch, 
Apostles' Acts ch . 8, who was a devout person and well disposed ; and 
we find his zeal and sincerity rewarded by God's sending to him a pro- 
per person to instruct him. 

14. Which is still further confirmed by th3 example of Cornelius, 
Acts eh. 10, who being « a devout man, and one that feared God with 
all his house, and gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God 
always », was so far accepted by God that He was graciously pleased to 

— 80 — 

provide means for his further instruction in his duty, and s©nt Peter to 
instruct him. Whereby He has plainiy pointed out to us the way by 
which He would have us seek for the knowledge of Him, to wit, by 
applying ourselves to such as He has appointed to teach His people. 
Accordingly wo find that Cornelius's alms and devotions, and incessant 
waiting upon God, did neither advance him to the Beatific Vision, nor 
so far as to have those truths presented to him by way of object, 
immediately, which were necessary to be believed by him in order to 
his salvation ; neither is he at all encouraged to look for or depend upon 
Vision or Intuition, but is sent to a man hke himself, to hear with his 
outward ears those things which concerned his Eternal \^^elfare. Whereas, 
if God had ever granted to mankind a power whereby he might, by due 
application and attention, attain to a sufficient knowledge of God and 
things necessary to salvation ; or, if such, a privilege, though witheld and 
denied before, had been purchased for men by Jesus Christ ;' there is no 
question but persons so extraordinarily well quahfied as these two good 
men, Cornelius and the Eunuch, were, would have enjoyed the benefit of 
it ; and then the event would have been that, by their constant attending 
upon God and their unwearied diligence in meditating and practising 
good things, they would have increased in spiritual knowledge, and made 
nearer approaches to God, till they had attained to Perfection. But we 
find nothing like this, but that on tlie contrary they were obhged to be 
instructed by the same means which God had apipoinied for other men. 

15. And then as to matter of Vision, the whole tenor of the 
Apostles' doctrine runs counter to it. Saint Paul tells us that all those 
ncble actions which were performed by the Ancient Worthies (Epistle to 
the Hebrews chap. 11) Avere done through Faith; which, as he himself 
defines it in verse 1, is r. The Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence 
of things, not seen :■ It is an assent which we give to things as true 
which we can neither apprehend by our senses, nor demonstrate by our 
reasoning ; so that the only objects of our fahh are such things, as. we 
receive upon the credit of another ; which how far it is from Vision, is 
evident to common sense. And the same Apostle tells us that « now we 
see through a glass darkly » ; and that * we know in part, and prophecy 
in part»; — see Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 13, verses 12 and 9. 

16.. Hence it is plain that all those texts which speak of the 
plentiful effusion of the Spirit in the times of the Gospel, are quite 
misunderstood by all those who interpret them after such a manner as 
if God had given such a measure of it to all mankind that, upon a due 
improvement of it, they might attain to the knowledge of Him and of all 
things necessary to salvation. Whereas it appears that, even in th« 
earUest times of the Gospel, there was no such thing ; but then all the 
Churches were planted by the ministry of the Apostles, who ordained 
others to succeed them in their offrce. If tliereforo in those "times,. it was 
not granted, it is a ridiculous absurdity to expect it in this Age ; and no 
small degree either of impudence or madness to pretend to it. 

n. Since it is not foreign to the matter in hand, the Reader will, 

— 81 — 

T. hope, pardon me if I digress a little, to show why we cannot reasonably- 

€xpeet prophets now. It seems to me that there are several reasons to 

be given why there should he prophets during the time of the Mosaic 

"Dispensation rather than after the Gospel had taken root. For, the 

promises made to the Jews having relation to their possessing the Land 

of Canaan, God was pleased to send to them prophets to quicken their 

memories, and keep them in mind of their duty, that thereby His 

judgments might be averted from them; (and especially, because of the 

prevaihng idolatry of those times ; for after they were well fixed in the 

practice of the true religion, and out of that danger, we find no prophets); 

and we find that most of the ancient prophecies tend that way. But now 

we are quite upon another bottom ; we are taught that ^ we have here 

no continuing city»; that « when these tabernacles shall be dissolved, we 

have a habitation not made with hands, eternal in the heavens ». That 

we are to « set our minds on things above, not on things on the Earth » ; 

ihat we are to « deny ourselves, and take up our cross and follow 

Christ*; that <• through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom 

of heavens, and many passages to the same effect. So that to have 

prophets foretelling future ovents, relating to the welfare nnd pieservation 

of our temporals, or tht- contrary, seems not so proper for n [leople whose 

very profession supposes I hem to have laid aside all soheitude concerning 

them. Again, before the Coming of Christ, God's will was but imperfectly 

revealed ; and it was necessary that there should be fore-runners to 

prepare the way against His Coming, and raise or awaken the expectation 

of him in the people, that they might be better prepared to receive him. 

But after He was once come who was to complete and fulfil all ; after 

« God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past 

unto the fathers by the prophets, had in these last days spoken unto us 

by His Son, whom He has appointed heir of all things, etc. , who was 

the biightness of His glory, and the express image of His person* , etc., — 

I say, after God had, by this Glorious Person, manifested and revealed 

His Whole Will to us, and declared whatsoever He required to be believed 

and done by us whilst in these Mortal Bodies ; there was no longer need 

of Revelation to those who had received the most perfect one that could 

be delivered. So that all those reasons being removed, which were to 

be given for a succession of immediately-inspired prophets before the 

coming of Christ ; it is altogether groundless, to say no worse of it, to 

■expect any now that he has come. What methods God will hereafter 

use, when His time is come, to bring in the Fulness of the Gentiles, and 

to convert the Jews; or what endowments He will bestow upon those 

persons whom He shall please to make use of as His instruments to 

complete that great work, will then be best known when it is come to 

pass. There is no question but that He will use sufficient means. All 

that I here contend for is, that those means which He has already afforded 

are abundantly sufficient for those who have the happiness to be baptized 

and brought up in the profession of the Christian Faith ; and consequently 

that it is unreasonable to expect any other helps, or to seek any other 

11 

— 82 — 

means of serving God than what are delivered in His Holy Word, and 
made use of in His Church. 

18. To return to our argument. If these things, contended for by 
enthusiasts, were not granted either under the Jewish or Christian 
I)ispensation, as I hope has been sufficiently proved ; it follows, a majori, 
that those who are deprived of those advantages, which both Jews and 
Christians enjoyed, cannot have them : And therefore in vain do we 
search for persons so endowed amongst Muslims or Heathens. For, 
without any breach of charity in respect to those persons who never 
were so happy as to have the Gospel preached to them ; we may assure 
ourselves that they do not enjoy equal privileges with us, who by our 
baptism have a federal right to all those helps of the Holy Spirit promised 
to the Church in the Holy. Scriptures. And yet there would not be mjjch 
difference if, by their diligently adhering to any principle or light which . 
God has bestowed upon mankind in general, they might attain to true 
saving knowledge. And for this reason, our Author who was himself a 
Muslim seems as little to have consulted the honor of his Prophet 
Muhammad, and the necessity of believing his doctrine, in feigning a. 
person, brought up by himself, to have by his unaided application and 
industry attained to the knowledge of all things revealed to that Arabian 
prophet, as our enthusiasts do value the means (1) which God has always 
used to convey His Will to mankind. Whilst out of a groundless charity 
they do in a manner put all men upon the same level as to the means 
of salvation. Which opinion of theirs, however plausible at first sight, 
upon account of that specious show of Universal Charity to-mankind, does 
most certainly tend to the undervaluing and lessening of those inestimable 
benefits which our Blessed Savior has purchased for, and promised to his 
Church ; and ought no more to be received than that charitable opinion 
of the early church doctor (teacher) Origen who believed that after a certain 
time of punishment not only the wickedest of men but also the devils 
themselves should be saved. 

.19. I have now shown that what is here held by our Author, and 
by too many others in our own times, has no manner of foundation. 
That it was never promised nor expected, either under the Mosaic or 
Christian Dispensation ; from whence I have inferred that it cannot be 
expected anywhere else, and consequently that there is no such thing at 
all. If I have not spoken all the while particularly to my Author, the 
reason is because I write to Christians, and have chiefly regard to those 
errors, held by some of that Denomination, which are common with those 
of our Author. Besides, if that were requisite, it is only allowing for 
argument's sake that the Quran was written by inspiration, and that 
Muhammad was a prophet, and then the same way of arguing proves the 
enthusiasm of our Author who, being a professed Muslim, and they being 
obliged to believe that Muhammad is the « Khatimatu-1-anbiya » , i. e.. 
The Seal of the Prophets, and that theirs is the last Dispensation which, 
mankind shall ever receive from God, has ventured to suppose the 

(1) See s.ection 109. ' 

— 83 — 
possibility of a man's attaining to the true knowledge of God, and things 
necessary to salvation, and all other things both spiritual and natural 
Belonging either to this world or that to come, without the Help of any 
Outward' Instruction. 

20. I need not insist upon this any longer ; I shall only remark 
that as true Piety is the same in all ages and climates, and good solid 
sense too, so is also Enthusiasm. And I have sometimes wondered', 
when I have read the whimsies and conceits of the Arab enthusiasts 
(whose numerous sects equal those heresies mentioned by Epiphanius (1), 
or even that plentiful crop which the Devil has sowed of them in our 
times) to find such a harmony between them and ours at present. Such 
a perfect agreement in their wild notions, and these expressed in the 
very self-same Cant, may easily convince any one that the instruments 
of both were strung and tuned by the same hand. Another thing 
observable is this : Let the Enthusiast have never such great abilities, 
there is always something or other \vhieh proves his pretensions to 
Revelation to be false ; and as they tell us that, let the Devil change 
himself into what shape he will, he can never conceal his Cloven Foot, 
so neither can the Enthusiast make himself pass for Inspired, with any 
person of tolerable discerning ; but there will appear some very conside- 
rable flaw which shall manifestly prove him to be a deceiver, or at least 
a person deceived. This is the fate of them ; and our Author could not 
avoid it. He has indeed carried his Philosopher beyond the Orb of Saturn 
(section 90); but he might as well have saved him that trouble; for he 
brought nothing down with him but what he himself was able to furnish 
him withal before he went, namely Muslim Divinity, and Aristotehan 
Philosophy. As to the former of these, I shall not need to say anything; 
but I am well assured that when he talked of those discoveries in the 
latter, made by him when he was in that glorious state, he never dreamed 
ia the least of those more certain discoveries which should be made 
afterwards by the sagacity of our astronomers and philosophers ; and that 
the contrary of what he believed, as to those things, should be proved 
by undeniable demonstration. 

21. -Nor does it succeed better with such pretenders in our Age; 
who, taught by woful experience, have of late grown more wary, and 
have rarely pretended to inspirations, except in such matters as they 
might be well assured of by other means. The safest way for them, I 
confess, though at the same time extremely absurd and ridiculous. For, 
if a man pretends to know a thing by divine inspiration, when there are 
other means of attaining it ; I have much more reason to think, either 
that he is an impostor and deceiver, or else that, through warmth of 
conceit or the delusion of the Devil, he imagines himself to be divinely 
inspired when he is not ; rather than to believe that God, who does 
nothing but for most wise and excellent ends and purposes should reveal 

(1) A Greek ecclesiastical writer, born in Palestine of Jewish 
parents, and broneht up hy Egyptian monks; Bishop in t;yprus, died 
403 A.D. 

a thing to any person immediately,, when He had before afforded him 
sufficient means of knowing it otherwise. 

22. It remains that we beg of God to give us His Grace, and the 
assistance of His Holy Spirit, that we may sincerely and heartily apply 
ourselves to the diligent use of those means which He has appointed for 
our instruction, in His Church ; that we seek for the knowledge of Him 
in His Holy Word, and approach to Him in His ordinances, and by a 
holy pious conversation'. These are the ways which He has chalked out 
for us; and if any persons will not be content with these means, but 
will walk in by-paths, and follow every ignis fatuus that presents itself; 
if they be at the last convinced of their fatal mistake when it is too late, 
they must blame themselves. God of His infinite mercy lead them out 
of their errors, and guide both them and ns through this imperfect state',' 
till at last we attain to the Perfect Vision and Full Enjoyment of Himself,' 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen. 

The End. 

PLEASURES OF PIEJY 

A Deity believed, is joy begun ; 

A Deity ador'd, is; joy advane'd ; 

A Deity belov'd, is joy matur'd . 

Each branch of piety delight inspires : 

Faith builds a bridge from this world to the next 

O'er death's dark gulf, and all its horror hides ; 

Praise, the sweet exhalation of our joy , 

That joy exalts, and makes it sweeter ^till ; 

Pray'r ardent opens heav'n, lets down a stream 

Of glory on the consecrated hour 

Of man in audience with the Deity. 

-S-e>SKO-5- 

Cornell University Library 
B748 .A16 1905 

improvement of human reason exhibited I 

olin 

3 1924 028 974 479