OUTLINES 

OF 

MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 

BY 

DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI 

THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 
OF CALIFORNIA 

GIFT OF 

Lt. Col. George White 

Add to 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 

K. J. BRILL, PRINTERS, LEYDEN, HOLLAND. 

OUTLINES 

OF 

MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 

BY 

DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI 

LONDON 

LUZAC AND COMPANY 

(OPPOSITE THE BRITISH MUSEUM) 

PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO. 
1907. 

PREFACE. 

The object of this book is twofold: (i) To refute 
the many wrong opinions which are entertained by 
Western critics concerning the fundamental teachings 
of Mahayana Buddhism ; (2) To awake interest among 
scholars of comparative religion in the development 
of the religious sentiment and faith as exemplified 
by the growth of one of the most powerful spiritual 
forces in the world. The book is therefore at once 
popular and scholarly. It is popular in the sense that 
it tries to expose the fallacy of the general attitude 
assumed by other religionists towards Mahayanism. 
It aims to be scholarly, on the other hand, when it 
endeavors to expound some of the most salient 
features of the doctrine, historically and systematically. 

In attempting the accomplishment of this latter 
object, however, the author makes no great claim, 
because it is impossible to present within this pres- 
cribed space all the data that are available for a 
comprehensive and systematic elucidation of the 
Mahayana Buddhism, whose history began in the 
sixth century before the Christian era and ran through 
a period of more than two thousand years before it 
assumed the form in which it is at present taught 
in the Orient. During this long period, the Mahayana 

928 

VI 

doctrine was elaborated by the best minds that India, 
Tibet, China, and Japan ever produced. It is no 
wonder then that so many diverse and apparently 
contradictory teachings are all comprised under the 
general name of Mahayana Buddhism. To expound 
all these theories even tentatively would be altogether 
outside the scope of such a work as this. All that I 
could or hoped to do was to discuss a few of the 
most general and most essential topics of Mahayanism, 
making this a sort of introduction to a more detailed 
exposition of the system as a whole as well as in 
particular. 

To attain the first object, I have gone occasionally 
outside the sphere within which I had properly to 
confine the work. But this deviation seemed imperative 
for the reason that some critics are so prejudiced 
that even seemingly self-evident truths are not com- 
prehended by them. I may be prejudiced in my own 
way, but very frequently I have wondered how com- 
pletely and how wretchedly some people can be made 
the prey of self-delusion. 

The doctrinal history of Mahayana Buddhism is 
very little known to Occidental scholars. This is 
mainly due to the inaccessibility of material which is 
largely written in the Chinese tongue, one of the 
most difficult of languages for foreigners to master. 
In this age of liberal culture, it is a great pity that 
so few of the precious stones contained in the religion 
of Buddha are obtainable by Western people. Human 
nature is essentially the same the world over, and 

VII 

whenever and wherever conditions mature we see 
the same spiritual phenomena; and this fact ever 
strengthens our faith in the universality of truth and 
in the ultimate reign of lovingkindness. It is my 
sincere desire that in so far as my intellectual attain- 
ment permits I shall be allowed to pursue my study 
and to share my findings with my fellow- beings. 

In concluding this prelude, the author wishes to 
say that this little book is presented to the public 
with a full knowledge of its many defects, to revise 
which he will not fail to make use of every oppor- 
tunity offered him. 

DAISETZ T. SUZUKI. 

CONTENTS. 

PREFACE . . v 

INTRODUCTION I 

(1) The Mahay ana and Htnayana Buddhism. Why the 
Two Doctrines? -- The Original Meaning of Mahay- 
ana. — An Older Classification of Buddhists. — Mahay- 
ana Buddhism defined I 

(2) Is the Mahay ana Buddhism the genuine teaching 
of Buddha ? No Life Without Growth — Mahayanism a 
Living Religion 1 1 

(3) Some Misstatements about the Mahayanism. Why 
Injustice Done to Buddhism. — Examples of Injustice. 
— Monier Monier- Williams. — Beal. — Waddell . . 16 

(4) The Significance of Religion. No Revealed Religion. 
- The Mystery. — Intellect and Imagination. — The 

Contents of Faith vary 24 

CHAPTER i. A GENERAL CHARACTERISATION OF BUDDHISM 32 

No God and No Soul. — Karma. — Avidya. — Non- 
atman. — The Non-atmanness of Things. — Dharma- 
kaya. — Nirvana. — Intellectual Tendency of Buddhism. 

CHAPTER n. HISTORICAL CHARACTERISATION OF MAHA- 
YANISM 60 

Sthiramati's Conception of Mahayanism. -- Seven 
Principal Features of Mahayanism. - - Ten Essential 
Features of Mahayanism. 

SPECULATIVE MAHAYANISM. 

CHAPTER in. PRACTICE AND SPECULATION . . . . 77 
Relation of Feeling and Intellect. - - Buddhism and 
Speculation. — Religion arid Metaphysics. 

CHAPTER iv. CLASSIFICATION OF KNOWLEDGE. . . 87 
Three Forms of Knowledge. — Illusion. — Relative 
Knowledge. -- Absolute Knowledge. — World-Views 
founded on the three Forms of Knowledge. — Trans- 
cendental Truth and Relative Understanding. 

CHAPTER v. BHUTATATHATA (SUCHNESS) 99 

Indefinability. — The "Thundrous Silence." — Such- 
ness Conditioned. — Questions Defying Solution. — The 
Theory of Ignorance. — Dualism and Moral Evil. 

CHAPTER vi. THE TATHAGATA-GARBHA AND THE ALAYA- 

VIJNANA 125 

The Garbha and Ignorance. — The Alaya-vijnana and 
its Evolution. — The Manas. — The Samkhya Philosophy 
and Mahayanism. 

CHAPTER vn. THF. THEORY OF NON- ATMAN OR NON-EGO 140 
Atman. -- Buddha's First Line of Inquiry. - - The 
Skandha. -- King Milinda and Nagasena. — Ananda's 
Attempts to Locate the Soul. — Atman and the "Old 
Man." — The Vedantic Conception. — Nagarjunaonthe 
Soul. — Non-atman-ness of Things. — Svabhava. — The 
Real Significance of Emptiness. 

CHAPTER vm. KARMA .181 

Definition. — The Working of Karma. — Karma and 
Social injustice. --An Individualistic View of Karma. 
- Karma and Determinism. — The Maturing of Good 
Stock and the Accumulation of Good Merits. — Immor- 
tality.. 

XI 

PRACTICAL MAHAYANISM. 

CHAPTER ix. THE DHARMAKAYA 217 

God. — Dharmakaya. -- Dharmakaya as Religious 
Object. - More Detailed Characterisation. — The 
Dharmakaya and Individual Beings. — The Dharmakaya 
as Love. — Later Mahayanists' View of the Dharmakaya. 

- The Freedom of the Dharmakaya. -- The Will of 
the Dharmakaya. 

CHAPTER x. THE DOCTRINE OF TRIKAYA. . . . 242 

The Human and the Super-human Buddha. -- An 
Historical View. — Who was Buddha ? — The Trikaya 
as Explained in the Suvarna-Prabha. — Revelation in 
All Stages of Culture. - - The Sambhogakaya. -- A 
Mere Subjective Existence. Attitude of Modern 

Mahayanists. — Recapitulation. 

CHAPTER xi. THE BODHISATTVA 277 

The Three Yanas. — Strict Individualism. — The 
Doctrine of Parivarta. - Bodhisattva in "Primitive" 
Buddhism. — We are all Bodhisattvas. — The Bud- 
dha's Life. — - The Bodhisattva and Love. — The 
Meaning of Bodhi and Bodhicitta. Love and 

Karuna. — Nagarjuna and Sthiramati on Bodhicitta. 

- The Awakening of the Bodhicitta. — The Bodhi- 
sattva's Pranidhana. 

CHAPTER xn. TEN STAGES OF BODHISATTVAHOOD .311 

Gradation in our Spiritual Life. -- Pramudita. - 
Vimala. -- Prabhakari. -- Arcismati. — Sudurjana. - 
Bhimukhi. - - Durangama. - - Acala. — Sadhumati. - 
Dharmamegha. 

XII 

CHAPTER xiu. NIRVANA 331 

Nihilistic Nirvana not the First Object. — Nirvana is 
Positive. — The Mahayanistic Conception of Nirvana. 
- Nirvana as the Dharmakaya. — Nirvana in its Fourth 
Sense. — Nirvana and Samsara are One. - The Middle 
Course. — How to Realise Nirvana. — Love Awakens 
Intelligence. -- Conclusion 

APPENDIX, HYMNS OF MAHAYANA FAITH. . . . 375 
INDEX 409 

INTRODUCTION. 

i. THE MAHAY ANA AND THE HINAYANA 
BUDDHISM. 

HPHE terms "Mahayana" and "Hinayana" may 
"*• sound unfamiliar to most of our readers, per- 
haps even to those who have devoted some time to 
the study of Buddhism. They have hitherto been 
induced to believe that there is but one form of 
Buddhism, and that there exists no such distinction 
as Mahayanism and Hinayanism. But, as a matter of 
fact, there are diverse schools in Buddhism just as 
in 'other religious systems. It is said that, within a 
few hundred years after the demise of Buddha, there 
were more- than twenty different schools, t all claiming 

1 According to Vasumitra's Treatise on the Points of Con- 
• tention by the Different Schools of Buddhism, of which there 
are three Chinese translations, the earliest being one by 
Kumarajiva (who came to China in A. D. 401), the first 
great schism seems to have broken out about one hundred 
years after the Buddha. The leader of the dissenters was 
Mahadeva, and his school was known as the Mahasangika 
(Great Council), while the orthodox was called the school 
of Sthaviras (Elders). Since then the two schools subdivided 
themselves into a number of minor sections, twenty of which 
are mentioned by Vasumitra. The book is highly interesting 
as throwing light on the early pages of the history of Bud- 
dhism in India. 

i 

2 INTRODUCTION 

to be the orthodox teaching of their master. These, 
however, seem to have vanished into insignificance 
one after another, when there arose a new school 
quite different in its general constitution from its 
predecessors, but far more important in its signifi- 
cance as a religious movement. This new school or 
rather system made itself so prominent in the mean- 
time as to stand distinctly alone from all the other 
schools, which latter became a class by itself. Essen- 
tially, it taught everything that was considered to 
be Buddhistic, but it was very comprehensive in its 
principle and method and scope. And, by reason of 
this, Buddhism was now split into two great systems, 
Mahayanism and Hinayanism, the latter indiscriminately 
including all the minor schools which preceded Ma- 
hayanism in their formal establishment. 

Broadly speaking, the difference between Mahayanism 
and Hinayanism is this : Mahayanism is more liberal 
and progressive, but in many respects too metaphys- 
ical and full of speculative thoughts that frequently 
reach a dazzling eminence : Hinayanism, on the other 
hand, is somewhat conservative and may be considered 
in many points to be a rationalistic ethical system 
simply. 

Mahayana literally means "great vehicle" and Hina- 
yana "small or inferior vehicle," that is, of salvation. 
This distinction is recognised only by the followers 
of Mahayanism, because it was by them that the 
unwelcome title of Hinayanism was given to their 
rival brethren, — thinking that they were more pro- 

INTRODUCTION 3 

gressive and had a more assimilating energy than 
the latter. The adherents of Hmayanism, as a matter 
of course, refused to sanction the Mahayanist doc- 
trine as the genuine teaching of Buddha, and insisted 
that there could not be any other Buddhism than 
their own, to them naturally the Mahayana system 
was a sort of heresy. 

Geographically, the progressive school of Buddhism 
found its supporters in Nepal, Tibet, China, Corea, 
and Japan, while the conservative school established 
itself in Ceylon, 1 Siam, and Burma. Hence the Maha- 
yana and the Hinayana are also known respectively 
Northern and Southern Buddhism. 

En passant, let me remark that this distinction, 
however, is not quite correct, for we have some 

1 The Anagarika Dharmapala of Ceylon objects to this 
geographical distinction. He does not see any reason why 
the Buddhism of Ceylon should be regarded as Hinayanism, 
when it teaches a realisation of the Highest Perfect Knowl- 
edge (Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi) and also of the six Virtues 
of Perfection (Paramita), — these two features, among some 
others, being considered to be characteristic of Mahayanism. 
It is possible that when the so-called Mahayanism gained 
great power all over Central India in the times of Nagarjuna 
and Aryadeva, it also found its advocates in the Isle of Lion, 
or at least the followers of Buddha there might have been 
influenced to such an extent as to modify their conservative 
views At the present stage of the study of Buddhism, how- 
ever, it is not yet perfectly clear to see how this took place. 
When a thorough comparative review of Pali, Singhalese, 
Tibetan, Sanskrit, and Chinese Buddhist documents is effected, 
we shall be able to understand the history and development 
of Buddhism to its full extent. 

4 INTRODUCTION 

schools in China and Japan, whose equivalent or 
counterpart cannot be found in the so-called Northern 
Buddhism, that is, Buddhism flourishing in Northern 
India. For instance, we do not have in Nepal or in 
Tibet anything like the Sukhavati sects of Japan or 
China. Of course, the general essential ideas of the 
Sukhavati philosophy are found in the sutra literature 
as well as in the writings of such authors as Agva- 
ghosa, Asanga, and Nagarjuna. But those ideas were 
not developed and made into a new sect as they 
were in the East. Therefore, it may be more proper 
to divide Buddhism into three, instead of two, geo- 
graphical sections: Southern, Northern, and Eastern. 

Why the two Doctrines? 

In spite of this distinction, the two schools, Hina- 
yanism and Mahayanism, are no more than two main 
issues of one original source, which was first discov- 
ered by (Jakyamuni ; and, as a matter of course, we 
find many common traits which are essential to both 
of them. The spirit that animated the innermost 
heart of Buddha is perceptible in Southern as well 
as in Northern Buddhism. The difference between 
them is not radical or qualitative as imagined by 
some. It is due, on the one hand, to a general unfold- 
ing of the religious consciousness and a constant 
broadening of the intellectual horizon, and, on the 
other hand, to the conservative efforts to literally 
preserve the monastic rules and traditions. Both 
schools started with the same spirit, pursuing the 

INTRODUCTION 5 

same course. But after a while one did not feel any 
necessity for broadening the spirit of the master and 
adhered to his words as literally as possible; whilst 
the other, actuated by a liberal and comprehensive 
spirit, has drawn nourishments from all available 
sources, in order to unfold the germs in the original 
system that were vigorous and generative. These 
diverse inclinations among primitive Buddhists natu- 
rally led to the dissension af Mahayanism and Hi- 
nayanism. 

We cannot here enter into any detailed accounts 
as to what external and internal forces were acting 
in the body of Buddhism to produce the Mah^yana 
system, or as to how gradually it unfolded itself so 
as to absorb and assimilate all the discordant thoughts 
that came in contact with it. Suffice it to state and 
answer in general terms the question which is fre- 
quently asked by the uninitiated: "Why did one 
Buddhism ever allow itself to be differentiated into 
two systems, which are apparently in contradiction 
in more than one point with each other?" In other 
words, "How can there be two Buddhisms equally 
representing the true doctrine of the founder?" 

The reason is plain enough. The teachings of a 
great religious founder are as a rule very general, 
comprehensive, and many-sided : and, therefore, there 
are great possibilities in them to allow various liberal 
interpretations by his disciples. And it is on this 
very account of comprehensiveness that enables fol- 
lowers of diverse needs, characters, and trainings to 

O INTRODUCTION 

satisfy their spiritual appetite universally and severally 
with the teachings of their master. This comprehensive- 
ness, however, is not due to the intentional use by the 
leader of ambiguous terms, nor is it due to the ob- 
scurity and confusion of his own conceptions. The 
initiator of a movement, spiritual as well as intel- 
lectual, has no time to think out all its possible 
details and consequences. When the principle of the 
movement is understood by the contemporaries and 
the foundation of it is solidly laid down, his own 
part as initiator is accomplished; and the remainder 
can safely be left over to his successors. The latter 
will take up the work and carry it out in all its 
particulars, while making all necessary alterations and 
ameliorations according to circumstances. Therefore, 
the role to be played by the originator is necessa- 
rily indefinite and comprehensive. 

Kant, for instance, as promoter of German philo- 
sophy, has become the father of such diverse philo- 
sophical systems as Jacobi's Fichte's, Hegel's, Scho- 
penhauer's, etc., while each of them endeavored to 
develop some points indefinitely or covertly or indi- 
rectly stated by Kant himself. Jesus of Nazareth, 
as instigator of a revolutionary movement against 
Judaism, did not have any stereotyped theological 
doctrines, such as were established later by Christian 
doctors. The indefiniteness of his views was so ap- 
parent that it caused even among his personal disci- 
ples a sort of dissension, while a majority of his 
disciples cherished a visionary hope for the advent 

INTRODUCTION. 7 

of a divine kingdom on earth. But those externali- 
ties which are doomed to pass, do not prevent the 
spirit of the movement once awakened by a great 
leader from growing more powerful and noble. 

The same thing can be said of the teachings of the 
Buddha. What he inspired in his followers was the 
spirit of that religious system which is now known 
as Buddhism. Guided by this spirit, his followers 
severally developed his teachings as required by their 
special needs and circumstances, finally giving birth 
to the distinction of Mahayanism and Hinayanism. 

The Original Meaning of Mahayana. 

The term Mahayana was first used to designate 
the highest principle, or being, or knowledge, of which 
the universe with all its sentient and non-sentient 
beings is a manifestation, and through which only 
they can attain final salvation (moksa or nirvana). 
Mahayana was not the name given to any religious 
doctrine, nor had it anything to do with doctrinal 
controversy, though later it was so utilised by the 
progressive party. 

Agvaghosa, the first Mahayana expounder known to 
us, living about the time of Christ, — used the 

term in his religio-philosophical book called Discourse 
on the Awakening of Faith in the Makdydna ' as 
synonymous with Bhutatathata, or Dharmakaya, 2 the 

1 Translated into English by the author, 1900. The Open 
Court Pub. Co. Chicago. 

2 These terms are explained elsewhere. 

8 INTRODUCTION 

highest principle of Mahayanism. He likened the 
recognition of, and faith in, this highest being and 
principle into a conveyance which will carry us safely 
across the tempestuous ocean of birth and death 
(samsara) to the eternal shore of Nirvana. 

Soon after him, however, the controversy between 
the two schools of Buddhism, conservatives and 
progressionists as we might call them, became more 
and more pronounced ; and when it reached its climax 
which was most probably in the times of Nagarjuna 
and Aryadeva, i. e., a few centnries after Acvaghosa, 
the progressive party ingeniously invented the term 
Hmayana in contrast to Mahayana, the latter having 
been adopted by them as the watchword of their 
own school. The Hinayanists and the Tirthakas * then 
were sweepingly condemned by the Mahayanists as 
inadequate to achieve a universal salvation of sentient 
beings. 

An Older Classification of Buddhists, 

Before the distinction of Mahayanists and Hinayanists 
became definite, that is to say, at the time of Nagar- 
juna or even before it, those Buddhists who held a 
more progressive and broader view tried to distinguish 
three yanas among the followers of the Buddha, viz., 
Bodhisattva-yana, Pratyekabuddha-yana, and (Jravaka- 
yana; yana being another name for class. 

1 Followers of any religious sects other than Buddhism. 
The term is sometimes used in a contemptuous sense, like 
heathen by Christians. 

INTRODUCTION 9 

The Bodhisattva is that class of Buddhists who, 
believing in the Bodhi (intelligence or wisdom), which 
is a reflection of the Dharmakaya in the human soul, 
direct all their spiritual energy toward realising and 
developing it for the sake of their fellow-creatures. 

The Pratyekabuddha is a "solitary thinker'' or a 
philosopher, who, retiring into solitude and calmly 
contemplating on the evanescence of worldly pleasures, 
endeavors to attain his own salvation, but remains 
unconcerned with the sufferings of his fellow-beings. 
Religiously considered, a Pratyekabuddha is cold, 
impassive, egotistic, and lacks love for all mankind. 

The Qravaka which means uhearer" is inferior in 
the estimate of Mahayanists even to the Pratyeka- 
buddha, for he does not possess any intellect that 
enables him to think independently and to find out 
by himself the way to final salvation. Being endowed, 
however, with a pious heart, he is willing to listen 
to the instructions of the Buddha, to believe in him, 
to observe faithfully all the moral precepts given by 
him, and rests fully contented within the narrow 
horizon of his mediocre intellect. 

To a further elucidation of Bodhisattvahood and 
its important bearings in the Mahayana Buddhism, we 
devote a special chapter below. For Mahayanism is 
no more than the Buddhism of Bodhisattvas, while 
the Prayekabuddhas and the (Jravakas are considered 
by Mahayanists to be adherents of Hinayanism. 

I o INTRODUCTION 

The Mahayana Buddhism Defined. 

We can now form a somewhat definite notion as 
to what the Mahayana Buddhism is. It is the Buddhism 
which, inspired by a progressive spirit, broadened its 
original scope, so far as it did not contradict the 
inner significance of the teachings of the Buddha, 
and which assimilated other religio-philosophical be- 
liefs within itself, whenever it felt that, by so doing, 
people of more widely different characters and intel- 
lectual endowments could be saved. Let us be satis- 
fied at present with this statement, until we enter 
into a more detailed exposition of its doctrinal 
peculiarities in the pages that follow. 

It may not be out of place, while passing, to remark 
that the term Mahayanism is used in this work 
merely in contradistinction to that form of Buddhism, 
which is flourishing in Ceylon and Burma and other 
central Asiatic nations, and whose literature is princi- 
pally written in the language called Pali, which comes 
from the same stock as Sanskrit. The term "Mahayana" 
does not imply, as it is used here, any sense of 
superiority over the Hinayana. When the historical 
aspect of Mahayanism is treated, it may naturally 
develop that its over-zealous and one-sided devotees 
unnecessarily emphasised its controversial and dogmat- 
ical phase at the sacrifice of its true spirit ; but the 
reader must not think that this work has anything 
to do with those complications. In fact, Mahayanism 
professes to be a boundless ocean in which all form 

INTRODUCTION I I 

of thought and faith can find its congenial and welcome 
home; why then should we make it militate against 
its own fellow -doctrine, Hinayanism? 

2. IS THE MAHAYANA BUDDHISM THE GE- 
NUINE TEACHING OF THE BUDDHA ? 

What is generally known to the Western nations 
by the name of Buddhism is Hinayanism, whose 
scriptures as above stated are written in Pali and 
studied mostly in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam. It was 
through this language that the first knowledge of 
Buddhism was acquired by Orientalists; and nat- 
urally they came to regard Hinayanism or Southern 
Buddhism as the only genuine teachings of the 
Buddha. They insisted, and some of them still in- 
sist, that to have an adequate and thorough knowl- 
edge of Buddhism, they must confine themselves 
solely to the study of the Pali, that whatever may 
be learned from other sources, i. e., from the Sans- 
krit, Tibetan, or Chinese documents should be con- 
sidered as throwing only a side-light on the reliable 
information obtained from the Pali, and further that 
the knowledge derived from the former should in 
certain cases be discarded as accounts of a degene- 
rated form of Buddhism. Owing to these unfortu- 
nate hypotheses, the significance of Mahayanism as 
a living religion has been entirely ignored; and even 
those who are regarded as best authorities on the 
subject appear greatly misinformed and, what is worse, 
altogether prejudiced. 

1 2 INTRODUCTION 

No Life Without Growth, 

This is very unfair on the part of the critics, be- 
cause what religion is there in the whole history of 
mankind that has not made any development what- 
ever, that has remained the same, like the granite, 
throughout its entire course? Let us ask whether 
there is any religion which has shown some signs of 
vitality and yet retained its primitive form intact 
and unmodified in every respect. Is not changeable- 
ness, that is, susceptibility to irritation the most 
essential sign of vitality? Every organism grows, 
which means a change in some way or other. There 
is no form of life to be found anywhere on earth, 
that does not grow or change, or that has not any 
inherent power of adjusting itself to the surrounding 
conditions. 

Take, for example, Christianity. Is Protestantism 
the genuine teaching of Jesus of Nazareth? or does 
Catholicism represent his true spirit? Jesus himself 
did not have any definite notion of Trinity doctrine, 
nor did he propose any suggestion for ritualism. 
According to the Synoptics, he appears to have 
cherished a rather immature conception of the king- 
dom of God than a purely ideal one as conceived 
by Paul, and his personal disciples who were just 
as illiterate philosophically as the master himself were 
anxiously waiting in all probability for its mundane 
realisation But what Christians, Catholics or Protes- 
tants, in these days of enlightenment, would dare 

INTRODUCTION 13 

give a literal explanation to this material conception 
of the coming kingdom ? 

Again, think of Jesus's view on marriage and social 
life. Is it not an established fact that he highly ad- 
vocated celibacy and in the case of married people 
strict continence, and also that he greatly favored 
pious poverty and asceticism in general? In these 
respects, the monks of the Medieval Ages and the 
Catholic priests of the present day (though I cannot 
say they are ascetic and poor in their living) must 
be said to be in more accord with the teaching of 
the master than their Protestant brethren. But what 
Protestants would seriously venture to defend all 
those views of Jesus, in spite of their avowed decla- 
ration that they are sincerely following in the steps 
of their Lord ? Taking all in all, these contradictions 
do not prevent them, Protestants as well as Catho- 
lics, from calling themselves Christians and even good, 
pious, devoted Christians, as long as they are con- 
sciously or unconsciously animated by the same 
spirit, that was burning in the son of the carpenter 
of Nazareth, an obscure village of Galilee, about two 
thousand years ago. 

The same mode of reasoning holds good in the 
case of Mahayanism, and it would be absurd to insist 
on the genuineness of Hinayanism at the expense of 
the former. Take for granted that the Mahayana 
school of Buddhism contains some elements absorbed 
from other Indian religio-philosophical systems; but 
what of it? Is not Christianity also an amalgama- 

14 INTRODUCTION. 

tion, so to speak, of Jewish, Greek, Roman, Babylo- 
nian, Egyptian, and other pagan thoughts? In fact 
every healthy and energetic religion is historical, in 
the sense that, in the course of its development, it 
has adapted itself to the ever-changing environment, 
and has assimilated within itself various elements 
which appeared at first even threatening its own ex- 
istence. In Christianity, this process of assimilation, 
adaptation, and modification has been going on from 
its very beginning. As the result, we see in the 
Christianity of to-day its original type so metamor- 
phosed, so far as its outward appearance is concern- 
ed, that nobody would now take it for a faithful 
copy of the prototype. 

Mahayanism a Living Faith. 

So with Mahayanism. Whatever changes it has 
made during its historical evolution, its spirit and 
central ideas are all those of its founder. The ques- 
tion whether or not it is genuine, entirely depends on 
our interpretation of the term "genuine." If we take 
it to mean the lifeless preservation of the original, 
we should say that Mahayanism is not the genuine 
teaching of the Buddha, and we may add that Ma- 
hayanists would be proud of the fact, because being 
a living religious force it would never condescend to 
be the corpse of a by-gone faith. The fossils, how- 
ever faithfully preserved, are nothing but rigid inor- 
ganic substances from which life is forever departed. 

INTRODUCTION 1 5 

Mahayanism is far from this ; it is an ever-growing 
faith and ready in all times to cast off its old gar- 
ments as soon as they are worn out. But its spirit 
originally inspired by the "Teacher of Men and Gods" 
($dstadevamanusyanam) is most jealously guarded 
against pollution and degeneration. Therefore, as far 
as its spirit is concerned, there is no room left to 
doubt its genuineness ; and those who desire to have 
a complete survey of Buddhism cannot ignore the 
significane of Mahay an ism. 

It is naught but an idle talk to question the histo- 
rical value of an organism, which is now full of vital- 
ity and active in all its functions, and to treat it 
like an archeological object, dug out from the depths 
of the earth, or like a piece of bric-a-brac, discov- 
ered in the ruins of an ancient royal palace. Mahay a- 
nism is not an object of historical curiosity. Its vital- 
ity and activity concern us in our daily life. It is a 
great spiritual organism ; its moral and 'religious for- 
ces are still exercising an enormous power over mil- 
lions of souls; and its further development is sure to 
be a very valuable contribution to the world-progress 
of the religious consciousness. What does it matter, 
then, whether or not Mahayanism is the genuine 
teaching of the Buddha ? 

Here is an instance of most flagrant contradictions 
present in our minds, but of which we are not 
conscious on account of our preconceived ideas. 
Christian critics vigorously insist on the genuineness 
of their own religion, which is no more than a 

1 6 INTRODUCTION. 

hybrid, at least outwardly ; but they want to condemn 
their rival religion as denegerated, because it went 
through various stages of development like theirs. 
It is of no practical use to trouble with this nonsen- 
sical question, — the question of the genuineness 
of Mahay anism, which by the way is frequently 
raised by outsiders as well as by some unenlightened 
Buddhists themselves. 

3. SOME MISSTATEMENTS ABOUT THE 
MAHAYANA DOCTRINES. 

Before entering fully into the subject proper of 
this work, let us glance over some erroneous opinions 
about the Mahayana doctrines, which are held by 
some Western scholars, and naturally by all uniniti- 
ated readers, who are like the blind led by the 
blind. It may not be altogether a superfluous work 
to. give them a passing review in this chapter and 
to show broadly what Mahayanism is not. 

Why Injustice is done to Buddhism. 

The people who have had their thoughts and sen- 
timents habitually trained by one particular set of 
religious dogmas, frequently misjudge the value of 
those thoughts that are strange and unfamiliar to 
them. We may call this class of people bigots or 
religious enthusiasts. They may have fine religious 
and moral sentiments as far as their own religious 
training goes ; but, when examined from a broader 
point of view, they are to a great extent vitiated 

INTRODUCTION. 1 7 

with prejudices, superstitions, and fanatical beliefs, 
which, since childhood, have been pumped into their 
receptive minds, before they were sufficiently devel- 
oped and could form independent judgments. This 
fact so miserably spoils their purityof sentiment and 
obscures their transparency of intellect, that they are 
disqualified to perceive and appreciate whatever is 
good and true and beautiful in the so-called heathen 
religions. This is the main reason why those Chris- 
tian missionaries are incapable of rightly understand- 
ing the spirit of religion generally — I mean, those 
missionaries who come to the East to substitute one 
set of superstitions for another. 

This strong general indictment against the Christian 
missionaries, however, is by no means prompted by 
any partisan spirit. My desire, on the contrary, is 
to do justice to those thoughts and sentiments that 
have been working consciously or unconsciously in 
the human mind from time immemorial and shall 
work on till the day of the last judgment, if there 
ever be such a day. To see what these thoughts and 
sentiments are, which, by the way, constitute the 
kernel of every religion, we must without any reluc- 
tance throw off all the prejudices we are liable to 
cherish, though quite unknowingly; and keeping 
always in view what is most essential in the religious 
consciousness, we must not confound it with its 
accessories, which are doomed to die in the course 
of time. 

1 8 INTRODUCTION. 

Examples of Injustice. 

As specimen of injustice done to the Mahayana 
Buddhism by Christian critics, we quote the following 
passages from Monier- William's Buddhism , Wad- 
dell's Buddhism in Tibet, and Samuel Deal's Buddhism 
in China, all of which are representative works each 
in its own field. 

Monier Monier- Williams. 

Monier Monier-Williams is a well- known authority 
on Sanskrit literature, and his works in this depart- 
ment will long remain as a valuable contribution to 
human knowledge. But, unfortunately, as soon as 
he attempts to enter the domain of religious contro- 
versy, his intellect becomes pitiously obscured by his 
preconceived ideas. He thinks, for instance, that the 
principal feature of Mahayanism consists merely in 
amplifying the number of Bodhisattvas, who are con- 
tented, according to his view, with their "perpetual 
residence in the heavens, and quite willing to put 
off all desires for Buddhahood and Parinirvana." 
(P. 190.) 

This remark is so absurd that it will at once be 
rejected by any one who has a first-hand knowledge 
of the Mahayana system, as even unworthy of refu- 
tation, but Monier-Williams takes special pains to 
give to his characterisation of the Mahayana doctrine 
a show of rational explanation. "Of course," says 
he, "men instinctively recoiled from utter self-annihi- 

INTRODUCTION. 1 9 

lation, and so the Buddha's followers ended in chan- 
ging the true idea of Nirvana and converting it from 
a condition of non-existence into a state of lazy 
beatitude in celestial regions (!), while they encour- 
aged all men — whether monks or laymen — to make 
a sense of dreamy bliss in Heaven (!), and not total 
extinction of life, the end of all their efforts." 
(P. 156.) 

This view of the Buddhist heaven as interpreted 
by Monier- Williams is nothing but the conception 
of the Christian heaven colored with paganism. Noth- 
ing is more foreign to Buddhists than this distin- 
guished Sankritist's interpretation of celestial exist- 
ence. The life of devas (celestial beings) is just as 
much subject to the law of birth and death as that 
of men on earth. What consolation would there be 
for the Mahayanists striving after the highest princi- 
ple of existence, only to find themselves transmi- 
grated to a celestial abode, that is also full of sor- 
rows and sufferings ? Always working for the welfare 
of their fellow-creatures, the Bodhisattvas never 
desire any earthly or heavenly happiness for them- 
selves. Whatever merits, according to the law of 
karma, there be stored up for their good work, they 
do not have any wish to enjoy them by themselves, 
but they will have all these merits turned over 
(parivarta) to the interests of their fellow-beings. 
This is the ideal of Bodhisattvas, i.e., of the followers 
of Mahayanism. 

2O INTRODUCTION. 

Beat. 

Samuel Deal who is considered by Western scholars 
to be an authority on Chinese Buddhism, refering to 
the Mahayana conception of Dharmakaya, * says in 
his Buddhism in China (p. 156): "We can have little 
doubt, then, that from early days worship was offered 
by Buddhists at several spots, consecrated by the 
presence of the Teacher, to an invisible presence. 
This presence was formulated by the later Buddhists 
under the phrase, 'the Body of the Law', Dhar- 
makaya." 

Then, alluding to Buddha's instruction that says 
after his Parinirvana the Law given by him should 
be regarded as himself, Beal proceeds to say : "Here 
was the germ from which proceeded the idea or 
formula of an invisible presence : teaching and power 
of the Law (Dharma) represented the Dharmakaya 
or Law-Body of Buddha, present with the order, and 
fit for reverence." 

To interpret Dharmakaya as the Body of the Law 
is quite inadequate and misleading. To the Hinaya- 
nists, there is nothing beside the Tripitaka as the 
object of reverence, and, therefore, the notion of the 
Body of the Law has no meaning to them. The idea 

1 The conception of Dharmakaya constitutes the central 
point in the system of Mahayanism, and the right compre- 
hension of it is ot vital importance. The Body of the Law, 
as it is commonly rendered in English, is not exact and leads 
frequently to a misconception of the entire system. The point 
is fully discussed below. 

INTRODUCTION. 2 1 

is distinctly Mahay^nistic, but Beal is not well in- 
formed about its real significance as understood by 
the Buddhists. The chief reason of his misinterpre- 
tation, as I judge, lies in his rendering dkarma by 
"law", while dharma here means "that which sub- 
sists," or "that which maintains itself even when all 
the transient modes disappear," in short, "being," 
or "substance." Dharmakaya, therefore, would be a 
sort of the Absolute, or Essence-Body of all things. 
This notion plays such an important r61e in Maha- 
yanism that an adequate knowledge of it is indispen- 
sable to understand the constitution of Mahayanism 
as a religious system. 

Waddell. 

Let us state one more case of misrepresentation 
by Western scholars of the Mahayana Buddhism. 
Waddell, author of Buddhism in Tibet, referring 
to the point of divergence between the so-called 
Northern Buddhism and the Southern, says (pp. 10 — 
u): "It was the theistic Mahayana doctrine which 
substituted, for the agnostic idealism and simple 
morality of Buddha, a speculative theistic system 
with a mysticism of sophistic nihilism in the back- 
ground." 

And again : "This MaMyana [meaning NagSirjuna's 
MadhyatnikajschooJ] was essentially a sophistic rnnlt- 
ism, or rather Parinirvana, while ceasing to be ex- 
tinction of life, was converted a mystic state which 
admitted of no definition." 

22 INTRODUCTION. 

It may not be wrong to call Mahayanism a specu- 
lative theistic system in a wide sense, but it must 
be asked on what ground Waddell thinks that it has 
in its background "a mysticism of sophistic nihilism " 
Could a religious system be called sophistry when it 
makes a close inquiry into the science of dialectics, 
in order to show how futile it is to seek salvation 
through the intellect alone? Could a religious system 
be called a nihilism when it endeavors to reach the 
highest reality which transcends the phenomenality 
of concrete individual existences ? Could a doctrine 
be called nihilistic when it defines the absolute as 
neither void (gunya) nor not-void (a$unya) ? 

I could cull some more passages from other Bud- 
dhist scholars of the West and show how far Maha- 
yanism has been made by them a subject of mis- 
representation. But since this work is not a polemic, 
but devoted to a positive exposition of its basic doc- 
trines, I refrain from so doing. Suffice it to state 
that one of the main causes of the injustice done to 
Buddhism by the Christian critics comes from their 
preconceptions, of which they may not be aware, 
but which all the more vitiate their "impartial" 
judgments. 

4. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGION. 

Those misconceptions about Buddhism as above 
stated induce me to digress in this introductory part 
and to say a few words concerning the distinction 

INTRODUCTION. 23 

between the form and the spirit of religion. A clear 
knowledge of this distinction will greatly facilitate the 
formation of a correct notion about Mahayanism and 
will also help us duly to appreciate its significance 
as a living religious faith. 

By the spirit of religion I mean that element in 
religion which remains unchanged throughout its 
successive stages of development and transformation : 
while the form of it is the external shell which is 
subject to any modification required by circumstances. 

No Revealed Religion. 

It admits of no doubt that religion, as everything 
else under the sun, is subject to the laws of evolution, 
and that, therefore, there is no such thing as a 
revealed religion, whose teachings are supposed to 
have been delivered to us direct from the hands of 
an anthropomorphic or anthropopsychic supernatural 
being, and which- like an inorganic substance, remains 
forever the same, without changing, without growing, 
without modifying itself in accord with the surrounding 
conditions. Unless people are so blinded by a belief 
in this kind of religion as to insist that its dogmas 
have suffered absolutely no change whatever since 
its "revelation," they must recognise like every clear- 
headed person the fact that there are some ephemeral 
elements in every religion, which must carefully be 
distinguished from its quintessence which remains 
eternally the same. 

When this discrimination is not observed, prejudice 

24 INTRODUCTION. 

will at once assert itself, inducing them to imagine 
that the religion in which they were brought up with 
all its truths and superstitions is the only orthodox 
religion in the world, and all the other religions are 
nothing else than heathenism, idolatry, atheism, apos- 
tasy, and the like. This attitude of such religionists, 
however, serves only to betray their own narrowness 
of mind and dimness of spiritual insight. No one who 
desires to penetrate into the innermost recesses of 
the human heart and who longs to feel the fullest 
meaning of life, should foster in himself in the least 
degree a disposition of bigotry. 

The Mystery. 

Religion is the inmost voice of the human heart 
that under the yoke of a seemingly finite existence 
groans and travails in pain. Mankind, from their first 
appearance on earth, have never been satisfied with 
the finiteness and impermanency of life. They have 
always been yearning after something that will liberate 
them from the slavery of this mortal coil, or from 
the cursed bondage of metempsychosis, as Hindu 
.thinkers express it. This something, however, on 
account of its transcending all the principles of 
separation and individuation, which characterise the 
phenomena of this mundane existence, has always 
remained as something indefinite, inadequate, chaotic, 
and full of mystery. And, according to different 
degrees of intellectual development in different ages 
and nations, people have endeavored to invest this 

INTRODUCTION. 25 

mysterious something with all sorts of human feelings 
and intelligence. Most of modern scientists are now 
content with the hypothesis that the mystery is 
unfathomable by the human mind, which is conditioned 
by the law of relativity, and that our business here, 
moral as well as intellectual, can be executed without 
troubling ourselves with this ever-haunting problem 
of mystery; — this doctrine is called agnosticism. 

But this hypothesis can in no wise be considered 
the final sentence passed on the mystery. From the 
scientific point of view, the maxim of agnosticism is 
excellent, as science does not pretend to venture into 
the realm of non-relativity. Dissatisfaction, however, 
presents itself, when we attempt to silence by this 
hypothesis the last demand of the human heart. 

Intellect and Imagination. 

The human heart is not an intellectual crystal. 
When the intellect displays itself in its full glory, 
the heart still aches and struggles to get hold of 
something beyond. The intellect may sometimes de- 
clare that it has at last laid its hand on what is demanded 
by the heart. Time passes on, and the mystery is 
examined from the other points that escaped consid- 
eration before, and, to the great disappointment of 
the heart, the supposed solution is found to be 
wanting. The intellect is baffled. But the human heart 
never gets tired of its yearnings and demands a 
satisfaction ever more pressingly. Should they be 
considered a mere nightmare of imagination ? Surely 

26 INTRODUCTION. 

not, for herein lies the field where religion claims 
supreme authority, and its claim is perfectly right. 

But religion cannot fabricate whatever it pleases; 
it must work in perfect accord with the intellect. As 
the essential nature of man does not consist solely 
in intellect, or will, or feeling, but in the coordination 
of these psychical elements, religion must guard her- 
self against the unrestrained flight of imagination. 
Most of the superstitions fondly cherished by a pious 
heart are due to the disregard of the intellectual element 
in religion. 

The imagination creates : the intellect discriminates. 
Creation without discrimination is wild : discrimination 
without creation is barren Religion and science, 
when they do not work with mutual understanding, 
are sure to be one-sided The soul makes an ab- 
normal growth at one point, loses its balance, and is 
finally given up to a collapse of the entire system. 
Those pious religious enthusiasts who see a natural 
enemy in science and denounce it with all their 
energy, are, in my opinion, as purblind and distorted 
in their view, as those men of science who think that 
science alone must claim the whole field of soul- 
activities as well as those of nature. I am not in 
sympathy with either of them : for one is just as 
arrogant in its claim as the other. Without a careful 
examination of both sides of a shield, we are not 
competent to give a correct opinion upon it. 

But the imagination is not the exclusive possession 
of religion, nor is discrimination or ratiocination the 

INTRODUCTION. 2? 

monopoly of science. They are reciprocal and com- 
plementary : one cannot do anything without the 
other. The difference between science and religion 
is not that between certitude and probability. The 
difference is rather in their respective fields of acti- 
vity. Science is solely concerned with things condi- 
tional, relative, and finite. When it explains a given 
phenomenon by some fixed laws which are in turn 
nothing but a generalisation of particular facts, the 
task of science is done, and any further attempt to 
go beyond this, i. e., to make an inquiry into the 
whence, whither, and why of things, is beyond 
its realm. But the human soul does not remain 
satisfied here, it asks for the ultimate principle under- 
lying all so-called scientific laws and hypotheses. 
Science is indifferent to the teleology of things : a 
mechanical explanation of them appeases its intellec- 
tual curiosity. But in religion teleology is of para- 
mount importance, it is one of the most fundamental 
problems, and a system which does not give any 
definite conception on this point is no religion. 
Science, again, does not care if there is something 
beyond or outside its manifold laws and theories ; 
but a religion which does not possess a God or 
anything corresponding to it, ceases to be so, for it 
fails to give consolation to the human heart 

The Contents of Faith vary. 

The solution of religious problems, as far as they 
fall within the sphere of relative experience, is large- 

28 INTRODUCTION. 

ly a matter of personal conviction, determined by 
one's intellectual development, external circumstances, 
education, disposition, etc. The conceptions of faith 
thus formulated are naturally infinitely diversified; 
even among the followers of a certain definite set of 
dogmas, each will understand them in his own way, 
owing to individual peculiarities. If we could subject 
their conceptions of faith to a strict analysis as a 
chemist does his materials, we should detect in them 
all the possible forms of differentiation. But all these 
things belong to the exterior of religion and have 
nothing to do with the essentials which underlie them. 

The abiding elements of religion come from within, 
and consist mainly in the mysterious sentiment that 
lies hidden in the deepest depths of the human heart, 
and that, when awakened, shakes the whole structure 
of personality and brings about a great spiritual 
revolution, which results in a complete change of 
one's world-conception. When this mysterious sen- 
timent finds expression and formulates its conceptions 
in the terms of intellect, it becomes a definite system 
of beliefs, which is popularly called religion, but 
which should properly be termed dogmatism, that is, 
an intellectualised form of religion. On the other 
hand, the outward forms of religion consist of those 
changing elements that are mainly determined by the 
intellectual and moral development of the times as 
well as by individual esthetical feelings. 

True Christians and enlightened Buddhists may, 
therefore, find their point of agreement in the recog- 

INTRODUCTION. 29 

nition of the inmost religious sentiment that consti- 
tutes the basis of our being, though this agreement 
does by no means prevent them from retaining their 
individuality in the conceptions and expressions of 
faith. My conviction is : If the Buddha and the 
Christ changed their accidental places of birth, 
Gautama might have been a Christ rising against the 
Jewish traditionalism, and Jesus a Buddha, perhaps 
propounding the doctrine of non-ego and Nirvana 
and Dharmakaya. 

However great a man may be, he cannot but be 
an echo of the spirit of the times. He never stands, 
as is supposed by some, so aloof and towering above 
the masses as to be practically by himself. On the 
contrary, "he," as Emerson says, "finds himself in the 
river of the thoughts and events, forced onward by the 
ideas and necessities of his contemporaries." So it was 
with the Buddha, and so with the Christ. They were 
nothing but the concrete representatives of the ideas 
and feelings that were struggling in those times against 
the established institutions, which were degenerating 
fast and menaced the progress of humanity. But at 
the same time those ideas and sentiments were the 
outburst of the Eternal Soul, which occasionally 
makes a solemn announcement of its will, through 
great historical figures or through great worldevents. 

Believing that a bit of religio-philosophical expo- 
sition as above indulged will prepare the minds of 

3O INTRODUCTION. 

my Christian readers sincerely to take up the study 
of a religious system other than their own, I now 
proceed to a systematical elucidation of the Maha- 
yana Buddhism, as it is believed at present in the 
Far East. 

CHAPTER I. 

A GENERAL CHARACTERISATION OF BUDDHISM, 
No God and no Soul. 

OUDDHISM is considered by some to be a religion 
•*^ without a God and without a soul. The state- 
ment is true and untrue according to what meaning 
we give to those terms. 

Buddhism does not recognise the existence of a 
being, who stands aloof from his ''creations," and 
who meddles occasionally with human affairs when 
his capricious will pleases him. This conception of 
a supreme being is very offensive to Buddhists They 
are unable to perceive any truth in the hypotheses, 
that a being like ourselves created the universe out 
of nothing and first peopled it with a pair of sentient 
beings ; that, owing to a crime commited by them, 
which, however, could have been avoided if the cre- 
ator so desired, they were condemned by him to 
eternal damnation ; that the creator in the meantime 
feeling pity for the cursed, or suffering the bite of 
remorse for his somewhat rash deed, despatched his 
only beloved son to the earth for the purpose of 
rescuing mankind from universal misery, etc., etc. 
If Buddhism is called atheism on account of its 

32 CHAPTER I. 

refusal to take poetry for actual fact, its followers 
would have no objection to the designation. 

Next, if we understand by soul atman, which, 
secretly hiding itself behind all mental activities, direct 
them after the fashion of an organist striking different 
notes as he pleases, Buddhists outspokenly deny the 
existence of such a fabulous being. To postulate an 
independent atman outside a combination of the five 
Skandhas 1, of which an individual being is supposed 
by Buddhists to consist, is to unreservedly welcome 
egoism with all its pernicious corollaries. And what 
distinguishes Buddhism most characteristically and 
emphatically from all other religions is the doctrine 
of non-atman or non-ego, exactly opposite to the 
postulate of a soul-substance which is cherished by 
most of religious enthusiasts. In this sense, Buddhism 
is undoubtedly a religion without the soul. 

To make these points clearer in a general way, 
let us briefly treat in this chapter of such principal 
tenets of Buddhism as Karma, Atman, Avidya, Nirvana, 
Dharmakaya, etc. Some of these doctrines being the 
common property of the two schools of Buddhism, 
Hinayanism and Mahayanism, their brief, comprehen- 
sive exposition here will furnish our readers with a 
general notion about the constitution of Buddhism, 
and will also prepare them to pursue a further specific 
exposition of the Mahayana doctrine which follows. 

1 They are: (i) form or materiality (rupa}} (2) sensation 
(vedana), (3) conception (samjna), (4) action or deeds (samkard), 
and (5) consciousness (vijndna). These terms are explained 
elsewhere. 

CHAPTER I. 33 

Karma. 

One of the most fundamental doctrines established 
by Buddha is that nothing in this world comes 
from a single cause, that the existence of a universe 
is the result of a combination of several causes 
(hetu) and conditions (pratyaya), and is at the 
same time an active force contributing to the pro- 
duction of an effect in the future. As far as phe- 
nomenal existences are concerned, this law of cause 
and effect holds universally valid. Nothing, even God, 
can interfere with the course of things thus regulated, 
materially as well as morally. If a God really exists 
and has some concern about our worldly affairs, he 
must first conform himself to the law of causation. 
Because the principle of karma, which is the Buddhist 
term for causation morally conceived, holds supreme 
everywhere and all the time. 

The conception of karma plays the most important 
role in Buddhist ethics. Karma is the formative prin- 
ciple of the universe. It determines the course of 
events and the destiny of our existence. The reason 
why we cannot change our present state of things 
as we may will, is that it has already been determined 
by the karma that was performed in our previous 
lives, not only individually but collectively. But, for 
this same reason, we shall be able to work out our 
destiny in the future, which is nothing but the resultant 
of several factors that are working and that are being 
worked by ourselves in this life. 

3 

34 CHAPTER I. 

Therefore, says Buddha : 

"By self alone is evil done, 
By self is one disgraced; 
By self is evil left undone, 
By self alone is he purified; 
Purity and impurity belong to self: 
No one can purify another." 1 

Again, 

"Not in the sky 

Nor in the midst of the sea, 

Nor entering a cleft of the mountains, 

Is found that realm on earth 

Where one may stand and be 

From an evil deed absolved." 2 

This doctrine of karma may be regarded as an 
application in our ethical realm of the theory of the 
conservation of energy. Everything done is done once 
for all; its footprints on the sand of our moral and 
social evolution are forever left ; nay, more than left, 
they are generative, good or evil, and waiting for 
further development under favorable conditions. In 
the physical world, even the slightest possible movement 
of our limbs cannot but affect the general cosmic 
motion of the earth, however infinitesimal it be; and 
if we had a proper instrument, we could surely 
measure its precise extent of effect. So is it even 
with our deeds. A deed once performed, together 
with its subjective motives, can never vanish without 
leaving some impressions either on the individual 

1 The Dhammapada, v. 165. Tr. by A. J. Edmunds. 

2 The Dhammapada, v. 127. 

CHAPTER I. 35 

consciousness or on the supra-individual, i. e., social 
consciousness. 

We need not further state that the conception of 
karma in its general aspect is scientifically verified 
In our moral and material life, where the law of 
relativity rules supreme, the doctrine of karma must 
be considered thoroughly valid. And as long as its 
validity is admitted in this field, we can live our 
phenomenal life without resorting to the hypothesis of 
a personal God, as declared by Lamarck when his 
significant work on evolution was presented to 
Emperor Napoleon. 

But it will do injustice to Buddhism if we desig- 
nate it agnosticism or naturalism, denying or ignoring 
the existence of the ultimate, unifying principle, in 
which all contradictions are obliterated. Dharmakaya 
is the name given by Buddhists to this highest prin- 
ciple, viewed not only from the philosophical but also 
from the religious standpoint. In the Dharmakaya, 
Buddhists find the ultimate significance of life, which, 
when seen from its phenomenal aspect, cannot escape 
the bondage of karma and its irrefragable laws. 

Avidyd. 

What claims our attention next, is the problem of 
nescience, which is one of the most essential features 
of Buddhism. Buddhists think, nescience (in Sans- 
krit avidya) is the subjective aspect of karma, involv- 
ing us in a series of rebirths. Rebirth, considered 
by itself, is no moral evil, but rather a necessary 

36 CHAPTER I. 

condition of progress toward perfection, if perfection 
ever be attainable here. It is an evil only when it 
is the outcome of ignorance, — ignorance as to the 
true meaning of our earthly existence. 

Ignorant are they who do not recognise the eva- 
nescence of wordly things and who tenaciously cleave 
to them as final realities ; who madly struggle to 
shun the misery brought about by their own folly ; 
who savagely cling to the self against the will of 
God, as Christians would say ; who take particulars 
as final existences and ignore one pervading reality 
which underlies them all ; who build up an adaman- 
tine wall between the mine and thine : in a word, 
ignorant are those who do not understand that there 
is no such thing as an ego-soul, and that all indiv- 
idual existences are unified in the system of Dhar- 
makaya. Buddhism, therefore, most emphatically 
maintains that to attain the bliss of Nirvana we must 
radically dispel this illusion, this ignorance, this root 
of all evil and suffering in this life. 

The dotrine of nescience or ignorance is technically 
expressed in the following formula, which is com- 
monly called the Twelve Nidanas or Pratyayasamut- 
pada, that is to say Chains of Dependence: 

( i ) There is Ignorance (avidya) in the beginning ; 

(2) from Ignorance Action (sanskara) comes forth ; 

(3) from Action Consciousness (vijndna) comes forth ; 

(4) from Consciousness Name-and-Form (namarupa) 
comes forth; (5) from Name-and-Form the Six Organs 
(sadayatana) come forth ; (6) from the Six Organs 

CHAPTER I. 37 

Touch (sparga) comes forth; (7) from Touch Sensa- 
tion (vedana) comes forth ; (8) from Sensation Desire 
(trsna) comes forth ; (9) from Desire Clinging (upa- 
dana] comes forth; (10) from Clinging Being (bhdva) 
comes forth; (11) from Being Birth (jati) comes 
forth; and (12) from Birth Pain (duhkhd) comes 
forth. 

According to Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakoga, the 
formula is explained as follows : Being ignorant in our 
previous life as to the significance of our existence, 
we let loose our desires and act wantonly. Owing 
to this karma, we are destined in the present life to 
be endowed with consciousness (yijndna), name-and- 
form (namarupd), the six organs of sense (sadaya- 
tand), and sensation (vedana). By the exercise of 
these faculties, we now desire for, hanker after, cling 
to, these illusive existences which have no ultimate 
reality whatever. In consequence of this "Will to 
Live" we potentially accumulate or make up the 
karma that will lead us to further metempsychosis 
of birth and death. 

The formula is by no means logical, nor is it 
exhaustive, but the fundamental notion that life 
started in ignorance or blind will remains veritable. 

Non-Atman. 

The problem of nescience naturally leads to the 
doctrine usually known as that of non-Atman, i. e., 
non-ego, to which allusion was made at the beginning 

38 CHAPTER I. 

of this chapter. This doctrine of Buddhism is one 
of the subjects that have caused much criticism by 
Christian scholars. Its thesis runs : There is no such 
thing as ego-soul, which, according to the vulgar 
interpretation, is the agent of our mental activities. 
And this is the reason why Buddhism is sometimes 
called a religion without the soul, as aforesaid. 

This Buddhist negation of the ego-soul is perhaps 
startling to the people, who, having no speculative 
power, blindly accept the traditional, materialistic 
view of the soul. They think, they are very spiritual 
in endorsing the dualism of soul and flesh, and in 
making the soul something like a corporeal entity, 
though far more ethereal than an ordinary object of 
the senses. They think of the soul as being more 
in the form of an angel, when they teach that it 
ascends to heaven immediately after its release from 
the material imprisonment. 

They further imagine that the soul, because of its 
imprisonment in the body, groans in pain for its 
liberty, not being able to bear its mundane limita- 
tions. The immortality of the soul is a continuation 
after the dismemberment of material elements of this 
ethereal, astral, ghost-like entity, — very much resem- 
bling the Samkhyan Lingham or the Vedantic su- 
ksama-fartra. Self-consciousness will not a whit 
suffer in its continued activity, as it is the essential 
function of the soul. Brothers and sisters, parents 
and sons and daughters, wives aud husbands, all 
transfigured and sublimated, will meet again in the 

CHAPTER I. 39 

celestial abode, and perpetuate their home life much 
after the manner of their earthly one. People who 
take this view of the soul and its immortality must 
feel a great disappointment or even resentment, when 
they are asked to recognise the Buddhist theory of 
non-atman. 

The absurdity of ascribing to the soul a sort of 
astral existence taught by some theosophists is due 
to the confusion of the name and the object corres- 
ponding to it. The soul, or what is tantamount 
according to the vulgar notion, the ego, is a name 
given to a certain coordination of mental activities. 
Abstract names are invented by us to economise our 
intellectual labors, and of course have no correspond- 
ing realities as particular presences in the concrete 
objective world. Vulgar minds have forgotten the 
history of the formation of abstract names. Being 
accustomed always to find certain objective realities 
or concrete individuals answering to certain names, 
they — those na'ive realists — imagine that all names, 
irrespective of their nature, must have their concrete 
individual equivalents in the sensual world. Their 
idealism or spiritualism, so called, is in fact a gross 
form of materialism, in spite of their unfounded fear 
for the latter as atheistic and even immoral ; — curse 
of ignorance! 

The non-atman theory does not deny that there is 
a coordination or unification of various mental oper- 
ations. Buddhism calls this system of coordination 
vijnana, not atman. Vijnana is consciousness, while 

4O CHAPTER I. 

atman is the ego conceived as a concrete entity, — 
a hypostatic agent which, abiding in the deepest recess 
of the mind, directs all subjective activities according 
to its own discretion. This view is radically rejected 
by Buddhism. 

A familiar analogy illustrating the doctrine of non- 
atrnan is the notion of a wheel or that of a house. 
Wheel is the name given to a combination in a fixed 
form of the spokes, axle, tire, hub, rim, etc. ; house 
is that given to a combination of roofs, pillars, win- 
dows, floors, walls, etc., after a certain model and 
for a certain purpose. Now, take all these parts 
independently, and where is the house or the wheel 
to be found? House or wheel is merely the name 
designating a certain form in which parts are sys- 
tematically and definitely disposed. What an absurd- 
ity, then, it must be to insist on the independent 
existence of the wheel or of the house as an agent 
behind the combination of certain parts thus definite- 
ly arranged ! 

It is wonderful that Buddhism clearly anticipated the 
outcome of modern psychological researches at the 
time when all other religious and philosophical sys- 
tems were eagerly cherishing dogmatic superstitions 
concerning the nature of the ego. The refusal of 
modern psychology to have soul mean anything more 
than the sum-total of all mental experiences, such as 
sensations, ideas, feelings, decisions, etc., is precisely 
a rehearsal of the Buddhist doctrine of non-atman. 
It does not deny that there is a unity of consciousness, 

CHAPTER I 4 1 

for to deny this is to doubt our everyday experiences, 
but it refuses to assert that this unity is absolute, 
unconditioned, and independent. Everything in this 
phenomenal phase of existence, is a combination of 
certain causes (hetu) and conditions (pratyaya) brought 
together according to the principle of karma; and 
everything that is compound is finite and subject to 
dissolution, and, therefore, always limited by something 
else. Even the soul-life, as far as its phenomenality 
goes, is no exception to this universal law. To maintain 
the existence of a soul-substance which is supposed 
to lie hidden behind the phenomena of consciousness, 
is not only misleading, but harmful and productive 
of some morally dangerous conclusions. The supposition 
that there is something where there is really nothing, 
makes us cling to this chimerical form, with no other 
result than subjecting ourselves to an eternal series 
of sufferings. So we read in the Lankavatara Sutra, III : 

"A flower in the air, or a hare with horns, 
Or a pregnant maid of stone: 
To take what is not for what is, 
Tis called a judgment false. 

"In a combination of causes, 

The vulgar seek the reality of self. 

As truth they understand not, 

From birth to birth they transmigrate." 

The Non-Atman-ness of Things. 

Mahayanism has gone a step further than Hina- 
yamsm in the development of the doctrine of non- 
atman, for it expressly disavows, besides the denial 

42 CHAPTER I. 

of the existence of the ego-substance, a noumenal 
conception of things, i. e., the conception of particu- 
lars as having something absolute in them. Hinaya- 
nism, indeed, also disfavors this conception of thing- 
iness, but it does so only implicitly. It is Mahayanism 
that definitely insists on the non-existence of a personal 
(pudgala) as well as a thingish (dharma) ego. 

According to the vulgar view, particular existences 
are real, they have permanent substantial entities, 
remaining forever as such. They think, therefore, 
that organic matter remains forever organic just as 
much as inorganic matter remains inorganic ; that, 
as they are essentially different, there is no mutual 
transformation between them. The human soul is 
different from that of the lower animals and sentient 
beings from non-sentient beings ; the difference being 
well-defined and permanent, there is no bridge over 
which one can cross to the other. We may call this 
view naturalistic egoism. 

Mahayanism, against this egoistic conception of the 
world, extends its theory of non-atman to the realm 
\ lying outside us. It maintains that there is no irre- 
ducible reality in particular existences, so long as 
they are combinations of several causes and condi- 
tions brought together by the principle of karma. 
Things are here because they are sustained by karma. 
As soon as its force is exhausted, the conditions 
that made their existence possible lose efficience and 
dissolve, and in their places will follow other con- 
ditions and existences. Therefore, what is organic 

CHAPTER I. 43 

to-day, may be inorganic to-morrow, and vice versa. 
Carbon, for instance, which is stored within the earth 
appears in the form of coal or graphite or diamond ; 
but that which exists on its surface is found some- 
times combined with other elements in the form of 
an animal or a vegetable, sometimes in its free ele- 
mentary state. It is the same carbon everywhere ; 
it becomes inorganic or organic, according to its 
karma, it has no atman in itself which directs its 
transformation by its own self-determining will. Mutual 
transformation is everywhere observable; there is a 
constant shifting of forces, an eternal transmigration 
of the elements, — all of which tend to show the 
transitoriness and non-atman-ness of individual ex- 
istences. The universe is moving like a whirl-wind, 
nothing in it proving to be stationary, nothing in it 
rigidly adhering to its own form of existence. 

Suppose, on the other hand, there were an atman 
behind every particular being; suppose, too, it were 
absolute and permanent and self-acting ; and this 
phenomenal world would then come to a standstill, 
and life be forever gone. For is not changeability 
the most essential feature and condition of life, and 
also the strongest evidence for the non-existence of 
individual things as realities? The physical sciences 
recognise this universal fact of mutual transformation 
in its positive aspect and call it the law of the con- 
servation of energy and of matter. Mahay anism, 
recognising its negative side, proposes the doctrine 
of the non-atman-ness of things, that is to say, the 

44 CHAPTER I. 

impermanency of all particular existences. Therefore, 
it is said, "Sarvam anityam, sarvam gunyam, sarvam 
\ anatman" (All is transitory, all is void, all is with- 
out ego.) 

Mahayanists condemn the vulgar view that denies 
the consubstantiality and reciprocal transformation of 
all beings, not only because it is scientifically unten- 
able, but mainly because, ethically and religiously 
considered, it is fraught with extremely dangerous 
ideas, — ideas which finally may lead a "brother to 
deliver up the brother to death and the father the 
child," and, again, it may constrain "the children to 
rise up against their parents and cause them to be 
put to death." Why? Because this view, born of 
egoism, would dry up the well of human love and 
sympathy, and transform us into creatures of bestial 
selfishness ; because this view is not capable of inspiring 
us with the sense of mutuality and commiseration 
and of making us disinterestedly feel for our fellow- 
beings. Then, all fine religious and humane sentiments 
would depart from our hearts, and we should be nothing 
less than rigid, lifeless corpses, no pulse beating, no 
blood running. And how many victims are offered 
every day on this altar of egoism ! They are not 
necessarily immoral by nature, but blindly led by the 
false conception of life and the world, they have been 
rendered incapable of seeing their own spiritual doubles 
in their neighbors. Being ever controlled by their 
sensual impulses, they sin against humanity, against 
nature, and against themselves. 

CHAPTER I. 45 

We read in the Mahayana-abhisamaya Sutra 
(Nanjo, no. 196) : 

"Empty and calm and devoid of ego 
Is the nature of all things : 
There is no individual being 
That in reality exists. 

"Nor end nor beginning having 

Nor any middle course, 

All is a sham, here's no reality whatever: 

It is like unto a vision and a dream. 

"It is like unto clouds and lightning, 

It is like unto gossamer or bubbles floating 

It is like unto fiery revolving wheel, 

It is like unto water-splashing. 

"Because of causes and conditions things are here: 
In them there's no self-nature [i. e., atman] : 
All things that move and work, 
Know them as such. 

"Ignorance and thirsty desire, 
The source of birth and death they are: 
Right contemplation and discipline by heart, 
Desire and ignorance obliterate. 

"All beings in the world, 
Beyond words they are and expressions: 
Their ultimate nature, pure and true, 
Is like unto vacuity of space." l 

The Dharmakaya. 

The Dharmakaya, which literally means "body or 
system of being," is, according to the Mahayanists, 

1 This last passage should not be understood in the sense 
of a total abnegation of existence. It means simply the tran- 
scendentality of the highest principle. 

46 CHAPTER I. 

the ultimate reality that underlies all particular phe- 
nomena; it is that which makes the existence of 
individuals possible ; it is the raison d'etre of the 
universe; it is the norm of being, which regulates 
the course of events and thoughts. The conception 
of Dharmakaya is peculiarly Mahayanistic, for the 
Hinayana school did not go so far as to formulate 
the ultimate principle of the universe; its adherents 
stopped short at a positivistic interpretation of Bud- 
dhism. The Dharmakaya remained for them to be the 
Body of the Law, or the Buddha's personality as 
embodied in the truth taught by him. 

The Dharmakaya may be compared in one sense 
to the God of Christianity and in another sense to 
the Brahman or Paramatman of Vedantism. It is 
different, however, from the former in that it does 
not stand transcendentally above the universe, which, 
according to the Christian view, was created by God, 
but which is, according to Mahayanism, a manifesta- 
tion of the Dharmakaya himself. It is also different 
from Brahman in that it is not absolutely impersonal, 
nor is it a mere being. The Dharmakaya, on the 
contrary, is capable of willing and reflecting, or, to 
use Buddhist phraseology, it is Karuna (love) and 
Bodhi (intelligence), and not the mere state of being. 

This pantheistic and at the same time entheistic 
Dharmakaya is working in every sentient being, for 
sentient beings are nothing but a self-manifestation 
of the Dharmakaya. Individuals are not isolated 
existences, as imagined by most people. If isolated, 

CHAPTER I. 47 

they are nothing, they are so many soap-bubbles 
which vanish one after another in the vacuity of 
space. All particular existences acquire their meaning 
only when they are thought of in their oneness in 
the Dharmakaya. The veil of Maya, i. e., subjective 
ignorance may temporally throw an obstacle to our 
perceiving the universal light of Dharmakaya, in 
which we are all one. But when our Bodhi or intellect, 
which is by the way a reflection of the Dharmakaya 
in the human mind, is so fully enlightened, we no 
more build the artificial barrier of egoism before our 
spiritual eye ; the distinction between the meum and 
teum is obliterated, no dualism throws the nets of 
entanglement over us ; I recognise myself in you and 
you recognise yourself in me ; tat tvam asi. Or, 

"What is here, that is there; 
What is there, that is here : 
Who sees duality here, 
From death to death goes he." ' 

This state of enlightenment may be called the 
spiritual expansion of the ego, or, negatively, the 
ideal annihilation of the ego. A never-drying stream 
of sympathy and love which is the life of religion 
will now spontaneously flow out of the fountain- 
head of Dharmakaya. 

The doctrine of non-ego teaches us that there is t- 
no reality in individual existences, that we do not 
have any transcendental entity called ego-substance. 

7 he Kathopanisad, IV. 10. 

48 CHAPTER I. 

The doctrine of Dharmakaya, to supplement this, 
teaches us that we all are one in the System of 
Being and only as such are immortal. The one 
shows us the folly of clinging to individual exist- 
ences and of coveting the immortality of the ego- 
soul; the other convinces us of the truth that we 
are saved by living into the unity of Dharmakaya. 
The doctrine of non-atrnan liberates us from the 
shackle of unfounded egoism ; but as mere liberation 
does not mean anything positive and may perchance 
lead us to asceticism, we apply the energy thus 
released to the execution of the will of Dharmakaya. 

The questions : "Why have we to love our neigh- 
bors as ourselves? Why have we to do to others all 
things whatsoever we would that they should do to 
us?" are answered thus by Buddhists: "It is because 
we are all one in the Dharmakaya, because when the 
clouds of ignorance and egoism are totally dispersed, 
the light of universal love and intelligence cannot 
help but shine in all its glory. And, enveloped in 
this glory, we do not. see any enemy, nor neighbor, 
we are not even conscious of whether we are one in 
the Dharmakaya. There is no 'my will' here, but 
only 'thy will,' the will of Dharmakaya, in which we 
live and move and have our being." 

The Apostle Paul says : "For as in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall all be made alive." Why ? 
Buddhists would answer, "because Adam asserted 
his egoism in giving himself up to ignorance, (the 
tree of knowledge is in truth the tree of ignorance, 

CHAPTER I. 49 

for from it comes the duality of me and thee) ; while 
Christ on the contrary surrendered his egoistic asser- 
tion to the intelligence of the universal Dharmakaya. 
That is why we die in the former and are made 
alive in the latter." 

• 

Nirvana. 

The meaning of Nirvana has been variously inter- 
preted by non-Buddhist students from the philologi- 
cal and the historical standpoint ; but it matters little 
what conclusions they have reached, as we are not 
going to recapitulate them here ; nor do they at all 
affect our presentation of the Buddhists' own view as 
below. For it is the latter that concerns us here most 
and constitutes the all-important part of the problem 
We have had too much of non-Buddhist speculation 
on the question at issue. The majority of the critics, 
while claiming to be fair and impartial, have, by 
some preconceived ideas, been led to a conclusion, 
which is not at all acceptable to intelligent Buddhists. 
Further, the fact has escaped their notice that Pali 
literature from which they chiefly derive their infor- 
mation on the subject represents the views of one 
of the many sects that arose soon after the demise 
of the Master and were constantly branching off at 
and after the time of King Agoka. The probability 
is, that Buddha himself did not have any stereotyped 
conception of Nirvana, and, as most great minds do, 
expressed his ideas outright as formed under various 
circumstances ; though of course they could not be 

4 

5O CHAPTER I. 

in contradiction with his central beliefs, which must 
have remained the same throughout the course of his 
religious life. Therefore, to understand a problem in 
all its apparently contradictory aspects, it is very 
necessary to grasp at the start the spirit of the 
author of the problem, and when this is done the 
rest will be understood comparatively much easier. 
Non-Buddhist critics lack in this most important qual- 
ification ; therefore, it is no wonder that Buddhists 
themselves are always reluctant to accede to their 
interpretations. 

Enough for apology. Nirvana, according to Bud- 
dhists, does not signify an annihilation of conscious- 
ness nor a temporal or permanent suppression of 
mentation ', as imagined by some; but it is the 

1 Guyau, a French sociologist, refers to the Buddhist con- 
ception of Nirvana in his Non-Religion of the Future I take 
his interpretation as typical of those non-Buddhist critics 
who are very little acquainted with the subject but pretend 
to know much. (English translation, pp 472 — 474.) 

"Granted the wretchedness of life, the remedy that pessi- 
mists propose is the new religious salvation that modern 
Buddhists are to make fashionable. . . The conception is that 
of Nirvana. To sever all the ties which attach you to the 
external world ; to prune away all the young offshoots of 
desire, and recognise that to be rid of them is a deliverance ; 
to practise a sort of complete psychial circumcision; to recoil 
upon yourself and to believe that by so doing you enter 
into the society of the great totality of things (the mystic 
would say, of God); to create an inner vacuum, and to feel 
dizzy in the void and, nevertheless, to believe that the void 
is plenitude supreme, pleroma, these have always constituted 
temptations to mankind. Mankind has been tempted to 
meddle with them, as it has been tempted to creep up to 

annihilation of the notion of ego-substance and of 
all the desires that arise from this erroneous concep- 
tion. But this represents the negative side of the 
doctrine, and its positive side consists in universal 
love or sympathy (karund) for all beings. 

These two aspects of Nirvana, i. e., negatively, 
the destruction of evil passions, and, positively, the 
practice of sympathy, are complementary to each 
other; and when we have one we have the other. 
Because, as soon as the heart is freed from the 
cangue of egoism, the same heart, hitherto so cold 
and hard, undergoes a complete change, shows ani- 
mation, and, joyously escaping from self -imprisonment, 
finds its freedom in the bosom of Dharmakaya. In 
this latter sense, Nirvana is the "humanisation" of 
Dharmakaya, that is to say, "God's will done in 
earth as it is in heaven." If we make use of the 

the verge of dizzy precipices and look over . . . Nirvana leads, 
in fact, to the annihilation of the individual and of the race, 
and to the logical absurdity that the vanquished are the vic- 
tors over the trials and miseries of life " 

Then, the author recites the case of one of his acquain- 
tances, who made a practical experiment of Nirvana, rejecting 
variety in his diet, giving up meat, wine, every kind of ragout, 
every form of condiment, and reducing to its lowest possible 
terms the desire that is most fundamental in every living 
being— the desire of food, and substituting a certain number 
of cups of pure milk. "Having thus blunted his sense of 
taste and the grosser of his appetites, having abandoned all 
physical activity, he thought to find a recompense in the pleas- 
ure of abstract meditation and of esthetic contemplation. 
He entered to a state which was not that of dreamland, but 
neither was it that of real life, with its definite details." 

$2 CHAPTER I. 

terms, subjective and objective. Nirvana is the former, 
and the Dharmakaya is the latter, phase of one and 
the same principle. Again, psychologically, Nirvana 
is enlightenment, the actualisation of the Bodhicitta* 
(Heart of Intelligence). 

The gospel of love and the doctrine of Nirvana 
may appear to some to contradict each other, for 
they think that the former is the source of energy 
and activity, while the latter is a lifeless, inhuman, 
ascetic quietism. But the truth is, love is the emo- 
tional aspect and Nirvana the intellectual aspect of 
the inmost religious consciousness which constitutes 
the essence of the Buddhist life. 

That Nirvana is the destruction of selfish desires 
is plainly shown in this stanza : 

•To the giver merit is increased; 

When the senses are controlled anger arises not. 

The wise forsake evil, 

By the destruction of desire, sin, and infatuation, 

A man attains to Nirvana.'" 

The following which was breathed forth by Buddha 
against a certain class of monks, testifies that when 
Nirvana is understood in the sense of quietism or 
pessimism, he vigorously repudiated it: 

"Fearing an endless chain of birth and death, 
And the misery of transmigration, 
Their heart is filled with worry, 
Bnt they desire their safety only. 

1 For detailed explanation of this term see Chapter XL 
* The Udana, Ch. VIII, p. 118. Translation by General 
Strong 

CHAPTER I. 53 

"Quietly sitting and reckoning the breaths,- 
They're bent on the Anapanam. * 
They contemplate on the filthiness of the body, — 
Thinking how impure it is! 

-They shun the dust of the triple world, 
And in ascetic practise their safety they seek: 
Incapable of love and sympathy are they, 
For on Nirvana abides their thought." * 

Against this ascetic practise of some monks, the 
Buddha sets forth what might be called the ideal of 
the Buddhist life : 

"Arouse thy will, supreme and great, 

Practise love and sympathy, give joy and protection ; 

Thy love like unto space, 

Be it without discrimination, without limitation. 

Merits establish, not for thy own sake, 

But for charity universal ; 

Save and deliver all beings, 

Let them attain the wisdom of the Great Way." 

It is apparent that the ethical application of the 
doctrine of Nirvana is naught else than the Golden 

1 This is a peculiarly Indian religious practice, which con- 
sists in counting one's exhaling and inhaling breaths. When a 
man is intensely bent on the practise, he gradually passes to 
a state of trance, forgetting everything that is going on around and 
within himself. The practise may have the merit of alleviating 
nervousness and giving to the mind the bliss of relaxation, 
but it oftentimes leads the mind to a self-hypnotic state. 

2 Here Nirvana is evidently understood to mean self-abne- 
gation or world-flight or quietism, which is not in accord with 
the true Buddhist interpretation of the term. 

54 CHAPTER I. 

Rule, 1 so called. The Golden Rule, however, does 
not give any reason why we should so act, it is a 
mere command whose authority is ascribed to a cer- 
tain superhuman being. This does not satisfy an 
intellectually disposed mind, which refuses to accept 
anything on mere authority, for it wants to go to 
the bottom of things and see on what ground they 
are standing. Buddhism has solved this problem by 
finding the oneness of things in Dharmakaya, from 
which flows the eternal stream of love and sym- 
pathy. As we have seen before, when the cursed 
barrier of egoism is broken down, there remains 
nothing that can prevent us from loving others as 
ourselves. 

Those who wish to see nothing but an utter bar- 
renness of heart after the annihilation of egoism, are 
much mistaken in their estimation of human nature. 
For they think its animation comes from selfishness, 
and that all forms of activity in our life are propelled 
simply by the desire to preserve self and the race. 
They, therefore, naturally shrink from the doctrine 
that teaches that all things worldly are empty, and 
that there is no such thing as ego -substance whose 

1 The sentiment of the Golden Rule is not the monopoly of 
Christianity ; it has been expressed by most of the leaders 
of thought, thus, for instance : ''Requite hatred with virtue" 
(Lao-tze). "Hate is only appeased by love" (Buddha). "Do 
not do to others what ye would not have done to you by 
others" (Confucius). "One must neither return evil, nor do 
an* evil to any one among men, not even if one has to suffer 
from them" (Plato, Crito, 49). 

CHAPTER I. 55 

immortality is so much coveted by most people. But 
the truth is, the spring of love does not lie in the 
idea of self, but in its removal. For the human heart, 
being a reflection of the Dharmakaya which is love 
and intelligence, recovers its intrinsic power and good- 
ness, only when the veil of ignorance and egoism is 
cast aside. The animation, energy, strenuousness, 
which were shown by a self-centered will, and which 
therefore were utterly desplicable, will not surely die 
out with the removal of their odious atmosphere in 
which egoism had enveloped them. But they will 
gain an ever nobler interpretation, ever more elevating 
and satisfying significance; for they have gone through 
a baptism of fire, by which the last trace of egoism 
has been thoroughly consumed The old evil master 
is eternally buried, but the willing servants are still 
here and ever ready to do their service, now more 
efficiently, for their new legitimate and more autho- 
ritative lord. 

Destruction is in common parlance closely associ- 
ated with nothingness, hence Nirvana, the destruction 
of egoism, is ordinarily understood as a synonym of 
nihilism. But the removal of darkness does not bring 
desolation, but means enlightenment and order and 
peace. It is the same chamber, all the furniture is 
left there as it was before. In darkness chaos reigned, 
goblins walked wild; in enlightenment everything is 
in its proper place. And did we not state plainly that 
Nirvana was enlightenment? 

56 CHAPTER I. 

The Intellectual Tendency of Buddhism. 

One thing which in this connection I wish to refer 
to, is what makes Buddhism appear somehow cold 
and impassive. By this I mean its intellectuality. 

The fact is that anything coming from India greatly 
savors of philosophy. In ancient India everybody of 
the higher castes seems to have indulged in intellec- 
tual and speculative exercises. Being rich in natural 
resources and thus the struggle for existence being 
reduced to a minimum, the Brahmans and the Ksatriyas 
gathered themselves under most luxuriously growing 
trees, or retired to the mountain-grottoes undisturbed 
by the hurly-burly of the world, and there they 
devoted all their leisure hours to metaphysical specu- 
lations and discussions. Buddhism, as a product of 
these people, is naturally deeply imbued with intel- 
lectualism. 

Further, in India there was no distinction between 
religion and philosophy. Every philosophical system 
was at the same time a religion, and vice versa. 
Philosophy with the Hindus was not an idle display 
of logical subtlety which generally ends in entangling 
itself in the meshes of sophistry. Their aim of philos- 
ophising was to have an intellectual insight into the 
significance of existence and the destiny of humanity. 
They did not believe in anything blindly nor accept 
anything on mere tradition. Buddha most character- 
istically echoes this sentiment when he says, ' 'Follow 
my teachings not as taught by a Buddha, but as 

CHAPTER I. 57 

being in accord with truth." This spirit of self-reliance 
and self- salvation later became singularly Buddhistic. 
Even when Buddha was still merely an enthusiastic 
aspirant for Nirvana, he seems to have been strongly 
possessed of this spirit, for he most emphatically 
declared the following famous passage, in response 
to the pathetic persuation of his father's ministers, 
who wanted him to come home with them: "The 
doubt whether there exists anything or not, is not 
to be settled for me by another's words. Arriving at 
the truth either by mortification or by tranquilisation, 
I will grasp myself whatever is ascertainable about 
it. It is not mine to receive a view which is full of 
conflicts, uncertainties, and contradictions. What 
enlightened men would go by other's faith? The 
multitudes are like the blind led in the darkness by 
the blind." * 

To say simply, "Love your enemy," was not satis- 
factory to the Hindu mind, it wanted to see the reason 
why. And as soon as the people were convinced 
intellectually, they went even so far as to defend the 
faith with their lives. It was not an uncommon event 
that before a party of Hindu philosophers entered 
into a discussion they made an agreement that the 
penalty of defeats should be the sacrifice of the life. 
They were, above all, a people of intellect, though 
of course not lacking in religious sentiment. 

It is no wonder, then, that Buddha did not make 
the first proclamation of his message by "Repent, for 

1 The Buddhacarita, Book IX, 63-64. 

58 CHAPTER 1. 

the kingdom of heaven is at hand," but by the estab- 
lishment of the Four Noble Truths. 1 One appeals 
to the feeling, and the other to the intellect. That 
which appeals to the intellect naturally seems to be 
less passionate, but the truth is, feeling without the 
support of intellect leads to fanaticism and is always 
ready to yield itself to bigotry and superstition. 

The doctrine of Nirvana is doubtless more intellec- 
tual than the Christian gospel of love. It first recog- 
nises the wretchedness of human life as is proved by 
our daily experiences; it then finds its cause in our 
subjective ignorance as to the true meaning of exis- 
tence, and in our egocentric desires which, obscuring 
our spiritual insight, make us tenaciously cling to 
things chimerical ; it then proposes the complete 
annihilation of egoism, the root of all evil, by which, 
subjectively, tranquillity of heart is restored, and, 
objectively, the realisation of universal love becomes 
possible. Buddhism, thus, proceeds most logically in 
the development of its doctrine of Nirvana and uni- 
versal love. 

Says Victor Hugo (Les Miserables^ vol. II): "The 
reduction of the universe to a single being, the ex- 
pansion of a single being even to God, this is love." 
When a man clings to the self and does not want 

1 According to one Northern Buddhist tradition, Buddha is 
recorded to have exclaimed at the time of his supreme spir- 
itual beatitude : "Wonderful ! All sentient beings are univer- 
sally endowed with the intelligence and virtue of the 
Tathagata!" 

CHAPTER I. 59 

to identify himself with other fellow-selves, he cannot 
expand his being to God. When he shuts himself in 
the narrow shell of ego and keeps all the world 
outside, he cannot reduce the universe to his innermost 
self. To love, therefore, one must first enter Nirvana. 
The truth is everywhere the same and is attained 
through the removal of ignorance. But as individual 
disposition differs according to the previous karma, 
some are more prone to intellectualism, while the 
others to sentimentality (in its psychological sense). 
Let us then follow our own inclination conscientiously 
and not speak evil of ombse.- Tto^U called the 
Doctrine of Middle Path. ^s 

CHAPTER II. 

HISTORICAL CHARACTERISATION OF 
MAHAYANISM 

"\ It 7E are now in a position to enter into a specific 
exposition of the Mahayana doctrine. But, before 
doing so, it will be well for us first to consider the 
views that were held by the Hindu Buddhist thinkers 
concerning its characteristic features ; in other words, 
to make an historical survey of its peculiarities. 

As stated in the Introduction, the term Mahayana 
was invented in the times of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva 
(about the third or fourth century after Christ), when 
doctrinal struggles between the Qravaka and the Bo- 
dhisattva classes reached a climax. The progressive 
Hindu Buddhists, desiring to announce the essential 
features of their doctrine, did so naturally at the 
expense of their rival and by pointing out why theirs 
was greater than, or superior to, Hinayanism. Their 
views were thus necessarily vitiated by a partisan 
spirit, and instead of impartially and critically enume- 
rating the principal characteristics of Mahayanism, 
they placed rather too much stress upon those points 
that do not in these latter days appear to be very 
essential, but that were then considered by them to 
be of paramount importance. These points, never- 

CHAPTER II. 6 1 

theless, throw some light on the nature of Mahayana 
Buddhism as historically distinguished from its consan- 
guineous rival and fellow-doctrine. 

Stkiramati' s Conception of Mahayanism. 

Sthiramati 1 in his Indroduction to Mahayanism 
states that Mahayanism is a special doctrine for the 
Bodhisattvas, who are to be distinguished from the 
other two classes, viz, the Qravakas and the Pratyeka- 
buddhas. The essential difference of the doctrine 
consists in the belief that objects of the senses 
are merely phenomenal and have no absolute reality, 
that the indestructible Dharmakaya which is all-per- 
vading constitutes the norm of existence,, that all 
Bodhisattvas 2 are incarnations of the Dharmakaya, who 
not by their evil karma previously accumulated, but 
by their boundless love for all mankind, assume 

1 His date is not known, but judging from the contents of 
his works, of which we have at present two or three among 
the Chinese Tripitaka, it seems that he lived later than 
Agvaghosa, but prior to, or simultaneously with, Nagarjuna. 
This little book occupies a very important position in the 
development of Mahayanism in India. Next to Agvaghosa's 
Awakening of Faith, the work must be carefully studied by 
scholars who want to grasp every phase of the history of 
Mahayana school as far as it can be learned through the 
Chinese documents. 

1 Be it remarked here that a Bodhisattva is not a particu- 
larly favored man in the sense of chosen people or elect. 
We are all in a way Bodhisattvas, that is, when we recognise 
the truth that we are equally in possession of the Samyak- 
sambodhi, Highest True Intelligence, and through which every- 
body without exception can attain final enlightenment. 

62 CHAPTER II. 

corporeal existences, and that persons who thus ap- 
pear in the flesh, as avatars of the Buddha supreme, 
associate themselves with the masses in all possible 
social relations, in order that they might thus lead 
them to a state of enlightenment. 

While this is a very summary statement of the 
Mahayana doctrine, a more elaborate and extended 
enumeration of its peculiar features in contradistinc- 
tion to those of Hinayanism, is made in the Miscel- 
lanea on Mahayana Metaphysics, l The Spiritual 
Stages of the Yogdcara, 2 An Exposition of the Holy 
Doctrine, 3 A Comprehensive Treatise on Mahay a- 
nism, 4 and others. Let us first explain the "Seven 
General Characteristics" as described in the first three 
works here mentioned. 

Seven Principal Features of Mahayanism. 

According to Asanga, who lived a little later than 
Nagarjuna, that is, at the time when Mahayanism was 
further divided into the Yogacarya and the Madhya- 
mika school, the seven features peculiar to Mahayanism 
as distinguished from Hinayanism, are as follows: 

(i) Its Comprehensiveness. Mah^nism does not 
confine itself to the teachings of one Buddha alone; 

1 Mahayana-abhidharma-sangiti-fastra, by Asanga. Nanjo, 
No. 1199. 

* Yogacarya-bhumi-f&stra, Nanjo, No. u7o. The work is sup- 
posed to have been dictated to Asanga by a mythical Bo- 
dhisattva. 

8 By Asanga. Nanjo, 1177. 

4 Mahayana-samparigraha-fastra, by Asanga. Nanjo, 1183. 

CHAPTER II. 63 

but wherever and whenever truth is found, even under 
the disguise of most absurd superstitions, it makes 
no hesitation to winnow the grain from the husk and 
assimilate it in its own system. Innumerable good 
laws taught by Buddhas * of all ages and localities 
are all taken up in the coherent body of Mahayanism. 

(2) Universal love for All Sentient Beings. Hinaya- 
nism confines itself to the salvation of individuals 
only ; it does not extend its bliss universally, as each 
person must achieve his own deliverance. Mahayanism, 
on the other hand, aims at general salvation; it 
endeavors to save us not only individually, but univer- 
sally. All the motives, efforts, and actions of the 
Bodhisattvas pivot on the furtherance of universal 
welfare. 

(3) Its Greatness in Intellectual Comprehension. 
Mahayanism maintains the theory of non-atman not 
only in regard to sentient beings but in regard to 
things in general. While it denies the hypothesis of 
a metaphysical agent directing our mental operations, 
it also rejects the .view that insists on the noumenal 
or thingish reality of existences as they appear to 
our senses. 

(4) Its Marvelous Spiritual Energy. The Bodhisattvas 
never become tired of working for universal salvation, 

T Perceiving an incarnation of the Dharmakaya in every 
spiritual leader regardless of his nationality and professed 
creed, Mahayanists recognise a Buddha in Socrates, Moham- 
med, Jesus, Francis of Assisi, Confucius, Laotze, and many 
others. 

64 CHAPTER II. 

nor do they despair because of the long time required 
to accomplish this momentous object. To try to 
attain enlightenment in the shortest possible period 
and to be self-sufficient without paying any attention 
to the welfare of the masses, is not the teaching of 
Mahayanism. 

(5) Its Greatness in the Exercise of the Up ay a. 
The term upaya literally means expediency. The 
great fatherly sympathetic heart of the Bodhisattva 
has inexhaustible resources at his command in order 
that he might lead the masses to final enlightenment, 
each according to his disposition and environment. 
Mahayanism does not ask its followers to escape the 
metempsychosis of birth and death for the sake of 
entering into the lethargic tranquillity of Nirvana; 
for metempsychosis in itself is no evil, and Nirvana 
in its coma is not productive of any good. And as 
long as there are souls groaning in pain, the Bodhi- 
sattva cannot rest in Nirvana; there is no rest for 
his unselfish heart, so full of love and sympathy, 
until he leads all his fellow-beings to the eternal bliss 
of Buddhahood. To reach this end he employs innume- 
rable means (upaya) suggested by his disinterested 
lovingkindness. 

(6) Its Higher Spiritual Attainment. In Hinayanism 
the highest bliss attainable does not go beyond 
Arhatship which is ascetic saintliness. But the followers 
of Mahayanism attain even to Buddhahood with all 
its spiritual powers. 

(7) Its Greater Activity. When the Bodhisattva 

CHAPTER II. 65 

reaches the stage of Buddhahood, he is able to manifest 
himself everywhere in the ten quarters of the universe * 
and to minister to the spiritual needs of all sentient 
beings. 

These seven peculiarities are enumerated to be 
the reasons why the doctrine defended by the pro- 
gressive Buddhists is to be called Mahayanism, or the 
doctrine of great vehicle, in contradistinction to 
Hmayanism, the doctrine of small vehicle. In each 
case, therefore, Asanga takes pains to draw the line 
of demarcation distinctly between the two schools 
of Buddhism and not between Buddhism and all 
other religious doctrines which existed at his time. 

The Ten Essential Features of Buddhism. 

The following statement of the ten essential fea- 
tures of Mahayanism as presented in the Comprehen- 
sive Treatise on Mahayanism, is made from a diffe- 
rent standpoint from the preceding one, for it is 
the pronunciamento of the Yogacara school of Asanga 

1 Ancient Hindu Buddhists, with their fellow-philosophers, 
believed in the existence of spiritually transfigured beings, 
who, not hampered by the limitations of space and time, can 
manifest themselves everywhere for the benefit of all sentient 
beings. We notice some mysterious figures in almost all Mahayana 
sutras, who are very often described as shedding innumerable 
rays of light from the forehead and illuminating all the three 
thousand worlds simultaneously. This may merely be a poetic 
exaggeration. But this Sambhogakaya or Body of Bliss (see 
Acvaghosa's Awakening of Faith, p. 101) is very difficult for 
us to comprehend as it is literally described. For a fuller 
treatment see the chapter on "Trikaya." 

5 

66 CHAPTER II. 

and Vasubandhu rather than that of Mahayanism 
generally. This school together with the Madhyamika 
school of Nagarjuna constitute the two divisions of 
Hindu Mahayanism. 4 

The points enumerated by Asanga and Vasubandhu 
as most essential in their system are ten. 

(i) It teaches an immanent existence of all things 
in the Alayavijnana or All-Conserving Soul. The 
conception of an All-Conserving Soul, it is claimed, 
was suggested by Buddha in the so-called Hinayana 
sutras ; but on account of its deep meaning and of 
the liability of its being confounded with the ego-soul 
conception, he did not disclose its full significance 
in their sutras; but made it known only in the 
Mahayana sutras. 

According to the Yogacara school, the Alaya is 
not an universal, but an individual mind or soul, 
whatever we may term it, in which the "germs" of 
all things exist in their ideality. 2 The objective 
world in reality does not exist, but by dint of sub- 

1 Though I am very much tempted to digress and to enter 
into a specific treatment concerning these two Hindu Maha- 
yana doctrines, I reluctantly refrain from so doing, as it 
requires a somewhat lengthy treatment and does not entirely 
fall within the scope of the present work. 

2 That Agvaghosa's conception of the Alaya varies with the 
view here presented may be familiar to readers of his Awak- 
ening of Faith. This is one of the most abstruse problems 
in the philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism, and there are 
several divergent theories concerning its nature, attributes, 
activities, etc. In a work like this, it is impossible to give 
even a general statement of those controversies, however 

CHAPTER II. 67 

jective illusion that is created by ignorance, we pro- 
ject all these "germs" in the Alayavijnana to the 
outside world, and imagine that they are there really 
as they are ; while the Manovijnana (ego-consciousness) 
which is too a product of illusion, tenaciously clin- 
ging to the Alayavijfiana as the real self, never aban- 
dons its egoism. The Alayavijnana, however, is indif- 
ferent to, and irresponsible for, all these errors on 
the part of the Manovijnana. * 

(2) The Yogacara school distinguishes three kinds 
of knowledge: I. Illusion (parikalpita), 2. Discrimi- 
native or Relative Knowledge (paratantra), and 3. 
Perfect Knowledge (parinispanna). 

The distinction may best be illustrated by the well- 
known analogy of a rope and a snake. Deceived by 
a similarity in appearance, men frequently take a 
rope lying on the ground for a poisonous snake and 

interesting they may be to students of the history of intellec- 
tual development in India. 

The Alayavijnana, to use the phraseology of Samkhya phi- 
losophy, is a composition, so to speak, of the Soul (purusa) 
and Primordial Matter (prakrti). It is the Soul, so far as it 
is neutral and indifferent to all those phenomenal manifesta- 
tions, that are going on within as well as without us. It is 
Primordial Matter, inasmuch as it is the reservoir of everything, 
whose lid being lifted by the hands of Ignorance, there in- 
stantly springs up this universe of limitation and relativity. 
Enlightenment or Nirvana, therefore, consists in recognising 
the error of Ignorance and not in clinging to the products 
of imagination. 

1 For a more detailed explanation of the ideal philosophy 
of the Yogacara, see my article on the subject in Le Muse'on, 
1905- 

68 CHAPTER II. 

are terribly shocked on that accoun t. But when they 
approach and carefully examine it, they become at 
once convinced of the groundlessness of this apprehen- 
sion, which was the natural sequence of illusion. This 
may be considered to correspond to what Kant calls 
Schein . 

Most people, however, do not go any further in 
their inquiry. They are contented with the sensual, 
empirical knowledge of an object with which they 
come in contact. When they understand that the 
thing they mistook for a snake was really nothing 
but a yard of innocent rope, they think their knowl- 
edge of the object is complete, and do not trouble 
themselves with a philosophical investigation as to 
whether the rope which to them is just what it 
appears to be, has any real existence in itself. They do 
not stop a moment to reflect that their knowledge 
is merely relative, for it does not go beyond the 
phenomenal significance of the things they perceive. 

But is an object in reality such as it appears to 
be to our senses? Are particular phenomena as such 
really actual? What is the value of our knowledge 
concerning those so-called realities? When we make 
an investigation into such problems as these, the 
Yogacara school says, we find that their existence is 
only relative and has no absolute value whatever 
independent of the perceiving subject. They are the 
"ejection" of our ideas into the outside world, which 
are centred and conserved in our Alayavijnana and 
which are awakened into activity by subjective 

CHAPTER II. 69 

ignorance. This clear insight into the nature of things, 
i.e., into their non-realness as atman, constitutes perfect 
knowledge. 

(3) When we attain to the perfect knowledge, we 
recognise the ideality of the universe. There is no 
such thing as an objective world, which is really an 
illusive manifestation of the mind called Alayavijnana, 
But even this supposedly real existence of the 
Alayavijnana is a product of particularisation called 
forth by the ignorant Manovijnana. The Manovijnana, 
or empirical ego, as it might be called, having no 
adequate knowledge as to the true nature of the 
Alaya, takes the latter for a metaphysical agent, that 
like the master of a puppet-show manages all mental 
operations according to its humour. As the silkworm 
imprisons itself in the cacoon created by itself, the 
Manovijnana, entangling itself in ignorance and con- 
fusion, takes its own illusory creations for real 
realities. 

(4) For the regulation of moral life, the Yogacara 
with the other Mahayana schools, proposes the prac- 
tising of the six Paramitas (virtues of perfection), 
which are : I . Dana (giving), 2. ftla (moral precept), 
3. Ksanti (meekness), 4. Virya (energy), 5. Dhyana 
(meditation), 6. Prajna (knowledge or wisdom). In 
way of explanation, says Asanga: "By not clinging 
to wealth or pleasures (i), by not cherishing any 
thoughts to violate the precepts (2), by not feeling 
dejected in the face of evils (3), by not awakening 
any thought of indolence while practising goodness (4), 

7O CHAPTER II. 

by maintaining serenity of mind in the midst of 
disturbance and confusion of this world (5), and finally 
by always practising ekacitta f and by truthfully 
comprehending the nature of things (6), the Bodhisat- 
tvas recognise the truth of vijnanamatra, — the truth 
that there is nothing that is not of ideal or subjective 
creation. 

(5) Mahayanism teaches that there are ten spiritual 
stages of Bodhisattvahood, viz., I. Pramudita, 2. Vimala, 
3 Prabhakari, 4. Arcismati, 5. Sudurjaya, 6. Abhimukhi, 
7. Durangama, 8. Acala, 9. Sadhumati, 10. Dharmame- 
gha2. By passing through all these stages one after 
another, we are believed to reach the oneness of 
Dharmakaya. 

(6) The Yogacarists claim that the precepts that 
are practised by the followers of Mahayanism are far 
superior to those of Hinayanists. The latter tend to 
externalism and formalism, and do not go deep into 
our spiritual, subjective motives. Now, there are 
physical, verbal, and spiritual precepts observed by 
the Buddha. The Hinayanists observe the first two 
neglecting the last which is by far more important 
than the rest. For instance, the (Jravaka's interpreta- 
tion of the ten £iksas 3 is literal and not spiritual; 

1 -'One mind" or "one heart" meaning the mental attitude 
which is in harmony with the monistic view of nature in its 
broadest sense. 

2 These ten stages of spiritual development are somewhat 
minutely explained below. See Chapter XII. 

8 The ten moral precepts of the Buddha are: (i) Kill no 
living being; (2) Take nothing that is not given; (3) Keep 

CHAPTER II. 71 

further, they follow these precepts because they wish 
to attain Nirvana for their own sake, and not for 
others'. The Bodhisattva, on the other hand, does not 
wish to be bound within the narrow circle of moral 
restriction. Aiming at an universal emancipation of 
mankind, he ventures even violating the ten c.iksas, 
if necessary. The first giksa, for instance, forbids the 
killing of any living being; but the Bodhisattva does 
not hesitate to go to war, in case the cause he espous- 
es is right and beneficient to humanity at large. 

(7) As Mahayanism insists on the purification of 
the inner life, its teaching applies not to things 
outward, its principles are not of the ascetic and 
exclusive kind. The Mahay anists do not shun to 
commingle themselves with the "dust of worldliness" ; 
they aim at the realisation of the Bodhi; they are 
not afraid of being thrown into the whirlpool of 
metempsychosis; they endeavor to impart spiritual 
benefits to all sentient beings without regard to 
their attitude, whether hostile or friendly, towards 
themselves ; having immovable faith in the Mahayana, 
they never become contaminated by vanity and 
worldly pleasures with which they may constantly 
be in touch ; they have a clear insight into the doc- 
trine of non-atman ; being free from all spiritual 
faults, they live in perfect accord with the laws of 
Suchness and discharge their duties without the 

matrimonial sanctity; (4) Do not lie; (5) Do not slander; 
(6) Do not insult; (7) Do not chatter; (8) Be not greedy; 
(9) Bear no malice; (10) Harbor no scepticism. 

72 CHAPTER II. 

least conceit or self-assertion : in a word, their inner 
life is a realisation of the Dharmakaya. 

(8) The intellectual superiority of the Bodhisattva 
is shown by his possession of knowledge of non-par- 
ticularisation (andndrtka). 1 This knowledge, philoso- 
phically considered, is the knowledge of the absolute, 
or the knowledge of the universal. The Bodhisattva's 
mind is free from the dualism of samsara (birth-and- 
death) and nirvana, of positivism and negativism, of 
being and non-being, of object and subject, of ego 
and non-ego. His knowledge, in short, transcends 
the limits of final realities, soaring high to the 
realm of the absolute and the abode of non-par- 
ticurality. 

(g) In consequence of this intellectual elevation, 
the Bodhisattva perceives the working of birth and 
death in nirvana, and nirvana in the transmigration 
of birth and death. He sees the "ever-changing 
many" in the "never-changing one," and the "never- 

1 Mahayanism recognises two "entrances" through which a 
comprehensive knowledge of the universe is obtained. One 
is called the "entrance of sameness" (samatd) and the other 
the "entrance of diversity" (nandtva). The first entrance 
introduces us to the universality of things and suggests a 
pantheistic interpretation of existence. The second leads us 
to the particularity of things culminating in monotheism or 
polytheism, as it is viewed from different standpoints. The 
Buddhists declare that neither entrance alone can lead us to 
the sanctum sanctorum of existence ; and in order to obtain 
a sound, well-balanced knowledge of things in general, we 
must go through both the entrances of universality and parti- 
cularity. 

CHAPTER II. 73 

changing one'1 in the "ever-changing many." His 
inward life is in accord at once with the laws of 
transitory phenomena and with those of transcenden- 
tal Suchness. According to the former, he does not 
recoil as ascetics do when he comes in contact with 
the world of the senses ; he is not afraid of suffering 
the ills that the flesh is heir to; but, according to 
the latter, he never clings to things evanescent, his 
inmost consciousness forever dwells in the serenity 
of eternal Suchness. 

(10) The final characteristic to be mentioned as 
distinctly Mahayanistic is the doctrine of Trikaya. 
There is, it is asserted, the highest being which is 
the ultimate cause of the universe and in which all 
existences find their essential origin and significance. 
This is called by the Mahay anists Dharmakaya. The 
Dharmakaya, however, does not remain in its abso- 
luteness, it reveals itself in the realm of cause and 
effect. It then takes a particular form. It becomes 
a devil, or a god, or a deva, or a human being, or 
an animal of lower grade, adapting itself to the 
degrees of the intellectual development of the people. 
For it is the people's inner needs which necessitate 
the special forms of manifestation. This is called 
Nirmanakaya, that is, the body of transformation. 
The Buddha who manifested himself in the person 
of Gautama, the son of King of (^uddhodana about two 
thousand five hundred years ago on the Ganges, is 
a form of Nirmanakaya. The third one is called 
Sambhogakaya, or body of bliss. This is the spiri- 

74 CHAPTER II. 

tual body of a Buddha, invested with all possible 
grandeur in form and in possession of all imaginable 
psychic powers. The conception of Sambhogakaya 
is full of wild imaginations which are not easy of 
comprehension by modern minds. ! 

These characteristics enumerated at seven or ten 
as peculiarly Mahayanistic are what the Hindu Bud- 
dhist philosophers of the first century down to the 
fifth or sixth century of the Christian era thought 
to be the most essential points of their faith and 
what they thought entitled it to be called the "Great 
Vehicle" (Mahay ana) of salvation, in contradistinction 
to the faith embraced by their conservative brethren. 
But, as we view them now, the points here specified 
are to a great extent saturated with a partisan spirit, 
and besides they are more or less scattered and 
unconnected statements of the so-called salient fea- 
tures of Mahayanism. Nor do they furnish much 
information concerning the nature of Mahayanism 
as a coherent system of religious teachings. They 
give but a general and somewhat obscure delineation 
of it, and that in opposition to Hinayanism. In point 
of fact, Mahayanism is a school of Buddhism and 
has many characteristics in common with Hinaya- 
nism. Indeed, the spirit of the former is also that 
of the latter, and as far as the general trend of 
Buddhism is concerned there is no need of em- 

1 The doctrine ol Trikaya will be given further elucidation 
in the chapter bearing the same title. 

CHAPTER II. 75 

phasising the significance of one school over the 
other. On the following pages I shall try to present 
a more comprehensive and impartial exposition of 
the Buddhism, which has been persistently designated 
by its followers as Mahayanism. 

SPECULATIVE MAHAYANISM. 

CHAPTER III. 
PRACTISE AND SPECULATION. 

TV /TAHAvANISM perhaps can best be treated in two 
•* •*• main divisions, as it has distinctly two principal fea- 
tures in its doctrinal development. I may call one 
the speculative phase of Mahayanism and the other 
practical. The first part is essentially a sort of 
Buddhist metaphysics, where the mind is engaged 
solely in ratiocination and abstraction. Here the 
intellect plays a very prominent part, and some of 
the most abstruse problems of philosophy are freely 
discussed. Speculative followers of Buddhism have 
taken great interest in the discussion of them and 
have written many volumes on various subjects. ' 

1 No efforts have yet been made systematically to trace 
the history of the development of the Mahayana thoughts in 
India as well as in China and Japan. We have enough ma- 
terial at least to follow the general course it has taken, as 
far as the Chinese and Tibetan collections of Tripitaka are 
concerned. When a thorough comparison by impartial, un- 
prejudiced scholars of these documents has been made with 
the Pali and Sanskrit literature, then we shall be able to 
write a comprehensive history of the human thoughts that 

CHAPTER III. 77 

The second or practical phase of Mahayanism deals 
with such religious beliefs that constitute the life 
and essence of the system. Mahayanists might have 
reasoned wrongfully to explain their practical faith, 
but the faith itself is the outburst of the religious 
sentiment which is inherent in human nature. This 
practical part, therefore, is by far more important, 
and in fact it can be said that the speculative part 
is merely a preparatory step toward it. Inasmuch as 
Mahayanism is a religion and not a philosophical sys- 
tem, it must be practical, that is, it must directly 
appeal to the inmost life of the human heart. 

Relation of Feeling and Intellect in Religion. 

So much has been said about the relation between 
philosophy and religion ; and there are many scholars 
who so firmly believe in the identity of religion 
either with superstitions or with supernatural revela- 
tion, that the denial of this assertion is considered 
by them practically to be the disavowal of all religions. 
For, according to them, there is no midway in religion. 
A religion which is rational and yet practical is no 
religion. Now, Buddhism is neither a vagary of imagi- 
nation nor a revelation from above, and on this account 
it has been declared by some to be a philosophy. 
The title "Speculative Mahayanism" thus, is apt to 

have governed the Oriental people during the last two thou- 
sand years. When this is done, the result can further be 
compared with the history of other religious systems, thus 
throwing much light on the general evolution of humanity 

78 CHAPTER III. 

be taken as a confirmation of such opinion. To remove 
all the misconceptions, therefore, which might be 
entertained concerning the religious nature of Mahaya- 
nism and its attitude toward intellectualism, I have 
deemed it wise here to say a few words about the 
relation between feeling and intellect in religion. 

There is no doubt that religion is essentially prac- 
tical; it does not necessarily require theorisation. 
The latter, properly speaking, is the business of 
philosophy. If religion was a product of the intellect 
solely, it could not give satisfaction to the needs of 
man's whole being. Reason constitutes but a part of 
the organised totality of an individual being. Abstrac- 
tion however high, and speculation however deep, do 
not as such satisfy the inmost yearings of the human 
heart. But this they can do when they enter into 
one's inner life and constitution ; that is, when abstrac- 
tion becomes a concrete fact and speculation a living 
principle in one's existence ; in short, when philosophy 
becomes religion. 

Philosophy as such, therefore, is generally distin- 
guished from religion. But we must not suppose that 
religion as the deepest expression of a human being 
can eliminate altogether from it the intellectual 
element. The most predominant role in religion may 
be played by the imagination and feeling, but ratio- 
cination must not fail to assert its legitimate right in 
the co-ordination of beliefs. When this right is denied, 
religion becomes fanaticism, superstition, fata morgana, 
and even a menace to the progress of humanity. 

CHAPTER III. 79 

The intellect is critical, objective, and always tries 
to stand apart from the things that are taken up for 
examination. This alienation or keeping itself aloof 
from concrete facts on the part of the intellect, 
constantly tends to disregard the real significance of 
life, of which it is also a manifestation. Therefore, 
the conflict between feeling and reason, religion and 
science, instinct and knowledge, has been going on 
since the awakening of consciousness. 

Seeing this fact, intellectual people are generally 
prone to condemn religion as barring the freedom 
and obstructing the progress of scientific investiga- 
tions. It is true that religion went frequently to the 
other extreme and tried to suppress the just claim 
of reason; it is true that this was especially the 
case with Christianity, whose history abounds with 
regretable incidents resulting from its violent encroach- 
ments upon the domain of reason. It is also true 
that the feeling and the intellect are sometimes at 
variance, that what the feeling esteems as the most 
valuable treasure is at times relentlessly crushed by 
the reason, while the feeling looks with utmost con- 
tempt at the results that have been reached by the 
intellect after much lucubration. But this fatal con- 
flict is no better than the fight which takes place 
between the head and the tail of a hydra when it 
is cut in twain ; it always results in self-destruction. 

We cannot live under such a miserable condition 
forever; when we know that it is altogether due to 
a myopia on the part of our understanding. The 

8O CHAPTER III. 

truth is that feeling and reason "cannot do with- 
out one another, and must work together insepa- 
rably in the process of human development, since 
reason without feeling could have nothing to act for 
and would be impotent to act, while feeling without 
reason would act tyrannically and blindly — that 
is to say, if either could exist and act at all with- 
out the other; for in the end it is not feeling nor 
reason, which acts, but it is the man who acts ac- 
cording as he feels and reasons". (H. Maudsley's 
Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings, p. vn). 
If it is thus admitted that feeling and reason must 
co-ordinate and co-operate in the realisation of hu- 
man* ideals, religion, though essentially a phenomenon 
of the emotional life, cannot be indifferent to the 
significance of the intellect. Indeed, religion, as much 
as philosophy, has ever been speculating on the pro- 
blems that are of the most vital importance to hu- 
man life. In Christianity speculation has been car- 
ried on under the name of theology, though it claims 
to be fundamentally a religion of faith. In India, 
however, as mentioned elsewhere, there was no divi- 
ding line between philosophy and religion ; and every 
teaching, every system, and every doctrine, however 
abstract and speculative it might appear to the Western 
mind, was at bottom religious and always aimed 
at the deliverance of the soul. There was no philos- 
ophical system that did not have some practical 
purpose. 

Indian thinkers could not separate religion from 

CHAPTER III. 8 1 

philosophy, practice from theory. Their philosophy 
flowed out of the very spring of the human heart 
and was not a mere display of fine intellectuation. 
If their thinking were not in the right direction 
and led to a fallacy which made life more miserable, 
they were ever ready to surrender themselves to a 
superior doctrine as soon as it was discovered. But 
when they thought they were in the right track, 
they did not hesitate to sacrifice their life for it. 
Their philosophy had as much fire as religion. 

Buddhism and Speculation. 

Owing to this fact, Buddhism as much as Hinduism 
is full of abstract speculations and philosophical reflec- 
tions so much so that some Christian critics are 
inclined to deny the religiosity of Buddhism. But no 
student of the science of comparative religion would 
indorse such a view nowadays. Buddhism, in spite of 
its predominant intellectualism, is really a religious 
system. There is no doubt that it emphasises the ra- 
tional element of religion more than any other religious 
teachings, but on that account we cannot say that 
it altogether disregards the importance of the part 
to be played by the feeling. Its speculative, philoso- 
phical phase is really a preparation for fully appre- 
ciating the subjective significance of religion, for 
religion is ultimately subjective, that is to say, the 
essence of religion is love and faith, or, to use Buddhist 
phraseology, it is the expression of the Bodhi which 

6 

82 CHAPTER III. 

consists in prajna l (intelligence or wisdom) and 
karuna (love or compassion). Mere knowledge (not 
prajna) has very little value in human life. When not 
guided by love and faith, it readily turns out to be 
the most obedient servant of egoism and sensualism. 
What Tennyson says in the following verses is 
perfectly true with Buddhism : 

"Who loves not knowledge ? Who shall rail 
Against her beauty? May she mix 
With men and prosper! Who shall fix 

Her pillars? Let her work prevail. 

"But on her forehead sits a fire ; 

She sets her forward countenance 

And leaps into the future chance, 
Submitting all things to desire. 

"Half grown as yet, a child, and vain — 
She cannot fight the fear of death. 
What is she, cut from love and faith, 

But some wild Pallas from the brain 

"Of demons ? fiery-hot to burst 
All barriers in her onward race 
For power. Let her know her place; 

She is the second, not the first. 

"A higher hand must make her mild, 
If all be not in vain, and guide 
Her footsteps, moving side by side 

With Wisdom, like the younger child." 

1 Prajna, bodhi, buddhi, vidy& and jha or jnana are all syn- 
onymous and in many cases interchangeable. But they allow 
a finer discrimination. Speaking in a general way, prajn& is 
reason, bodhi wisdom or intelligence, buddht enlightenment, 
indya ideality or knowledge, and jna or jnana intellect. Of 
these five terms, prajna and bodhi are essentially Buddhistic 

CHAPTER III. 83 

But it must be remembered that Buddhism never 
ignores the part which is played by the intellect in 
the purification of faith. For it is by the judicious 
exercise of the intellect, that all religious superstitions 
and prejudices are finally destroyed. 

The intellect is so far of great consequence, and 
we must respect it as the thunderbolt of Vajrapani, 
which crushes everything that is mere sham and false. 
But at the same time we must also remember that 
the quintessence of religion like the house built on 
the solid rock never suffers on account of this destruc- 
tion. Its foundation lies too deeply buried in human 

and have acquired technical meaning. In this work both 
prajna and bodhi are mostly translated by intelligence, for 
their extent of meaning closely overlaps each other. But 
this is rather vague, and wherever I thought the term intel- 
ligence alone to be misleading, I either left the originals un- 
translated, or inserted them in parentheses. To be more 
exact, prajna in many cases can safely be rendered by faith, 
not a belief in revealed truths, but a sort of immediate 
knowledge gained by intuitive intelligence. Prajna corres- 
ponds in some respects to wisdom, meaning the foundation 
of all reasonings and experiences. It may also be considered 
an equivalent for Greek sophia. Bodhi, on the other hand, 
has a decidedly religious and moral significance. Besides 
being prajna itself, it is also love (karuna) \ for, according 
to Buddhism, these two, prajna and karuna, constitute the 
essence of Bodhi. May Bodhi be considered in some respects 
synonymous with the divine wisdom as understood by Chris- 
tian dogmatists? But there is something in the Buddhist 
notion of Bodhi that cannot properly be expressed by wisdom 
or intelligence. This seems to be due to the difference of 
philosophical interpretation by Buddhists and Christians of 
the conception of God. It will become clearer as we proceed 
farther. 

84 CHAPTER III. 

heart to be damaged by knowledge or science. So 
long as there is a human heart warm with blood and 
burning with the fire of life, the intellect however 
powerful will never be able to trample it under foot 
Indeed, the more severely the religious sentiment is 
tested in the crucible of the intellect, the more glo- 
rious and illuminating becomes its intrinsic virtue. 
The true religion is, therefore, never reluctant to appear 
before the tribunal of scientific investigation. In fact 
by ignoring the ultimate significance of the religious 
consciousness, science is digging its own grave. For 
what purpose has science other than the unravelling 
of the mysteries of nature and reading into the 
meaning of existence? And is this not what consti- 
tutes the foundation of religion? Science cannot be 
final, it must find its reason in religion ; as a mere 
intellectual exercise it is not worthy of our serious 
consideration. 

Religion and Metaphysics. 

The French sociologist, M. Guyau, says in his 
Irreligion of the Future (English translation p. 10) : 

"Every positive and historical religion presents 
three distinctive and essential elements: (i) An at- 
tempt at a mythical and non-scientific explanation 
of natural phenomena (divine intervention, miracles, 
efficacious prayers, etc.), or of historical facts (incar- 
nation of Jesus Christ or of Buddha, revelation, and 
so forth) ; (2) A system of dogmas, that is to say, 
of symbolic ideas, of imaginative beliefs, forcibly 

CHAPTER III. 85 

imposed upon one's faith as absolute verities, even 
though they are susceptible of no scientific demon- 
stration or philosophical justification; (3) A cult and 
a system of rites, that is to say, of more or less 
immutable practices regarded as possessing a mar- 
velous efficacy upon the course of things, a propi- 
tiatory virtue. A religion without myth, without dogma, 
without cult, without rite, is no more than that 
somewhat bastard product, 'natural religion,' which 
is resolvable to a system of metaphysical hypotheses." 
M Guyau seems to think that what will be left 
in religion, when severed from its superstitions and 
imaginary beliefs and mysterious rites, is a system 
of metaphysical speculations, and that, therefore, it 
is not a religion. But in my opinion the French so- 
ciologist shares the error that is very prevalent 
among the scientific men of to-day. He is perfectly 
right in trying to strip religion of all its ephemeral 
elements and external integuments, but he is entirely 
wrong when he does this at the expense of its very 
essence, which consists of the inmost yearings of 
the human heart. And this essence has no affinity 
with the superstitions which grow round it like 
excrescences as the results of insufficient or abnormal 
nourishment. Nor does it concern itself with mere 
philosophising and constructing hypotheses about 
metaphysical problems. Far from it. Religion is a 
cry from the abysmal depths of the human heart, 
that can never be silenced, until it finds that something 
and identifies itself with it, which reveals the teleo- 

86 CHAPTER III. 

logical significance of life and the universe. But this 
something has a subjective value only, as Goethe 
makes Faust exclaim, "Feeling is all in all, name 
for it I have none." Why? Because it cannot objec- 
tively or intellectually be demonstrated, as in the 
case with those laws which govern phenomenal exis- 
tences, — the proper objects of the discursive human 
understanding. And this subjectivity of religion is 
what makes "all righteousnesses as filthy garments." 
If religion deprived of its dogmas and cults is to 
be considered, as M. Guyau thinks, nothing but a 
system of metaphysics, we utterly lose sight of its 
subjective significance or its emotional element, which 
indeed constitutes its raison d'etre. 

* * 
* 

Having this in view we proceed to see first on 
what metaphysical hypothesis speculative Mahayana 
Buddhism is built up ; but the reader must remember 
that this phase of Mahayanism is merely a preliminary 
to its more essential part, which we expound later 
under the heading of "Practical Mahayanism," in 
contradistinction to "Speculative Mahayanism." 

CHAPTER IV. 
CLASSIFICATION OF KNOWLEDGE 

Three Forms of Knowledge. 

JV/T AHAYANISM generally distinguishes two or three 
forms of knowledge. This classification is a sort 
of epistemology, inasmuch as it proposes to ascertain 
the extent and nature of human knowledge, from a re- 
ligious point of view. Its object is to see what kind of 
human knowledge is most reliable and valuable for the 
annihilation of ignorance and the attainment of enlight- 
enment. The Mahayana school which has given most 
attention to this division of Buddhist philosophy is 
the Yogacara of Asanga and Vasubandhu. The Lan- 
kavatara and the Sandhinirmocana and some other 
Sutras, on which the school claims to have its doctrinal 
foundation, teach three forms of knowledge. The 
sutra literature, however, as a rule does not enter 
into any detailed exposition of the subject ; it merely 
classifies knowledge and points out what form of 
knowledge is most desirable by the Buddhists. To 
obtain a fuller and more discursive elucidation, we 
must come to the Abhidharma Pitaka of that school. 
Of the text books most generally studied of the 

88 CHAPTER IV. 

Yogacara, we may mention Vasubandhu's Vijnanamatra 
with its commentaries and Asanga's Comprehensive 
Treatise on Mahdydnism The following statements 
are abstracted mainly from these documents. 

The three forms of knowledge as classified by the 
Yogacara are: (i) Illusion (parikalpita), (2) Relative 
Knowledge (paratantra), and (3) Absolute Knowledge 
(parinispanna) . 

Illusion. 

Illusion (parikalpita), to use Kantian phraseology, 
is a sense-perception not co-ordinated by the categories 
of the understanding; that is to say, it is a purely 
subjective elaboration, not verified by objective reality 
and critical judgment. So long as we make no practical 
application of it, it will harbor no danger; there is 
no evil in it, at least religiously. Perceptual illusion 
is a psychical fact, and as such it is justified. A 
straight rod in water appears crooked on account of 
the refraction of light ; a sensation is often felt in 
the limb after it has been amputated, for the nervous 
system has not yet adjusted itself to the new condition. 
They are all illusions, however. They are doubtless 
the correct interpretation of the sense-impressions 
in question, but they are not confirmed by other 
sense-impressions whose coordination is necessary 
to establish an objective reality. The moral involved 
in this is : all sound inferences and correct behavior 
must be based on critical knowledge and not on 
illusory premises. 

CHAPTER IV. 89 

Reasoning in this wise, the Mahayanists declare 
that the egoism fostered by vulgar minds belongs to 
this class of knowledge, though of a different order, 
and that those who tenaciously cling to egoism as 
their final stronghold are believers in an intellectual 
fata morgana, and are like the thirsty deer that madly 
after the visionary water in the desert, or like the 
crafty monkey that tries to catch the lunar reflection 
in the water. Because the belief in the existence of 
a metaphysical agent behind our mental phenomena 
is not confirmed by experience and sound judgment, 
it being merely a product of unenlightened subjectivity. 

Besides this ethical and philosophical egoism, all 
forms of world-conception which is founded on the 
sandy basis of subjective illusion, such as fetichism, 
idolatry, anthropomorphism, anthropopsychism, and 
the like, must be classed under the parikalpita-laksana 
as doctrines having illusionary premises. 

Relative Knowledge. 

Next comes the paratantra-laksana , a welt-an- 
schauung based upon relative knowledge, or better, 
upon the knowledge of the law of relativity. Accord- 
ing to this view, everything in the world has a 
relative and conditional existence, and nothing can 
claim an absolute reality free from all limitations. 
This closely corresponds to the theory advanced by 
most of modern scientists, whose agnosticism denies 
our intellectual capability of transcending the law of 
relativity. 

QO CHAPTER IV. 

^ The paratantra-laksana, therefore, consists in the 
knowledge derived from our daily intercourse with 
the outward world. It deals with the highest ab- 
stractions we can make out of our sensuous expe- 
riences. It is positivistic in its strictest sense. It 
says : The universe has only a relative existence, and 
our knowledge is necessarily limited. Even the highest 
generalisation cannot go beyond the law of relativity. 
It is impossible for us to know the first cause and 
the ultimate end of existence ; nor have we any 
need to go thus beyond the sphere of existence, which 
would inevitably involve us in the maze of mystic 
imagination. 

The paratantra-laksana, therefore, is a positivism, 
agnosticism, or empiricism in its spirit. Though the 
Yogacara Buddhists do not use all these modern phi- 
losophical terms, the interpretation here given is really 
what they intended to mean by the second form of 
knowledge. A world-conception based on this view, 
it is declared by the Mahayanists, is sound as far 
as our perceptual knowledge is concerned ; but it 
does not exhaust the entire field of human experi- 
ence, for it does not take into account our spiritual 
life and our inmost consciousness. There is some- 
thing in the human heart that refuses to be satisfied 
with merely systematising under the so-called laws 
of nature those multitudinous impressions which we 
receive from the outside world. There is a singular 
feeling, or sentiment, or yearning, whatever we may 
call it, in our inmost heart, which defies any plainer 

CHAPTER IV. 91 

description than a mere suggestion or an indirect 
statement. This somewhat mystic consciousness 
seems despite its obscureness to contain the meaning 
of our existence as well as that of the universe. The 
intellect may try to persuade us with all its subtle 
reasonings to subdue this disquieting feeling and to 
remain contented with the systematising of natural 
laws, so called. But it is deceiving itself by so doing; 
because the intellect is but a servant to the heart, 
and so far as it is not forced to self-contradiction, 
it must accommodate itself to the needs of the heart. 
That is to say, we must transcend the narrow limits 
of conditionality and see what indispensable postulates 
are underlying our life and experiences. The recog- 
nition of these indispensable postulates of life con- 
stitutes the Yogacara's third form of knowledge called 
parinispanna-laksana. 

Absolute Knowledge. 

Parinispanna-laksana literally means the world- 
view founded on the most perfect knowledge. Ac- 
cording to this view, the universe is a monistico- 
pantheistic system. While phenomenal existences 
are regulated by natural laws characterised by condi- 
tionality and individuation, they by no means exhaust 
all our experiences which are stored in our inmost 
consciousness. There must be something, — this is 
the absolute demand of humanity, the ultimate postu- 
late of experience, — be it Will, or Intelligence, 
which, underlying and animating all existences, forms 

92 CHAPTER IV. 

the basis of cosmic, ethical, and religious life. This 
highest Will, or Intelligence, or both may be term- 
ed God, but the Mahayanists call it religiously Dhar- 
makaya, ontologically Bhutatathata, and psycholog- 
ically Bodhi or Sambodhi. And they think it must 
be immanent in the universe manifesting itself in 
all places and times ; it must be the cause of per- 
petual creation ; it must be the principle of morality. 
This being so, how do we come to the recognition 
of its presence? The Buddhists say that when our 
minds are clear of illusions, prejudices, and egotistic 
assumptions, they become transparent and reflect 
the truth like a dust-free mirror. The illumination 
thus gained in our consciousness constitutes the 
so-called parinispanna^ the most perfect knowledge, 
that leads to Nirvana, final salvation, and eternal bliss. 

World-views Founded on the Three 
Fronts of Knowledge. 

The reason will be obvious to the reader 
why the Yogacara school distinguishes three class- 
es of world-conception founded on the three kinds 
of knowledge. The parikalpita-laksana is most 
primitive and most puerile. However, in these days 
of enlightenment, what is believed by the masses is 
naught else than a parikalpita conception of the world. 
The material existence as it appears to our senses 
is to them all in all. They seem to be unable to 
shake off the yoke of egoistic illusion and naive 
realism. Their God must be transcendent and anthro- 

CHAPTER IV. 93 

popathic, and always willing to meddle with worldly 
affairs as his whim pleases. How different the world 
is, in which the multitudes of unreflecting minds are 
living, from that which is conceived by Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas ! Hartmann, a German thinker, is right, 
when he says that the masses are at least a century 
behind in their intellectual culture. But the most 
strange thing in the world is that, in spite of all 
their ignorance and superstitious beliefs, the waves of 
universal transformation are ever carrying them onward 
to a destination, of which, perhaps, they have not the 
slightest suspicion. 

The paratantra-laksana advances a step further, 
but the fundamental error involved in it is its persis- 
tent self-contradictory disregard for what our inmost 
consciousness is constantly revealing to us. The intellect 
alone can by no means unravel the mystery of our 
entire existence. In order to reach the highest truth, 
we must boldly plunge with our whole being into a 
region where absolute darkness defying the light of 
intellect is supposed to prevail. This region which is. 
no more nor less than the field of religious conscious- 
ness is shunned by most of the intellectual people 
on the plea that the intellect by its very nature is 
unable to fathom it. But the only way that leads us 
to the final pacification of the heart-yearnings is to 
go beyond the horizons of limiting reason and to 
resort to the faith that has been planted in the heart 
as the sine qua non of its own existence and vitality. 
And by faith I mean Prajna (wisdom), transcendental 

94 CHAPTER IV. 

knowledge, that comes direct from the intelligence- 
essence of the Dharmakaya. A mind, so tired in 
vainly searching after truth and bliss in the verbiage 
of philosophy and the nonsense of ritualism, finds 
itself here completely rested bathing in the rays of 
divine effulgence, — whence this is, it does not 
question, being so filled with supramundane blessings 
which alone are felt. Buddhism calls this exalted 
spiritual state Nirvana or Moksa; and parinispanna- 
laksana is a world-conception which naturally follows 
from this subjective , ideal enlightenment. * 

Two Forms of Knowledge. 

The other Hindu Mahayanism, the Madhyamika 
school of Nagarjuna, distinguishes two, instead of 
three, orders of knowledge, but practically the 
Yogacara and the Madhyamika come to the same 
conclusion. 2 

1 For detailed exposition of the three forms of knowledge, 
the reader is requested to peruse Asanga's Comprehensive 
Treatise on Mahayanism (Nanjo's Catalogue, No. 1183), Vasu- 
bandhu's work on Mahayana idealism ( Vijnanamatra £astra, 
Nanjo, No. 1215), the Sutra on the Mystery of Deliverance 
(Sandhinirmocana-sutra, Nanjo. Nos. 246 aud 247), etc 

2 When the eminent representatives of both parties, such 
as Dharmapala and Bhavaviveka, were at the height of their 
literary activity in India about the fifth or sixth century after 
Christ, their partisan spirit incited them bitterly to denounce 
each other, forgetting the common ground on which their 
principles were laid down. Their disagreement in fact on 
which they put an undue emphasis was of a very trifling 
nature. It was merely a quarrel over phraseology, for one 
insisted on using certain words just in the sense which the 
other negated. 

CHAPTER IV. 95 

The two kinds of knowledge or truth distinguished 
by the Madhyamika philosophy are Samvrtti-satya 
and Paramartha-satya, that is, conditional truth 
and transcendental truth. We read in Nagarjuna's 
Madhyamika fdstra (Buddhist Text Society edition, 
pp. 180, 181): 

"On two truths is founded 
The holy doctrine of Buddhas: 
Truth conditional, 
And truth transcendental. 

"Those who verily know not 
The distinction of the two truths. 
Know not the essence 
Of Buddhism which is meaningful." l 

The conditional truth includes illusion and relative 
knowledge of the Yogacara school, while the tran- 
scendental truth corresponds to the absolute knowledge. 

In explaining these two truths, the Madhyamika 
philosophers have made a constant use of the terms, 
gunya and agunya, void and not-void, which unfor- 
tunately became a cause of the misunderstanding 
by Christian scholars of Nagarjuna's transcendental 
philosophy. Absolute truth is void in its ultimate 
nature, for it contains nothing concrete or real or 
individual that makes it an object of particularisation. 
But this must not be understood, as is done by 
some superficial critics, in the sense of absolute 

1 Dve satye samupa9ritya buddhanam dharde^ana 
Lokasamvrttisatyafi ca satyafi ca paramarthatah. 
Ye ca anayor na jananti vibhagam satyayor dvayoh, 
Te tatvam na vijananti gambhirabuddhagasane." 

96 CHAPTER IV. 

nothingness. The Madhyamika philosophers make the 
satya (transcendental truth) empty when contrasted 
with the realness of phenomenal existences. Because 
it is not real in the sense a particular being is 
real; but it is empty since it transcends the prin- 
ciple of individuation. When considered absolutely, 
it can neither be empty nor not-empty, neither gunya 
nor agunya, neither asti nor ndsti, neither abhdva 
nor bhava, neither real nor unreal. All these terms 
imply relation and contrast, while the Paramdrtha 
Satya is above them, or better, it unifies all con- 
trasts and antitheses in its absolute oneness. There- 
fore, even to designate it at all may lead to the mis- 
understanding of the true nature of the Satya, for 
naming is particularising. It is not, as such, an 
object of intellectuation or of demonstrative knowl- 
edge. It underlies everything conditional and pheno- 
menal, and does not permit itself to be a particular 
object of discrimination. 

Transcendental Truth and Relative 
Understanding 

One may say: If transcendental truth is of such 
an abstract nature, beyond the reach of the under- 
standing, how can we ever hope to attain it and 
enjoy its blessings? But Nagarjuna says that it is 
not absolutely out of the ken of the understanding; 
it is, on the contrary, through the understanding 
that we become acquainted with the quarter towards 
which our spiritual efforts should be directed, only 

CHAPTER IV. 97 

let us not cling to the means by which we grasp 
the final reality. A finger is needed to point at 
the moon, but when we have recognised the moon, 
let us no more trouble ourselves with the finger. The 
fisherman carries a basket to take the fish home, 
but what need has he to worry about the basket 
when the contents are safely on the table? Only so 
long as we are not yet aware of the way to enlight- 
enment, let us not ignore the value of relative knowl- 
edge or conditional truth or lokasamvrttisatya as 
Nagarjuna terms it. 

"If not by worldly knowledge, 
The truth is not understood; 
When the truth is not approached, 
Nirvana is not attained." * 

From this, it is to be infered that Buddhism never 
discourages the scientific, critical investigation of 
religious beliefs. For it is one of the functions of 
science that it should purify the contents of a belief 
and that it should point out in which direction our 
final spiritual truth and consolation have to be sought. 
Science alone which is built on relative knowledge 
is not able to satisfy all our religious cravings, but 
it is certainly able to direct us to the path of enlight- 
enment. When this path is at last revealed, we shall 
know how to avail ourselves of the discovery, as 
then Prajfia (or Sambodhi, or Wisdom) becomes the 

1 Vyavaharam anagritya paramartho na degyate, 
Paramartham anagamya nirvanam na adhigamyata. 

The Madhyamika, p. 181. 
7 

98 CHAPTER IV. 

guide of life. Here we enter into the region of the 
unknowable. The spiritual facts we experience are not 
demonstrable, for they are so direct and immediate 
that the uninitiated are altogether at a loss to get a 
glimpse of them. 

CHAPTER V. 

BHUTATATHATA (SUCHNESS). 

1HROM the ontological point of view, Paramartha-satya 
or Parinispanna (transcendental truth) is called 
Bhutatathata, which literally means "suchness of exist- 
ence." As Buddhism does not separate being from 
thought nor thought from being, what is suchness in 
the objective world, is transcendental truth in the 
subjective world, and vice versa Bhutatathata, then, 
is the Godhead of Buddhism , and it marks the con- 
summation of all our mental efforts to reach the 
highest principle, which unifies all possible contradic- 
tions and spontaneously directs the course of world- 
events. In short, it is the ultimate postulate of exist- 
ence. Like Paramartha-satya, as above stated, it does 
not belong to the domain of demonstrative knowledge 
or sensuous experience ; it is unknowable by the 
ordinary processes of intellectuation, which the natural 
sciences use in the formulation of general laws; and 
it is grasped, declare the Buddhists, only by the 
minds that are capable of exercising what might be 
called religious intuition. 

Agvaghosa argues, in his Awakening of Faith for 
the indefinability of this first principle. When we say 
it is c.unya or empty, on account of its being indepen- 

IOO CHAPTER V. 

dent of all the thinkable qualities, which we attribute 
to things relative and conditional, people would take 
it for the nothingness of absolute void But when we 
define it as a real reality, as 'it stands above the 
evanescence of phenomena, they would imagine that 
there is something individual and existing outside the 
pale of this universe, which, though as concrete as 
we ourselves are, lives an eternal life. It is like 
describing to the blind what an elephant looks like; 
each one of them gets but a very indistinct and 
imperfect conception of the huge creature, yet every 
one of them thinks he has a true and most comprehen- 
sive idea of it. l Agvaghosa, thus, wishes to eschew all 
definite statements concerning the ultimate nature of 
being, but as language is the only mode with which 
we mortals can express our ideas and communicate 
them to others, he thinks the best expression that 
can be given to it is Bhutatathata, i. e., "suchness of 
existence," or simply, "suchness." 

Bhutatathata (suchness), thus absolutely viewed, does 
not fall under the category of being and non-being; 
and minds which are kept within the narrow circle 
of contrasts, must be said to be incapable of grasping 
it as it truly is. Says Nagarjuna in his (Jastra (Ch. XV.) : 

"Between thisness (svabhava) and thatness (parabhdva), 

Between being and non-being, 

Who discriminates, 

The truth of Buddhism he perceives not." * 

1 Cf. The Udana, chapter VI. 

1 Svabhavam parabhavanca, bhavancabhavameva ca, 
Ye pagyanti, na pac.yante tatvam hi buddhagasane. 

CHAPTER V. IOI 

Or, 

"To think 'it is', is eternalism, 
To think 'it is not', is nihilism: 
Being and non-being, 
The wise cling not to either/*1 

Again, 

"The dualism of ' to be * and ' not to be, ' 
The dualism of pure and not-pure : 
Such dualism having abandoned, 
The wise stand not even in the middle."9 

To quote, again, from the Awakening of Faith 
(pp. 58—59): "In its metaphysical origin, Bhatata- 
that£ has nothing to do with things defiled, i.e., 
conditional: it is free from all signs of individuali- 
sation, such as exist in phenomenal objects: it is 
independent of an unreal, particularising consciousness." 

Indefinabitity. 

Absolute Suchness from its very nature thus defies 
all definitions. We cannot even say that it is, for 
everything that is presupposes that which is not: 
existence and non-existence are relative terms as 
much as subject and object, mind and matter, this 
and that, one and other: one cannot be conceived 

1 Astiti ca^vatagraho, nastltyucchedadarcanam: 
Tasmadastitvanastitve nacriyet* vicaksanmh 
1 Astiti n&stiti ubhe ' pi anti 
£uddhi aguddhiti ime 'pi anti; . 
Tasmadubhe anta vivarjayitva 
Madhye ' pi syanam na karoti pa^ditmh. 

IO2 CHAPTBft V. 

without the other. "It is not so (na &*)1," therefore, 
may be the only way our imperfect human tongue 
can express it. So the Mahayanists generally desig- 
nate absolute Suchness as £unyata or void. 

But when this most significant word, cunyata, is 
to be more fully interpreted, we would say with 
Ac.vaghosa that "Suchness is neither that which is 
existence nor that which is non-existence; neither 
that which is at once existence and non-existence, 
nor that which is not at once existence and non- 
existence; it is neither that which is unity nor that 
which is plurality; neither that which is at once unity 
and plurality, nor that which is not at once unity 
and plurality.'* * 

1 This is the famous phrase in the Brhadaranyaka Upamsat 
occurring in several places (II, 3, 6 ; III, 9, 26 ; IV, 2, 4 ; IV 
4, 22; IV, 5, 5). The Atman or Brahman, it says, "is tc 
be described by No, No! He is incomprehensible, for h< 
cannot be comprehended; he is imperishable, for he cannot 
perish; he is unattached, for he does not attach himself 
unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not fail. Him (whc 
knows), these two do not overcome, whether he says that foi 
some reason he has done evil, or for some reason he has don< 
good— he overcomes both, and neither what he has done, noi 
what he has omitted to do, affects him." 

* The Awakening of Faith, p. 59. Cf. this with the utterances 
of Dionysius the Areopagite, as quoted by Prof. W. Jaraei 
in his Varieties of Religious Experience^ pp. 416—41? : Th< 
cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor ha* 
it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence; nor is il 
spoken or thought It is neither number, nor order, noi 
magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality, nor inequality, noi 
similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands, nor moves 
nor rests..*. It is neither essence, nor eternity, nor time 

CHAPTER V. IO3 

Nagarjana's famous doctrine of "The Middle Path 
of Eight No's" breathes the same spirit, which declares : 

"There is no death, no birth, no destruction, no persistence, 
No oneness, no manyness, no coming, no departing, l 

Elsewhere, he expresses the same idea in a some- 
what paradoxical manner, making the historical Buddha 
a real concrete manifestation of Suchness : 

"After his passing, deem not thus: 
' The Buddha still is here, ' 
He is above all contrasts, 
To be and not to be. 

"While living, deem not thus: 
c The Buddha is now here. ' 
He is above all contrasts, 
To be and not to be." * 

This view of Suchness as no-ness abounds in the 
literature of the Dhyana school of Mahayanism. To 
cite one instance : When Bodhi-Dharma 3, the founder 

Even intellectual contact does not belong to it. It is neither 
science nor truth. It is not even royalty nor wisdom ; not 
one ; not unity ; not divinity or goodness ; nor even spirit as 
we know it.". . . . ad libitum. 

T Anirodham anutpadam anucchedam ac.ac_vatam, 
Anekartham ananartham anagamam anirgamam. 

(Madhyamika fdstra, first stanza.) 
2 Param nirodhadbhagavan bhavatityeva nohyate, 
Na bhavatyubhayam ceti nobhayam ceti nohyate : 
Atisthamano ' pi bhagavan bhavatityeva nohyate, 
Na bhavatyubhayam ceti nobhayam ceti nohyate. 

(Madhyamika, p. 199). 

3 He was the third son of king of Kac.i<?) in southern India. 
He came to China A. D. 527 and after a vain attempt to con- 
vert Emperor Wu to his own view, he retired to a monastery, 
where, it is reported, he spent all day in gazing at the wall 

IO4 CHAPTER V. 

of the Dhyana sect, saw Emperor Wu of Liang dynasty 
(A D. 502 — 556), he was asked what the first principle 
of the Holy Doctrine was, he did not give any lengthy, 
periphrastic statement- after the manner of a philosopher, 
but laconically replied, "Vast emptiness and nothing 
holy.0 The Emperor was bewildered and did not know 
how to take the words of his holy adviser. Naturally, 
he did not expect such an abrupt answer, and, being 
greatly disappointed, ventured another question: 
"Who is he, then, that stands before me?" By this 
he meant to repudiate the doctrine of absolute Such- 
ness. His line of argument being this : If there is 
nothing in the ultimate nature of things that distin- 
guishes between holiness and sinfulness, why this 
world of contrasts, where some are revered as holy, 
for instance, Bodhi-Dharma who is at this very 
moment standing in front of him with the mission 
of propagating the holy teachings of Buddha ? Bodhi- 
Dharma, however, was a mystic and was fully con- 
vinced of the insufficiency of the human tongue to 
express the highest truth which is revealed only 

without making any further venture to propagate his mysticism. 
But finally he found a most devoted disciple in the person 
of Shen Kuang, who was once a Confucian, and through whom 
the Dhyana school became one of the most powerful Mahayana 
sect in China as well as in Japan. Dharma died in the year 
535. Besides the one here mentioned, he had another audience 
with the Emperor. At that time, the Emperor said to Dharma: 
"I have dedicated so many monasteries, copied so many 
sacred books, and converted so many bhiksus and bhiksunis : 
what do you think my merits are or ought to be?" To this, 
however, Dharma replied curtly, "No merit whatever." 

CHAPTER V. IO5 

intuitively to the religious consciousness. His con- 
clusive answer was, "I do not know" 4 

This "I do not know" is not to be understood 
in the spirit of agnosticism, "but in the sense of 
"God when understood is no God," for in se est 
et per se conceptur. This way of describing Suchness 
by negative terms only, excluding all differences of 
name and form (namarupa) to reach a higher kind 
of affirmation, seems to be the most appropriate 
one, inasmuch as the human understanding is limited 
in so many respects ; but, nevertheless, it has caused 
much misinterpretation even among Buddhists them- 
selves, not to mention those Christian Buddhist schol- 
ars of to-day, who sometimes appear almost wilfully 
to misconstrue the significance of the gunyata philo- 
sophy. It was to avoid these unfortunate misinter- 
pretations that the Mahayanists frequently made the 
paradoxical assertion that absolute Suchness is 
empty and not empty, cunya and agunya, being and 
non-being, sat and asat, one and many, this and that. 

The "Thundrous Silence." 

There yet remains another mode of explaining 
absolute Suchness, which though most practical and 
most effective for the religiously disposed minds, 
may prove very inadequate to a sceptical intellect. 

1 Another interesting utterance by a Chinese Buddhist, who, 
earnestly pondering over the absoluteness of Suchness for 
several years, understood it one day all of a sudden, is: 
"The very instant you say it is something (or a nothing), 
you miss the mark." 

IO6 CHAPTER V. 

It is the "thundrous silence" of Vimalakirti in response 
to an inquiry concerning the nature of Suchness or 
the "Dharma of Non-duality/' as it is termed in 
the Sutra * 

Bodhisattva Vimalakirti j>nce asked a host of Bodhi- 
sattvas led by Manjugri, who came to visit him, 
to express their views as to how to enter into the 
Dharma of Non-duality. Some replied, "Birth and 
death are two, but the Dharma itself was never born 
and will never die. Those who understand this are 
said to enter into the Dharma of Non-duality." Some 
said, " T and 'mine' are two. Because I think 'I am' 
there are things called 'mine.' But as there is no 
'I am' where shall we look for things 'mine'? By 
thus reflecting we enter into the Dharma of Non- 
duality." Some replied, "Samsara and Nirvana are 
two. But when we understand the ultimate nature 
of Samsara, Samsara vanishes from our consciousness, 
and there is neither bondage nor release, neither 
birth nor death. By thus reflecting we enter into 
the Dharma of Non-duality." Others said, "Ignorance 
and enlightenment are two. No ignorance, no enlight- 
enment, and there is no dualism. Why? Because 
those who have entered a meditation in which there 
is no sense-impression, no cogitation, are free from 
ignorance as well as from enlightenment. This holds 
true with all the other dualistic categories. Those 
who enter thus into the thought of sameness are 

* The Vtmalaktrii Sutra, Kumarajiva's translation, Part II, 
Chapter 5. 

CHAPTER V. lO/ 

said to enter into the Dharma of Non-duality." Still 
others answered, "To long for Nirvana and to shun 
worldliness are of dualism. Long not for Nirvana, 
shun not worldliness, and we are free from dualism. 
Why? Because bondage and release are relative terms, 
and when there is no bondage from the beginning, 
who wishes to be released ? No bondage, no release, 
and therefore no longing, no shunning : this is called 
the entering into the Dharma of Non-duality." 

Many more answers of similar nature came forth 
from all the Bodhisattvas in the assembly except the 
leader Manjugri. Vimalakirti now requested him to 
give his own view, and to this Manjugri responded, 
"What I think may be stated thus: That which is 
in all beings wordless, speechless, shows no signs, 
is not possible of cognisance, and is above all ques- 
tionings and answerings, — to know this is said to 
enter into the Dharma of Non-duality." 

Finally, the host Vimalakirti himself was demanded 
by Manjucri to express his idea of Non- duality, but 
he kept completely silent and uttered not a word. 
Thereupon, Manjugri admiringly exclaimed, "Well 
done, well done ! The Dharma of Non-duality is truly 
above letters and words!"1 

1 Deussen relates, in his address delivered before the Bombay 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1893, a similar attitude 
of a Vedantist mystic in regard to the highest Brahma. 'The 
Bhava, therefore, when asked by the king Vaksalin, to explain the 
Brahman, kept silence. And when the king repeated his request 
again and again, the rishi broke out into the answer : 'I tell it you, 
but you don't understand it ; f&nto 'yam dtmd, this atmais silence !" 

IO8 CHAPTER V. 

Now, of this Suchness, the Mahayanists distinguish 
two aspects, as it is comprehended by our conscious- 
ness, which are conditional and non-conditional, or 
the phenomenal world of causality and the transcen- 
dental realm of absolute freedom. This distinction 
corresponds to that, in the field of knowledge, of 
relative truth and transcendental truth. d 

1 It is a well-known fact that the Vedanta philosophy, too, 
makes a similar distinction between Brahman as sagunam 
(qualified) and Brahman as nirgunam (unqualified). The former 
is relative, phenomenal, and has characteristics of its own; 
but the latter is absolute, having no qualification whatever 
to speak of, it is absolute Suchness. (See Max Mueller's The 
Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, p. 220 et seq.) 

Here, a very interesting question suggests itself: Which 
is the original and which is the copy, Mahayanism or Vedan- 
tism ? Most of European Sanskrit scholars would fain wish to 
dispose of it at once by declaring that Buddhism must be 
the borrower. But I am strongly inclined to the opposite 
view, for there is reliable evidence in favor of it. In a writing 
of Acvaghosa, who dates much earlier than Qankara or 
Badarayana we notice this distinction of absolute Suchness 
and relative Suchness. He writes in his Awakening of Faith 
(p- 55 et seq.) that though Suchness is free from all modes 
of limitation and conditionality, and therefore it cannot be 
thought of by our finite consciousness, yet on account of 
Avidya inherent in the human mind absolute Suchness mani- 
fests itself in the phenomenal world, thereby subjecting itself 
to the law of causality and relativity and proceeds to say 
that there is a twofold aspect in Suchness from the point 
of view of its explicability. The first aspect is trueness as 
negation (funyata) in the sense that it is completely set 
apart from the attributes of all things unreal, that it is a 
veritable reality The second aspect is trueness as affirmation 
(afunyata), in the sense that it contains infinite merits, that 
it is self-existent. Considering the fact that Acvaghosa comes 

CHAPTER V. IO9 

Suchness Conditioned. 

Absolute transcendental Suchness defying all means 
of characterisation does not, as long as it so remains, 
have any direct significance in the phenomenal world 
and human life. When it does, it must become condi- 
tional Suchness as Gesetzmassigkeit in nature and as 
ethical order in our practical life. Suchness as absolute 
is too remote, too abstract, and may have only a 
metaphysical value. Its existence or non-existence 
seems not to affect us in our daily social life, inasmuch 
as it is transcendental. In order to enter into our* 
limited consciousness, to become the norm of our 
conscious activities, to regulate the course of the 
evolutionary tide in nature, Suchness must surrender 
its "splendid isolation," must abandon its absoluteness. 

When Suchness thus comes down from its sovereign- 
seat in the realm of unthinkability, we have this 
universe unfolded before our eyes in all its diversity 
and magnificence. Twinkling stars inlaid in the vaulted 
sky; the planet elaborately decorated with verdant 
meadows, towering mountains, and rolling waves ; the 
birds cheerfully singing in the woods ; the beasts 
wildly running through the thickets; the summer 
heavens ornamented with white fleecy clouds and on 

earlier than any Vedanta philosophers, it stands to reason to 
say that the latter might have borrowed the idea of distin- 
guishing the two aspects of Brahma from their Buddhist 
predecessors. 

£ankara also makes a distinction between saguna and mrguna 
vidya, whose parallel we find in the Mahayanist samvrtti and 
paramartha satya. 

IIO CHAPTER V. 

earth all branches and leaves growing in abundant 
luxury; the winter prairie destitute of all animation, 
only with naked trees here and there trembling in 
the dreary north winds; all these manifestations, not 
varying a hair's breadth of deviation from their 
mathematical, astronomical, physical, chemical, and 
biological laws, are naught else than the work of 
conditional Suchness in nature. 

When we turn to human life and history, we have 
the work of conditional Suchness manifested in all 
forms of activity as passions, aspirations, imagina- 
tions, intellectual efforts, etc. It makes us desire 
to eat when hungry, and to drink when thirsty; it 
makes the man long for the woman, and the woman 
for the man; it keeps children in merriment and 
frolic; it braces men and women bravely to carry 
the burden of life. When we are oppressed, it 
causes us to cry, "Let us have liberty or die" ; 
when we are treated with injustice, it leads us even 
to murder and fire and revolution; when our noble 
sentiments are aroused to the highest pitch, it makes 
us ready to sacrifice all that is most dear to us. In 
brief, all the kaleidoscopic changes of this phenomenal 
world, subjective as well as objective, come from the 
playing hands of conditional Suchness. It not only 
constitutes the goodness and blessings of life, but 
the sins, crimes, and misery which the flesh is heir to. 1 

1 While passing, I cannot help digressing and entering on 
a polemic in this footnote. The fact is, Western Buddhist 
critics stubbornly refuse to understand correctly what is 

CHAPTER V. Ill 

Ac.vaghosa in his Awakening of Faith speaks of 
the Heart (krdaya) of Suchness and of the Heart 
of Birth-and-Death. By the Heart of Suchness he 
means the absolute and by the Heart of Birth-and- 
Death a manifestation of the absolute in this world 
of particulars. "They are not separate," however, 
says he, but they are one, for the Heart of 

insisted by Buddhists themselves. Even scholars who are sup- 
posed to be well informed about the subject, go astray and 
make false charges against Buddhism. Max Mueller, for exam- 
ple, declares in his Six Systems of Indian Philosophy (p. 242) 
that "An important distinction between Buddhists and Vedan- 
tists is that the former holds the world to have arisen from 
what is not, the latter from what is, the Sat or Brahman." 
The reader who has carefully followed my exposition above 
will at once detect in this Max Mueller's conclusion an incor- 
rect statement of Buddhist doctrine As I have repeatedly 
said, Suchness, though described in negative terms, is not a 
state of nothingness, but the highest possible synthesis that 
the human intellect can reach. The world did not come from 
the void of Suchness, but from its fulness of reality. If it were 
not so, to where does Buddhism want us to go after deliver- 
ance from the evanescence and nothingness of the phenomenal 
world ? 

Max Mueller in another place (op. cit. p. 210) speaks of the 
Vedantists' assertion of the reality of the objective world for 
practical purposes (vyavaharartham) and of their antagonistic 
attitude toward "the nihilism of the Buddhists." "The Bud- 
dhists" this seems to refer to the followers of the Madhyamika 
school, but a careful perusal of their texts will reveal that 
what they denied was not the realness of the world as a 
manifestation of conditional Suchness, but its independent 
realness and our attachment to it as such. The Madhyamika 
school was not in any sense a nihilistic system. True, its 
advocates used many negative terms, but what they meant by 
them was obvious enough to any careful reader. 

112 CHAPTER V. 

Suchness is the Heart of Birth-and-Death. It is on 
account of our limited senses and finite mind that 
we have a world of particulars, which, as it is, is 
no more than a fragment of the absoulte Bhutatathata. 
And yet it is through this fragmentary manifestation 
that we are finally enabled to reach the fundamental 
nature of being in its entirety. Says Agvaghosa, 
"Depending on the Tathagata-garbha, there evolves 
the Heart of Birth-and-Death. What is immortal and 
what is mortal are harmoniously blended, for they 

are not one, nor are they separate Herein all 

things are organised. Hereby all things are created." 
The above is from the ontological standpoint. 
When viewed psychologically, the Heart of Suchness 
is enlightenment, for Buddhism makes no distinction 
between being and thought, world and mind. The 
ultimate nature of the two is considered to be absolutely 
one. Now, speaking of the nature of enlightenment, 
Agvaghosa says : "It is like the emptiness of space 
and the brightness of the mirror in that it is true, 
and real, and great. It completes and perfects all 
things. It is free from the condition of destructibility. 
In it is reflected every phase of life and activity 
in the world. Nothing goes out of it, nothing enters 
into it, nothing is annihilated, nothing is destroyed. 
It is one eternal soul, no forms of defilement can 
defile it. It is the essence of intelligence. By reason 
of its numerous immaculate virtues which inhere 
in it, it perfumes the hearts of all beings." Thus, 
the Heart of Suchness, which is enlightenment and 

CHAPTER V. I 13 

the essence of intelligence, constantly works in 
and through the hearts of all human beings, that is, 
in and through our finite minds. In this sense, Bud- 
dhism declares that truth is not to be sought in 
highly abstract philosophical formulae, but in the 
phenomena of our everyday life such as eating, 
dressing, walking, sleeping, etc. The Heart of Suchness 
acts and does not abstract; it synthesises and does 
not "dissect to murder." 

Questions Defying Solution. 

Speaking of the world as a manifestation of 
Suchness, we are here beset with the most puzzling 
questions that have baffled the best minds ever since 
the dawn of intellect. They are : Why did Suchness 
ever leave its abode in the mysterious realm of 
transcendentality and descend on earth where every 
form of misery greets us on all sides ? What inherent 
necessity was there for it to mingle in the dust of 
worldliness while it could enjoy the unspeakable 
bliss of its own absoluteness? -In other words, why 
did absolute Suchness ever become conditional 
Suchness ? To dispose of these questions as not con- 
cerning human interests is the creed of agnosticism 
and positivism ; but the fact is, they are not questions 
whimsically framed by the human mind when it was 
in the mood of playing with itself. They are queries 
of the most vital importance ever put to us, and 
the significance of life entirely hangs on our inter- 
pretation of them. 

8 

I 14 CHAPTER V. 

Buddhism confesses that the mystery is unsolvable 
purely by the human mind, for it is absolutely 
beyond the region of finite intellect and the power 
of a logical demonstrability. The mystery can only 
be solved in a practical way when we attain the 
highest spiritual enlightenment of Buddhahood, in 
which the Bodhi with its unimpeded supernatural 
light directly looks into the very abyss of Suchness. 
The Bodhi or Intelligence which constitutes the 
kernel of our being, is a partial realisation in us 
of Suchness. When this intelligence is merged and 
expands in the Body of Suchness, as the water in a 
vessel poured into the waters of the boundless 
ocean, it at once perceives and realises its nature, 
its destiny, and its significance in life. 

Buddhism is a religion and leaves many topics 
of metaphysics unsolved, at least logically. Though 
it is more intellectual and philosophical than any 
other religion, it does not pretend to build a complete 
system of speculation. As far as theorisation is 
concerned, Buddhism is dogmatic and assumes 
many propositions without revealing their dialectical 
processes. But they are all necessary and fundamental 
hypotheses of the religious consciousness ; they are 
the ultimate demands of the human soul. Religion has 
no positive obligation to prove its propositions after 
the fashion of the natural sciences. It is enough for 
religion to state the facts as they are, and the intellect, 
though hampered by limitations inherent in it, has to 
try her best to put them together in a coherent system. 

CHAPTER V. 115 

The solution, then, by Buddhism of those queries 
stated above cannot be said -to be very logical and 
free from serious dufficulties, but practically it 
serves all required purposes and is conducive to 
religious discipline. By this I mean the Buddhist 
theory of Nescience or Ignorance (avidya). 

Theory of Ignorance. 

The theory of nescience or ignorance (avidya) is 
an attempt by Buddhists to solve the relation between 
the one and the many, between absolute Suchness 
and conditional Suchness, between Dharmakaya and 
Sarvasattva, between wisdom (bodhi) and sin (klega)^ 
between Nirvana and Samsara. But Buddhism does 
not give us any systematic exposition of the doctrine. 
What it says is categorical and dogmatic. "This * 
universe is really the Dharmadhatu ; * it is character- 
ised by sameness (samata) ; there is no differentiation 
(visama) in it ; it is even emptiness itself (funyata) ; 
all things have no pudgala (self). But, because of 
nescience, there are four or six mahdbhuta (elements), 
five skandha (aggregates), six (or eight) vijndna 
(senses), and twelve niddna (chains of causation). 
All these names and forms (ndmarupa) are of nes- 
cience or ignorance." Or, according to Acvaghosa, 
"The Heart of Suchness is the vast All of one 
Dharmadhatu ; it is the essence of all doctrines. 
The ultimate nature does not perish, nor does it 

1 Dharmadhatu is the world as seen by an enlightened mind, 
where all forms of particularity do not contradict one another, 
but make one harmonious whole. 

I 1 6 CHAPTER V. 

decay. All particular objects exist because of con - 
fused subjectivity (smrti). i Independent of confused 
subjectivity, there is no outside world to be perceived 
and discriminated." "Everything that is subject to 
the law of birth and death exists only because of 
ignorance and karma." Such statements as these 
are found almost everywhere in the Buddhist lite- 
rature; but as to the question how and why this 
negative principle of ignorance came to assert itself 
in the body of Suchness, we are at a loss where 
to find an authoritative and definite answer to it. 

One thing, however, is certain, which is this : 
Ignorance (avidyd) is principium individium, that 
creates the multitudinousness of phenomena in the 
absolute oneness of being, that tosses up the roaring 
billows of existence in the eternal ocean of Suchness, 
that breaks the silence of Nirvana and starts the 
wheel of metempsychosis perpetually rolling, that, 
veiling the transpicuous mirror of Bodhi, affects the 
reflection of Suchness therein, that transforms the 
sameness (samata) of Suchness to the duality of 
thisness and thatness and leads many confused 
minds to egoism with all its pernicious corollaries. 

Perhaps, the best way to attack the problem of 
ignorance is to understand that Buddhism is a tha 
roughly idealistic doctrine as every true religion 
should be, and that psychologically, and not ontologic- 

*The word literally means recollection or memory. Acva- 
ghosa uses it as a synonym of ignorance, and so do many 
other Buddhist philosophers. 

CHAPTER V. 117 

ally, should Suchness be conceived, and further, that 
nescience is inherent in Suchness, though only hypo- 
thetically, illusively, apparently, and not really in any 
sense. 

According to Brahmanism, there was in the begin- 
ning only one being ; and this being willed to be two ; 
which naturally resulted in the differentiation of sub- 
ject and object, mind and nature. In Buddhism, how- 
ever, Suchness is not explicitly stated as having had 
any desire to be other than itself, at least when it 
is purely metaphysically conceived. But as Buddhism 
interprets this world of particularisation as a manifes- 
tation of Suchness conditioned by the principle of 
ignorance, ignorance must be considered, however 
illusory in its ultimate nature, to have potentially or 
rather negatively existed in the being of Suchness; 
and when Suchness, by its transcendental freedom of 
will, affirmed itself, it did so by negating itself, that 
is, by permitting itself to be conditioned by the 
principle of ignorance or individuation. The latter, 
as is expressly stated everywhere in Buddhist sutras 
and c.astras, is no more than an illusion and a 
negative quantity, it is merely the veil of Maya. 
This chimerical nature of ignorance preserves the 
essential absoluteness of the first principle and 
rrakes the monism of the Mahayana doctrine tho- 
roughly consistent. What is to be noted here, however, 
is this: Buddhism does not necessarily regard this 
world of particulars as altogether evanescent and 
dream-like. When ignorance alone is taken notice 

Il8 CHAPTER V. 

of and the presence of Suchness in all this multitu- 
dinousness of things is denied, this existence is 
positively declared to be void. But when an en- 
lightened mind perceives Suchness even in the 
midst of the utter darkness of ignorance, this life 
assumes an entirely new aspect, and we come to 
realise the illusiveness of all evils. 

To return to the subject, ignorance or nescience 
is defined by Acvaghosa as a spark of conscious- 
ness1 that spontaneously flashes from the unfathom- 
able depths of Suchness. According to this, ignorance 
and consciousness are interchangeable terms, though 
with different shades of meaning. Ignorance is, so 
to speak, the raison d'etre of consciousness, is that 
which makes the appearance of the latter possible, 
while ignorance itself is in turn an illusive emanation 
of Suchness. It is then evident that the awakening 
of consciousness marks the first step toward the 
rising of this universe from the abyss of the self- 
identity of Suchness. For the unfolding of con- 
sciousness implies the separation of the perceiving 
and the perceived, the visayin and the visaya, of 
subject and object, mind and nature. 

The eternal abyss of Suchness, so called, is the 
point where subjectivity and objectivity are merged 
in absolute oneness. It is the time, though strictly 

1 Smrti or citta or vijnana. They are all used by Ac. vaghosa 
and other Buddhist authors as synonymous. Smrti literally 
means memory; citta, thought or mentation; and vijnana is 
generally rendered by consciousness, though not very accurately. 

CHAPTER V. 119 

speaking chronology does not apply here, when all 
"the ten thousand things" of the world have not 
yet been differentiated and even when the God 
who "created the heaven and earth" has not yet 
made his debut. To use psychological terms, it is 
a state of transcendental or transmarginal consciousness, 
where all sense-perceptions and conceptual images 
vanish, and where we are in a state of absolute 
unconsciousness. This sounds mystical ; but it is an 
established fact that in the field of our mental 
activities there is an abyss where consciousness 
sometimes suddenly disappears. This region beyond 
the threshold of awaredness, though often a trysting 
place for psychical abnormalities, has a great religious 
significance, which cannot be ignored by superficial 
scientific arguments. Here is the region where the 
consciousness of subject and object is completely 
annihilated, but here we do not have the silence 
and darkness of a grave, nor is it a state of absolute 
nothingness. The self is here lost in the presence 
of something indescribable, or better, it expands so 
as to embrace the world-all within itself, and is 
not conscious of any egoistic elation or arrogance ; 
but it merely feels the fulness of reality and a 
touch of celestial joy that cannot be imparted to 
others by anything human. The most convincing 
spiritual insight into the nature of being comes from 
this source. Enlightenment is the name given by 
Buddhists to the actual gaining of this insight. 
Bodhi or Prajna or intelligence is the term for the 

I2O CHAPTER V. 

spiritual power that brings about this enlightenment 
When the mind emerges from this state of sameness, 
consciousness spontaneously comes back as it vanished 
before, retaining the memory of the experience so 
unique and now confronting the world of contrasts 
and mutual dependence, in which our empirical ego 
moves. The transition from one state to the other 
is like a flash of lightning scintilating from behind 
the clouds; though the two, the subliminal and the 
superficial consciousness, seem to be one continuous 
form of activity, permitting no hiatus between them. 
At any rate, this awakening of subjectivity and the 
leaving behind of transmarginal consciousness marks 
the start of ignorance. Therefore, psychologically 
speaking, ignorance must be considered synonymous 
with the awakening of consciousness in a sentient 
being. 

Here we have the most mysterious fact that baffles 
all our intellectual efforts to unravel, which is: How 
and why has ignorance, or what is tantamount, con- 
sciousness, ever been awakened from the absolute 
calmness (gdnti) of being? How and why have the 
waves of mentation ever been stirred up in the ocean 
of eternal tranquillity ? Acvaghosa simply says, 
"spontaneously." This by no means explains anything, 
or at least it is not in the line with our so-called 
scientific interpretations, nor does it give us any reason 
why. Nevertheless, religiously and practically viewed, 
"spontaneous" is the most graphic and vigorous 
term there is for describing the actual state of things 

CHAPTER V. 121 

as they pass before our mental eye. In fact, there 
is always something vague and indefinite in all our 
psychological experiences. With whatever scientific 
accuracy, with whatever objective precision we may 
describe the phenomena that take place in the mind, 
there is always something that eludes our scrutiny, 
is too slippery, as it were, to take hold of ; so that 
after all our strenuous intellectual efforts to be exact 
and perspicuous in our expositions, we are still 
compelled to leave much to the imagination of the 
reader. In case he happens to be lacking in the 
experience which we have endeavored to describe 
we shall vainly hope £o awaken in him the said 
impression with the same degree of intensity and 
realness 

It is for this reason that Agvaghosa and other 
Mahayanists declare that the rising of consciousness 
out of the abysmal depths of Suchness is felt by 
Buddhas and other enlightened minds only that have 
actually gone through the experience. The why of 
ignorance nobody can explain as much as the why 
of Suchness But when we personally experience this 
spiritual fact, we no more feel the need of harboring 
any doubt about how or why Everything becomes 
transparent, and the rays of supernatural enlightenment 
shine like a halo round our spiritual personality. We 
move as dictated by the behest of Suchness, i. e., 
by the Dharmakaya, and in which we feel infinite bliss 
and satisfaction. This religious experience is the most 
unique phenomenon in the life of a sentient being. 

122 CHAPTER V. 

Dualism and Moral Evil. 

As we cannot think that the essence of the external 
world to be other than that of our own mind, that 
is to say, as we cannot think subject and object to 
be different in their ultimate nature, our conclusion 
naturally is that the same principle of Ignorance 
which gathers the clouds of subjectivity, calls up the 
multitudinousness of phenomena in the world-mind 
of Suchness The universe in its entirety is an 
infinite mind, and our limited mind with its transmar- 
ginal consciousness is a microcosm. What the finite 
mind feels in its inmost self, must also be what the 
cosmic mind feels, nay, we can go one step further, 
and say that when the human mind enters the region 
lying beyond the border of subjectivity and objectivity, 
it is in communion with the heart of the universe, 
whose secrets are revealed here without reserve. 
Therefore, Buddhism does not make any distinction 
between knowing and being, enlightenment and 
Suchness. When the mind is free from ignorance and 
no more clings to things particular, it is said to be 
in harmony and even one with Suchness. 

We must, however, remember that ignorance as 
the principle of individuation and a spontaneous 
expression of Suchness, is no moral evil. The awa- 
kening of subjectivity or the dawn of consciousness 
forms part of the necessary cosmic process. The 
separation of subject and object, or the appearance 
of a phenomenal world, is nothing but a realisation 

CHAPTER V. 123 

of the cosmic mind (Dharmakaya). As such Ignorance 
performs an essential function in the evolution of 
the world-totality. Ignorance is inherent in Buddhas 
as well as in all sentient beings. Every one of us 
cannot help perceiving an external world (visaya) 
and forming conceptions and reasoning and feeling 
and willing. We do not see any moral fault here. 
If there is really anything morally wrong, then we 
cannot do anything with it, we are utterly helpless 
before it, for it is not our fault, but that of the 
cosmic soul from which and in which we have our 
being. 

Ignorance has produced everywhere a state of 
relativity and reciprocal dependence. Birth is insepar- 
ably linked with death, congregation with segregation, 
evolution with involution, attraction with repulsion, 
the centripetal with the centrifugal force, the spring 
with the fall, the tide with the ebb, joy with sorrow, 
God with Satan, Adam with Eve, Buddha with 
Devadatta, etc., ect., ad infinitum. These are neces- 
sary conditions of existence; and if existence is an 
evil, they must be abolished, and with their abolition 
the very reason of existence is abolished, which 
means absolute nothingness, — an impossibility as 
long as we exist. The work of ignorance in the world 
of conditional Suchness is quite innocent, and Bud- 
dhists do not recognise any fault in its existence, if 
not contaminated by confused subjectivity. Those 
who speak of the curse of existence, or those who 
conceive Nirvana to be the abode of non-existence 

124 CHAPTER V. 

and the happiness of absolute annihilation, are consi- 
dered by Buddhists to be unable to understand the 
significance of Ignorance. 

Is there then no fault to be found with Ignorance ? 
Not in Ignorance itself, but in our defiled attachment 
to it, that is, when we are ignorant ot Ignorance. 
It is wrong to cling to the dualism of subject and 
object as final and act accordingly. It is wrong to 
take the work of ignorance as ultimate and to 
forget the foundation on which it stands. It is wrong, 
thinking that the awakening of consciousness reveals 
the whole world, to ignore the existence of unseen 
realities. In short, evils quickly follow our steps 
when we try to realise the conclusions of ignorance 
without knowing its true relation to Suchness. 
Egoism is the most fundamental of all errors and evils. 

When we speak of ignorance as hindering the 
light of intelligence from penetrating to the bottom 
of reality, we usually understand the term ignorance 
not in the philosophical sense of principium individuum, 
but in the sense of confused subjectivity, which 
conceives the work of Ignorance as the final reality 
culminating in egoism. So, we might say that while 
the principle of Ignorance is philosophically justified, 
its unenlightened actualisation in our practical life 
is altogether unwarranted and brings on us a series 
of dire calamities. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE TATHAGATA-GARBHA AND THE 
ALAYA-VIJNANA. 

CUCHNESS (Bkutatathdtd), the ultimate principle of 
existence, is known by so many different names, 
as it is viewed in so many different phases of its 
manifestation. Suchness is the Essence of Buddhas, 
as it constitutes the reason of Buddhahood ; it is 
the Dharma, when it is considered the norm of 
existence ; it is the Bodhi when it is the source of 
intelligence ; Nirvana, when it brings eternal peace 
to a heart troubled with egoism and its vile passions ; 
Prajna (wisdom), when it intelligently directs the 
course of nature; the Dharmakaya, when it is 
religiously considered as the fountain-head of love 
and wisdom ; the Bodhicitta (intelligence-heart), when 
it is the awakener of religious consciousness ; QunyatH 
(vacuity), when viewed as transcending all particular 
forms ; the summum bonum (kugalam)^ when its 
ethical phase is emphasised; the Highest Truth 
(paramattha), when its epistemological feature is put 
forward; the Middle Path (madhyamarga), when it 
is considered above the onesidedness and limitation 
of individual existences; the Essence of Being 
(bhutakoti), when its ontological aspect is taken into 

126 CHAPTER VI. 

account ; the Tathagata- garbha (the Womb of Tatha- 
gata), when it is thought of in analogy to mother 
earth, where all the germs of life are stored, and 
where all precious stones and metals are ' concealed 
under the cover of filth. And it is of this last aspect 
of Suchness that I here propose to consider at 
some length. 

The Tathagata-Garbha and Ignorance. 

Tathagata-Garbha literally means Tathagata's womb d 
or treasure or store, in which the essence of Ta- 
thagatahood remains concealed under the veil of Igno- 
rance. It may rightly be called the womb of uni- 
verse, from which issues forth the multitudinousness 
of things, mental as well as physical. 

The Tathagata-Garbha, therefore, may be explained 
ontologically as a state of Suchness quickened by Igno- 
rance and ready to be realised in the world of parti- 
culars, that is, when it is about to transform itself 
to the duality of subject and object, though there is 
yet no perceptible manifestation of motility in any 
form. Psychologically, it is the transcendental soul of 
man just coming under the bondage of the law of 
karmaic causation Though pure and free in its nature 
as the expression of Suchness in man, the transcen- 

1 Cf. tt& Bhagavad&ta (S. B E. Vol. VIII, chap. XIV, p. 107): 
"The Brahman is a womb for me, in which I cast the seed. 
From that, O descendant of Bharata ! is the birth of all 
things. Of the bodies, 0 son of Kunti ! which are born from 
all wombs, the main womb is the great Brahman, and I am 
the father, the giver of the seed." 

CHAPTER VI. 127 

dental soul or pure intelligence is now influenced by 
the principle of birth- and-death and subjects itself to 
organic determinations. As it is, it is yet devoid of 
differentiation and limitation, save that there is a 
bare possibility of them It will, however, as soon as 
it is actualised in a special form, unfold all its 
particularities subject to their own laws ; it will hunger, 
desire, strive, and even be annoyed by its material 
Xlapndfew and then, beginning to long for liberation, 
will jtruggle inwardly. Here is then no more of the 
absoffirc^ freedom of Suchness, as long as its pheno- 
/ menal phase alone is considered, since the Garbha 
\ works under the constraint of particularisation. The 
essence of Tathagatahood, however, is here preserved 
intact, and, whenever it is possible, our finite minds 
are able to feel its presence and power. Hypothetic- 
ally, therefore, the Garbha is always in association 
with passions and desires that are of Ignorance. 

We read in the frimdld-Sutra : "With the storage 
of passions attached we find the Tathagata-Garbha,0 
or, "The Dharmakaya of the Tath^gata not detached 
from the storage of passions is called Tathagata- 
Garbha." In Buddhism, passion or desire or sin (kief a) 
is generally used in contrast to intelligence or Bodhi 
or Nirvana. As the latter, religiously considered, 
represents a particular manifestation in the human 
mind of the Dharmakaya or Bhutatathata, so the former 
is a reflection of universal Ignorance in the microcosm. 
Therefore, the human soul in which, according to 
Buddhism, intelligence and desire are merged, should 

128 CHAPTER VI. 

be regarded as an individuation of the Tathagata- 
Garbha. And it is in this capacity that the Garbha 
is called Alayavijndna. 

The Alayavijndna and its Evolution. 

As we have seen, the Alayavijnana or All-Conserving 
Soul is a particularised expression in the human mind 
of the Tathagata-Garbha. It is an individual, ideal 
reflex of the cosmic Garbha. It is this "psychic germ," 
as the Alaya is often designated, that stores ^1 the 
mental possibilities, which are set in motion oy the 
impetus of an external world, which works on the 
Alaya through the six senses (vijndna). 

Mahayanism is essentially idealistic and does not 
make a radical, qualitative distinction between subject 
and object, thought and being, mind and nature, 
consciousness and energy. Therefore, the being and 
activity of the Alaya are essentially those of the 
Garbha; and again, as the Garbha is the joint cre- 
ation of universal Ignorance and Suchness, so is the 
Alaya the product of desire (klega} and wisdom (bodki). 
The Garbha and the Alaya, however, are each in 
itself innocent and absolutely irresponsible for the 
existing state of affairs. And let it be remarked 
here that Buddhism does not condemn this life and 
universe for their wickedness as was done by some reli- 
gious teachers and philosophers. The so-called wick- 
edness is not radical in nature and life. It is merely 
superficial. It is the work of ignorance and desire, 
and when they are converted to do service for the 

CHAPTER VI. 129 

Bodhi, they cease to be wicked or sinful or evil. 
Buddhists, therefore, strongly insist on the innate and 
intrinsic goodness of the Alaya and the Garbha 

Says Agvaghosa in his Awakening of Faith (p. 
75) : "In the All- Conserving Soul (Alaya} Ignorance 
obtains, and from non-enlightenment [thus produced] 
starts that which sees, that which represents, that 
which apprehends an objective world, and that which 
constantly particularises." Here we have the evolution 
of the Garbha in its psychological manifestation; in 
other words, we have here the evolution of the 
Alayavijnana. When the Garbha or Alaya comes 
under the influence of birth-and-death (samsdra), it 
no longer retains its primeval indifference or sameness 
(samatd) ; but there come to exist that which sees 
(visayiri) and that which is seen (visaya), a mind 
and an objective world. From the interaction of 
these two forms of existence, we have now before 
our eyes the entire panorama of the universe swiftly 
and noiselessly moving with its never-tiring steps 
A most favorite simile with Buddhists to illustrate 
these incessant activities of the phenomenal world, 
is to compare them to the waves that are seen for- 
ever rolling in a boundless ocean, while the body of 
waters which make up the ocean is compared to 
Suchness, and the wind that stirs up the waves to 
the principle of birth-and-death or ignorance which 
is the same thing So we read in the Lankdvatdra 
Sutra : 

I3O CHAPTER VI. 

"Like unto the ocean-waves, 
Which by a raging storm maddened 
Against the rugged precipice strike 
Without interruption; 
Even so in the Alaya-sea 
Stirred by the objectivity-wind 
All kinds of mentation-waves 
Arise a-dancing, a-rolling." 1 

But all the psychical activities thus brought into 
full view, should not be conceived as different from 
the Mind (citta) itself. It is merely in the nature of 
our understanding that we think of attributes apart 
from their substance, the latter being imagined to 
be in possession and control of the former. There 
is, however, in fact no substance per se, independent 
of its attributes, and no attributes detached from that 
which unites them. And this is one of the fundamen- 
tal conceptions of Buddhism, that there is no soul- 
in-itself considered apart from its various manifesta- 
tions such as imagination, sensation, intellectuation, 
etc. The innumerable ripples and waves and billows 
of mentation that are stirred in the depths of the 
Tathagata-Garbha, are not things foreign or external 
to it, but they are all particular expressions of the 
same essence, they are working out its immanent 
destiny. So continues the Lankdvatdra Sutra : 

1 This is translated from the Chinese of Qksananda; the 
Sanskrit reads as follows : 

"Taranga hi udadher yadvat pavanapratyaya irita, 
Nrtyamanah pravartante vyucchedag ca na vidhyate : 
Alayodhyas tatha nityam visayapavana iritah, 
Cittais tarangavijnanair nrtyamanah pravartate." 

CHAPTER VI. 131 

"The saline crystal and its red-bluishness, 

The milky sap and its sweetness, 

Various flowers and their fruits, 

The sun and the moon and their luminosity : 

These are neither separable nor inseparable. 

As waves are stirred in the water, 

Even so the seven modes of mentation 

Are awakened in the Mind and united with it. 

When the waters are troubled in the ocean, 

We have waves that roll each in its own way: 

So with the Mind All-Conserving. 

When stirred, therein diverse mentations arise : 

Citta, Manas, and Manovijfiana. 

These we distinguish as attributes, 

In substance they differ not from each other ; 

For they are neither attributing nor attributed. 

The sea-water and the waves, 

One varies not from the other: 

It is even so with the Mind and its activities ; 

Between them difference nowhere obtains. 

Citta is karma-accumulating, 

Manas reflects an objective world, 

Manovijfiana is the faculty of judgment, 

The five Vijnanas are the differentiating senses." * 

1 From the Chinese. The Sanskrit reads as follows : 
"Nile rakte : tha lavane gankhe ksire ca carkare, 
Kasayaih phalapuspadyaih kirana yatha bhaskare : 
No ' nyena ca nananyena taranga hi udadher mata ; 
VijSanani tatha sapta, cittena saha samyukta. 
Udadheh parinamo ' sau taranganam vicitrata, 
Alayam hi tatha cittam vijnanakhyam pravartate; 
Cittam manac ca vijfianam laksanartham prakalpyate ; 
Abhinna laksana hi astau na laksya na ca laksana. 
Udadhec. ca taranganam yatha nasti vigesana. 
Vijnananam tatha citte parinamo na labhyate. 
Cittena ciyate karmah, manasa ca viciyate, 
Vijnanena vijanati, drcyam kalpeti pancabhih." 

The Manas. 

The Alayavijfiana which is sometimes, as in the 
preceding quotations, simply called citta (mind), is, 
as such, no more than a state of Suchness, allowing 
itself to be influenced by the principle of birth-and- 
death, i. e., by Ignorance ; and there has in it taken 
place as yet no "awakening" or "stirring up" (vttti), 
from which results a consciousness. When the Manas 
is evolved, however, we have a sign of mentality there- 
by set in motion, for the Manas, according to the 
Mahayanists, marks the dawn of consciousness in the 
universe. 

The Manas, deriving its reason of consciousness 
from the Citta or Alaya, reflects on it as well as on 
an external world, and becomes conscious of the 
distinction between me and not- me. But since this 
not-I or external world is nothing but an unfoldment 
of the Alaya itself, the Manas must be said really to 
be self-reflecting, when it discriminates between sub- 
ject and object. If the Alaya is not yet conscious 
of itself, the Manas is, as the latter comes to realise 
the state of self-awareness. The Alaya is perhaps to 
be compared in a sense to the Kantian "ego of 
transcendental apperception"; while the Manas is the 
actual center of self-consciousness. But the Manas 
and the Alaya (or Citta) are not two different things in 
the sense that one emanates from the other or that 
one is created by the other. It is better to under- 

CHAPTER VI. 133 

stand the Manas as a state or condition of the Citta 
in its evolution. 

Now, the Manas is not only contemplative, but 
capable of volition. It awakens the desire to cling 
to the state of individuation, it harbors egoism, 
passion, and prejudice ; it wills and creates : for 
Ignorance, the principle of birth-and-death, is there 
in its full force, and the absolute identity of Suchness 
is here forever departed. Therefore, the Manas 
really marks the beginning of concrete, particularising 
consciousness-waves in the eternal ocean of the All- 
Conserving Mind. The mind which was hitherto 
indifferent and neutral here acquires a full consciousness ; 
discriminates between ego and non-ego; feels pain 
and pleasure ; clings to that which is agreeable and 
shrinks from that which is disagreeable ; urges activities 
according to judgments, false or truthful; memorises 
what has been experienced, and stores it all: — in 
short, all the modes of mentation come into play 
with the awakening of the Manas. 

According to Agvaghosa, with the evolution of 
the Manas there arise five important psychical 
activities which characterise the human mind. They 
are : ( i ) motility , that is the capability of creating 
karma; (2) the power to perceive; (3) the power 
to respond ; (4) the power to discriminate ; and 
(5) individuality. Through the exercise of these five 
functions, the Manas is able to create according 
to its will, to be a perceiving subject, to respond to 
the stimuli of an external world, to deliver judgments 

134 CHAPTER VI. 

over what it likes and what it dislikes, and finally 
to retain all its own "karma-seeds" in the past 
and to mature them for the future, according to 
circumstances. 

With the advent of the Manas, the evolution of 
the Citta is complete. Practically, it is the consumma- 
tion of mentality, for self-consciousness is ripe now. 
The will can affirm its ego-centric, dualistic activities, 
and the intellect can exercise its discriminating, rea- 
soning, and image-retaining faculties. The Manas now 
becomes the center of psychic coordination. It receiv- 
es messages from the six senses and pronounces 
over the impressions whatever judgments, intellectual 
or volitional, which are needed at the time for its 
own conservation. It also reflects on its own sanctum, 
and, perceiving there the presence of the Alaya, 
wrongfully jumps to the conclusion that herein lies 
the real, ultimate ego-soul, from which it derives the 
notions of authority, unity, and permanency. 

As is evident, the Manas is a double-edged sword. 
It may destroy itself by clinging to the error of ego- 
conception, or it may, by a judicious exercise of its 
reasoning faculty, destroy all the misconceptions that 
arise from a wrong interpretation of the principle of 
Ignorance. The Manas destroys itself by being over- 
whelmed by the dualism of ego and alter, by taking 
them for final, irreducible realities, and by thus fos- 
tering absolute ego-centric thoughts and desires, and by 
making itself a willing prey of an indomitable egoism, 
religiously and morally. On the other hand, when it 

CHAPTER VI. 135 

sees an error in the conception of the absolute reality 
of individuals, when it perceives a play of Ignorance 
in the dualism of me and not-me, when it recognises 
the raison d'etre of existence in the essence of 
Tathagatahood, i. e., in Suchness, when it realises 
that the Alaya which is mistaken for the ego is no 
more than an innocent and irreproachable reflection 
of the cosmic Garbha, it at once transcends the 
sphere of particularity and becomes the very harbinger 
of eternal enlightenment. 

Buddhists, therefore, do not see any error or evil 
in the evolution of the Mind (dlaya). There is nothing 
faulty in the awakening of consciousness, in the 
dualism of subject and object, in the individualising 
operation of birth-and-death (samsdra), only so long 
as our Manas keeps aloof from the contamination 
of false egoism. The gravest error, however, perme- 
ates every fiber of our mind with all its wickedness 
and irrationality, as soon as the nature of the evol- 
ution of the Alaya is wrongfully interpreted by the 
abuse of the functions of the Manas. * 

1 A little digression here. It has frequently been affirmed 
of the ethics of Mahayanism that as it has a nihilistic tendency 
its morality turns towards asceticism ignoring the significance 
of the sentiment and instinct It is true that Mahayanism 
perfectly agrees with Vedantism when the latter declares : 
"If the killer thinks that he kills, if the killed thinks that he 
is killed, they do not understand ; for this one does not kill, 
nor is that one killed." (The Katopanishad, II 19.) This belief 
in non-action (Laotzean Wu Wei} apparently denies the ex- 
istence of a world of relativity, but he will be a superficial 
critic who will stop short at this absolute aspect of Mahayana 

136 CHAPTER VI. 

Though Mahayanism most emphatically denies the 
existence of a personal ego which is imagined to be 
lodging within the body and to be the spiritual master 
of it, it does not necessarily follow that it denies the 
unity of consciousness or personality or individuality. 
In fact, the assumption of Manovijnana by Buddhists 
most conclusively proves that they have an ego in 
a sense, the denial of whose empirical existence is 
tantamount to the denial of the most concrete facts 
of our daily experiences. What is most persistently 
negated by them is not the existence of ego, but its 
final, ultimate reality. But to discuss this subject 
more fully we have a special chapter below devoted 
to "Atman." 

The Samkhya Philosophy and Mahayanism 

If we draw a comparison between the Samkhya 
philosophy and Mahayanism, the Alayavijnana may 

philosophy and refuses to consider its practical side. As we 
have seen above, Buddhists do not conceive the evolution of 
the Manovijnana as a fault on the part of the cosmic mind, 
nor do they think the assertion of Ignorance altogether wrong 
and morally evil. Therefore, Mahayanism does not deny the 
claim of reality to the world of the senses, though of course 
relatively, and not absolutely. 

Again, "Tat tvam asi" (thou art it) or "I am the Buddha" 
— this assertion, though arrogant it may seem to some, is 
perfectly justifiable in the realm of absolute identity, where 
the serene light of Suchness alone pervades. But when we 
descend on earth and commingle in the hurly-burly of our 
practical, dualistic life, we cannot help suffering from its 
mundane limitations. We hunger, we thirst, we grieve at the 
loss of the dearest, we feel remorse over errors committed. 

CHAPTER VI. 137 

be considered an unification of Soul (purusa) and 
Nature (prakrti\ and the Manovijnana a combination 
of Buddhi (intellect) or Mahat (great element) with 
Ahankara (ego). According to the Sdmkhyakarika (i i), 
the essential nature of Prakrti is the power of creation, 
or, to use Buddhist phraseology, it is blind activity; 
while that of Purusa is witnessing (saksitvd) and 
perceiving (drastttva). (The Kdrika, 19.) A modern 
philosopher would say, Purusa is intelligence and 
Prakrti the will ; and when they are combined and 
blended in one, they make Hartmann's Unbewusste 
Geist (unconscious spirit). The All-Conserving Mind 
(Alaya) in a certain sense resembles the Unconscious, 
as it is the manifestation of Suchness, the principle 
of enlightenment, in its evolutionary aspect as condi- 
tioned by Ignorance; and Ignorance apparently 

Mahayanism does not teach the annihilation of those human 
passions and feelings. 

There was once a recluse-philosopher, who was considered 
by the villagers to have completely vanquished all natural 
desires and human ambitions They almost worshipped him 
and thought him to be superhuman. One day early in Winter, 
a devotee approached him and reverentially inquired after his 
health. The sage at once responded in verse : 

"A hermit truly I am, world-renounced ; 
Yet when the ground is white with snow, 
A chill goes through me and I shiver." 

A false conception of religious saintliness as cherished by 
so many pious-hearted, but withal ignorant, minds, has led 
them into some of the grossest superstitions, whose curse is 
still lingering even among us. Our earthly life has so many 
limitations and tribulations. The ills that the flesh is heir to 
must be relieved by some material, scientific methods. 

138 CHAPTER VI. 

corresponds to the will as the principle of blind 
activity. The Samkhya philosophy is an avowed 
dualism and permits the existence of two principles 
independent of each other. Mahayanism is fundamen- 
tally monistic and .makes Ignorance merely a condition 
necessary to the unfolding of Suchness * Therefore, 
what the Samkhya splits into two, Mahayanism puts 
together in one. 

So is the parallelism between the Manovijnana, 
and Buddi and Ahankara. Buddhi, intellect, is de- 
fined as adhyavasdya (Kdrika, 23), while Ahankara 
is interpreted as abhimanas (Kdrika, 24), which is 
evidently self-consciousness. As to the exact meaning 
of adhyavasdya, there is a divergence of opinion : 
"ascertainment," "judgment," "determination," "ap- 
prehension" are some of the English equivalents 
chosen for it. But the inner signification of Buddhi 
is clear enough ; it indicates the awakening of knowl- 
edge, the dawn of rationality, the first shedding of 
light on the dark recesses of unconsciousness ; so the 
commentators give as the synonyms mati (understand- 
ing), khydti (cognition), jndnam, prajnd, etc , the 
last two of these, which mean knowledge or intelli- 
gence, being also technical terms of Mahayanism. And, 
as we have seen above, these senses are what the 
Buddhists give to their Manovijnana, save that the 

1 That the Buddhist Ignorance corresponds to the Samkhya 
Prakrti can be seen also from the fact that some Samkhya 
commentators give to Prakrti as its synonyms such terms as 
fdktt (energy) which reminds of karma or sankara, tamas 
(darkness), mayd, and even the very word avidya (ignorance) 

CHAPTER VI. 139 

latter in addition has the faculty of discriminating 
between teum and meum, while in the Samkhya this 
is reserved for Ahankara. Thus, here, too, in place 
of the Samkhya dualism, we have the Buddhist unity. 
Another point we have to take notice here in 
comparing the two great Hindu religio-philosophical 
systems, is that the Samkhya philosophy pluralises 
the Soul (purusa, Kdrika, 18), while Buddhism pos- 
tulates one universal Citta or Alaya. According to 
the followers of Kapila, therefore, there must be as 
many souls as there are individuals, and at every 
departure or advent of an individual there must be 
assumed a corresponding soul passing away or coming 
into existence, though we do not know its whence 
and whither. Buddhism, on the other hand, denies the 
existence of any individual mind apart from the All- 
Conserving Mind (Alaya] which is universal. Individu- 
ality first appears at the awakening of the Manovijnana. 
The quintessence of the Mind is Suchness and is not 
subject to the limitations of time and space as well 
as the law of causation. But as soon as it asserts 
itself in the world of particularisation, it negates 
itself thereby, and, becoming specialised, gives rise 
to individual souls ' 

1 This view of the oneness of the Alaya or Citta (mind) 
may not be acceptable to some Mahayanists, particularly to 
those who advocate the Yogacara philosophy ; but the present 
author is here trying to expound a more orthodox and more 
typical and therefore more widely-recognised doctrine of 
Mahayanism, i. e.. that of Acvaghosa. 

CHAPTER VII. 
THE THEORY OF NON-ATMAN OR NON-EGO. 

TF I am requested to formulate the ground-principles 
of the philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism, and, 
indeed, of all the schools of Buddhism, I would sug- 
gest the following : 

(1) All is momentary (sarvam ksanikam), 

(2) All is empty (sarvam $unyam). 

(3) All is without self (sarvam andtmam). 

(4) All is such as it is (sarvam tathdtvam). 
These four tenets, as it were, are so closely inter- 
related that, stand or fall, they all inevitably share 
one and the same fate together. Whatever different 
views the various schools of Buddhism may hold on 
points of minor importance, they all concur at least 
on these four principal propositions. 

Of these four propositions, the first, the second, 
and the fourth have been elucidated above, more or 
less explicitly. If the existence of a relative world 
is the work of ignorance and as such has no final 
reality, it must be considered illusory and empty ; 
though it does not necessarily follow that on this 
account our life is not worth living. We must not 

CHAPTER VII. 141 

confuse the moral value of existence with the on- 
tological problem of its phenomenality. It all depends 
on our subjective attitude whether or not our world 
and life become full of significance When the illu- 
siveness or phenomenality of individual existences is 
granted and we use the world accordingly, that is, 
"as not abusing it," we escape the error and curse 
of egoism and take things as they are presented to 
us, as reflecting the Dharma of Suchness. We no 
more cling to forms of particularity as something 
ultimate and absolutely real and as that in which lies 
the essence of our life. We take them for such as 
they are, and recognise their reality only in so far 
as they are considered a partial realisation of Such- 
ness, and do not go any further. Suchness, indeed, 
lies not hidden behind them, but exists immanently 
in them. Things are empty and illusory so long as 
they are particular things and are not thought of in 
reference to the All that is Suchness and Reality. 

From this, it logically follows that in this world 
of relativity all is momentary, that nothing is permanent, 
so far as isolated, particular existences are concerned.' 
Even independently of the statement made above, 
the doctrine of universal impermanency is an almost 
self-evident truth experienced everywhere, and does 
not require any special demonstration to prove its 
validity. The desire for immortality which is so 
conspicuous and persistent in all the stages of devel- 
opment of the religious consciousness that the very 
desire has been thought to be the essence of all 

142 CHAPTER VII. 

religious systems, is. the most conclusive proof that 
things on this earth are in a constant flux of 
becoming, and that there is nothing permanent or 
stationary in our individual existences; if otherwise, 
people would never have sought for immortality. 
If this be granted as a fact of our everyday 
experience, we naturally ask: "Why are things so 
changeable? Why is life so fleeting? What is it 
that makes things so mutable and transitory?" To 
this, the Buddhist's answer is: Because the universe 
is a resultant product of many efficient forces that 
are acting according to different karmas ; — the 
destiny of those forces being that no one force or 
no one set of forces can constantly be predominant 
over all the others, but that when one has exhausted 
its potential karma, it is replaced by another that 
has been steadily coming forward in the meantime. 
Hence the universal cadence of birth and death, 
of the spring and the fall, of the tide and the ebb, 
of integration and disintegration. Where there is 
attraction, there is repulsion; where there is the 
centripetal force, there is the centrifugal force. 
Because it is the law of karma that at the very 
moment of birth the arms of death are around the 
neck of life. The universe is nothing but a grand 
rhythmic manifestation of certain forces working 
in conformity to their predetermined laws; or, to 
use Buddhist terminology, this lokadhdtu (material 
world) consists in a concatenation of hetus (causes) 
and pratyayas (conditions) regulated by their karma. 

CHAPTER VII. 143 

If this were not so, there would be either a certain 
fixed state of things in which perfect equilibrium 
would be maintained, or an inexpressible confusion 
of things of which no knowledge or experience 
would be possible. In the former case, we should 
have universal stagnation and eternal death; in the 
latter case, there would be no universe, no life, 
nothing but absolute chaos. Therefore, so long as 
we have the world before us, in which all the 
possible varieties of particularisation are manifested 
it cannot be otherwise than in a state of constant 
vicissitudes and therefore of universal transitoriness. 
Now, the Buddhist argument for the theory of 
non-ego is this : If individual existences are due to 
relations obtaining between diverse forces, which 
act sometimes in unison with and sometimes in 
opposition to one another as predetermined by their 
karma, they cannot be said to have any transcendental 
agency behind them, which is a permanent unity 
and absolute dictator. In other words, there is no 
atman or ego-soul behind our mental activities, and 
no thing-in-itself (svabhdva), so to speak, behind 
each particular form of existence. This is called the 
Buddhist theory of non-atman or non-ego. 

Atman 

Buddhists use the term "atman" in two senses : 
first, in the sense of personal ego, ! and secondly, in 

1 Pudgala or pudgalasamjna is sometimes used by Maha- 
yanists as a synonym of atman. The Buddhist atman in the 

144 CHAPTER VII. 

that of thing-in-itself, perhaps, with a slight modifi- 
cation of its commonly accepted meaning. Let us 
use the term "atman " here in its first sense as 
equivalent to bhutalman, for we are going first to 
treat of the doctrine of non-ego, and later of that of 
no-thing-in-itself. 

Atman is usually translated "life," "ego," or "soul," ' 
and is a technical term used both by Vedanta 
philosophers and Buddhists. But we have to note 
at the beginning that they do not use the term in 
the same sense. When the Vedanta philosophy, espe- 
cially the later one, speaks of atman as our inmost 
self which is identical with the universal Brahma, it 
is used in its most abstract metaphysical sense and 
does not mean the soul whatever, as the latter is 

sense of ego-substratum may be considered to correspond to 
the Vedantist Jivatman, which is used in contradistinction to 
Paramatman, the supreme being or Brahma. 

1 Mahayana Buddhists generally understand the essential 
characteristic of atman to consist in freedom, and by freedom 
they mean eternality, absolute unity, and supreme authority. 
A being that is transitory is not free, as it is conditioned by 
other beings, and therefore it has no atman. A being that 
is an aggregate of elemental matter or forms of energy is 
not absolute, for it is a state of mutual relationship, and 
therefore it has no atman. Again, a being that has no author- 
itative command over itself and other beings, is not free, for 
it will be subjected to a power other than itself, and there- 
fore it has no atman. Now, take anything that we come 
across in this world of particulars ; and does it not possess 
one or all of these three qualities : transitoriness, composite- 
ness, and helplessness or dependence ? Therefore, all concrete 
individual existences not excepting human beings have no 
atman, have no ego, that is eternal, absolute, and supreme. 

CHAPTER VII. 145 

commonly understood by vulgar minds. On the other 
hand, Buddhists understand by atman this vulgar, 
materialistic conception of the soul (bkutdtman] and 
positively denies its existence as such. If we, for 
convenience' sake, distinguish between phenomenal 
and noumenal in our notion of ego or soul, the 
atman of Buddhism is the phenomenal ego, namely, 
a concrete agent that is supposed to do the acting, 
thinking, and feeling; while the atman of Vedantists 
is the noumenal ego as the raison d' etre of our 
psychical life. The one is in fact material, however 
ethereal it might be conceived. The other is a highly 
metaphysical conception transcending the reach of 
human discursive knowledge. The latter may be 
identified with Paramatman and the former with 
Jivatman. Paramatman is a universal soul from which, 
according to Vedantism, emanates this world of 
phenomena, and in a certain sense it may be said 
to correspond to the Tathagata-garbha of Buddhism. 
Jivatman is the ego-soul as it is conceived by ignorant 
people as an independent entity directing all the 
mental activities. It is this latter atman that was 
found to be void by Buddha when he arose from his 
long meditation, declaring : 

"Many a life to transmigrate, 
Long quest, no rest, hath been my fate, 
Tent-designer ! inquisitive for : 
Painful birth from state to state. 

1 Tent-designer is a figurative term for the ego-soul. Fol- 
lowing the prevalent error, the Buddha at first made an 

10 

146 CHAPTER VII. 

"Tent-designer! I know thee now; 
Never again to build art thou : 
Quite out are all thy joyful fires, 
Rafter broken and roof-tree gone, 
Gain eternity— dead desires." l 

Buddha's First Line of Inquiry. 

\ Buddhism finds the source of all evils and sufferings 
in the vulgar material conception of the ego-soul, 
and concentrates its entire ethical force upon the 
destruction of the ego-centric notions and desires. 
The Buddha seems, since the beginning of his wan- 
dering life, to have conceived the idea that the way 
of salvation must lie somehow in the removal of 
this egoistic prejudice, for so long as we are not 
liberated from its curse we are liable to become the 
prey of the three venomous passions : covetousness, 
infatuation, and anger, and to suffer the misery of 
birth and death and disease and old age. Thus, when 
he received his first instructions from the Samkhya 
philosopher, Arada, he was not satisfied, because he 
did not teach how to abandon this ego-soul itself. 
The Buddha argued: "I consider that the embodied 
ego-soul, though freed from the evolvent-evolutes, 2 

earnest search after the ego that was supposed to be snugly 
sitting behind our mental experiences, and the result was 
this utterance. 

1 The Dharmapada, vs. 153 — 154. Tr. by A. J. Edmunds. 

2 Prakrtivikrtayas. This is a technical term of Samkhya 
philosophy and means the modes of Prakrti, as evolved from 
it and as further evolving on. See Satis Chandra Banarji, 
Samkhya-Phzlosophy, p. XXXIII et seq. 

CHAPTER VII. 147 

is still subject to the condition of birth and has 
the condition of a seed. The seed may remain dor- 
mant so long as it is deprived of the opportunity 
of coming into contact with the requisite conditions 
of quickening and being quickened, but since its 
germinating power has not been destroyed, it will 
surely develop all its potentialities as soon as it is 
brought into that necessary contact. Even though 
the ego- soul free from entanglement [i. e. from the 
bondage of Prakrti] is declared to be liberated, yet, 
so long as the ego-soul remains, there can be no 
absolute abandonment of it, there can be no real 
abandonment of egoism." 1 

The Buddha then proceeds to indicate the path 
through which he reached his final conclusion and 
declares: "There is no real separation of the qualities 
and their subject ; for fire cannot be conceived apart 
from its heat and form." When this argument is 
logically carried out, it leads nowhere but to the 
Buddhist doctrine of non-atman, that says: The"-' 
existence of an ego-soul cannot be conceived apart 
from sensation, perception, imagination, intelligence, 
volition, etc., and, therefore, it is absurd to think 
that there is an independent individual soul-agent 
which makes our consciousness its workshop. 

To imagine that an object can be abstracted 
from its qualities, not only logically but in reality, 
that there is some unknown quantity that is in 

1 The passages quoted here as well as one in the next pa- 
ragraph are taken from A^vaghosa's Buddhacarita. 

148 CHAPTER VII. 

possession of such and such characteristic marks 
(laksana) whereby it makes itself perceivable by 
our senses, says Buddhism, is wrong and unwarranted 
by reason. Fire cannot be conceived apart from its 
form and heat; waves cannot be conceived apart 
from the water and its commotion ; the wheel cannot 
exist outside of its rim, spokes, axle, etc. All things, 
thus, are made of hetus and pratyayas, of causes 
and conditions, of qualities and attributes; and it 
is impossible for our pudgala or atman or ego or 
soul to be any exception to this universal condition 
of things. 

Let me in this connection state an interesting 
incident in the history of Chinese Buddhism. Hui-K'e, 
the second patriarch of the Dhyana sect in China, 
was troubled with this ego-problem before his con- 
version. He was at first a faithful Confucian, but 
Confucianism did not satisfy all his spiritual wants. 
His soul was wavering between agnosticism and 
scepticism, and consequently he felt an unspeakable 
anguish in his inmost heart. When he learned of 
the arrival of Bodhidharma in his country, he hastened 
to his monastery and implored him to give him some 
spiritual advice. But Bodhidharma did not utter a 
word, being seemingly absorbed in his deep medi- 
tation. Hui-K'e, however, was determined to obtain 
from him some religious instructions at all hazards. 
So it is reported that he was standing at the same 
spot seven days and nights, when he at last cut off 
his left arm with the sword he was carrying (being 

CHAPTER VII. 149 

a military officer) and placed it before Dharma, saying : 
"This arm is a token of my sincere desire to be 
instructed in the Holy Doctrine. My soul is troubled 
and annoyed; pray let your grace show me the way 
to pacify it." Dharma quietly arose from his medita- 
tion and said: "Where is your soul? Bring it here 
and I will have it pacified." Hui-K'e replied: "I have 
been searching for it all these years, but I have never 
succeeded in laying a hand on it." Dharma then 
exclaimed: "There, I have your soul pacified!" .At 
this, it is said, a flash of spiritual enlightenment went 
across the mind of Hui-K'e, and his "soulM/ was 
pacified once for all. 

The Skandhas. 

When the five skandhas are combined according to 
their previous karma and present a temporal existence 
in the form of a sentient being, vulgar minds imagine 
that they have here an individual entity sustained by 
an immortal ego-substratum. In fact, the material 
body (rupakaya) alone is not what makes the ego- 
soul, nor the sensation (vedana), nor the deeds (sans- 
kara), nor the consciousness (vifndna), nor the con- 
ception (samjna) ; but only when they are all combined 
in a certain form they make a sentient being. Yet 
this combination is not the work of a certain inde- 
pendent entity, which, according to its own will, 
combines the five skandhas in one form and then 
hides itself in it. The combination of the constituent 

I5O CHAPTER VII. 

elements, Buddhism declares, is achieved by them- 
selves after their karma. When a certain number of 
atoms of hydrogen and of oxygen are brought to- 
gether, they attract each other on their own accord 
or owing to their own karma, and the result is 
water. The ego of water, so to speak, did not will 
to bring the two elements and make itself out of 
them. Even so is it with the existence of a sentient 
being, and there is no need of hypostasising a fabu- 
lous ego-monster behind the combination of the five 
skandhas. 

Skandha (khanda in Pali) literally means "aggregate' * 
or "aglomeration", and, according to the Chinese 
exegetists, it is called so, because our personal 
existence is an aggregate of the five constituent 
elements of being, because it comes to take a definite 
individual form when the skandhas are brought together 
according to their previous karma. The first of the 
five aggregates is matter (rupa), whose essential qual- 
ity is thought to consist in resistance. The material 
part of our existence in the five sense-organs called 
indryas: eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and the body. 
The second skandha is called sensation or sense- 
' , impression (vedand), which results from the contact 
of the six vijfianas (senses) with the visaya (external 
world). The third is called samjnd which corresponds 
to our conception. It is the psychic power by which 
we are enabled to form the abstract images of par- 
ticular objects. The fourth is sanskdra which may be 
rendered action or deed. Our intelligent consciousness, 

CHAPTER VII. 151 

responding to impressions received which are either 
agreeable or disagreeable or indifferent, acts accor- 
dingly; and these acts bear fruit in the coming 
generations. 

Sanskara, the fourth constituent of being, comprises 
two categories, mental (caitta) and non-mental (cittavi- 
prayukta). And the mental is subdivided into six : 
fundamental (mahdbkumi), good (kugala], tormenting 
(klega), evil (aku$ala), tormenting minor (upaklega), 
and indefinite (aniyata). It may be interesting to 
enumerate what all these sankaras are, as they shed 
light on the practical ethics of Buddhism. 

There are ten fundamental sanskaras belonging 
to the category of mental or psychic activities : I . 
cetana (mentation), 2. sparga (contact), 3. chanda 
(desire), 4. mati (understanding), 5. smrti (recollec- 
tion), 6. manaskara (concentration), 7. adhimoksa 
(unfettered intelligence), 8. samadhi ("meditation). The 
ten good sanskaras are: I. graddha (faith), 2. virya 
(energy), 3. upeksa (complacency), 4. hri (modesty), 
5. apatrapa (shame), 6 alobha (non-covetousness), 7. 
advesa (freedom from hatred), 8. ahimsa (gentleness 
of heart), 9. pragradbhi (mental repose), 10. apramada 
(attentiveness). 

The six tormenting sanskaras are as follows : I . 
moha (folly), 2. pramada (wantonness), 3. kausidya 
(indolence), 4. ac.raddhya (scepticism), 5. styana (sloth- 
fulness), 6. auddhatpa (unsteadiness). 

The two minor evil sanskaras are : I . ahrtkata, 
state of not being modest, or arrogance, or self- 

152 CHAPTER VII. 

assertiveness, and 2. anapatrapa, being lost to shame, 
or to be without conscience. 

The ten minor tormenting sanskaras are : I . krodha 
(anger), 2. mraksa (secretiveness), 3. matsarya (niggard- 
liness), 4. irsya (envy), 5. pradaga (uneasiness), 6. 
vihimsa (noxiousness), 7. upanaha (malignity), 8. may£ 
(trickiness), 9. cathya (dishonesty), 10. mada (arrogance). 

The eight indefinite sanskaras are: I . kaukrtya (repent- 
ance), 2. middha (sleep), 3 . vitarka (inquiry), 4. vicara 
(investigation), 5. raga (excitement), 6. pratigha (wrath), 
7. mana (self-reliance), 8. vicikitsS. (doubting). 

The second grand category of sanskara which is 
not included under "mental" or "psychic," comprises 
fourteen items as follows : I . prapti (attainment), 2. 
aprapti (non-attainment), 3. sabhagata (grouping), 4 
asanjfiika (unconsciousness), 5. asanjfiisamapatti (un- 
conscious absorption in religious meditation), 6. niro- 
dhasamapatti (annihilation-trance of a heretic), 7. jivita 
(vitality), 8. jati (birth), 9. sthiti (existing), 10. jara 
(decadence), n. anityata (transitoriness), 12. namakaya 
(name), 13. padakaya (phrase), 14. vyanjanakaya 
(sentence). 

Now, to return to the main problem. The fifth 
skandha is called vijnana, commonly rendered consci- 
ousness, which, however, is not quite correct. The 
vijnana is intelligence or mentality, it is the psychic 
power of discrimination, and in many cases it can 
be translated by sense. There are, according to 
Hinayanists, six vijnanas or senses : visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory, tactual, and cogitative ; according 

CHAPTER VII. 153 

to Mahayanism there are eight vijnanas : the manovij- 
nana and the alayavijn^na, being added to the above 
six. This psychological phase of Mahayana philosophy 
is principally worked out by the Yogacara school, 
whose leading thinkers are Asanga and Vasubandhu. 

King Milinda and Nagasena 

Buddhist literature, Northern as well as Southern, 
abounds with expositions of the doctrine of non-ego, 
as it is one of the most important foundation-stones 
on which the magnificent temple of Buddhism is built. 
The dialogue * between King Milinda and Nagasena, 
among many others, is very interesting for various 
reasons and full of suggestive thoughts, and we have 
the following discussion of theirs concerning the 
problem of ego abstracted from the Dialogue. 

At their first meeting the King asks Nagasena, 
"How is your Reverence known, and what is your name ?" 

To this the monk-philosopher replies: UI am known 
as Nagasena, and it is by that name that my brethren 
in the faith address me. But although parents give 
such a name as Nagasena, or Surasena, Virasena, 
or Sihasena, yet this Nagasena and so on— is only a 
generally understood term, a designation in common 
use. For there is no permanent self involved in the 
matter." 

Being greatly surprised by this answer, the King 

1 The Questions of King Milinda, Sacred Books of the East, 
Vol. XXXV. 

154 CHAPTER VII. „ 

volleys upon Nagasena a series of questions as follows : 
"If there be no permanent self involved in the matter, 
who is it, pray, who gives to you members of the 
Order your robes and food and lodging and neces- 
saries for the sick? Who is it who enjoys such 
things when given? Who is it who lives a life of 
righteousness ? Who is it who devotes himself to 
meditation? Who is it who attains to the goal of the 
Excellent Way, to the Nirvana of Arhatship? And 
who is it who destroys living creatures? who is it 
who takes what is not his own? who is it who lives 
an evil life of worldly lusts, who speaks lies, who 
drinks strong drink, who in a word commits any one 
of the five sins which work out their bitter fruit 
even in this life? If that be so, there is neither 
merit nor dement; there is neither doer nor cause 
of good or evil deeds; there is neither fruit nor 
result of good or evil karma. If we are to think 
that were a man to kill you there would be no 
murder, l then it follows that there are no real masters 
or teachers in your Order, that your ordinations are 
void. You tell me that your brethren in the Order 
are in the habit of addressing you as Nagasena. Now, 
what is that Nagasena? Do you mean to say that 
the hair is Nagasena?" 

This last query being denied by the Buddhist sage, 
the King asks: "Or is it the nails, the skin, the 
flesh, the nerves, the bones, the marrow, the kidneys, 

1 This reminds us of the passage quoted elsewhere from 
the Katha-U pants had; cf. the footnote to it. 

• CHAPTER VII. 155 

the heart, the liver, the abdomen, the spleen, the 
lungs, the larger intestines, the smaller intestines, the 
faeces, the bile, the phlegm, the pus, the blood, the 
sweat, the fat, the tears, the serum, the saliva, the 
mucus, the oil that lubricates the joints, the urine, 
or the brain or any or all of these, that is Nagasena ? 

"Is it the material form that is Nagasena, or the 
sensations, or the ideas, or the confections (deeds), 
or the consciousness, that is Nagasena ?" 

To all these questions, the King, having received 
a uniform denial, exclaims in excitement : "Then, 
thus, ask as I may, 1 can discover no Nagasena. 
Nagasena is a mere empty sound. Who then is the 
Nagasena that we see before us ? l It is a falsehood 
that your Reverence has spoken, an untruth?" 

Nagasena does not give any direct answer, but 
quietly proposes some counter-questions to the King. 
Ascertaining that he came in a carriage to the Buddhist 
philosopher, he asks : "Is it the wheel, or the 
framework, or the ropes, or the spokes of the wheels, 
or the goad, that are the chariot?" 

To this, the king says, "No," and continues : "It 
is on account of its having all these things that it 

1 As cited elsewhere, Bodhi-Dharma of the Dhyana sect, 
when questioned in a similar way, replied, "I do not know." 
Walt Whitman echoes the same sentiment in the lollowing 
lines: 

"A child said, what is the grass ? fetching it to me with 

full hands ; 

How could I answer the child ? I do not know what it is, 
any more than he." 

156 CHAPTER VII. 

comes under the generally understood term, the 
designation in common use, of 'chariot.'" 

"Very good," says Nagasena, "Your Majesty has 
rightly grasped the meaning of 'chariot.' And just 
even so it is on account of all these things you 
questioned me about the thirty-two kinds of organic 
matter in a human body, and the five skandhas 
(constituent elements of being) that I come under 
the generally-understood term, the designation in 
common use, of 'Nagasena.'" 

Then, the sage quotes in way of confirmation a 
passage from the Samyutta Nikdya : "Just as it is 
by the condition precedent of the co-existence of 
its various parts that the word 'chariot' is used, just 
so it is that when the skandhas are there we talk 
of a 'being.'" 

* 
* 

To further illustrate the theory of non-atman from 
earlier Buddhist literature, let me quote the following 
from the Jdtaka Tales (No. 244) : 

The Bodhisattva said to a pilgrim. "Will you have 
a drink of Ganges-water fragrant with the scent of 
the forest?" 

The pilgrim tried to catch him in his words : "What 
is the Ganges ? Is the sand the Ganges ? Is the water 
the Ganges? Is the hither bank the Ganges? Is the 
further bank the Ganges?" 

But the Bodhisattva retorted, "If you except the 

CHAPTER VII. 157 

water, the sand, the hither bank, and the further 
bank, where can you find any Ganges?" 

Following this argument we might say, "Where 
is the ego-soul, except imagination, volition, intellec- 
tion, desire, aspiration, etc.?" 

Ananda's Attempts to Locate the Soul. 

In the Surangama Sutra *, Buddha exposes the 
absurdity of the hypothesis of an individual concrete 
soul-substance by subverting Andanda's seven succes- 
sive attempts to determine its whereabouts. Most 
people who firmly believe in personal immortality, 
will see how vague and chimerical and logically 
untenable is their notion of the soul, when it is 
critically examined as in the following case. Ananda's 
conception of the soul is somewhat puerile, but I 
doubt whether even in our enlightened age the belief 

1 There seem to be two Chinese translations of this Sutra, 
one by Kumarajiva and the other by Paramartha, but appar- 
ently they are different texts bearing the same title. Besides 
these two, there is another text entirely in Chinese trans- 
literation. Owing to insufficiency of material at my disposal 
here, I cannot say anything definite about the identity or 
diversity of these documents. The following discussion that 
is reported to have taken place between the Buddha and 
Ananda is an abstract prepared from the first and the second 
fasciculi of Paramartha's (?) translation. Beal gives in his 
Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese (pp. 2 86 -369) 
an English translation of the first four fasc. of thz Surangama. 
Though this translation is not quite satisfactory in many 
points the reader may find there a detailed account of the 
discussion which is here only partially and roughly recap- 
itulated. 

158 CHAPTER VII. 

entertained by the multitude is any better than his. 

When questioned by the Buddha as to the locality 
of the soul, Ananda asserts that it resides within the 
body. Thereupon, the Buddha says: "If your intel- 
ligent soul resides within your corporeal body, how 
is it that it does not see your inside first ? To illustrate, 
what we see first in this lecture hall is the interior 
and it is only when the windows are thrown open 
that "we are able to see the outside garden and woods. 
It is impossible for us who are sitting in the hall 
to see the outside only and not to see the inside. 
Reasoning in a similar way, why does not the soul 
that is considered to be within the body see the 
internal organs first such as the stomach, heart, veins 
etc. ? If however it does not see the inside, surely 
it cannot be said to reside within the body." 

Ananda now proposes to solve the problem by 
locating the soul outside the body. He says that the 
soul is like a candle-light placed without this hall. 
Where the light shines everything is visible, but 
within the room there are no candles burning, and 
therefore here prevails nothing but darkness. This 
explains the incapacity of the soul to see the inside 
of the body. But the Buddha argues that "it is 
impossible for the soul to be outside. If so, what the 
soul feels may not be felt by the body, and what 
the body feels may not be felt by the soul, as there 
is no relationship between the two. The fact, however, 
is that when you, Ananda, see my hand thus stretched, 
you are conscious that you have the perception of 

CHAPTER VII. 159 

it. As far as there is a correspondence between the 
soul and the body, the soul cannot be said to be 
residing outside the body." 

The third hypothesis assumed by Ananda is that 
the soul hides itself just behind the sense-organs. 
Suppose a man put a pair of lenses over his eyes. 
Cannot he see the outside world through them? The 
reason why it cannot see the inside is that it resides 
within the sense-organs. 

But says the Buddha: ''When we have a lens 
over an eye, we perceive this lens as well as the 
outside world. If the soul is hidden behind the sense- 
organ, why does it not see the sense-organ itself? 
As it does not in fact, it cannot be residing in the 
place you mention." 

Ananda proposes another theory. "Within, we have 
the stomach, liver, heart, etc. : without, we have so 
many orifices. Where the internal organs are, there 
is darkness; but where we have openings, there is 
light. Close the eyes and the soul sees the darkness 
inside. Open the eyes and it sees the brightness 
outside. What do you say to this theory?" 

The Buddha says: "If you take the darkness you 
see when the eyes are closed for your inside, do 
you consider this darkness as something confronting 
your soul, or not? In the first case, wherever there 
prevails a darkness, that must be thought to be your 
interior organs. In the latter case, seeing is impossible, 
for seeing presupposes the existence of subject and 
object. Besides this, there is another difficulty. Grant- 

l6o CHAPTER VII. 

ing your supposition that the ejte could turn itself 
inward or outward and see the darkness of the 
interior or the brightness of the external world, it 
could also see your own face when the eye is opened. 
If it could not do so, it must be said to be incapable 
of turning the sight inward." 

The fifth assumption as made by Ananda is that 
the soul is the essence of understanding or intellig- 
ence, which is not within, nor without, nor in the 
middle, but which comes into actual existence as 
soon as it confronts the objective world, for it is 
taught by the Buddha that the world exists on account 
of the mind and the mind on account of the world. 

To this the Buddha replies: "According to your 
argument, the soul must be said to exist before it 
comes in contact with the world ; otherwise, the con- 
tact cannot have any sense. The soul, then, exists as 
an individual presence, not after nor at the time of 
a contact with the external world, but assuredly before 
the contact. Granting this, we come back again to the 
old difficulties : Does the soul come out of your in- 
side, or does it come in from the outside? In case 
of the first alternative, the soul must be able to see 
its own face." 

Ananda interrupts: "Seeing is done by the eyes, 
and the soul has nothing to do with it." 

The Buddha objects : "If so, a dead man has eyes 
just as perfect as a living man. l He must be able 

1 Cf the following which is extracted from the Questions 
of King Milinda (Sacred Books of the East, vol. XXXV, 

CHAPTER VII. l6l 

to see things, but if he sees at all, he cannot be dead. 
Well, if your intelligent soul has a concrete existence, 
should it be thought simple or compound ? Should 
it be thought of as filling the body or being present 
only in a particular spot ? If it is a simple unit, when 
one of your limbs is touched, all the four will at 
once be conscious of the touch, which really means 
no touch. If the soul is a compound body, how can 
it distinguish itself from another soul? If it is filling 
the body all over, there will be no localisation of 
sensation, as must be the case according to the first 
supposition of a simple soul-unit. Finally, if it occu- 
pies only a particular part of the body, you may ex- 
perience certain feelings on that spot only, and all 
the other parts will remain perfectly anesthetic. All 
these hypotheses are against the actual facts of our 
experience and cannot be logically maintained." 

For the sixth time, Ananda ventures to untie the 
Gordian knot of the soul-problem. "As the soul cannot 
be located neither within nor without, it must be 
somewhere in the middle." But the Buddha again re- 
futes this, saying: "This'middle* is extremely indefinite. 
Should it be located as a point in space or some- 
where on the body ? If it is on the surface of the body, 

133): "If there be a soul [distinct from the body] which does 
all this, then if the door of the eye were thrown down [if 
the eye were plucked out] could it stretch out its head, as 
it were, through the larger aperture and [with greater range] 
see forms much more clearly than before? Could one hear 
sounds better if the ears were cut off, or taste better if the 
tongue were pulled out, or feel touch better if the body were 
destroyed?" n 

1 62 CHAPTER VII. 

it is not the middle; if it is in the body, 
it is then within. If it is said to occupy a point in 
space, how should that point be indicated? Without 
an indication, a point is no point; and if an indica- 
tion is needed, it can be fixed anywhere arbitrarily, 
and then there will be no end of confusion." 

Ananda interposes and says that he does not mean 
this kind of "middle." The eye and the color condi- 
tioning each other, there comes to exist visual percep- 
tion. The eye has the faculty to discriminate, and 
the color-world has no sensibility ; but the perception 
takes place in their "middle," that is, in their interac- 
tion; and then it is said that there exists a soul. 

Says the Buddha: "If the soul, as you say, exists 
in the relation between the sense-organs (indryd) and 
their respective sense-objects (visaya), should we 
consider the soul as uniting and partaking the natures 
of these two incongruous things, visaya and indrya? 
If the soul partakes something of each, it has no 
characteristics of its own. If it unites the two natures, 
the distinction between subject and object exists no 
more. 'In the middle' is an empty word; that is to 
say, to conceive the soul as the relation between the 
indryas and the visayas is to make it an airy nothing." 

The seventh and final hypothesis offered by Ananda 
is that the soul is the state of non-attachment, and that, 
therefore, it has no particular locality in which it 
abides. But this is also mercilessly attacked by the 
Buddha who declares: "Attachment presupposes the 
existence of beings to which a mind may be attached. 

CHAPTER VII. 163 

Now, should we consider these things (dharmas} such 
as the world, space, land, water, birds, beasts, etc. 
as existing or not existing ? If the external world does 
not exist, we cannot speak about non-attachment, as 
there is nothing to attach from the first. If the external 
world really is, how can we manage not to come in 
contact with it ? When we say that things are devoid 
of all characteristic marks, it amounts to the declara- 
tion that they are non-existent. But they are not 
non-existent, they must have certain characteristics 
that distinguish themselves. Now, the external world 
has certainly some marks (laksana) and it must by 
all means be considered as existing. There then is 
no room for your theory of non-attachment." 

At this, Ananda surrenders and the Buddha discloses 
his theory of Dharmakaya, which we shall expound 
at some length in the chapter specially devoted to it. 

* 
* * 

By way of a summary of the above , let me remark 
that the Buddhists do not deny the existence of the 
so-called empirical ego in contradistinction to the 
noumenal ego, which latter can be considered to cor- 
respond to the Buddhist atman. Vasubandhu in his 
treatise on the Yogacara's idealistic philosophy declares 
that the existence of atman and dharma is only hy- 
pothetical, provisional, apparent, and not in any sense 
real and ultimate. To express this in modern terms, 
the soul and the world, or subject and object, have 
only relative existence, and no absolute reality can 

1 64 CHAPTER VII. 

be ascribed to them. Psychologically speaking, every 
one of us has an ego or soul which means the unity 
of consciousness; and physically, this world of phe- 
nomena is real either as a manifestation of one energy 
or as a composite of atoms or electrons, as is con- 
sidered by physicists. 

To confine ourselves to the psychological question, 
what Buddhism most emphatically insists on is the 
non-existence of a concrete, individual, irreducible 
soul-substance, whose immortality is so much coveted 
by most unenlightened people. Individuation is only 
relative and not absolute. Buddhism knows how 
far the principle c6uld safely and consistently be 
carried out, and its followers will not forget where 
to stop and destroy the wall, almost adamantine to 
some religionists, of individualism. Absolute indivi- 
dualism, as the Buddhists understand it, incapacitates 
us to follow the natural flow of sympathy; to bathe 
in the eternal sunshine of divinity which not only 
surrounds but penetrates us ; to escape the curse of 
individual immortality which is strangely so much 
sought after by some people; to trace this mundane 
life to its fountainhead of which it drinks so freely, 
yet quite unknowingly; to rise rejuvenated from the 
consuming fire of Kala (Chronos). To think that there 
is a mysterious something behind the empirical ego 
and that this something comes out triumphantly after 
the fashion of the immortal phoenix from the funeral 
pyre of corporeality, is not Buddhistic. 

What I would remark here in connection with this 

CHAPTER VTI. 165 

problem of the soul, is its relation to that of Alaya- 
vijnana, of which it is said that the Buddha was very 
reluctant to talk, on account of its being easily con- 
founded with the notion of the ego. The Alaya, as 
was explained, is a sort of universal soul from which 
our individual empirical souls are considered to have 
evolved. The Manas which is the first offspring of 
the Alaya is endowed with the faculty of discrimi- 
nation, and from the wrongful use of this faculty 
there arises in the Manas the conception of the Alaya 
as the ego, — the real concrete soul-substratum. 

The Alaya, however, is not a particular phenome- 
non, for it is a state of Suchnes's in its evolutionary 
disposition and has nothing in it yet to suggest its 
concrete individuality. When the Manas finds out its 
error and lifts the veil of Ignorance from the body 
of the Alaya, it soon becomes convinced of the ul- 
timate nature of the soul, so called. For the soul is 
not individual, but supra-individual. 

Atman and the "Old Man." 

When the Buddhists exclaim : "Put away your 
egoism, for the ego is an empty notion, a mere word 
without reality," some of our Christian readers may 
think that if there is no ego, what will become of 
our personality or individuality? Though this point 
will become clearer as we proceed, let us remark 
here that what Buddhism understands by ego or 
atman may be considered to correspond in many 
respects to the Christian notion of "flesh" or the 

1 66 CHAPTER VII. 

"old man," which is the source of all our sinful 
acts. Says Paul : "I am crucified with Christ ; never- 
theless I live ; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me : 
and the life which 1 live now in the flesh I live by 
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave 
himself for m«." (Gal. ii, 20.) When this passage is 
interpreted by the Buddhists, the "1" that was anni- 
hilated through crucifixion, is our false notion of 
an ego-soul (atman) ; and the "I" that is living through 
the grace of God is the Bodhi, a reflex in us of the 
Dharmakaya. 

When Christians put the spirit and the flesh in 
contrast and advise us to "walk in the spirit" and 
not to "fulfil the lust of the flesh," it must be said 
that they understand by the flesh our concrete, ma- 
terial existence whose characteristic is predominantly 
individual, and by the spirit, that which transcends 
particularity and egoism; for "love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, faith, meekness, temperance," and suchlike 
virtues are possible only when our egocentric, atman- 
made desires are utterly abnegated. Buddhism is more 
intellectual than Christianity or Judaism and prefers 
philosophical terms which are better understood than 
popular language which leads often to confusion. Com- 
pared with the Buddhists' conception of £tman, the 
"flesh" lacks in perspicuity and exactitude, not to 
speak of its dualistic tendency which is extremely 
offensive to the Buddhists. 

CHAPTER VII. 167 

The Vedantic Conception. 

Though the doctrine of non-atman is pre-eminently 
Buddhistic, other Hindu philosophers did not neglect 
to acknowledge its importance in our religious life. 
Having grown in the same soil under similar cir- 
cumstances, the following passage which is taken from 
the Yogavdsistha (which is supposed to be a Vedantic 
work, Upagama P., ch. LII, 31, 44) sounds almost 
like Buddhistic : 

"I am absolute, I am the light of intelligence, I 
am free from the defilement of egoism. O thou that 
art unreal ! I am not bound by thee, the seed of 
egoism." 1 

The author then argues : Where shall we con- 
sider the ego-soul, so called, to be residing in this 
body of flesh and bones? and what does it look 
like? We move our limbs, but the movement is 
due to the vital airs (vdtd]. We think, but con- 
sciousness is a manifestation of the great mind 
(mahacitta). We cease to exist, but extinction belongs 
to the body (kayo). Now, take apart what we 
imagine to constitute our personal existence. The 
flesh is one thing, the blood is another, and so 
on with mentation (bodha) and vitality (spandd}. The 
ear hears, the tongue tastes, the eye sees, the mind 

1 Nirvikalpo 'smi ciddipo nirahankaravasanah 
Tvaya ahankarabijena na sainbaddho 'smi asanmaya (31) 

1 68 CHAPTER VII, 

thinks, but what and where is that which we call "ego" ? 
Then comes the conclusion : "In reality, there is 
no such thing as the ego-soul, nor is there any 
mine and thine, nor imagination. All this is nothing 
but the manifestation of the universal soul which is 
the light of pure intelligence." ] 

Ndgdrjuna on the Soul. 

In conclusion, let me quote some passage bearing 
on the subject from Nagarjuna's Discourse on the 
Middle Path (chapter 9) : 2 "Some say that there are 
seeing, hearing, feeling, etc., because there is something 
which exists even prior to those [manifestations]. Fpr 
how could seeing, etc. come from that which does 
not exist? Therefore, it must be admitted that that 
being [i.e. soul] existed prior to those [manifestations]. 

"But [this hypothesis of the prior (purva} or inde- 
pendent existence of the soul is wrong, because] how 
could that being be known if it existed prior to 
seeing, feeling, etc. ? If that being could exist without 
seeing, etc., the latter too could surely exist without 
that being. But how could a thing which could not 
be known by any sign exist before it is known? 
How could this exist without that, and how could 

1 Yatha bhutataya na ahammano na tvam na vasana 
Atma guddhacidabhasah kevalo yam vijrbhate. (44) 

2 The following is a somewhat free translation of the ori- 
ginal Chinese of Kumarajiva, which pretty closely agrees with 
the Sanskrit text published by the Buddhist Text Society 
of India. 

CHAPTER VII. l69 

that exist without this} [Are not all things relative 
and conditioning one another?] 

"If that being called soul could not exist prior to 
all manifestations such as seeing, etc., how could it 
exist prior to each of them taken individually? 

"If it is the same soul that sees, hears, feels, etc., 
it must be assumed that the soul exists prior to 
each of these manifestations. This, however, is not 
warranted by facts. [Because in that case one must 
be able to hear with the eyes, see with the ears, as 
one soul is considered to direct all these diverse 
faculties at its will.] 

"If, on the other hand, the hearer is one, and the 
seer is another, the feeler must be still another. Then, 
there will be hearing, seeing, etc. simultaneously, — 
which leads to the assumption of a plurality of souls. l 
[This too is against experience.] 

"Further, the soul does not exist in the element 
(bkuta) on which seeing, hearing, feeling, etc. depend. 
[To use modern expression, the soul does not exist 
in the nerves which respond to the external stimuli.] 

"If seeing, hearing, feeling, etc. have no soul that 
exists prior to them, they too have no existence as 
such. For how could that exist without this, and this 
without that} Subject and object are mutually con- 
ditioned. The soul as it is has no independent, indi- 
vidual reality whatever. Therefore, the hypothesis 
that contends for the existence of an ego-soul prior 

1 The Sanskrit text does not give this passage. 

170 CHAPTER VII. 

to simultaneous with, or posterior to, seeing, etc., is to 
be abandoned as fruitless, for the ego-soul existeth not." 

Non-dtman-ness of Things. 

The word "atman" is used by the Buddhists not 
only psychologically in the sense of soul, self, or ego, 
but also ontologically in the sense of substance or 
thing-in-itself or thinginess ; and its existence in this 
capacity is also strongly denied by them. For the 
same reason that the existence of an individual ego- 
soul is untenable, they reject the hypothesis of 
the permament existence of an individual object as 
such. As there is no transcendent agent in our soul- 
life, so there is no real, eternal existence of individuals 
as individuals, but a system of different attributes, 
which, when the torce of karma is exhausted, 
ceases to subsist. Individual existences cannot 
be real by their inherent nature, but they are illu- 
sory, and will never remain permanent as such; for 
they are constantly becoming, and have no selfhood 
though they may so appear to our particularising sen- 
ses on account of our subjective ignorance. They are 
in reality cunya and anatman, they are empty and 
void of atman. 

Svabkdva, 

The term "sabhava" (self-essence or noumenon) is 
sometimes used by the Mahayanists in place of atman, 
and they would say that all dharmas have no self- 

CHAPTER VII. 171 

essence, sarvam dharmam nihsvabhavam^ which is to 
say, that all things in their phenomenal aspect are 
devoid of individual selves, that it is only due to our 
ignorance that we believe in the thinginess of things, 
whereas there is no such thing as svabhava or atman or 
noumenon which resides in them. Svabhava and atman 
are thus habitually used by Buddhists as quite 
synonymous. 

What do they exactly understand by "svabhava" 
whose existence is denied in a particular object as 
perceived by our senses ? This has never been expli- 
citly defined by the Mahayanists, but they seem to 
understand by svabhava something concrete, indivi- 
dual, yet independent, unconditional, and not subject 
to the law of causation (pratyayasamutpada}. It, there- 
fore, stands in opposition to gunyata, emptiness, as 
well as to conditionality. Inasmuch as all beings are 
transient and empty in their inherent being, they 
cannot logically be said to be in possession of self- 
essence which defies the law of causation. All things 
are mutually conditioning and limiting, and apart 
from their relativity they are non-existent and cannot 
be known by us. Therefore, says Nagarjuna, "If sub- 
stance be different from attribute, it is then beyond 
comprehension." 1 For "a jag is not to be known 
independent of matter et cetera, and matter in turn 
is not to be known independent of ether et cetera." 2 

1 Laksyal laksanam anyac cet syat tal laksyam alaksanam. 
8 Rupadi vyatirekena yatha kumbho na vidyate, 
Vahyadi vyatirena tatha rupam na vidyate. 

CHAPTER VII. 

As there is no subject without object, so there is no 
substance without attribute ; for one is the condition 
for the other. Does self-essence then exist in causa- 
tion? No, " whatever is subject to conditionality, is 
by its very nature tranquil and empty." (Pratt ty a yad 
yad bhavati^ tat tac gdntam svabhdvatak.) Whatever 
owes its existence tp a combination of causes and 
conditions is without self-essence, and therefore it is 
tranquil (gdnta\ it is empty, it is unreal (asat\ and 
the ultimate nature of this universal emptiness is not 
within the sphere of intellectual demonstrability, for 
the human understanding is not capable of transcend- 
ing its inherent limitations. 

Says Pingalaka, a commentator of Nagarjuna : "The 
cloth exists on account of the thread ; the matting is 
possible on account of the rattan. If the thread had 
its own fixed, unchangeable self-essence, it could not 
.be made out of -the flax. If the cloth had its own 
fixed, unchangeable self-essence, it could not be made 
from the thread. But as in point of fact the cloth 
comes from the thread and the thread from the flax, 
it must be said that the thread as well as the cloth 
had no fixed, unchangeable self-essence. It is just 
like the relation that obtains between the burning 
and the burned. They are brought together under 
certain conditions, and thus there takes place a 
phenomenon called burning. The burning and the 
burned, each has no reality of its own. For when 
one is absent the other is put out of existence. It is 
so with all things in this world, they are all empty, 

CHAPTER VII. 173 

without self, without absolute existence, they are like 
the will-'o-the-wisp." * 

The Real Significance of Emptiness. 

From these statements it will be apparent that the 
emptiness of things (gunyata) does not mean nothing- 
ness, as is sometimes interpreted by some critics, 
but it simply means conditionality or transitoriness 
of all phenomenal existences, it is a synonym for 
aniyata or pratitya. Therefore, emptiness, according 
to the Buddhists, signifies, negatively, the absence of 
particularity, the non-existence of individuals as such, 
and positively, the ever-changing state of the pheno- 
menal world, a constant flux of becoming, an eternal 
series of causes and effects. It must never be under- 
stood in the sense of annihilation or absolute nothing-* 
ness, for nihilism is as much condemned by Buddhism 
as naive realism. "The Buddha proclaimed emptiness 
as a remedy for all doctrinal controversies, but those 
who in turn cling to emptiness are beyond treatment." 
A medicine is indispensable as long as there is a 
disease to heal, but it turns poisonous when applied 
after the restoration of perfect health. To make this 
point completely clear, let me quote the following 
from Nagarjuna's Mddhyamika fastra (Chap. XXIV). 
u [Some one may object to the Buddhist doctrine of 
emptiness, declaring:] If all is void {gunya) and 

1 Abstracted from Pingalaka's Commentary on the Mddhyamika 
£astra, Chapter VII. The Chinese translation is by Kumarajiva. 

CHAPTER VII. 

there is neither creation nor destruction, then it must 
be concluded that even the Fourfold Noble Truth 
does not exist. If the Fourfold Noble Truth does not 
exist, the recognition of Suffering, the stoppage of 
Accumulation, the attainment of Cessation, and the 
advancement of Discipline, — all must be said to be 
unrealisable. If they are altogether unrealisable, there 
cannot be any of the four states of saintliness ; and 
without these states there cannot be anybody who 
will aspire for them. If there are no wise men, the 
Sangha is then impossible. Further, as there is no 
Fourfold Noble Truth, there is no Good Law 
(saddkatma) ; and as there is neither Good Law 
nor Sangha, the existence of Buddha himself must 
be an impossibility. Those who talk of emptiness, 
therefore, must be said to negate the Triple Treasure 
(triratna) altogether. Emptiness not only destroys 
the law of causation and the general principle of 
retribution (pkalasadbhdvam), but utterly annihilates 
the possibility of a phenomenal world." 
"[To this it is to be remarked that] 
" Only he is annoyed over such scepticism who 
understands not the true significance and interpretation 
of emptiness (gunyata). 

"The Buddha 's teaching rests on the discrimination 
' of two kinds of truth (satya) : absolute and relative. 
Those who do not have any adequate knowledge 
of them are unable to grasp the deep and subtle 
meaning of Buddhism. [The essence of being, dharmata, 
is beyond verbal definition or intellectual compre- 

CHAPTER VII. 175 

hension, for there is neither birth nor death in it, 
and it is even like unto Nirvana. The nature of 
Suchness, tattva, is fundamentally free from condi- 
tionally, it is tranquil, it distances all phenomenal 
frivolities, it discriminates not, nor is it particularised].* 

"But if not for relative truth, absolute truth is 
unattainable, and when absolute truth is not attained, 
Nirvana is not to be gained. 

"The dull-headed who do not perceive the truth 
rightfully go to self-destruction, for they are like an 
awkward magician whose trick entangles himself, or 
like an unskilled snake-catcher who gets himself hurt. 
The World-honored One knew well the abstruseness 
of the Doctrine which is beyond the mental capacity 
of the multitudes and was inclined not to disclose it 
before them. 

"The objection that Buddhism onesidedly adheres 
to emptiness and thereby exposes itself to grave 
errors, entirely misses the mark ; for there are no 
errors in emptiness. Why? Because it is on account 
of emptiness that all things are at all possible, and 
without emptiness all things will come to naught. 
Those who deny emptiness and find fault with it, are 
like a horseman who forgets that he is on horseback. 

"If they think that things exist because of their 
self-essence (svabhava), [and not because of their 
emptiness,] they thereby make things come out of 
causelessness (ahetupratyaycC), they destroy those 

1 The passage in parentheses is taken from Chandrakirti's 
Commentary on Nagarjuna, pp. 180—181. 

176 CHAPTER VII. 

relations that exist between the acting and the act and 
the acted; and they also destroy the conditions that 
make up the law of birth and death. 

"All is declared empty because there is nothing 
that is not a product of universal causation (pratyaya- 
samutpada). This law of causation, however, is merely 
provisional, though herein lies the middle path. 

"As thus there is not an object (dharma) which 
is not conditioned (pratitya), so there is nothing that 
is not empty. 

"If all is not empty, then there is no death nor 
birth, and withal disappears the Fourfold Noble Truth. 

"How could there be Suffering, if not for the law 
of causation? Impermanence is suffering. But with 
self-essence there will be no impermanence. [So long 
as impermanence is the condition of life, self-essence 
which is a causeless existence, is out of question.] 
Suppose Suffering is self-existent, then it could not 
come from Accumulation, which in turn becomes 
impossible when emptiness is not admitted. Again, 
when Suffering is self-existent, then there could be 
no Cessation, for with the hypothesis of self-essence 
Cessation becomes a meaningless term. Again, when 
Suffering is self-existent, then there will be no Path. 
But as we can actually walk on the Path, the hypothesis 
of selfcessence is to be abandoned. 

"If there is neither Suffering nor Cessation, it must 
be said that the Path leading to the Cessation of 
Suffering is also non-existent. 

"If there is really self-essence, Suffering could not 

CHAPTER VII. 177 

be recognised now, as it had not been recognised, 
for self-essence as such must remain forever the same. 
[That is to say, enlightened minds, through the 
teaching of Buddha, now recognise the existence of 
Suffering, though they did not recognise it when 
they were still uninitiated. If things were all in a fixed, 
self-determining state on account of their self-essence, 
it would be impossible for those enlightened men to 
discover what they had never observed before. The 
recognition of the Fourfold Noble Truth is only 
possible when this phenomenal world is in a state of 
constant becoming, that is, when it is empty as it 
really is.] 

"As it is with the recognition of Suffering, so it is 
with the stoppage of Accumulation, the attainment of 
Cessation, the realisation of Path as well as with the 
four states of saintliness. 

"If, on account of self-essence, the four states of 
saintliness were unattainable before, how could they 
be realised now, still upholding the hypothesis of self- 
essence ? [But we can attain to saintliness as a matter of 
fact, for there are many holy men who through their 
spiritual discipline have emerged from their former life of 
ignorance and darkness. If everything had its own 
self-essence which makes it impossible to transform 
from one state to another, how could a person desire to 
ascend, if he ever so desire, higher and higher on 
the scale of existence?] 

"If there were no four states of saintliness (catvdri 
phaldm\ then there would be no aspirants for it. 

12 

178 CHAPTER VII. 

And if there were no eight wise men (purusapun- 
gala\ there could exist no Sangha, 

"Again, when there could not be the Fourfold 
Noble Truth, the Law would be impossible, and with- 
out the Sangha and the Law how could the Buddha 
exist ? You might say : 'A Buddha does not exist on 
account of wisdom (Bodhi), nor does wisdom exist on 
account of the Buddha.' But if a man did not have 
Buddha-essence [that is, Bodhi] he could not hope 
to attain to Buddhahood, however strenuously he might 
exert himself in the ways of Bodhisattva. 

"Further, if all is not empty but has self-essence, 
[i. e. if all is in a fixed, unchangeable state of same- 
ness], how could there be any doing ? How could there 
be good and evil ? If you maintain that there is an 
effect (phala] which does not come from a cause good 
or evil, [which is the practical conclusion of the hypoth- 
esis of self-essence], then it means that retribution 
is independent of our deed, good or evil. [But is this 
justified by our experience?] 

"If it must then be admitted that our deed good 
or evil becomes the cause of retribution, retribution 
must be said to come from our deed, good or evil ; 
then how could we say there is no emptiness ? 

"When you negate the doctrine of emptiness, the law 
of universal causation, you negate the possibility of 
this phenomenal world. When the doctrine of emptiness 
is negated, there remains nothing that ought to be 
done; and a thing is called done which is not yet 
accomplished; and he is said to be a doer who has 

CHAPTER VII. 179 

not done anything whatever. If there were such a thing 
as self-essence, the multitudinousness of things must 
be regarded as uncreated and imperishable and eternally 
existing which is tantamount to eternal nothingness. 

"If there were no emptiness there would be no 
attainment of what has not yet been attained, nor 
would there be the annihilation of pain, nor the 
extinction of all the passions (sarvaklega). 

"Therefore, it is taught by the Buddha that those 
who recognise the law of universal causation, recog- 
nise the Buddha as well as Suffering, Accumulation, 
Cessation, and the Path." 

* 
* * 

The Mahayanistic doctrines thus formulated and 
transmitted down to the present days are: There is 
no such thing as the ego ; mentation is produced by 
the co-ordination of various vijnanas or senses. 

Individual existences have no selfhood or self-essence 
or reality, for they are but an aggregate of certain / 
qualities sustained by efficient karma. The world of 
particulars is the work of Ignorance as declared by 
Buddha in his Formula of Dependence (Twelve Nidanas). 
When this veil of Maya is uplifted, the universal light 
of Dharmakaya shines in all its magnificence. Indivi- 
dual existences then as such lose their significance 
and become sublimated and ennobled in the oneness 
of Dharmakaya. Egoistic prejudices are forever van- 
quished, and the aim of our lives is no more the 

ISO CHAPTER VII. 

gratification of selfish cravings, but the glorification 
of Dharma as it works its own way through the 
multitudinousness of things. The self does not stand 
any more in a state of isolation (which is an illusion), 
it is absorbed in the universal body of Dharma, it 
recognises itself in other selves animate as well as 
inanimate, and all things are in Nirvana. When we 
reach this state of ideal enlightenment, we are said 
to have realised the Buddhist life. 

CHAPTER VIII. 
KARMA. 

Definition. 

TV^ARMA, or Sanskara which is sometimes used as 
•^^ its synonym, — though the latter gives a slightly 
different shade of meaning, — comes from the Sanskrit 
root kr, "to do," "to make," "to perform," "to effect," 
"to produce," etc. Both terms mean activity in its 
concrete as well as in its abstract sense, and form 
an antithesis to intelligence, contemplation, or ideation 
in general. When karma is used in its most abstract 
sense, it becomes an equivalent to "beginningless 
ignorance," which is universally inherent in nature, 
and corresponds to the Will or blind activity of 
Schopenhauer; for ignorance as we have seen above 
is a negative manifestation of Suchness (Bkuta- 
tathdta] and marks the beginning or unfolding of a 
phenomenal world, whose existence is characterised 
by incessant activities actuated by the principle of 
karma. When Goethe says in Faust, "In Anfang war 
die That," he uses the term "That" in the sense of 
karma as it is here understood. 

When karma is used in its concrete sense, it is the 

1 82 CHAPTER VIII 

principle of activity in the world of particulars or 
namarupas : it becomes in the physical world the 
principle of conservation of energy, in the biological 
realm that of evolution and heredity etc., and in the 
moral world that of immortality of deeds. Sanskara, 
when used as an equivalent of karma, corresponds to 
this concrete signification of it, as it is the case in 
the Twelve Chains of Dependence (Nidanas, or Pra- 
tyayasamutpdda).* Here it follows ignorance (avidyd) 
and precedes consciousness (vijnana). Ignorance in 
this case means simply privation of enlightenment, 
and does not imply any sense of activity which is 
expressed in Sanskara. It is only when it is coupled 
with the latter that it becomes the principle of activity, 
and creates as its first offspring consciousness or 
mentality. In fact, ignorance and blind activity are 
one, their logical difference being this : the former 
emphasises the epistemological phase and the latter 
the ethical ; or, we might say, one is statical and the 
other dynamical. If we are to draw a comparison 
between the first four of the Twelve Nidanas and 
the several processes of evolution that takes place in 
the Tathagata-garbha as described above, we can take 
Ignorance and the principle of blind activity, san- 

1 The Twelve Nidanas are: (i) Ignorance (avidyd), (2) action 
(sanskara), (3) Consciousness (vijnana), (4) Name-and-form 
(namarupd), (5) Six Sense-organs (ayatand), (6) Contact (spared), 
(7) Sensation (vedana), (8) Desire (trsna), (9) Attachment 
(upddana), (10) Procreation (bhavd), (n) birth (jati\ (12) Old 
Age, Death, etc. (jara, marana, fo&a, etc.) 

CHAPTER VIII. 183 

skara, in the Twelve Chains as corresponding to 
the All-conserving Soul (dlayavi/ndna), and the Vijnana, 
consciousness of the Twelve Chains, to the Manovijnana, 
and the Namarupa to this visible world, visaya, in 
which the principle of karma works in its concrete form. 
As we have a special chapter devoted to "Ignorance" 
as an equivalent of karma in its abstract sense, let 
us here treat of the Buddhist conception of karma in 
the realm of names and forms, i. e. of karma in its 
concrete sense. But we shall restrict ourselves to the 
activity of karmaic causation in the moral world, as 
we are not concerned with physics or biology. 

The Working of Karma. 

The Buddhist conception of karma briefly stated 
is this : Any act, good or evil, once committed and 
conceived, never vanishes like a bubble in water, but 
lives, potentially or actively as the case may be, in 
the world of minds and deeds. This mysterious moral 
energy, so to speak, is embodied in and emanates from 
every act and thought, for it does not matter whether 
it is actually performed, or merely conceived in the 
mind. When the time comes, it is sure to germinate 
and grow with all its vitality. Says Buddha: 

"Karma even after the lapse of a hundred kalpas, 
Will not be lost nor destroyed; 
As soon as all the necessary conditions are ready, 
Its fruit is sure to ripe," J 

1 From a Chinese Mahayana sutra. 

184 CHAPTER VIII. 

Again, 

"Whatever a man does, the same he in himself will find, 
The good man, good: and evil he that evil has designed; 
And so our deeds are all like seeds, and bring forth fruit 
in kind." 1 

A grain of wheat, it is said, which was accidentally 
preserved in good condition in a tomb more than a 
thousand years old, did not lose its germinating energy, 
and, when planted with proper care, it actually started 
to sprout. So with karma, it is endowed with an 
enormous vitality, nay, it is even immortal. However 
remote the time of their commission might have been, 
the karma of our deeds never dies ; it must work 
out its own destiny at whatever cost, if not overcome 
by some counteracting force. The law of karma is 
irrefragable. 

The irrefragability of karma means that the law of 
causation is supreme in our moral sphere just as much 
as in the physical, that life consists in a concatenation 
of causes and effects regulated by the principle of 
karma, that nothing in the life of an individual or 
a nation or a race happens without due cause and 
sufficient reason, that is, without previous karrna. The 
Buddhists, therefore, do not believe in any special 
act of grace or revelation in our religious realm and 
moral life. The idea of deus ex machina is banned 
in Buddhism. Whatever is suffered or enjoyed morally 
in our present life is due to the karma, accumulated 

1 The Pali Jataka, no. 222. Translation by W. H. Rouse. 

CHAPTER VIII. 185 

since the beginning of life on earth. Nothing sown,/ 
nothing reaped. 

Whatever has been done leaves an ineffable mark 
in the individual's life and even in that of the universe ; 
and this mark will never be erased save by sheer 
exhaustion of the karma or by the interruption of 
an overwhelming counter-karma. In case the karma 
of an act is not actualised during one's own life- time, 
it will in that of one's successors, who may be phys- 
ical or spiritual. Not only "the evil that men do 
lives after them," but also the good, for it will not be 
"interred with their bones," as vulgar minds imagine. 
We read in the Samyukta Nikdyfr, III, I — 4 : 

"Assailed by death, in life's last throes, 
At quitting of this human state, 
What is it one can call his own? 
What with him take as he goes hence? 
What is it follows after him, 
And like a shadow ne'er departs? 

"His good deeds and his wickedness, 
Whate'er a mortal does while here; 
Tis this that he can call his own, 
This with him take as he goes hence. 
This is what follows after him, 
And like a shadow ne'er departs. 

"Let all, then, noble deeds perform, 
A treasure-store for future weal; 
For merit gained this life within, 
Will yield a blessing in the next." ' 

1 Warren's Buddhism in Translations, p. 214. 

1 86 CHAPTER VIII. 

In accordance with this karmaic preservation, 
Buddhists do not expect to have their sins expatiated 
by other innocent people so long as their own hearts 
remain unsoftened as ever. But when the all-embracing 
love of Buddhas for all sentient beings kindles even 
the smallest spark of repentance and enlightenment 
in the heart of a sinner, and when this ever-vacillating 
light grows to its full - magnitude under propitious 
conditions, the sinner gets fully awakened from the 
evil karma of eons, and enters, free from all curses, 
into the eternity of Nirvana. 

Karma and Social Injustice. 

w 

The doctrine of karma is very frequently utilised 
by some Buddhists to explain a state of things which 
must be considered cases of social injustice. 

There are some people who are born rich and 
noble and destined to enjoy all forms of earthly 
happiness and all the advantages of social life, though 
they have done nothing that justifies them in luxu- 
riating in such a fashion any more than their poor 
neighbors. These people, however, are declared by 
some pseudo-Buddhists to be merely harvesting the 
crops of good karma they had prepared in their 
former lives. On the other hand, the poor, needy, 
and low that are struggling to eke out a mere ex- 
istence in spite of their moral rectitude and honest 
industry, are considered to be suffering the evil 
karma which had been accumulated during their 
previous lives. The law of moral retribution is never 

CHAPTER VIII. IS/ 

suspended, as they reason, on account of the changes 
which may take place in a mortal being. An act, 
good or evil, once performed, will not be lost in the 
eternal succession and interaction of incidents, but 
will certainly find the sufferer of its due consequence, 
and it does not matter whether the actor has gone 
through the vicissitudes of birth and death. For the 
Buddhist conception of individual identity is not that 
of personal continuity, but of karmaic conservation. 
Whatever deeds we may commit, they invariably 
bear their legitimate fruit and follow us even after 
death. Therefore, if the rich and noble neglect to do 
their duties or abandon themselves to the enjoyment 
of sensual pleasures, then they are sure in their 
future births, if not in their present life, to gather 
the crops they have thus unwittingly prepared for 
themselves. The poor, however hard their lot in this 
life, can claim their rightful rewards, if they do not 
get despaired of their present sufferings and give 
themselves up to temptations, but dutifully continue 
to do things good and meritorious. Because as their 
present fate is the result of their former deeds, so 
will be their future fortune the fruit of their present 
deeds. 

This view as held by some pseudo-Buddhists gives 
us a wrong impression about the practical working 
of the principle of karma in this world of namarupas, 
for it tries to explain by karmaic theory the phe- 
nomena which lie outside of the sphere of its appli- 
cability. As I understand, what the theory of karma 

I 88 CHAPTER VIII. 

\ proposes to explain is not cases of social injustice 
and economic inequality, but facts of moral causation. 
The overbearing attitude of the rich and the noble, 
the unnecessary sufferings of the poor, the over-pro- 
duction of criminals, and suchlike social phenomena 
arise from the imperfection of our present social or- 
ganisation, which is based upon the doctrine of abso- 
lute private ownership. People are allowed to amass 
wealth unlimitedly for their own use and to bequeath 
it to the successors who do not deserve it in any way. 
And they do not pay regard to the injuries this 
system may incur upon the general welfare of the 
/ community to which they belong, and upon other 
* members individually. The rich might have slaughtered 
economically and consequently politically and morally 
millions of their brethren before they could reach 
places of social eminence they now occupy and enjoy 
to its full extent. They might have sacrificed hundreds 
of thousands of victims on the altar of Mammon in 
order to carry out their vast scheme of self-aggran- 
disement. And, what is worse, the wealth thus accu- 
mulated by an individual is allowed by the law to be 
handed down to his descendants, who are in a sense 
the parasitic members of the community. They are 
privileged to live upon the sweat and blood of oth- 
ers, who know not where to lay their heads, and 
who are daily succumbing to the heavy burden, not 
of their free choice, but forced upon them by society. 
Let us here closely see into the facts. There is one 
portion of society that does almost nothing toward 

CHAPTER VIII. 189 

the promotion of the general welfare, and there is 
another portion that, besides carrying the burden not 
of its own, is heroically struggling for bare existence. 
These sad phenomena which, owing to the imperfec- 
tion of social organisation, we daily witness about 
us,— should we attribute them to diversity of indivi- 
dual karma and make individuals responsible for what 
is really due to the faulty organisation of the com- 
munity to which they belong? No, the doctrine of 
karma certainly must not be understood to explain 
the cause of our social and economical imperfection. 
The region where the law of karma is made to 
work supreme is our moral world, and cannot be 
made to extend also over our economic field. Poverty 
is not necessarily the consequence of evil deeds, nor 
is plenitude that of good acts. Whether a person is 
affluent or needy is mostly determined by the prin- 
ciple of economy as far as our present social system 
is concerned. Morality and economy are two different 
realms of human activity. Honesty and moral recti- 
tude do not necessarily guarantee well-being. Dishon- 
esty and the violation of the moral law, on the con- 
trary, are very frequently utilised as handmaids of 
material prosperity. Do we not thus see many good, 
conscientious people around us who are wretchedly 
poverty-stricken ? Shall we take them as suffering the 
curse of evil karma in their previous lives, when we 
can understand the fact perfectly well as a case of 
social injustice ? It is not necessary by any means, 
nay, it is even productive of evil, to establish a rela- 

CHAPTER VIII. 

tion between the two things that in the nature of 
their being have no causal dependence. Karma ought 
not to be made accountable for economic inequality. 

A virtuous man is contented with his cleanliness 
of conscience and purity of heart, Obscure as is his 
present social position, and miserable as are his present 
pecuniary conditions, he has no mind to look back- 
ward' and find the cause of his social insignificance 
there, nor is he anxious about his future earthly 
fortune which might be awaiting him when his kar- 
maic energy appears in a new garment. His heart is 
altogether free from such vanities and anxieties. He 
is sufficent unto himself as he is here and now. And, 
as to his altruistic aspect of his moral deeds, he is well 
conscious that their karma would spiritually benefit 
everybody that gets inspired by it, and also that it 
would largely contribute to the realisation of good- 
ness on this earth. Why, then, must we contrive such 
a poor theory of karma as is maintained by some, 
in order that they might give him a spiritual solace 
for his material misfortune? 

Vulgar people are too eager to see everything and 
every act they perform working for the accumulation 
of earthly wealth and the promotion of material 
welfare. They would want to turn even moral deeds 
which have no relation to the economic condition of 
life into the opportunities to attain things mundane 
They would desire to have the law of karmaic causation 
applied to a realm, where prevails an entirely different 
set of laws. In point of fact, what proceeds from 

CHAPTER VIII. IQI 

meritorious deeds is spiritual bliss only, — contentment, 
tranquillity of mind, meekness of heart, and immova- 
bility of faith, — all the heavenly treasures which 
could not be corrupted by moth or rust. And what 
more can the karma of good deeds bring to us ? And 
what more would a man of pious heart desire to 
gain from his being good? "Take no thought for 
your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, 
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not 
the life more than meat and the body more than 
raiment?" Let us then do away with the worldly 
interpretation of karma, which is so contrary to the 
spirit of Buddhism. 

As long as we live under the present state of 
things, it is impossible to escape the curse of social 
injustice and economic inequality. Some people must 
be born rich and noble and enjoying a superabundance 
of material wealth, while others must be groaning 
under the unbearable burden imposed upon them by 
cruel society. Unless we make a radical change in 
our present social organisation, we cannot expect 
every one of us to enjoy equal opportunity and fair 
chance. Unless we have a certain form of socialism 
installed which is liberal and rational and systematic, 
there must be some who are economically more 
favored than others. But this state of affairs is a 
phenomenon of worldly institution and is doomed 
to die away sooner or later. The law of karma, on 
the contrary, is an eternal ordinance of the will of 
the Dharmakaya as manifested in this world of 

I Q2 CHAPTER VIII 

particulars. We must not confuse a transient accident 
of human society with an absolute decree issued from 
the world-authority. 

An Individualistic View of Karma. 

There is another popular misconception concerning 
the doctrine of karma, which seriously mars the true 
interpretation of Buddhism. I mean by this an individual- 
istic view of the doctrine. This view asserts that 
deeds, good or evil, committed by a person determine 
only his own fate, no other's being affected thereby 
in any possible way, and that the reason why we 
should refrain from doing wrong is: for we, and not 
others, have to suffer its evil consequences. This 
conception of karma which I call individualistic, 
presupposes the absolute reality of an individual soul 
and its continuance as such in a new corporeal exist- 
ence which is made possible by its previous karma. 
Because an individual soul is here understood as 
an independent unit, which stands in no relation 
to others, and which therefore neither does influence 
nor is influenced by them in any wise. All that is 
done by oneself is suffered by oneself only and no 
other people have anything to do with it, nor do 
they suffer a whit thereby. 

Buddhism, however, does not advocate this indivi- 
dualistic interpretation of karmaic law, for it is not 
\ in accord with the theory of non-atman, nor with 
that of Dharmakaya. 

According to the orthodox theory, karma simply 
means the conservation or immortality of the inner 

CHAPTER VIII. 193 

force of deeds regardless of their author's physical 
identity. Deeds once committed, good or evil, leave 
permanent effects on the general system of sentient 
beings, of which the actor is merely a component 
part ; and it is not the actor himself only, but every- 
body constituting a grand psychic community called 
"Dharmadhatu" (spiritual universe), that suffers or 
enjoys the outcome of a moral deed. 

Because the universe is not a theatre for one par- 
ticular soul only; on the contrary, it belongs to all 
sentient beings, each forming a psychic unit; and 
these units are so intimately knitted together in blood 
and soul that the effects of even apparently trifling 
deeds committed by an individual are felt by others 
just as much and just as surely as the doer himself. 
Throw an insignificant piece of stone into a vast expanse 
of water, and it will certainly create an almost 
endless series of ripples, however imperceptible, that 
never stop till they reach the furthest shore. The 
tremulation thus caused is felt by the sinking stone 
as much as the water disturbed. The universe that 
may seem to crude observers merely as a system 
of crass physical forces is in reality a great spiritual 
community, and every one of sentient beings forms 
its component part. This most complicated, most 
subtle, most sensitive, and best organised mass of 
spiritual atoms transmits its current of moral elec- 
tricity from one particle to another with utmost ra- 
pidity and surety. Because this community is at bottom 
an expression of one Dharmakaya. However diversified 

13 

194 CHAPTER VIII. 

and dissimilar it may appear in its material individual 
aspect, it is after all no more than an evolution of 
one pervading essence, in which the multitudinousness 
of things finds its unity and identity. Therefore, it 
is for the interests of the community at large, and 
not for their own welfare only, that sincere Buddhists 
refrain from transgressing moral laws and are encour- 
aged to promote goodness. Those whose spiritual 
insight thus penetrates deep into the inner unity and 
interaction of all human souls are called Bodhisattvas. 
It is with this spirit, let me repeat, that pious 
Buddhists do not wish to keep for themselves any 
merits created by their acts of love and benevolence, 
but wish to turn them over (farivarta) to the de- 
liverance of all sentient creatures from the darkness 
of ignorance. The most typical way of concluding 
any religious treatise by Buddhists, therefore, runs 
generally in the following manner : 

"The deep significance of the three karmas as taught by 

Buddha, 
I have thus completed elucidating in accord with the Dharma 

and logic: 

By dint of this merit I pray to deliver all sentient beings 
And to make them soon attain to perfect enlightenment." l 

Or, 

"All the merits arising from this my exposition 
May abide and be universally distributed among all beings ; 
And may they ascend in the scale of existence and 
increase in bliss and wisdom, 

1 On the Completion of Karma, by Vasubandhu. Nanjo, No. 1222. 

CHAPTER VIII. 195 

And soon attain to an enlightenment supreme, perfect, 
great, and far-reaching." l 

The reason why a moral deed performed by one 
person would contribute to the attainment by others 
of supreme enlightenment, is that souls which are 
ordinarily supposed to be individual and independent 
of others are not so in fact, but are very closely 
intermingled with one another, so that a stir produced in 
one is sooner or later transmitted to another influencing 
it rightfully or wrongfully. The karmaic effect of my 
own deed determines not only my own future, but 
to a not little extent that of others; hence those 
invocations just quoted by pious Buddhists who desire 
to dedicate all the merits they can attain to the 
general welfare of the masses. 

The ever-increasing tendency of humanity to widen 
and facilitate communication in every possible way is 
a phenomenon illustrative of the intrinsic oneness of 
human souls. Isolation kills, for it is another name for 
death. Every soul that lives and grows desires to embrace 
others, to be in communion with them* to be sup- 
plemented by them, and to expand infinitely so that 
all individual souls are brought together and united 
in the one soul. Under this condition only a man's 
karma is enabled to influence other people, and his 
merits can be utilised for the promotion of general 
enlightenment 

The Distinguishing of the Mean, by Vasubandhu. Nanjo, 12 48. 

196 CHAPTER VIII. 

Karma and Determinism. 

If the irrefragability of karma means the predeter- 
mination of our moral life, some would reason, the 
doctrine is fatalism pure and simple. It is quite true 
that our present life is the result of the karma 
accumulated in our previous existences, and that as 
long as the karma preserves its vitality there is no 
chance whatever to escape its consequences, good or 
evil. It is also true that as the meanest sparrow shall 
not fall on the ground without the knowledge of God, 
and as the very hairs of our heads are all numbered 
by him, so even a single blade of grass does not 
quiver before the- evening breeze without the force of 
karma. It is also true that if our intellect were not 
near-sighted as it is, we could reduce a possible 
complexity of the conditions under which our life 
exists into its simplest terms, and thus predict with 
mathematical precision the course of a life through 
which it is destined to pass. If we could record all 
our previous karma from time immemorial and all its 
consequences both on ourselves and on those who 
come in contact with us, there would be no difficulty 
in determining our future life with utmost certainty. 
The human intellect, however, as it happens, is 
incapable of undertaking a work of such an enormous 
magnitude, we cannot perceive the full significance of 
determinism; but, from the divine point of view, 
determinism seems to be perfectly justified, for there 
cannot be any short-sightedness on the part of a 
world-soul as to the destiny of the universe, which 

CHAPTER VIII. 197 

is nothing but its own expression. It is only from the 
human point of view that we feel uncertain about our 
final disposition and endeavor to explain existence now 
from a mechanical, now from a teleological standpoint, 
and yet, strange enough, at the bottom of our soul we feel 
that there is something mysterious here which makes us 
cry, either in despair or in trustful resignation, "Let 
thy will be done." While this very confidence in "thy 
will" proves that we have in our inmost consciousness 
and outside the pale of intellectual analysis a belief 
in the supreme order, which is absolutely preordained 
and which at least is not controllable by our finite, limi- 
ted, fragmentary mind, yet the doctrine of karma must 
not be understood in the strictest sense of fatalism. 
As far as a general theory of determinism is concerned, 
Buddhism has no objection to it. Grant that there is 
a law of causation, that every deed, actualised or 
thought of, leaves something behind, and that this 
something becomes a determining factor for our future 
life; then how could we escape the conclusion that 
"each of us is inevitable" as Whitman sings ? Religi- 
ous confidence in a divine will that is supposed to give 
us always the best of things, is in fact no more than 
a determinism. But if, in applying the doctrine to our 
practical life, we forget to endeavor to unfold all the 
possibilities that might lie in us, but could be awa- 
kened only after strenuous efforts, there will be no 
moral characters, no personal responsibility, no noble 
aspirations ; the mind will be nothing but a reflex 
nervous system and life a sheer machinery. 

198 CHAPTER VIII. 

In fact karma is not a machine which is not inca- 
pable of regeneration and self-multiplication. Karma 
is a wonderful organic power; it grows, it expands, 
and even gives birth to a new karma. It is like unto 
a grain of mustard, the least of all seeds, but, 
being full of vitality, it grows as soon as it comes 
in contact with the nourishing soil and becometh 
a tree so that the birds of the air come and lodge 
in the branches thereof. Its mystery is like that of 
sympathetic waves that pass through all the hearts 
which feel the great deeds of a hero or listen to the 
story of a self-sacrificing mother. Karma, good or evil, 
is contagious and sympathetic in its work. Even a most 
insignificant act of goodness reaps an unexpectedly 
rich crop. Even to the vilest rogue comes a chance 
for repentance by dint of a single good karma ever 
effected in his life, which has extended through many 
a kalpa. And the most wonderful thing in our spiri- 
tual world is that the karma thus bringing repentance 
and Nirvana to the heart of the meanest awakens and 
rekindles a similar karma potentially slumbering in other 
hearts and leads them to the final abode of enlightenment. 

Inasmuch as we confine ourselves to general, super- 
ficial view of the theory of karma, it leads to a form of 
determinism, but in our practical life which is a product 
of extremely complicated factors, the doctrine of karma 
allows in us all kinds of possibilities and all chances 
of development. We thus escape the mechanical con- 
ception of life, we are saved from the despair of pre- 
determination, though this is true to a great extent ; 

CHAPTER VIII. 199 

and we are assured of the actualisation of hopes, 
however remote it may be. Though the curse of evil 
karma may sometimes hang upon us very heavily, 
there is no reason to bury our aspirations altogether 
in the grave; on the contrary, let us bear it bravely 
and perform all the acts of goodness to destroy the 
last remnant of evil and to mature the stock of 
good karma. 

The Maturing of Good Stock (kugalamula) and the 
Accumulation of merits (punyaskandka). 

One of the most significant facts, which we cannot 
well afford to ignore while treating of the doctrine 
of karma, is the Buddhist belief that (Jakyamuni 
reached his supreme Buddhahood only after a long 
practise of the six virtues of perfection (paramitds) 
through many a rebirth. This belief constitutes the 
very foundation of the ethics of Buddhism and has 
all-important bearings on the doctrine of karma. 

The doctrine of karma ethically considered is this: 
Sentient beings can attain to perfection not by an 
intervention from on high, but through long, steady, 
unflinching personal efforts towards the actualisation 
of ideals, or, in other words, towards the maturing 
of good stock (kugalamula) and the accumulation of 
of merits (punyaskandhd]. This can be accomplished 
only through the karma of good deeds untiringly 
practised throughout many a generation. Each single 
act of goodness we perform to-day is recorded with 

2OO CHAPTER VIII. 

strict accuracy in the annals of human evolution 
and is so much the gain for the cause of righteousness. 
On the contrary, every deed of ill-will, every thought 
of self-aggrandisement, every word of impurity, every 
assertion of egoism, is a drawback to the perfection 
of humanity. To speak concretely, the Buddha repre- 
sents the crystalisation in the historical person of 
(Jakyamuni of all the good karma that was accumulated 
in innumerable kalpas previous to his birth. And if 
Devadatta, as legend has him, was really the enemy 
of the Buddha, he symbolises in him the evil karma 
that was being stored up with the good deeds of 
all Buddhas. Later Buddhism has thus elaborated to 
represent in these two historical figures the concrete 
results of good and evil karma, and tries to show 
in what direction its followers should exercise their 
spiritual energy. 

The doctrine of karma is, therefore, really the theory 
of evolution and heredity as working in our moral 
field. As Walt Whitman fitly sings, in every one of 
us, "converging objects of the universe" are perpet- 
ually flowing, through every one of us is "afflatus 
surging and surging — the current and index." And 
these converging objects and this afflatus are no more 
than our karma which is interwoven in our being 
and which is being matured from the very beginning 
of consciousness upon the earth. Each generation 
either retards or furthers the maturing of karma and 
transmits to the succeeding one its stock either impaired 
or augmented. Those who are blind enough not to 

CHAPTER VIII. 2O I 

\ 

see the significance of life, those who take their ego 
for the sole reality, and those who ignore the spiritual 
inheritance accumulated from time immemorial, — are 
the most worthless, most ungrateful, and most irres- 
ponsible people of the world. Buddhism calls them 
the children of Mara engaged in the work of destruction. 

Dr. G. R. Wilson of Scotland states a very pretty 
story about a royal robe in his article on uThe Sense 
of Danger" (The Monist, 1903, April), which graphi- 
cally illustrates how potential karma stored from time 
out of mind is saturated in every fibre of our subliminal 
consciousness or in the Alayavijnana, as Buddhists 
might say. The story runs as follows: 

"An Oriental robe it was, whose beginning was in 
a prehistoric dynasty of which the hieroglyphics are 
undecipherable. With that pertinacity and durability 
so characteristic of the East, this royal garment has 
been handed down, not through hundreds of years, 
but through hundreds of generations, — generations, 
some of them, unconsciously long and stale and dreary ; 
others short and quick and merry. A garment of kings, 
this, and of queens, a garment to which, as tradition 
prescribed, each monarch added something of quality, — a 
jewel of price, a patch of gold, a hem of rich 
embroidery, — and with each contribution a legend, 
worked into the imperishable fibre, told the story of 
the giver. Did something of the personality of these 
kings and queens linger in the work of their hands? 
If so, the robe was no dead thing, no mere covering 
to be lightly assumed or lightly laid aside, but a living 

2O2 CHAPTER VIII. 

power, royal influence, and the wearer, all unwitting, 
must have taken on something of the character of 
the dead. It is a princess of the royal blood, perhaps, 
sensitive and mystical, trembling on the apprehensive 
verge of monarchy, who dons the robe, and as she 
dons it, tingles to its message. These great rubies that 
blaze upon its front are the souvenirs of bloody con- 
querors. As she fingers them idly, she is thrilled with an 
emotion she does not understand, for in her blood 
something answers to the righting spirit they embody. 
Pearls are for peace. That rope has been strung by 
kings and queens who favored art and learning; and 
as the girl's fingers stray towards them the inspiration 
changes and her mind reverts to the purposes of 
the civilised scholar. Here is a gaudy hem, the 
legacy of an unfaithful queen, steeped in intrigue 
all her life until her murder ended it; and as 
the maiden lifts it to examine it more closely, she 
learns with shame and blushes, yet not knowing what 
has wrought this change in her, that, deep down in 
her character, are mischievous possibilities, possibilities 
of wickedness and disgrace that will dog the footsteps 
of her reign. Suchlike are the suggestions which the 
hidden parts of the mind bring forth, and in such 
subtle manner are they born." 

The doctrine of karma thus declares that an act 
of love and good-will you are performing here is 
not for your selfish interests, but it simply means 
the appreciation of the works of your worthy 
ancestors and the discharge of your duties towards 

CHAPTER VIII. 203 

all humanity and your contribution to the world- treasury 
of moral ideals. Mature good stock, accumulate merits, 
purify evil karma, remove the ego-hindrance, and 
cultivate love for all beings; and the heavenly gate 
of Nirvana will be opened not only to you, but to 
the entire world. 

We can sing with Walt Whitman the immortality 
of karma and the eternal progress of humanity, thus : 

"Did you guess anything lived only its moment? 

The world does not so exist— no part palpable or impal- 
pable so exist; 

No consummation exists without being from some long 
previous consummation— and that from some other, 

Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit nearer 
the beginning than any." * 

Immortality 

We read in the Milinda-panha: 

"Your Majesty, it is as if a man were to ascend 
to the story of a house with a light, and eat there; 
and the light in burning were to set fire to the thatch ; 
and the thatch in burning were to set fire to the house ; 
and the house in burning were to set fire to the vil- 
lage ; and the people of the village were to seize him, 
and say, 'Why, O man, did you set fire to the village ?' 
and he were to say, 'I did not set fire to the village. 
The fire of the lamp by whose light I ate was a 
different one from the one which set fire to the village' ; 

1 "Manhattan's Streets I Saunter'd, Pondering." I might have 
quoted the whole poem, if not for limitation of space. 

2O4 CHAPTER VIII. 

and they, quarreling, were to come to you. Whose 
cause, Your Majesty, would you sustain?" 

"That of the people of the village, Reverend Sir," etc. 

"And why?" 

"Because, in spite of what the man might say, the 
latter fire sprang from the former." 

"In exactly the same way, Your Majesty, although 
the name and form which is born into the next exist- 
ence is different from the name and form which is 
to end at death, nevertheless, it is sprung from it. 
Therefore is one not freed from one's evil deeds." 

The above is the Buddhist notion of individual 
identity and its conservation, which denies the immor- 
tality of the ego-soul and upholds that of karma. 

Another good way, perhaps, of illustrating this 
doctrine is to follow the growth and perpetuation of 
the seed. The seed is in fact a concrete expression of 
karma. When a plant reaches a certain stage of de- 
velopment, it blooms and bears fruit. This fruit con- 
tains in it a latent energy which under favorable con- 
ditions grows to a mature plant of its own kind. The 
new plant now repeats the processes which its prede- 
cessors went through, and an eternal perpetuation 
of the plant is attained. The life of an individual plant 
cannot be permanent according to its inherent nature, 
it is destined to be cut short some time in its course. 
But this is not the case with the current of an ever-lasting 
vitality that has been running in the plant ever since the 
beginning of the world. Because this current is not 
individual in its nature and stands above the vicissi- 

CHAPTER VIII. 2O5 

tudes which take place in the life of particular plants. 
It may not be manifested in its kinetic form all the 
time, but potentially it is ever present in the being 
of the seed. Changes are simply a matter of form, 
and do not interfere with the current of life in the 
plant, which is preserved in the universe as the energy 
of vegetation. 

This energy of vegetation is that which is manifest- 
ed in a mature plant, that which makes it blossom 
in the springtime, that which goes to seed, that which 
lies apparently dormant in the seeds, and that which 
resuscitates them to sprout among favorable surround- 
ings. This energy of vegetation, this mysterious force, 
when stated in Buddhist phraseology, is nothing else 
than the vegetative expression of karma, which in 
the biological world constitutes the law of heredity, 
or the transmission of acquired character, or some 
other laws which might be discovered by the biolo- 
gist And it is when this force manifests itself in the 
moral realm of human affairs that karma obtains its 
proper significance as the law of moral causation. 

Now, there are several forms of transmission, by 
means of which the karma of a person or a people 
or a nation or a race is able to perpetuate itself 
to eternity. A few of them are described below. 

One may be called genealogical, or, perhaps, biolo- 
gical. Suppose here are descendants of an illustrious 
family, some of whose ancestors distinguished them- 
selves by bravery, or benevolence, or intelligence, or 
by some other praiseworthy deeds or faculties. These 

206 CHAPTER VIII. 

people are as a rule respected by their neighbors as 
if their ancestral spirits were transmitted through 
generations and still lingering among their consan- 
guineous successors. Some of them in the line might 
have even been below the normal level in their 
intellect and morals, but this fact does not altogether 
nullify the possibility and belief that others of their 
family might some day develop the faculties possessed 
by the forefathers, dormant as they appear now, 
through the inspiration they could get from the noble 
examples of the past. The respect they are enjoying 
and the possibility of inspiration they may have are 
all the work of the karma generated by the ancestors. 
The author or authors of the noble karma are all 
gone now, their bones have long returned to their 
elements, their ego-souls are no more, their concrete 
individual personalities are things of the past ; but 
their karma is still here and as fresh as it was on 
the day of its generation and will so remain till the 
end of time. If some of them, on the other hand, 
left a black record behind them, the evil karma will 
tenaciously cling to the history of the family, and 
the descendants will have to suffer the curse as long 
as its vitality is kept up, no matter how innocent 
they themselves are. 

Here one important thing I wish to note is the 
mysterious way in which evil karma works. Evil does 
not always generate evils only; it very frequently 
turns out to be a condition, if not a cause, which 
will induce a moral being to overcome it with his 

CHAPTER VIII. 2O7 

utmost spiritual efforts. His being conscious of the 
very fact that his family history is somehow besmirch- 
ed with dark spots, would rekindle in his heart a 
flickering light of goodness. His stock of good karma 
finally being brought into maturity, his virtues would 
then eclipse the evils of the past and turn a new 
page before him, which is full of bliss and glory. 
Everything in this world, thus, seems to turn to be 
merely a means for the final realisation of Good. 
Buddhists ascribe this spiritual phenomenon to the 
virtues of the upaya (expediency) of the Dharmakaya 
or Amitabha Buddha. d 

To return to the subject. It does not need any 
further illustration to show that all these things which 
have been said about the family are also true of 
the race, the tribe, clan, nation, or any other form 
of community. History of mankind in all its manifold 
aspects of existence is nothing but a grand drama 
visualising the Buddhist doctrine of karmaic immortality. 
It is like an immense ocean whose boundaries nobody 
knows and the waves of events now swelling and 
surging, now ebbing, now whirling, now refluxing, 
in all times, day and night, illustrate how the laws 

1 If we understand the following words of Tolstoi in the 
light which we gain from the Buddhist doctrine of karmaic 
immortality, we shall perhaps find more meaning in them 
than the author himself wished to impart: "My brother who 
is dead acts upon me now more strongly than he did in life ; 
he even penetrates my being and lifts me up towards him." 

2O8 CHAPTER VIII. 

of karma are at work in this actual life. One act 
provokes another and that a third and so on to 
eternity without ever losing the chain of karmaic 
causation. 

Next, we come to a form of karma which might 
be called historical. By this I mean that a man's 
karma can be immortalised by some historical objects, 
such as buildings, literary works, productions of art, 
implements, or instruments. In fact, almost any object, 
human or natural, which, however insignificant in 
itself, is associated with the memory of a great man, 
bears his karma, and transmits it to posterity. 

Everybody is familiar with the facts that all literary 
work embodies in itself the author's soul and spirit, 
and that posterity can feel his living presence in the 
thoughts and sentiments expressed there, and that 
whenever the reader draws his inspiration from the 
work and actualises it in action, the author and the 
reader, though corporeally separate and living in 
different times, must be said spiritually feeling the 
pulsation of one and the same heart. And the same 
thing is true of productions of art. When we enter 
a gallery decorated with the noble works of Graecean 
or Roman artists, we feel as if we were breathing 
right in the midst of these art-loving people and 
seem to reawaken in us the same impressions that 
were received by them. We forget, as they did, the 
reality of our particular existence, we are unconsciously 
raised above it, and our imagination is filled with 
things not earthly. What a mysterious power it is ! — the 

CHAPTER VIII. 2O9 

power by which those inanimate objects carry us 
away to a world of ideals ! What a mysterious power 
it is that reawakens the spirits of by-gone artists on 
a sheet of canvas or in a piece of marble ! It was 
not indeed entirely without truth that primitive or 
ignorant people intuitively believed in the spiritual 
power of idols. What they failed to grasp was the 
distinction between the subjective presence of a spirit 
and its objective reality. As far as their religious 
feeling, and not their critical intellect, was concerned, 
they were perfectly justified in believing in idolatry. 
Taking all in all, these facts unmistakably testify the 
Buddhist doctrine of the immortality of karma. A 
chord of .karma touched by mortals of bygone ages 
still vibrates in their works, and the vibration with 
its full force is transmitted to the sympathetic souls 
down to the present day. 

Architectural creations bear out the doctrine of 
karma with no less force than works of art and literature. 
As the uppermost bricks on an Egyptian pyramid 
would fall on the ground with the same amount of 
energy that required to raise them up in the times 
of Pharaohs ; as a burning piece of coal in the furnace 
that was dug out from the heart of the earth emits 
the same quantity of heat that it absorbed from the 
sun some hundred thousand years ago ; even so every 
insignificant bit of rock or brick or cement we may find 
among the ruins of Babylonian palaces, Indian topes, 
Persian kiosks, Egyptian obelisks, or Roman pantheons, 
is fraught with the same spirit and soul that actuated 

14 

2IO CHAPTER VIII. 

the ancient peoples to construct those gigantic archi- 
tectural wonders. The spirit is here, not in its indivi- 
dual form, but in its karmaic presence. When we pick 
these insignificant, unseemly pieces, our souls become 
singularly responsive to inspirations coming from 
those of the past, and our mental eyes vividly perceive 
the splendor of the gods, glory of the kings, peace 
of the nation, prosperity of the peoples, etc., etc. 
Because our souls and theirs are. linked with the 
chain of karmaic causation through the medium of 
those visible remains of ancient days. Because the 
karma of those old peoples is still breathing its immor- 
tality in those architectural productions and sending 
its sympathetic waves out to the beholders. When 
thus we come to be convinced of the truth of the 
immortality of karma, we can truly exclaim with 
Christians, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, 
where is thy victory?" 

It is hardly necessary to give any further illustration 
to establish the doctrine of karma concerning its 
historical significance. All scientific apparatus and 
instruments are an undying eye-witness of the genius 
of the inventors. All industrial machines and agricultural 
implements most concretely testify the immortality of 
karma created by the constructors, in exact proportion 
as they are beneficial to the general welfare and 
progress of humanity. The instruments or machines or 
implements may be superseded by later and better 
ones, and possibly altogether forgotten by succeeding 
generations, but this does not annul the fact that the 

CHAPTER VIII. 211 

improved ones were only possible through the knowl- 
edge and experience which came from the use of 
the older ones, in other words, that the ideas and 
thoughts of the former inventors are still surviving 
through those of their successors, just as much as in 
the case of genealogical karma-transmission. Whatever 
garb the karma of a person may wear in its way 
down to posterity, it is ever there where its inspira- 
tion is felt. Even in an article of most trivial 
significance, even in a piece of rag, or in a slip of 
time-worn paper, only let there be an association 
with the memory of the deceased ; and an unutterable 
feeling imperceptibly creeps into the heart of the 
beholder; and if the deceased were known for his 
saintliness or righteousness, this would be an opportunity 
for our inspiration and moral elevation according to 
how our own karma at that moment is made up. 

We now come to see more closely the spiritual 
purport of karmaic activity. Any intelligent reader 
could infer from what has been said above what 
important bearing the Buddhist doctrine of karma has 
on our moral and spiritual life. The following remarks, 
however, will greatly help him to understand the full 
extent of the doctrine and to pass an impartial judgment 
on its merits. 

Here, if not anywhere else, looms up most con- 
spicuously the characteristic difference between Bud- 
dhism and Christianity as to their conception of 
soul-activity. Christianity, if I understand it rightly, 
conceives our soul- phenomena as the work of an 

212 CHAPTER VIII. 

individual ego-entity, which keeps itself mysteriously 
hidden somewhere within the body. To Christians, 
the soul is a metaphysical being, and its incarnation 
in the flesh is imprisonment. It groans after emanci- 
pation, it craves for the celestial abode, where, after 
bodily death, it can enjoy all the blessings due to its 
naked existence. It finds the nectar of immortality 
up in Heaven and in the presence of God the father 
and Christ the son, and not in the perpetuation of 
karma in this universe. The soul of the wicked, on 
the other hand, is eternally damned, if it is conceded 
that they have any soul. As soon as it is liberated 
from the bodily incarceration, it is hurled into the 
infernal fire, and is there consumed suffering un- 
speakable agony. Christianity, therefore, does not 
believe in the transmigration or reincarnation of a 
soul. A soul once departed from the flesh never 
returns to it; it is either living an eternal life in 
Heaven or suffering an instant annihilation in Hell. 
This is the necessary conclusion from their premises 
of an individual concrete ego-soul. 

Buddhism, however, does not teach the metaphysical 
existence of the soul. All our mental and spiritual 
experiences, it declares, are due to the operations of 
karma which inherits its efficiency from its previous 
"seeds of activity" (karmabtja), and which has brought 
the five skandhas into the present state of co-ordination. 
The present karma, while in its force, generates in 
turn the "seeds of activity" which under favorable 
conditions grow to maturity again. Therefore, as long 

CHAPTER VIII. 213 

as the force of karma is thus successively generated, 
there are the five skandhas constantly coming into 
existence and working co-ordinately as a person. 
Karma-reproduction, so to speak, effected in this 
manner, is the Buddhist conception of the transmi- 
gration of a soul. 

A Japanese national hero, General Kusunoki Masa- 
shige, who was an orthodox Buddhist, is said to have 
uttered the following words when he fell in the 
battle-field : "I will be reborn seven times yet and 
complete discharging my duties for the Imperial 
House." And he did not utter these words to no 
purpose. Because even to-day, after the lapse of more 
than seven hundred years, his spirit is still alive among 
his countrymen, and indeed his bronze statue on horse- 
back is solemnly guarding the Japanese Imperial 
palace. He was reborn more than seven times and will 
be reborn as long as the Japanese as a nation exist on 
earth. This constant rebirth or reincarnation means 
no more nor less than the immortality of karma. 
Says Buddha: "Ye disciples, take after my death those 
moral precepts and doctrines which were taught to 
you for my own person, for I live in them/' To live 
in karma, and not as an ego-entity, is the Buddhist 
conception of immortality. Therefore, the Buddhists 
will perfectly agree with the sentiment expressed by 
a noted modern poet in these lines : 

"We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts, not in breaths: 
In feelings, not in figures on a dial, 
We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives 
Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best." 

214 CHAPTER VIII. 

Some may like to call this kind of immortality 
unsatisfactory, and impetuously demand that the ego- 
soul, instead of mysterious force of karma, should be 
made immortal, as it is more tangible and better ap- 
preciated by the masses. The Buddhist response to 
such a demand would be; "If their intellectual and 
moral insight is not developed enough to see truth 
in the theory of karma, why, we shall let them adhere 
as long as they please to their crude, primitive faith 
and rest contented with it." Even the Buddha could 
not make children find pleasure in abstract meta- 
physical problems, whatever truth and genuine spiritual 
consolation there might be in them. What their hearts 
are after are toys and fairy- tales and parables. Therefore, 
a motto of Buddhism is : "Minister to the patients 
according to their wants and conditions." We cannot 
make a plant grow even an inch higher by artificially 
pulling its roots ; we have but to wait till it is ready 
for development. Unless a child becomes a man, we 
must not expect of him to put away childish things. 

The conclusion that could be drawn from the above 
is obvious If we desire immortality, let there be the 
maturing of good karma and the cleansing of the heart 
from the contamination of evils. In good karma we 
are made to live eternally, but in evil one we are 
doomed, not only ourselves but every one that follows 
our steps on the path of evils. Karma is always gene- 
rative ; therefore, good karma is infinite bliss, and evil 
one is eternal curse. It was for this reason that at 
the appearance of the Buddha in the Jambudvipa 

CHAPTER VIII. 215 

heaven and earth resounded with the joyous accla- 
mation of gods and men. It was a signal triumph for 
the cause of goodness. The ideal of moral perfection 
found a concrete example in the person of (Jakyamuni. 
It showed how the stock of good karma accumulated 
and matured from the beginning of consciousness on 
earth could be crystalised in one person and brought 
to an actuality even in this world of woes. The 
Buddha, therefore, was the culmination of all the good 
karma previously stored up by his spiritual ancestors. 
And he was at the same time the starting point for 
the fermentation of new karma, because his moral 
"seeds of activity" which were generated during his 
lifetime have been scattered liberally wherever his 
virtues and teachings could be promulgated. That is, 
his karma-seeds have been sown in the souls of all 
sentient beings. Every one of these seeds which 
are infinte in number will become a new centre of 
moral activity. In proportion how strong it grows and 
begins to bear fruit, it destroys the seeds of evil 
doers. Good karma is a combined shield and sword, 
while it protects itself it destroys all that is against 
it. Therefore, good karma is not only statically im- 
mortal, but it is dynamically so; that is to say, its 
immortality is not a mere absence of birth and death, 
but a constant positive increase in its moral efficiency. 
Pious Buddhists believe that every time Buddha's 
name is invoked with a heart free from evil thoughts, 
he enters right into the soul and becomes integral 
part of his being. This does not mean, however, that 

2l6 CHAPTER VIII. 

Buddha's ego-substratum which might have been 
enjoying its immortal spiritual bliss in the presence 
of an anthropomorphic God descends on earth at the 
invocation of his name and renders in that capacity 
whatever help the supplicant needs. It means, on the 
other hand, that the Buddhist awakens in his personal 
karma that which constituted Buddhahood in the 
Buddha and nourishes it to maturity. That which 
constitutes Buddhahood is not the personal ego of 
the Buddha, but his karma. Every chemical element, 
whenever occasioned to befree itself from a combi- 
nation, never fails to generate heat which it absorbed 
at the time of combination with other elements ; and 
this takes place no matter how remote the time of 
combination was. It is even so with the karma-seed 
of Buddha. It might have been in the barren soil of 
a sinful heart, and, being deeply buried there for many 
a year, might have been forgotten altogether by the 
owner. But, sooner or later, it will never fail to grow 
under favorable conditions and generate what it gained 
from the Buddha in the beginning of the world. And 
this regeneration will not be merely chemical, but 
predominantly biological ; for it is the law which 
conditions the immortality of karma. 

PRACTICAL BUDDHISM. 

CHAPTER IX. 
THE DHARMAKAYA. 

have considered the doctrine of Suchness 
(Bhutatathata) under "Speculative Buddhism," 
where it appeared altogether too abstract to be of 
any practical use to our earthly life. The theory as 
such did not seem to have any immediate bearings 
on our religious consciousness. The fact is, it must 
pass through some practical modification before it 
fully satisfies our spiritual needs. As there is no 
concrete figure in this world that is a perfect type 
of mathematical exactitude, — since everything here 
must be perceived through our more or less distorted 
physical organs ; even so with pure reason : however 
perfect in itself, it must appear to us more or less 
modified while passing through our affective-intellectual 
objectives. This modification of pure reason, however, 
is necessary from the human point of view ; because 
mere abstraction is contentless, lifeless, and has no 
value for our practical life, and again, because our 
religious cravings will not be satisfied with empty 
concepts lacking vitality. 

We may sometimes ignore the claims of reason 

2l8 CHAPTER IX. 

and rest satisfied, though usually unconsciously, 
with assertions which are conflicting when critically 
examined, but we cannot disregard by any means 
those of the religious sentiment, which finds satisfaction 
only in the very fact of things. If it ever harbored 
some flagrant contradictions in the name of faith, 
it was because its ever-pressing demands had to be 
met with even at the expense of reason. The truth 
is : the religious consciousness first of all demands 
fact, and when it attains that, it is not of much 
consequence to it whether or not its intellectual 
interpretation is logically tenable. If on the other hand 
logic be all-important and demand the first consideration 
and the sentiment had to follow its trail without a 
murmuring, our life would surely lose its savory 
aspect, turn tasteless, our existence would become 
void, the world would be a mere succession of 
meaningless events, and what remains would be nothing 
else than devastation, barreness, and universal misery. 
The truth is, in this life the will predominates and 
the intellect subserves ; which explains the fact that 
while all existing religions on the one hand display 
some logical inaccuracy and on the other hand a 
mechanical explanation of the world is gaining ground 
more and more, religion is still playing an important 
part everywhere in our practical life. Abstraction is 
good for the exercises of the intellect, but when it 
is the question of life and death we must have 
something more substantial and of more vitality than 
theorisation. It may not be a mathematically exact 

CHAPTER IX. 219 

and certain proposition, but it must be a working, 
living, real theory, that is, it must be a faith born 
of the inmost consciousness of our being. 

What practical transformations then has the doctrine 
of Suchness, in order to meet the religious demands, 
to suffer? 

God. 

Buddhism does not use the word God. The word 
is rather offensive to most of its followers, especially 
when it is intimately associated in vulgar minds with 
the idea of a creator who produced the world out 
of nothing, caused the downfall of mankind, and, 
touched by the pang of remorse, sent down his only 
son to save the depraved. But, on account of this, 
Buddhism must not be judged as an atheism which 
endorses an agnostic, materialistic interpretation of 
the universe. Far from it. Buddhism outspokenly 
acknowledges the presence in the world of a reality 
which transcends the limitations of phenomenality, 
but which is nevertheless immanent everywhere and 
manifests itself in its full glory, and in which we 
live and move and have our being. 

God or the religious object of Buddhism is generally 
called Dharmakaya-Buddha and occasionally Vairocana- 
Buddha or Vairocana-Dharmakaya-Buddha ; still an- 
other name for it is Amitabha-Buddha or Amitayur- 
Buddha, — the latter two being mostly used by the 
followers of the Sukhavati sect of Japan and China. 

22O CHAPTER IX. 

Again, very frequently we find (Jakyamuni, the Buddha, 
and the Tathagata stripped of his historical personality 
and identified with the highest truth and reality. 
These, however, by no means exhaust a legion of 
names invented by the fertile imagination of Buddhists 
for their object of reverence as called forth by their 
various spiritual needs. 

Dharmakaya. 

Western scholars usually translate Dharmakaya by 
"Body of the Law" meaning by the Law the doctrine 
set forth by (Jakyamuni the Buddha. It is said that 
when Buddha was preparing himself to enter into 
eternal Nirvana, he commanded his disciples to revere 
the Dharma or religion taught by him as his own 
person, because a man continues to live in the work, 
deeds, and words left behind himself. So, Dharmakaya 
came to be understood by Western scholars as 
meaning the person of Buddha incarnated in his 
religion. This interpretation of the term is not very 
accurate, however, and is productive of some very 
serious misinterpretations concerning the fundamental 
doctrines of Mahayanism. Historically, the Body of 
the Law as the Buddha incarnate might have been 
the sense of Dharmakaya, as we can infer from the 
occasional use of the term in some Hinayana texts. 
But as it is used by Eastern Buddhists, it has acquired 
an entirely new significance, having nothing to do 
with the body of religious teachings established by 
the Buddha. 

CHAPTER IX. 221 

This transformation in the conception of Dharmakaya 
has been effected by the different interpretation the 
term Dharma came to receive from the hand of the 
Mahayanists. Dharma is a very pregnant word and 
covers a wide range of meaning. It comes from the 
root dhr, which means "to hold," "to carry", "to 
bear," and the primitive sense of dharma was "that 
which carries or bears or supports," and then it 
came to signify "that which forms the norm, or 
regulates the course of things," that is, "law," "in- 
stitution," "rule," "doctrine," then, "duty," "justice," 
"virtue," "moral merit," "character," "attribute," "essen- 
tial quality," "substance," "that which exists," "reality," 
"being/' etc., etc. The English equivalent most 
frequently used for dharma by Oriental scholars is 
law or doctrine. This may be all right as far as the 
Pali texts go ; but when we wish to apply this inter- 
pretation to the Mahayana terms, such as Dharmadhatu, 
Dharmakaya, Dharmalaksa, Dharmaloka, etc., we are 
placed in an awkward position and are at a loss 
how to get at the meaning of those terms. There 
are passages in Mahayana literature in which the 
whole significance of the text depends upon how we 
understand the word dharma. And it may even be 
said that one of the many reasons why Christian 
students of Buddhism so frequently fail to recognise 
the importance of Mahayanism is due to their misinter- 
pretation of dharma. Max Mueller, therefore, rightly 
remarks in his introduction to an English translation 
of the Vajracchedika Sutra, when he says : "If we 

222 CHAPTER IX. 

were always to translate dharma by law, it seems to 
me that the whole drift of our treatise would become 
unintelligible." Not only that particular text of 
Mahayanism, but its entire literature would become 
utterly incomprehensible. 

In Mahayanism Dharma means in many cases "thing," 
"substance," or "being," or "reality," both in its 
particular and in its general sense, though it is also 
frequently used in the sense of law or doctrine. Kaya 
may be rendered "body," not in the sense of personality, 
but in that of system, unity, and organised form. 
Dharmakaya, the combination of dharma and kaya, 
thus means the organised totality of things or the 
principle of cosmic unity, though not as a purely 
philosophical concept, but as an object of the religious 
consciousness Throughout this work, however, the 
original Sanskrit form will be retained in preference 
to any English equivalents that have been used 
heretofore ; for Dharmakaya conveys to the minds of 
Eastern Buddhists a peculiar religious flavor, which, 
when translated by either God or the All or some 
abstract philosophical terms, suffers considerably. 

Dharmakaya as Religious Object. 

As aforesaid, the Dharmakaya is not a product of 
philosophical reflection and is not exactly equivalent 
to Suchness ; it has a religious signification as the 
object of the religious consciousness. The Dharmakaya 
is a soul, a willing and knowing being, one that is 

CHAPTER IX 223 

will and intelligence, thought and action. It is, as 
understood by the Mahayanists, not an abstract 
metaphysical principle like Suchness, but it is living 
spirit, that manifests itself in nature as well as in 
thought. The universe as an expression of this spirit 
is not a meaningless display of blind forces, nor is it 
an arena for the struggle of diverse mechanical powers. 
Further, Buddhists ascribe to the Dharmakaya in- 
numerable merits and virtues and an absolute perfect 
intelligence, and makes it an inexhaustible fountain-head 
of love and compassion; and it is in this that the 
Dharmakaya finally assumes a totally different aspect 
from a mere metaphysical principle, cold and lifeless. 

The Avatamsaka Sutra gives some comprehensive 
statements concerning the nature of the Dharmakaya 
as follows : 

"The Dharmakaya, though manifesting itself in the 
triple world, is free from impurities and desires. It 
unfolds itself here, there, and everywhere responding 
to the call of karma. It is not an individual reality, 
it is not a false existence, but is universal and pure. 
It comes from nowhere, it goes to nowhere ; it does 
not assert itself, nor is it subject to annihilation. It 
is forever serene and eternal. It is the One, devoid 
of all determinations. This Body of Dharma has no 
boundary, no quarters, but is embodied in all bodies. 
Its freedom or spontaneity is incomprehensible, its 
spiritual presence in things corporeal is incomprehen- 
sible. All forms of corporeality are involved therein, 
it is able to create all things. Assuming any concrete 

224 CHAPTER IX. 

material body as required by the nature and condition 
of karma, it illuminates all creations. Though it is the 
treasure of intelligence, it is void of particularity. 
There is no place in the universe where this Body 
does not prevail. The universe becomes, but this 
Body forever remains. It is free from all opposites 
and contraries, yet it is working in all things to lead 
them to Nirvana." 

More Detailed Characterisation. 

The above gives us a general, concise view as to 
what the Dharmakaya is, but let me quote the follow- 
ing more detailed description of it, in order that we 
may more clearly and definitely see into the charac- 
teristically Buddhistic conception of the highest being. 1 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! The Tathagata 2 is not a 
particular dharma, nor a particular form of activity, 
nor has it a particular body, nor does it abide in a 
particular place, nor is its work of salvation confined 
to one particular people. On the contrary, it involves 
in itself infinite dharmas, infinite activities, infinite 
bodies, infinite spaces, and universally works for the 
salvation of all things. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha! It is like unto space. Space s 
contains in itself all material existences and all the 
vacuums that obtain between them Again, it establish- 

1 The Avatamsaka Sutra, Chinese translation by Buddhabha- 
dra, fas. XXXIV. 

1 That is the Dharmakaya personified. 

3 In Hindu philosophy space is always conceived as an ob- 
jective entity in which all things exist. 

CHAPTER IX. 225 

es itself in all possible quarters, and yet we cannot 
say of it that it is or it is not in this particular spot, 
for space has no palpable form. Even so with the Dhar- 
kaya of the Tathagata. It presents itself in all places, 
in all directions, in all dharmas, and in all beings; 
yet the Dharmakaya itself has not been thereby par- 
ticularised. Because the Body of the Tathagata has 
no particular body but manifests itself everywhere and 
anywhere in response to the nature and condition of 
things. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha! It is like unto space. Space 
is boundless, comprehends in itself all existence, and 
yet shows no trace of passion [partiality]. It is even 
so with the Dharmakaya of the Tathagata. It illumi- 
nates all good works worldly as well as religious, but 
it betrays no passion or prejudice. Why ? Because the 
Dharmakaya is perfectly free from all passions and 
prejudices. l 

UO ye, sons of Buddha! It is like unto the Sun. 
The benefits conferred by the light of the sun upon 
all living beings on earth are incalculable : e. g. by 
dispelling darkness it gives nourishment to all trees, 
herbs, grains, plants, and grass ; it vanquishes humid- 
ity; it illuminates ether whereby benefitting all the 

1 This should be understood in the sense that "God maketh 
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the unjust." The Dharmakaya is uni- 
versal in its love, as space is in Its comprehensiveness Because 
it is absolutely free from human desires and passions that are 
the product of egoism and therefore tend always to be discrim- 
inative and exclusive. 

'5 

226 CHAPTER IX. 

living beings in air ; its rays penetr ate into the waters 
whereby bringing forth the beautiful lotus flowers into 
full blossom; it impartially shines on all figures and 
forms and brings into completion all the works on 
earth. Why? Because from the sun emanate infinite 
rays of life-giving light. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! It is even so with the Sun- 
Body of the Tathagata which in innumerable ways 
bestows benefits upon all beings That is, it benefits us by 
destroying evils, all good things thus being quickened to 
growth; it benefits us with its universal illumination 
which vanquishes t'he darkness of ignorance harbored in 
all beings ; it benefits us through its great compassionate 
heart which saves and protects all beings ; it benefits 
us through its great loving heart which delivers all 
beings from the misery of birth and death ; it benefits 
us by the establishment of a good religion whereby 
we are all strengthened in our moral activities; it 
benefits us by giving us a firm belief in the truth 
which cleanses all our spiritual impurities ; it benefits 
by helping us to understand the doctrine by virtue 
of which we are not led to disavow the law of 
causation ; it benefits us with a divine vision which 
enables us to observe the metempsychosis of all beings ; 
it benefits us by avoiding injurious deeds which may 
destroy the stock of merits accumulated by all beings ; 
it benefits us with an intellectual light which unfolds 
the mind-flowers of all beings ; it benefits us with an 
aspiration whereby we are enlivened to practice all 
that constitutes Buddhahood. Why? Because the Sun- 

CHAPTER IX. 227 

Body of the Tathagata universally emits the rays of 
the Light of Intelligence. 

UO ye, sons of Buddha! When the day breaks, 
the rising sun shines first on the peaks of all the 
higher mountains, then on those of high mountains, 
and finally all over the plains and fields; but the 
sunlight itself does not make this thought : I will 
shine first on all the highest mountains and then 
gradually ascending higher and higher shine on the 
plains and fields. The reason why one gets the 
sunlight earlier than another is simply because 
there is a gradation of height on the surface of the 
earth. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! It is even so with the 
Tathagata who is in possession of innumerable and 
immeasurable suns of universal intelligence. The in- 
numerable rays of the Light of Intelligence, emanating 
everlastingly from the spiritual Body of the Tathagata, 
will first fall on the Bodhisattvas and Mahasattvas 
who are the highest peaks among mankind, then on 
the Nidanabuddhas, then on the (Jravakas, then on 
those beings who are endowed with definitely good 
character, as they will each according to his own 
capacity unhesitatingly embrace the doctrine of de- 
liverance, and finally on all common mortals whose 
character may be either indefinite or definitely bad, 
providing them with those conditions which will prove 
beneficial in their future births But the Light of 
Intelligence emanating from the Tathagata does not 
make this thought: 'I will first shine on the Bodhi- 

228 CHAPTER IX. 

sattvas and then gradually pass over to all common 
mortals, etc.' The Light is universal and illuminates 
everything without any prejudice, yet on account of 
the diversity that obtains among sentient beings as 
to their character, aspirations, etc., the Light of 
Intelligence is diversely perceived by them. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! When the sun rises above 
the horizon, those people born blind, on account 
their defective sight, cannot see the light at all, but 
they are nevertheless benefited by the sunlight, for 
it gives them just as much as to any other beings 
all that is necessary for the maintenance of life: it 
dispels dampness and coldness and makes them feel 
agreeable, it destroys all the injurious germs that are 
produced on account of the absence of sunshine, 
and thus keeps the blind as well as the not-blind 
comfortable and healthy. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! It is even so with the 
Sun of Intelligence of the Tathagata. All those beings 
whose spiritual vision is blinded by false doctrine, or 
by the violation of Buddha's precepts, or by ignorance, 
or by evil influences, never perceive the Light of 
Intelligence; because they are devoid of faith. But 
they are nevertheless benefited by the Light ; for it 
disperses indiscriminately for all beings the sufferings 
arising from the four elements, and gives them physical 
comforts, for it destroys the root of all passions, 
prejudices, and pains for unbelievers as well as for believ- 
ers. . . By virtue of this omnipresent Light of Intelligence, 
the Bodhisattvas will attain perfect purity and the 

CHAPTER IX. 229 

knowledge of all things, the Nidanabuddhas and (Jra- 
vakas will destroy all passions and desires; mortals 
poorly endowed and those born blind will rid of 
impurities, control the senses, and believe in the four 
views ; * and those creatures living in the evil paths 
of existence such as hell, world of ghosts, and the 
animal realm, will be freed from their evils and torture 
and will, after death, be born in the human or celes- 
tial world .... 

"O ye, sons of Buddha! The Light of Dharmakaya 
is like unto the full moon which has four wondrous 
attributes: (i) It outdoes in its brilliance all stars and 
satellites ; (2) It shows in its size increase and decrease 
as observable in the Jambudvipa ; (3) Its reflection is 
seen in every drop or body of clear water ; (4) Whoever 
is endowed with perfect sight, perceives it vis-a-vis. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! Even so with the Dharmakaya 
of theT athagata, that has four wondrous attributes : (i) 
It eclipses the stars of the Nidanabuddhas, (Jravakas, 
etc. ; (2) It shows in its earthly life a certain variation 
which is due to the different natures of the beings 
to whom it manifests itself, 2 while the Dharmakaya 

1 The four views are: That the physical body is productive 
of impurities ; that sensuality causes pain; that the individual soul 
is not permanent; and that all things are devoid of the Atman. 

2 That is to say: The Dharmakaya, that assumes all forms 
of existence according to what class of being it is manifesting 
itself, is sometimes conceived by the believers to be a short- 
lived god, sometimes an immortal spirit, sometimes a celestial 
being of one hundred kalpas, and sometimes an existence of 
only a moment. As there are so many different dispositions, 

23O CHAPTER IX. 

itself is eternal and shows no increase or decrease 
in any way; (3) Its reflection is seen in the Bodhi 
(intelligence) of every pure-hearted sentient being; (4) 
All who understand the Dharma and obtain deliverance, 
each according to his own mental calibre, think that 
they have really recognised in their own way the 
Tathagata face to face, while the Dharmakaya itself 
is not a particular object of understanding, but univer- 
sally brings all Buddha-works into completion. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! The Dharmakaya is like 
unto the Great Brahmaraja who governs three thousand 
chiliocosms. The Raja by a mysterious trick makes 
himself seen universally by all living beings in his 
realm and causes them to think that each of them 
has seen him face to face; but the Raja himself 
has never divided his own person nor is he in 
possession of diverse features. 

"O ye, sons of Buddha ! Even so with the Tathagata ; 
he has never divided himself into many, nor has he ever 
assumed diverse features. But all beings, each ac- 
cording to his understanding and strength of faith, 
recognise the Body of the Tathagata, while he has 
never made this thought that he will show himself to 
such and such particular people and not to others . . . 

"O ye, sons of Buddha! The Dharmakaya is like 
unto the maniratna in the waters, whose wondrous 

characters, karmas, intellectual attainments, moral environments, 
etc., so there are 'as many Dharmakayas as subjectively 
represented in the minds of sentient beings, though the 
Dharmakaya, objectively considered, is absolutely one. 

CHAPTER IX. 231 

light transforms everything that comes in contact 
with it to its own color. The eyes that perceive it 
become purified. Wherever its illumination reaches, 
there is a marvelous display of gems of every de- 
scription, which gives pleasure to all beings to see. 
"O ye, sons of Buddha! It is even so with the 
Dharmakaya of the Tathagata, which may rightly be 
called the treasure of treasures, the thesaurus of all 
merits, and the mine of intelligence. Whoever comes 
in touch with this light, is all transformed into the 
same color as that of the Buddha. Whoever sees this 
light, all obtains the purest eye of Dharma. Whoever 
comes in touch with this light, rids of poverty and 
suffering, attains wealth and eminence, enjoys the bliss 
of the incomparable Bodhi" 

Dharmakaya and Individual Beings. 

From these statements it is evident that the 
Dharmakaya or the Body of the Tatha^gata, or the 
Body of Intelligence, whatever it may be designated, 
is not a mere philosophical abstraction, standing aloof 
from this world of birth and death, of joy and sorrow, 
calmly contemplates on the folly of mankind ; but 
that it is a spiritual existence which is "absolutely 
one, is real and true, and forms the raison d'etre of 
all beings, transcends all modes of upaya, is free from 
desires and struggles [or compulsion], and stands 
outside the pale of our finite understanding." 1 It is 

1 Asanga's General Treatise on Mahayanism. (Mahay&na 
samparigrahd). 

232 CHAPTER IX. 

also evident that the Dharmakaya, though itself free 
from ignorance (avidya) and passion (klega] and 
desire (trsna), is revealed in the finite and fragmental 
consciousness of human being, so that we can say in 
a sense that "this body of mine is the Dharmakaya" — 
though not absolutely ; and also in a generalised form 
that "the body of all beings is the Dharmakaya, and 
the Dharmakaya is the body of all beings," — though 
in the latter only imperfectly and fractionally realised. 
As we thus partake something in ourselves of the 
Dharmakaya, we all are ultimately destined to attain 
Buddhahood when the human intelligence, Bodhi, is 
perfectly identified with, or absorbed in, that of the 
Dharmakaya, and when our earthly life becomes the 
realisation of the will of the Dharmakaya. 

The Dharmakaya as Love. 

Here an important consideration forces itself upon 
us which is, that the Dharmakaya is not only an 
intelligent mind but a loving heart, that it is not only 
a god of rigorism who does not allow a hair's breadth 
deviation from the law of karma, but also an incarnation 
of mercy that is constantly belaboring to develop the 
most insignificant merit into a field yielding rich 
harvests. The Dharmakaya relentlessly punishes the 
wrong and does not permit the exhaustion of their 
karma without sufficient reason ; and yet its hands 
are always directing our life toward the actualisation 

CHAPTER IX. 233 

of supreme goodness. "Pangs of nature, sins of will, 
defects of doubt, and stains of blood," — discouraging 
and gloomy indeed is the karma of evil-doers ! But 
the Dharmakaya, infinite in love and goodness, is 
incessantly managing to bring this world-transaction 
to a happy terminus. Every good we do is absorbed 
in the universal stock of merits which is no more nor 
less than the Dharmakaya. Every act of lovingkindness 
we practice is conceived in the womb of Tathagata, 
and therein nourished and matured, is again brought 
out to this world of karma to bear its fruit. Therefore, 
no life walks on earth with aimless feet ; no chaff is 
thrown into the fire unquenchable. Every existence, 
great or insignificant, is a reflection of the glory 
of the Dharmakaya and as such worthy of its all- 
embracing love. 

For further corroboration of this view let us cite 
at random from a Mahayana sutra: 1 

"With one great loving heart 
The thirsty desires of all beings he quencheth with coolness 

refreshing ; 

With compassion, of all doth he think, 
Which like space knows no bounds; 
Over the world's all creation 
With no thought of particularity he revieweth. 

"With a great heart compassionate and loving, 
All sentient beings by him are embraced; 
With means (upayd) which are pure, free from stain, and 

all excellent, 
He doth save and deliver all creatures innumerable. 

1 The Avatamsaka Sutra, chap. 13, "On Merit." 

234 CHAPTER IX. 

"With unfathomable love and with compassion 
All creations caressed by him universally; 
Yet free from attachment his heart is. 

"As his compassion is great and is infinite, 
Bliss unearthly on every being he confereth, 
And himself showeth all over the universe; 
He'll not rest till all Buddhahood truly attains." 

Later Mahay dnists' view of the Dharmakaya. 

The above has been quoted almost exclusively from 
the so-called sutra literature of Mahayana Buddhism, 
which is distinguished from the other religio-philosoph- 
ical treatises of the school, because the sutras are 
considered to be the accounts of Buddha himself as 
recorded by his immediate disciples. 1 Let us now 
see by way of further elucidation what views were 
held concerning the Dharmakaya by such writers as 
Asanga, Vasubandhu, etc. 

We read in the General Treatise on Mahay dnism 
by Asanga and Vasubandhu the following statement : 

"When the Bodhisattvas think of the Dharmakaya, 
how have they to picture it to themselves? 

4 'Briefly stated, they will think of the Dharmakaya 
by picturing to themselves its seven characteristics, 
which constitute the faultless virtues and essential 

1 This is by no means the case, for some of the Mahayana 
sutras are undoubtedly productions of much later writers than 
the immediate followers of the Buddha, though of course it 
is very likely that some of the most important Mahayana 
canonical books were compiled within a few hundred years 
after the Nirvana of the Master. 

CHAPTER IX. 235 

functions of the Kaya. (i) Think of the free, unri- 
valed, unimpeded activity of the Dharmakaya, which 
is manifested in all beings ; (2) Think of the eternality 
of all perfect virtues in the Dharmakaya ; (3) Think 
of its absolute freedom from all prejudice, intellectual 
and affective ; (4) Think of those spontaneous activi- 
ties that uninterruptedly emanate from the will of the 
Dharmakaya; (5) Think of the inexhaustible wealth, 
spiritual and physical, stored in the Body of the 
Dharma; (6) Think of its intellectual purity which 
has no stain of onesidedness ; (7) Think of the earthly 
works achieved for the salvation of all beings by the 
Tathagatas who are reflexes of the Dharmakaya." 

As regards the activity of the Dharmakaya, which 
is shown in every Buddha's work of salvation, Asanga 
enumerates five forms of operation: (i) It is shown 
in his power of removing evils which may befall us 
in the course of life, though the Buddha is unable 
to cure any physical defects which we may have, 
such as blindness, deafness, mental abberration, etc. 
(2) It is shown in his irresistible spiritual domination 
over all evil-doers, who, base as they are, cannot help 
doing some good if they ever come in the presence of 
the Buddha. (3) It is shown in his power of destroying 
various unnatural and irrational methods of salvation 
which are practiced by followers of asceticism, hedon- 
ism, or Ishvaraism. (4) It is shown in his power of curing 
those diseased minds that believe in the reality, 
permanency, and indivisibility of the ego-soul, that is, 
in the pudgalavada. (5) It is shown in his inspiring 

236 CHAPTER IX. 

influence over those Bodhisattvas who have not yet 
attained to the stage of immovability as well as over 
those (Jravakas whose faith and character are still in 
a state of vacillation. 

The Freedom of the Dharmakdya. 

Those spiritual influences over all beings of the 
Dharmakaya through the enlightened mind of a 
Buddha, which we have seen above as stated by 
Asanga, are fraught with religious significance. 
According to the Buddhist view, those spiritual 
powers everlastingly emanating from the- Body of 
Dharma have no trace of human elaboration or 
constrained effort, but they are a spontaneous over- 
flow from its immanent necessity, or, as I take it, 
from its free will. The Dharmakaya does not make 
any conscious, struggling efforts to shower upon all 
sentient creatures its innumerable merits, benefits, 
and blessings. If there were in it any trace of elabora- 
tion, that would mean a struggle within itself of divers 
tendencies, one trying to gain ascendency over another. 
And it is apparent that any struggle and its necessary 
ally, compulsion, are incompatible with our conception 
of the highest religious reality. Absolute spontaneity 
and perfect freedom is one of those necessary attributes 
which our religious consciousness cannot help ascribing 
to its object of reverence. Buddhists therefore repeated- 
ly affirm that the activity of the Dharmakaya is 
perfectly free from all effort and coercion, external 
and internal. Its every act of creation or salvation 

CHAPTER IX. 237 

or love emanates from its own free will, unhampered 
by any struggling exertion which characterises the 
doings of mankind. This free will which is divine, 
standing in such a striking contrast with our own 
"free will" which is human and at best very much 
limited, is called by the Buddhists the Dharmakaya's 
''Purvapranidhanabala." l 

As the Dharmakaya works of its own accord it 
does not seek any recompense for its deed ; and it 
is evident that every act of the Dharmakaya is 
always for the best welfare of its creatures, for they 
are its manifestations and it must know what they 
need. We do not have to ask for our "daily bread," 

1 "Purvapranidhanabala" is frequently translated "the power 
of original (or primitive) prayer." Literally, purva means 
''former" or "original" or "primitive" ; and pranidhana, "desire" 
or "vow or "prayer"; and bala, "power." So far as literary 
rendering is concerned, "power of original prayer" seems to 
be the sense of the original Sanskrit. But when we speak of 
primitive prayers of the Dharmakaya or Tathagata, how shall 
we understand it? Has prayer any sense in this connection? 
The Dharmakaya can by its own free will manifest in any 
form of existence and finish its work in whatever way it deems 
best. There is no need for it to utter any prayer in the ag- 
ony of struggle to accomplish. There is in the universe no 
force whatever which is working against it so powerfully 
as to make it cry for help ; and there cannot be any struggle 
or agony in the activity of the Dharmakaya. The term prayer 
therefore is altogether misleading and inaccurate and implicates 
us in a grave error which tends to contradict the general 
Buddhist conception of Dharmakaya. We must dispense with 
the term entirely in order to be in perfect harmony with the 
fundamental doctrine of Buddhism. This point will receive 
further consideration later. 

238 CHAPTER IX. 

nor have we to praise or eulogise its virtues to court 
its special grace, nor is there any necessity for us to 
offer prayer or supplication to the Dharmakaya. 
Consider the lilies of the field which neither toil nor 
spin, — and 1 might add, — which ask not for any 
favoritism from above ; yet are they not arrayed even 
better than Solomon in all his glory ? The Dharmakaya 
shines in its august magnificence everywhere there is 
life, nay, even where there is death. We are all living 
in the midst of it and yet, strange to say, as "the fish 
knows not the presence of water about itself," and also 
as "the mountaineers recognise not the mountains 
among which they hunt," even so we know not whence 
that power comes whose .work is made manifest in us 
and whither it finally leadeth us. In spite of this profound 
ignorance, we really feel that we are here, and thereby 
we rest supremely contented. For we believe that 
all this is wrought through the mysterious and miracu- 
lous will of the Dharmakaya, who does all excellent 
works and seeks no recompense whatever. 

The Will of the Dharmakaya. 

Summarily speaking, the Dharmakaya assumes three 
essential aspects as reflected in our religious con- 
sciousness: first, it is intelligence (prajna)\ secondly, 
it is love (karund) ; and thirdly, it is the will (prani- 
dhdnabala). We know that it is intelligence from 
the declaration that the Dharmakaya directs the 
course of the universe, not blindly but rationally ; we 
know again that it is love because it embraces all 

CHAPTER IX. 239 

beings with fatherly tenderness ; * and finally we must 
assume that it is a will, because the Dharmakaya 
has firmly set down its aim of activity in that good 
shall be the final goal of all evil in the universe. 
Without the will, love and intelligence will not be 
realised ; without love, the will and intelligence will 
lose their impulse ; without intelligence, love and 
the will will be irrational. In fact, the three are co- 
ordinates and constitute the oneness of the Dharmakaya ; 
and by oneness I mean the absolute, and not the numeric- 
al, unity of all these three things in the being of the 
Dharmakaya, for intelligence and love and the will 
are differentiated as such only in our human, finite 
consciousness. 

Some Buddhists may not agree entirely with the 
view here expounded. They may declare : "We conform 
to your view when you say the Dharmakaya is in- 
telligence and love, as this is expressly stated in the 
sutras and gastras ; but we do not see how it could 
be made a will. Indeed, the Scriptures say that the 
Dharmakaya is in possession of the Pranidhanabala, 
but this bala or power is not necessarily the will, it 
is the power of prayers or intense vows. The Dhar- 
makaya actually made solemn vows, and their spiritual 
energy abiding in the world of particulars works out 
its original plan and makes possible the universal 
salvation of all creatures." 

It is quite true that the word pranidhanabala means 

1 "I am the father of all beings, and they are my children." 
(The Avatamsaka, the Pundarika, etc.) 

24O CHAPTER IX. 

literally "the power of original prayers." But this 
literary rendering totally ignores its inner significance 
without which the nature of the Dharmakaya would 
become unintelligible. We admit that the Dharmakaya 
knows no higher existence by which it is conditioned, 
nor has it any fragmentary, limited consciousness 
like that of human being, nor has it any intrinsic 
want by which it is necessitated to appeal to something 
other than itself. It is, therefore, utterly nonsensical 
to speak of its prayer, "original" or borrowed, as 
some Buddhists are inclined to think. On the other 
hand, we are perfectly justified in saying that whatever 
is done by the Dharmakaya is done by its own free 
will independent of all the determinations that might 
affect it from outside. 

But I can presume the reason why they speak of 
the prayers of the Dharmakaya instead of its will. 
Here we have an instance of emotional outburst. The 
fervency of the intense religious sentiment not in- 
frequently carries us beyond the limits of the intellect, 
landing us in a region full of mysteries and contra- 
dictions. It anthroposises everything beyond the proper 
measure of intellection and ascribes all earthly 
human feelings and passions to an object which the 
mind well-balanced demands to be above all the 
forms of human helplessness. The Buddhists, especi- 
ally those of the Sukhavati sect, d recognise the exist- 

1 To get more fully acquainted with the significance of 
the Sukhavati doctrine, the reader is advised to look up the 
Sukhavati sutras in the Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XLIX. 

CHAPTER IX. 241 

ence of an all-powerful will, all-embracing love, and 
all-knowing intelligence in the Dharmakaya, but they 
want to represent it more concretely and in a more 
humanly fashion before the mental vision of the less 
intellectual followers. The result thus is that the 
Dharmakaya in spite of its absoluteness made prayers 
to himself to emancipate all sentient beings from the 
sufferings of birth and death. But are not these self- 
addressed prayers of the Dharmakaya which sprang 
out of its inmost nature exactly what constitutes 
its will? 

16 

O 

CHAPTER X. 
THE DOCTRINE OF TRIKAYA. 

(BUDDHIST THEORY OF TRINITY.) 
The Human and the Super-human Buddha. 

NE of the most remarkable differences between the 
Pali and the Sanskrit, that is, between the Hinaya- 
na and the Mahayana Buddhist literature, is in the man- 
ner of introducing the characters or persons who take 
principal parts in the narratives. In the former, sermons 
are delivered by the Buddha as a rule in such a 
natural and plain language as to make the reader 
feel the presence of the teacher, fatherly-hearted and 
philosophically serene; while in the latter generally 
we have a mysterious, transcendent figure, more 
celestial than human, surrounded and worshipped by 
beings of all kinds, human, celestial, and even demo- 
niac, and this mystical central character performing 
some supernatural feats which might well be narrated 
by an intensely poetical mind. 

In the Pali scriptures, the texts as a rule open with 
the formula, "Thus it was heard by me" (Evam me 
sutam), then relate the events, if any, which induced the 
Buddha to deliver them, and finally lead the reader 
to the main subjects which are generally written in 

CHAPTER X. 243 

lucid style. Their opening or introductory matter is 
very simple, and we do not notice anything extraor- 
dinary in its further development. But with the Ma- 
hayana texts it is quite different. Here we have, as 
soon as the curtain rises with the stereotyped formula, 
"Evam maya grutam," a majestic prologue dramati- 
cally or rather grotesquely represented, which prepares 
the mind of the audience to the succeeding scenes, 
in which some of the boldest religio-philosophical 
proclamations are brought forth. The perusal of this 
introductory part alone will stupefy the reader by its 
rather monstrous grandeur, and he may without much 
ado declare that what follows must be extraordinary 
and may be even nonsensical. 

The following is an illustration showing the typical 
manner of introducing the characters in the Mahayana 
texts. * 

"Thus it was heard by me. Buddha was once stay- 
ing at Rajagriha, on the Gridhrakuta mountain. He 
was in the Hall of Ratnachandra in the Double Tower 
of Chandana. Ten years passed since his attainment of 
Buddhahood. He was surrounded by a hundred thousand 
Bhiksus and Bodhisattvas and Mahasattvas numbering 
sixty times as many as the sands of the Ganges. All of 
them were in possession of the greatest spiritual energy ; 
they had paid homage to thousands of hundred mil- 

1 What follows is selected from a short sutra called The 
Mahavaipulva-Tathagatagarbha Sutra, translated into Chinese 
by Buddhabhadra of the Eastern Tsin dynasty (A.D, 371-420). 
Nanjo, No 384. 

244 CHAPTER X. 

lions of niyutas i of Buddhas; they were able to set 
rolling the never-sliding-back Wheel of Dharma; and 
whoever heard their names could establish themselves 
firmly in the Highest Perfect Knowledge. Their names 
were. . . . [Here about fifty Bodhisattvas are mentioned.] 

"All these Bodhisattvas numbering sixty times as 
many as the sands of the Ganges coming from innume- 
rable Buddha-countries were accompanied by numberless 
Devas, Nagas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Aguras, Garudas, 
Kinnaras, and Mahoragas. * This great assembly all 
joined in revering, honoring, paying homage to the 
Bhagavat, the World-honored One. 

"At this time the Bhagavat in the Double Tower 
of Chandana seated himself in the assigned seat, entered 
upon a samadhi, and displayed a marvelous phenomenon. 
There appeared innumerable lotus-flowers with thou- 
sand-fold petals and each flower as large as a carriage- 
wheel. They had perfectly beautiful color and fragrant 
odour, but their petals containing celestial beings in 
them were not yet unfolded. They all were raised 
now by themselves high up in the heavens and hung 
over the earth like a canopy of pearls. Each one of 
these lotus-flowers emitted innumerable rays of light 
and simultaneously grew in size with wonderful vitality. 
But through the divine power of Buddha they all of 

1 Niyuta is an exceedingly large number, but generally 
considered to be equal to one billion. 

V 

2 All these are unhuman forms of existence, including 
demons, dragon-kings, winged beasts, etc. 

CHAPTER X. 245 

a sudden changed color and withered. All the celestial 
Buddhas sitting cross-legged within the flowers now 
came into full view, shone with innumerable hundred 
thousand-fold rays of light. At this moment the tran- 
scendent glory of the spot was beyond description." . . . 

As is here thus clearly shown, the Buddha in the 
Mahayana scriptures is not an ordinary human being 
walking in a sensuous world ; he is altogether dissimilar 
to that son of Suddhodana, who resigned the royal 
life, wandered in the wilderness, and after six years' 
profound meditation and penance discovered the Four- 
fold Noble Truth and the Twelve Chains of Dependence ; 
and we cannot but think that the Mahayana Buddha 
is the fictitious creation of an intensely poetic mind. 
Let it be so. But the question which engages us now 
is, "How did the Buddhists come to relegate the 
human Buddha to oblivion, as it were, and assign a 
mysterious being in his place invested with all possible 
or sometimes impossible majesty and supernaturality ?" 
This question, which marks the rise of Mahayana 
Buddhism, brings us to the doctrine of Trikaya, — which 
in a sense corresponds to the Christian theory of trinity. 

According to this doctrine, the Buddhists presume 
a triple existence of the Tathagata, that is, the Tathagata 
is conceived by them as manifesting himself in three 
different forms of existence : the Body of Trans- 
formation, the Body of Bliss, and the Body of Dharma. 
Though they are conceived as three, they are in fact 
all the manifestations of one Dharmakaya, — the Dhar- 
makaya that revealed itself in the historical (Jakyamuni 

246 CHAPTER X. 

Buddha as a Body of Transformation, and in the 
Mahayana Buddha as a Body of Bliss. However differ- 
ently they may appear from the human point of 
view, they are nothing but the expression of one eternal 
truth, in which all things have their raison d'etre. 

An Historical View. 

At present we are not in possession of any historical 
documents that will throw light on the question as to 
how early this doctrine of Trikaya or Buddhist trinity 
conception came to be firmly established among 
Northern Buddhists and found its way in an already- 
finished form as such into the Mahayana scriptures. 
As far as we know, it was Ac. vaghosa, the first Mahayana 
philosopher, who incorporated this conception in his 
Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana 
as early as the first century before Christ. This work, 
as the author declares, is a sort of synopsis of the 
Mahayana teachings, elucidating their principal features 
as taught by the Buddha in his various sutras. It is 
not an original work which expounds the individual 
views of Agvaghosa concerning Buddhism. He wrote 
the book in a concise and comprehensive form, in 
order that the later generations who remote from the 
Buddha could not have the privilege of being inspired 
by his august presence, might peruse it with concen- 
tration of mind and synthetically grasp the whole 
significance of many lengthy and voluminous sutras. 
Therefore, in the Awakening of Paith, we are supposed 

CHAPTER X. 247 

not to find any Mahayana doctrines that were not 
already taught by the Buddha and incorporated in the 
sutras. Everything Agvaghosa treats in his work must 
be considered merely a recapitulation of the doctrines 
which were not only formulated but firmly established 
as the Mahayana faith long before him. His is simply 
the work of a recorder. He carefully scanned all 
the Mahayana scriptures that had existed prior to his 
time and faithfully collected all the principal teachings 
of Mahayanism here and there scatteringly told in them. 
His merit lies in compilation and systematisation. 

This being the case, we must assume that all the 
doctrines that are found in Agvaghosa and distinct 
from those usually held to be Hinayanistic are the 
teachings elaborated by Buddhists from the time of 
Buddha's death down to the time of Agvaghosa. But 
as the latter apparently believes all these doctrines as 
Buddha's own and raises no doubt concerning their 
later origin, even if they were so, we must assume 
again that these doctrines were in a state of com- 
pletion long before Agvaghosa's time. If our calculation 
is correct that he lived in the first century before 
Christ, the Mahayana faith must be said to have been 
formulated at least two hundred years prior to his 
age, — taking this presumably as the time that is 
required for the formulation and dogmatical esta- 
blishment of a doctrine. This calculation places the 
development of the Mahayana faith during the first 
century after the Buddha, and, we know, it was 
during this time that so many schools and divisions, — 

248 CHAPTER X. 

among which we must also find the so-called "primitive" 
Buddhism of Ceylon, arose among the Buddhists, — each 
claiming to be the only authentic transmission of 
the Buddha's teaching. Did Mahayanism come out of 
this turmoil of contention? Did it boldly raise it- 
self from this chaos and claim to have solved all 
the questions and doubts that agitated the minds of 
Buddhists after the Nirvana? For certain we do not 
know anything concerning the chronology of the 
development of Buddhist philosophy and dogmas in 
India, at least before Agvaghosa; but, as far as our 
Chinese Buddhist literature records, we must conclude 
that this was most probably the case. 

To give our readers a glimpse of the state of 
things that were taking place in those early days of 
Buddhism in India, I will quote some passages from 
Vasumitra's Discourse on the Points of Controversy 
by the Different Schools of Buddhism, — the work 
once refered to in the beginning of this book. The 
two principal schools that arose soon after the Nir- 
vana of the Buddha were, as is well known, the 
Elders and the Great Council, and though they were 
further divided into a number of smaller sections 
and their views became so complex and intermixed 
that some of the Elders shared similar views with the 
Great Council School and vice versa, yet we can 
fairly distinguish one from the other and describe the 
the essential peculiarities of each school. These points 
of difference, generally speaking, are as follows, con- 
fining ourselves to their conceptions about the Buddha : 

CHAPTER X. 249 

(i) According to the School of the Great Council, 
the Buddha's personality is transcendental (lokottara), 
and all the Tathagatas are free from the defilements 
that might come from the material existence (bhdva- 
dgrava). ! For in the Buddha all evil passions hered- 
itary and acquired were eternally uprooted, and his 
presence on earth was absolutely spotless. (The 
Vibhasa, CLXXIII.) Contending this view, the Elders 
held that the Buddha's personality was not free from 
Bhavacrava, though his mind was fully enlightened. 
His corporeal existence was the product of blind love 
veiled with ignorance and tangled with attachment. 
If this were not so, the Buddha's feature would not 
have awakened an impure affection in the heart of 
a maiden, an ill-will in the heart of a highwayman, 
stupidity in the mind of an ascetic, and arrogance in 
that of a haughty Brahman. These incidents which 

JAgrava literally means "oozing," or "flowing out," and the 
Chinese translators rendered it by lou, dripping, or leaking. 
Roughly speaking, it is a general name for evils, principally 
material and sensuous. According to an Indian Buddhist scholar, 
Acrava has threefold sense: (i) "keeping," for it retains all 
sentient beings in the whirlpool of birth and death ; (2) 
"flowing," for it makes all sentient beings run in the stream 
of birth and death; (3) "leaking," or "oozing," for it lets such 
evils as avarice, anger, lust, etc., ooze out from the six 
sense-organs after the fashion of an ulcer, which lets out 
blood and filthy substance. The cause of Acrava is a blind 
will, and its result is birth and death. Specifically, Bhavacrava 
is one of the three Acravas, which are (i) kamacrava, (2) 
vidyacrava, and (3) bhavacrava. The first is egotistic desires, 
the second is ignorance, and the third is the material existence 
which we have to suffer on account of our previous karma. 

25O CHAPTER X. 

happened during the life of the Buddha evince that 
his corporeal presence was apt to agitate others' 
hearts, and to that extent it was contaminated by 
Bhavagrava. 

(2) The Great Council School insists that every 
word uttered by a Tathagata has a religious, spiritual 
meaning and purports to the edification of his fellow- 
beings ; that his one utterance is variously interpreted 
by his audience each according to his own disposition, 
but all to his spiritual welfare; that every instruction 
given out by the Buddha is rational and perfect. 
Against these views the Elders think that the Buddha 
occasionally uttered things which had nothing to do 
with the enlightenment of others ; that even with 
the Buddha something was out of his attainment, 
for instance, he could not make every one of his 
hearers perfectly understand his preachings ; that 
though the Buddha never taught anything irrational 
and heretical, yet all his speeches were not perfect, 
he said some things which had no concern with ra- 
tionality or orthodoxy. 

(3) The corporeal body (rupakdya) of the Buddha 
has no limits (koti) ; his majestic power has no limits ; 
every Buddha's life is unlimited ; a Buddha knows 
no fatigue^ knows not when to rest, always occupying 
himself with the enlightenment of all sentient beings 
and with the awakening in their hearts of pure faith. 

-^Against these tendencies of the Great Council School 
to deify the historical Buddha, the Elders generally 
insist on the humanity of Buddhahood. Though the 

CHAPTER X. 251 

Elders agree with the Great Council in that the body 
assumed by the Buddha as the result of his untiring 
accumulation of good karma through eons of his suc- 
cessive existences possesses a wonderful power, spir- 
itual and material, they do not conceive It to be 
beyond all limitations. 

(4) The Great Council School says that with the 
Buddha sleep is not necessary and he has no dreams. 
The Elders admit that the Buddha never dreams, 
but denies that he does not need any sleep. 

(5) As the Buddha is always in the state of a deep, 
exalted spiritual meditation, it is not necessary for 
him to think what to say when requested to answer 
certain questions. Though he might appear to the 
inquirers as if he thoroughly cogitates over the problems 
presented to him for solution, the Buddha's response 
is in fact immediate and without any efforts. The 
Elders, on the other hand, presume the Buddha's 
mental calculation as to how to express his ideas 
as best suited to the understanding of the audience. 
Indeed, he does not cogitate over the problem itself, 
for with him everything is transparent, but he thinks 
over the best method of presenting his ideas before 
his pupils. ! 

1 Our thoughtful readers must have noticed here that the 
conceptions of the Buddha as entertained by the Mahasangika 
School (Great Council) closely resemble those of the Mahayana 
Buddhism. Though we are still unable to trace step by step 
the development of Mahayanism in India, the hypothesis 
assumed by most of Japanese Buddhist scholars is that the 
Mahasangika was Mahayanistic in tendency. 

252 CHAPTER X. 

Now to return to the doctrine of Dharmakaya and 
Trikaya. When we consider these controversies as 
above stated, it is apparent that among many other 
questions which arose soon after the demise of the Bud- 
dha (Jakyamuni, there was one, which in all probability 
most agitated the minds of his disciples. I mean the 
question of the personality of Buddha. Was he merely 
a human being like ourselves? Then, how could he 
reach such a height of moral perfection ? Or was he 
a divine being ? But Buddha himself did not communi- 
cate anything to his disciples concerning his divinity, 
nor did he tell them to accept the Dharma on account 
of his divine personality, but solely for the sake of 
truth. But for all that how could the disciples ever 
eradicate from their hearts the feeling of sacred 
reverence for their teacher, which was so indelibly 
engraved there? Whenever they recalled the sermons, 
anecdotes, or gathas of their master, the truth and 
spirit embodied in them and the author must have 
become so closely associated that they could not but 
ask themselves: "What in the Buddha caused him 
to perceive and declare these solemn profound truths ? 
What was it that formed in him such a noble majestic 
character? What was there in the mind of Buddha 
that raised him to such a perfection of intellectual 
and religious life ? How was it possible that, possessed 
of such exalted moral and spiritual virtues, Buddha 
too had to succumb to the law of birth and death 
that is the lot of common mortals ? Some such ques- 
tions must have been repeatedly asked before they 

CHAPTER X. 253 

could answer them by the doctrines of Dharmakaya 
and Trikaya. 

Who was the Buddha? 

The evidence that these questions were constantly 
disturbing the minds of the disciples ever since the 
Master's entrance into Parinirvana, is scatteringly 
revealed throughout the Buddhist texts both Southern 
and Northern. The regret of the immediate followers 
that they did not ask the Buddha to prolong his 
earthly life, while the Buddha told them that he 
could do so if he wished, and their lamentation over 
the remains of the Blessed One, "How soon the 
Light of the World has passed away!" l — these 
utterances may be considered the first drops foreboding 
the showers of doubt and speculation as to his 
personality. 

According to the Suvarna Prabha Sutra, 2 a Bodhi- 
sattva, by the name of Ruciraketu, was greatly 
annoyed by the doubt why (Jakyamuni Tathagata 
had such a short life terminating only at eighty. He 

1 The Mahaparimbbana sutta. 

1 There are three Chinese translations of this sutra : the 
first, by Dharmaraksa during the first two decades of the 
fifth century A. D. ; the second, by Paramartha of the Liang 
dynasty, who came to China A. D. 546 and died A. D. 569 ; 
and the third, by I-tsing of the Tang dynasty who came back 
from his Indian pilgrimage in the year 695 and translated this 
sutra A. D. 703. The last is the only complete Chinese trans- 
lation of the Suvarna Prabhct. A part of the orginal Sanskrit 
text recovered in Nepal was published by the Buddhist Text 
Society of India in 1898. Nanjo, Nos. 126, 127, 130. 

254 CHAPTER X. 

taught the disciples that those who did not injure 
any living beings, and those who generously practised 
charity, in their former lives, could enjoy a consider- 
ably long life on earth; why then was the life of 
the Blessed One himself cut so short, who practised 
those virtues from time immemorial? The sutra now 
records that this doubt was dispelled by the declaration 
of four Tathagatas who mysteriously appeared to the 
sceptic and told him that "Every drop of water in 
the vast ocean can be counted, but the age of 
(Jakyamuni none can measure. Crush the mount 
Sumeru into particles as fine as mustard seeds and 
we can count them, but the age of (Jakyamuni 

none can measure the Buddha never entered 

into Parinirvana ; the Good Dharma will never perish. 
He showed an earthly death merely for the benefits 

of sentient beings." 

Here we have the conception of a spiritual Dharma- 
kaya germinating out of the corporeal death of 
(Jakyamuni. 1 Here we have the bridge that spans 

1 The notion that great men never die seems to be universal. 
Spiritually they would never perish, because the ideas that 
moved them and made them prominent in the history of 
humanity are born of truth. And in this sense every person 
who is possessed of worthy thoughts is immortal, while souls 
that are made of trumpery are certainly doomed to annihi- 
lation. But the masses are not satisfied with this kind of 
immortality. They must have something more tangible, more 
sensual, and more individual. The notion of bodily resurrection 
of Christ is a fine illustration of this truth. When the followers 
of Christ opened the master's grave, they did not find his 
body, so says legend, and they at once conceived the idea 

CHAPTER X. 255 

the wide gap between the human £akyamuni Buddha 
and the spiritual existence of the Dharmakaya. The 
Buddha did not die after he partook of the food 
offered by Chunda. His age was not eighty. His life 
did not pass to an airy nothingness when his cine- 
rary urns were divided among kings and Brahmans. 
His virtues and merits which were accumulated through- 
out innumerable kalpas, could not come to naught 
so abruptly. What constituted the essence of his 
life— and that of ours too — could not perish with 
the vicissitudes of the corporeal existence. The Buddha 
as a particular individual being was certainly subject 
to transformation — so is every mortal, but his truth 
must abide forever His Dharmakaya is above birth 
and death and even above Nirvana; but his Body of 
Transformation comes out of the womb of Tathagata 
as destined by karma and vanishes into it when the 
karma exhausts its force. The Buddha who is still 
seated at the summit of the Gridhrakuta, delivering 
to all beings the message of joy and bliss, and who 
among other precious teachings bequeathed to us 

of resurrection, for they reasoned that such a great man as 
Jesus could not suffer the same fate that befalls common 
mortals only. The story of his corporeal resurrection now 
took wing and went wild; some heard him speak to them, 
some saw him break bread, and others even touched his 
wounds. What a grossly materialistic conception early Christians 
(and alas, even some of the twentieth century) cherished 
about resurrection and immortality! It is no wonder, therefore, 
that primitive Buddhists raised a serious question about the 
personality of Buddha which culminated in the conception 
of the Sambhogakaya, Body of Bliss, by Mahayanists 

256 CHAPTER X. 

such sutras as the Avatamsaka, the Pundanka^ etc., 
is no more nor less than an expression of the eternal 
spirit. Thus came the doctrine of Dharmakaya to be 
formulated by the Mahay anists, and from this the 
transition to that of Trikaya was but a natural sequence. 
Because one without the other could not give an 
adequate solution of the problems above cited. 

The Trikaya as Explained in the Suvarna Prabha. 

What then is the Trikaya or triple body of the 
Tathagata? It is (i) Nirmana Kaya, the Body of 
Transformation ; (2) Sambhoga Kaya, the Body of 
Bliss ; and (3) Dharma Kaya, the Body of Dharma. If 
we draw a parallelism between the Buddhist and the 
Christian trinity, the Body of Transformation may be 
considered to correspond to Christ in the flesh, the 
Body of Bliss either to Christ in glory or to Holy 
Ghost, and Dharmakaya to Godhead. 

Let us again quote from the Suvarna Prabha, in 
which (I-tsing's translation, chap. III.) we find the 
following statements concerning the doctrine of 
Trikaya. 

"The Tathagata, when he was yet at the stage of 
discipline, practised divers deeds of morality for the 
sake of sentient beings. The practise finally attained 
perfection, reached maturity, and by virtue of its 
merits he acquired a wonderful spiritual power. The 
power enabled him to respond to the thoughts, deeds, 
and livings of sentient beings. He thoroughly under- 
stood them and never missed the right opportunity 

CHAPTER X. 257 

[to respond to their needs]. He revealed himself in 
the right place and in the right moment; he acted 
rightly, assuming various bodily forms [in response 
to the needs of mortal souls]. These bodily forms 
are called the Nirmanakaya of the Tathagata. 

"But when the Tathagatas, in order to make the 
Bodhisattvas thoroughly conversant with the Dharma, 
to instruct them in the highest reality, to let them 
understand that birth-and-death (samsdra) and Nirvana 
are of one taste, to destroy the thoughts of the ego, 
individuality, and the fear [of transmigration], and to 
promote happiness, to lay foundation for innumerable 
Buddha-dharmas, to be truly in accord with Suchness, 
the knowledge of Suchness, and the Spontaneous Will, 
manifest themselves to the Bodhisattvas in a form 
which is perfect with the thirty-two major and eighty 
minor features of excellence and shining with the halo 
around the head and the back, the Tathagatas are 
said to have assumed the Body of Bliss or Sam- 
bhogakaya. l 

"When all possible obstacles arising from sins 
[material, intellectual, and emotional] are perfectly 
removed, and when all possible good dharmas are 
preserved, there would remain nothing but Suchness and 
the knowledge of Suchness, — this is the Dharmakaya. 

"The first two forms of the Tathagata are provisional 
[and temporal] existences ; but the last one is a 
reality, wherein the former two find the reason of 

1 Compare this to the transfigured Christ. 

17 

258 CHAPTER X. 

their existence. Why? Because when deprived ot 
the Dharma of Suchness and of knowledge of non- 
particularity, no Buddha-dharma can ever exist ; because 
it is Suchness and Knowledge of Suchness that absorbs 
within itself all possible forms of Buddha-wisdom and 
renders possible a complete extinction of all passions 
and sins [arising from particularity]." 

According to the above, the Dharmakaya which is 
tantamount to Suchness or Knowledge of Suchness 
is absolute ; but like the moon whose image is reflected 
in a drop of water as well as in the boundless expanse 
of the waves, the Dharmakaya assumes on itself all 
possible aspects from the grossest material form to 
the subtlest spiritual existence. When it responds to 
the needs of the Bodhisattvas whose spiritual life 
is on a much higher plane than that of ordinary 
mortals, it takes on itself the Body of Bliss or 
Sambhogakaya. This Body is a supernatural existence, 
and almost all the Buddhas in the Mahayana scriptures 
belong to this class of being. Acvaghosa (p. ioi)says: 
"The Body has infinite forms. The form has infinite 
attributes. The attribute has infinite excellences. And 
the accompanying fruition, that is, the region where 
they are destined to be born [by their previous 
karma], also has infinite merits and ornamentations. 
Manifesting itself everywhere, the Body of Bliss 
is infinite, boundless, limitless, unintermittent [in 
its activity] which comes directly from the Mind 
[Dharmakaya]." 

But the Buddhas revealed to the eyes of common 

CHAPTER X. 259 

mortals are not of this kind They are common mortals 
themselves, and the earthly (Jakyamuni who came out of 
the womb of Mayadevi and passed away under the sala 
trees at the age of eighty years was one of them. He 
was essentially a manifestation of the Dharmakaya, and 
as such we ordinary people also partake something 
of him. But the masses, unless favored by good karma 
accumulated in the past, are generally under the spell 
of ignorance. They do not see the glory of Dharmakaya 
in its perfect purity shining in the lilies of the field 
and sung by the fowls of the air. They are blindly 
groping in the dark wilderness, they are vainly seeking, 
they are wildly knocking. To the needs of these people 
the Dharmakaya responds by assuming an earthly form 
as a human Buddha. 

Revelation in All Stages of Culture. 

En passant, let us remark that it is in this sense 
that Christ is conceived by Buddhists also as a mani- 
festation of the Dharmakaya in a human form. He is 
a Buddha and as such not essentially different from 
£akyamuni The Dharmakaya revealed itself as Qakya- 
muni to the Indian mind, because that was in harmony 
with its needs. The Dharmakaya appeared in the person 
of Christ on the Semitic stage, because it suited their 
taste best in this way. The doctrine of Trikaya, however, 
goes even further and declares that demons, animal 
gods, ancestor- worship, nature-worship, and what not, 
are all due to the activity and revelation of the Dhar- 
makaya responding to the spiritual needs of barbarous 

26O CHAPTER X. 

and half-cultured people. The Buddhists think that the 
Dharmakaya never does things that are against the 
spiritual welfare of its creatures, and that whatever 
is done by it is for their best interests at that moment 
of revelation, no matter how they comprehend the 
nature of the Dharmakaya. The Great Lord of Dharma 
never throws a pearl before the swine, for he knows 
the animal's needs are for things more substantial. 
He does not reveal himself in an exalted spiritual 
form to the people whose hearts are not yet capable 
of grasping anything beyond the grossly material. As 
they understand animal gods better than a metaphysical 
or highly abstracted being, let them have them and 
derive all possible blessings and benefits through their 
worshiping. But as soon as they become dissatisfied 
with the animal or human-fashioned gods, there must 
not be a moment's hesitation to let them have exactly 
what their enlightened understanding can comprehend. d 

1 Cf. I Cor. xm, ii. "When I was a child, I spake as a 
child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when 
I became a man, I put away childish things." This point of 
our ever-ascending spiritual progress is well illustrated in the 
Saddharma-pundarlka Siitra. See Chapters II, III, IV, V, and XI. 
The following passage quoted from chap. II, p. 49 (Kern's 
translation) will give a tolerably adequate view concerning 
diversity of means and unity of purpose as here expounded: 
"Those highest of men have, all of them, revealed most holy 
laws by means of illustrations, reasons and arguments, with 
many hundred proofs of skillfulness (updyakaufalya). And all 
of them have manifested but one vehicle and introduced but 
one on earth; by one vehicle have they led to full ripeness 
inconceivably many thousands of kotis of beings." As was 

CHAPTER X. 26l 

They are thus all the while being led, though uncon- 
sciously on their part, to the higher and higher region 
of mystery, till they come fully to grasp the true 
and real meaning of the Dharmakaya in its absolute 
purity, or, to use Christian terminology, till "we all, 
with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of 
the Lord, are changed into the same image from 
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." (2 Cor HI. 18.) 
The Mahayanists now argue that the reason why 
(Jakyamuni entered into Parinirvana when his worldly 
career was thought by him to be over is that by 
this his resignation to the law of birth and death, 
he wished to exemplify in him the impermanency of 
worldly life and the folly of clinging to it as final 
reality. As for his Dharmakaya, it has an eternal life, 
it was never born, and it would never perish; and 
when called by the spiritual needs of the Bodhisattvas, 
it will cast off the garb of absoluteness and preach 
in the form of a Sambhogakaya "never-ceasing ser- 
mons which run like a stream for ever and aye." It 
will be evident from this that Buddhists are ready 
to consider all religious or moral leaders of mankind, 
whatever their nationality, as the Body of Transfor- 
mation of the Dharmakaya. Translated into Christian 
thoughts, God reveals himself in every being that is 
worthy of him. He reveals himself not only at a certain 

elsewhere noted, this doctrine is sometimes known as the theory 
of Upaya. Upaya is very difficult term to translate into English ; 
it literally means "way," "method," or "strategy." For fuller 
interpretation see p. 298, footnote. 

262 CHAPTER X. 

period in history, but everywhere and all the time. 
His glory is perceived throughout all the stages of 
human culture. This manifestation, from the very 
nature of God, cannot be intermittent and sporadic 
as is imagined by some "orthodox Christians." The 
following from St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians 
(Chap. ^i)7Hvhen read in this connection, sounds 
almost like a Buddhist philosopher's utterance : "Now 
there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 
And there are diversities of administrations, but the 
same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but 
it is the same God which worketh all in all. But the 
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to 
profit withal For to one is given by the Spirit the 
word of wisdom ; to another the word of knowledge 
by the same Spirit ; to another faith by the same 
Spirit ; to another the gifts of healing by the same 
Spirit ; to another the working of miracles ; to another 
prophecy ; to another divers kinds of tongues ; to an- 
other the interpretation of tongues; but all these 
worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing 
to every man severally as he will. For as the body 
is one and hath many members, and all the members 
of that one body, being many, are one body : so 
also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptised 
into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether 
we be bond or free ; and have been all made to 
drink into one Spirit." 

CHAPTER X. 263 

The Sambhogakaya. 

One peculiar point in the doctrine of Trikaya, 
which modern minds find rather difficult to compre- 
hend, is the conception of the Sambhogakaya, or the 
Body of Bliss. We can understand the relation between 
the Dharmakaya and Nirmanakaya, the latter being 
similar to the notion of God incarnate or to that of 
Avatara* Inasmuch as the Dharmakaya does not exist 
outside the triple world but in it as the raison d'etre 
of its existence, all beings must be considered a 
partial manifestation of it ; and in this sense Buddhists 
sometimes call themselves Bodhisattvas, that is, beings 
of intelligence, because intelligence (Bodhi) is the 
psychological aspect of the Dharmakaya as realised 
in sentient beings. But the conception of Sambhogakaya 
is altogether too mysterious to be fathomed by a 
limited consciousness. The fact becomes more apparent 
when we are told that the Sambhogakaya, Body of 
Bliss, is a corporeal existence and at the same time 
filling the universe and that there are two forms of 
the Body of Bliss, one for self-enjoyment and the 
other as a sort of religious object for the Bodhisattvas. 

That the Body of Bliss is corporeal and yet infinite 
has already been shown by the quotations from the 
Suvarna Prabha and Acvaghosa on the preceding 
pages. For further confirmation of this point no less 
authority than Asanga and Vasubandhu will be here 
refered to. 

In A Comprehensive Treatise on the Mahay ana and 

264 CHAPTER X. 

in its commentary, the author Asanga and the com- 
mentator Vastibandhu endeavor to prove why the 
Body of Bliss cannot be the raison d'etre of the 
Dharmakaya, instead of vice versa; and in this connection 
they argue that (i) the Body of Bliss consists of the 
five Skandhas, that is, of material form (rupa), sen- 
sation (vedand), ideas (samjnd), deeds (sanskdra), and 
consciousness (vijndna}\ (2) it is subject to particu- 
larisation; (3) it reveals different virtues and characters 
according to the desires of Bodhisattvas ; (4) even 
to the same individual it appears differently at different 
times; (5) when it manifests itself simultaneously 
before an assemblage of Bodhisattvas of divers characters 
and qualifications, it at once assumes divers forms, 
in order to satisfy their infinitely diversified inclinations ; 
(6) it is a creation of the Alayavijnana, All-conserving 
Mind. 

These six peculiarities of the Body of Bliss as 
enumerated by Asanga and Vasubandhu make it 
indeed entirely dependent on the Dharmakaya, but 
they do not place us in any better position to penetrate 
into the deep mystery of its nature. Its supernatural 
incomprehensibility remains the same forever. In a 
certain sense, however, the Body of Bliss may be 
considered lo be corresponding to the Christian idea 
of an angel. Supernaturalness and luminosity are the 
two characters possessed by both, but angels are 
merely messengers of God communicating the latter's 
will to human beings. When they reveal themselves 
to a specially favored person, it is not of their own 

CHAPTER X. 265 

account. When they speak to him at all, it is by the 
name of the being who sent them. They do not 
represent him, they do not act his own will by them- 
selves. On the contrary, the Body of Bliss is the 
master of its own. It is an expression of the Dhar- 
makaya. It instructs and benefits all the creatures 
who come to it. It acts according to its own will 
and judgment. In these respects the Body of Bliss 
is altogether different from the Christian conception 
of angels. But will it be more appropriately compared 
to Christ in glory? 

Let us make another quotation from later authorities 
than Asanga and his brother Vasubandhu, and let 
us see more convincingly what complicated notions 
are involved in the idea of the Body of Bliss. According 
to the commentators on Vasubandhu's Vijndnamdtra 
fdstra (a treatise on the Yoga philosophy), * the 
Body of Bliss has two distinct aspects: (i) The body 
obtained by the Tathagata for his self-enjoyment, 
by dint of his religious discipline through eons ; (2) 
The body which the Tathagata manifests to the 

1 This is one of the most important philosophical works 
of the Yogacara school. Vasubandhu wrote the text (Nanjo, 
No. 1215) which consists only of thirty verses, but there 
appeared many commentators after the death of the author, 
who naturally entertained widely different views among them- 
selves on the subject-matter, as it is too tersely treated in 
the text. Hsuen Tsang made selections out of the ten noted 
Hindu exegetists in A. D. 659 and translated them into the 
Chinese language. The compilation consists of ten fascicles 
and is known as Discourse on the Ideality of the Universe (a free 
rendering of the Chinese title Chang wei shilun, Nanjo, No. 1197). 

266 CHAPTER X. 

Bodhisattvas in Pure Land (sukhavati}. This last body 
is in possession of wonderful spiritual powers, reveals 
the Wheel of Dharma, resolves all the religious doubts 
raised by the Bodhisattvas, and lets them enjoy the 
bliss of the Mahayana Dharma. 

A Mere Subjective Existence. 

Judging from all these characterisations, the most 
plausible conclusion that suggests itself to modern 
sceptical minds is that the Sambhogakaya must be a 
mere creation of an intelligent, finite mind, which is 
intently bent on reaching the highest reality, but, not 
being able, on account of its limitations, to grasp the 
object in its absoluteness, the finite mind fabricates 
all its ideals after its own fashion into a spiritual- 
material being, which is logically a contradiction, but 
religiously an object deserving veneration and worship. 
And this being is no more than the Body of Bliss. 4 
It lies half way between the pure being of Dharmakaya 
and the earthly form of Nirmanakaya, the Body of 
Transformation. It does not belong to either, but 
partakes something of both. It is in a sense spiritual 

. * May I venture to say that the conception of God as enter- 
tained by most Christians is a Body of Bliss rather than 
the Dharmakaya itself? In some respects their God is quite 
spiritual, but in others he is thought of as a concrete material 
being like ourselves. It seems to me that the human soul is 
ever struggling to free itself from this paradox, though without 
any apparent success, while the masses are not so intellectual 
and reflective enough as to become aware of this eternal 
contradiction which is too deeply buried in their minds. 

CHAPTER X. 267 

like the Dharmakaya, and yet it cannot go beyond 
material limitations, for it has a form, definite and 
determinate. When the human soul is thirsty after a 
pure being or an absolute which cannot be compre- 
hended in a palpable form, it creates a hybrid, an 
imitation, or a reflection, and tries to be satisfied 
with it, just as a little girl has her innate and not 
yet fully developed maternity satisfied by tenderly 
embracing and nursing the doll, an inanimate imitation 
of a real living baby. And the Mahayanists seem to 
have made most of this childish humanness. They 
produced as many sutras as their spiritual yearnings 
demanded, quite regardless of historical facts, and 
made the Body of Bliss of the Tathagata the author 
of all these works. For if the Dharmakaya of the 
Tathagata never entered into Parinirvana, why then 
could he not deliver sermons and cite gathas as often 
as beings of intelligence (Bodhisattvas) felt their needs ? 
The Suvarna Prabhd (fas. 2, chap. 3) again echoes 
this sentiment as follows: 

4<To illustrate by analogy, the sun or the moon 
does not make any conscious discrimination, nor 
does the water-mirror, nor the light [conceived separate 
from the body from which it emanates]. But when 
all these three are brought together, there is produced 
an image [of the sun or the moon in the water]. So 
it is with Suchness and Knowledge of Suchness. It 
is not possessed of any particular consciousness, but 
by virtue of the Spontaneous Will [inherent in the 
nature of Suchness, or what is the same thing, in the 

268 CHAPTER X. 

Dharmakaya], the Body of Transformation or of Bliss 
[as a shadow of the Dharmakaya] reveals itself in 
response to the spiritual needs of sentient beings. 

"And, again, as the water-mirror boundlessly 
expanding reflects in all different ways the images 
of akasa (void space) through the medium of light, 
while space itself is void of all particular marks, so 
the Dharmakaya reflects its images severally in the 
receiving minds of believers, and this by virtue of 
Spontaneous Will. The Will creates the Body of 
Transformation as well as the Body of Bliss in all 
their possible aspects, while the original, the Dharma- 
kaya, does not suffer one whit a change on this 
account." 

According to this, it is evident that whenever our 
spiritual needs become sufficiently intense there is a 
response from the Dharmakaya, and that this response 
is not always uniform as the recipient minds show 
different degrees of development, intellectually and 
spiritually. If we call this communion between sentient 
souls and the Dharmakaya an inspiration, all the 
phenomena that flow out of fulness of heart and 
reflect purity of soul should be called "works of 
inspiration" ; and in this sense the Mahayanists consider 
their scriptures as emanating directly from the foun- 
tainhead of the Dharmakaya. 

Attitude of Modern Mahayanists. 

Modern Mahayanists in full accordance with this 
interpretation ^of the Doctrine of Trik^ya do not place 

CHAPTER X. 269 

much importance on the objective aspects of the 
Body of Bliss (Sambhogakdya]. They consider them 
at best the fictitious products of an imaginative mind ; 
they never tarry a moment to think that all these 
mysterious Tathagatas or Bodhisattvas who are 
sometimes too extravagantly and generally too tediously 
described in the Mahayana texts are objective realities, 
that the Sukhavatis or Pure Lands ! are decorated 
with such worldly stuff as gold, silver, emerald, cat's 
eye, pearl, and other precious stones, that pious 
Buddhists would be transfered after their death to 
these ostentatiously ornamented heavens, be seated 
on the pedestals of lotus-flowers, surrounded by 
innumerable Bodhisattvas and Buddhas, and would 
enjoy all the spiritual enjoyments that human mind 
can conceive. On the contrary, modern Buddhists 
look with disdain on these egotistic materialistic 
conceptions of religious life. For, to a fully en- 
lightened soul, of what use could those worldly trea- 

1 The reader must not think that there is but one Pure 
Land which is elaborately described in the Sukhavati Vyuha 
Sutra as the abode of the Tathagata Amitabha, situated 
innumerable leagues away in the West. On the contrary, the 
Mahayana texts admit the existence of as innumerable pure 
lands as there are Tathagatas arid Bodhisattvas, and every 
single one of these holy regions has no boundary and is co- 
existent with the universe, and, therefore, their spheres 
necessarily intercrossing and overlapping one another. It would 
look to every intelligent mind that those innumerable Buddha- 
countries existing in such a mysterious and incomprehen- 
sible manner cannot be anything else than our own subjective 
creation. 

2/O CHAPTER X. 

sures be ? What happiness, earthly or heavenly, does 
such a soul dream of, outside the bliss of embracing 
the will of the Dharmakaya as his own? 

Recapitulation. 

To sum up, the Buddha in the Pali scriptures was 
a human being, though occasionally he is credited to 
have achieved things supernatural and superhuman. 
His historical career began with the abandonment of 
a royal life, then the wandering in the wilderness, and 
a long earnest meditation on the great problems of 
birth-and-death, and his final enlightenment under 
the Bodhi tree, then his fifty years' religious pere- 
grination along the valleys of the Ganges, and the 
establishment of a religious system known as Buddhism, 
and finally his eternal entrance into the "Parinirvana 
that leaves nothing behind" (anupadhigesanirvana). 
And as far as plain historical facts are concerned, 
these seem to exhaust the life of ^akyamuni on 
earth. But the deep reverence which was felt by his 
disciples could not be satisfied with this prosaic 
humanness of their master and made him something 
more than a mortal soul. So even the Pali tradition 
gives him a supramundane life besides the earthly 
one. He is supposed to have been a Bodhisattva in 
the Tusita heaven before his entrance into the womb 
of Mayadevi. The honor of Bodhisattvahood was 
acceded to him on account of his deeds of 
self-sacrifice which were praised throughout his 
innumerable past incarnations. While he was walk- 

CHAPTER X. 271 

ing among us in the flesh, he was glorified with 
the thirty- two major and eighty minor excellent charac- 
teristics of a great man. 1 But he was not the first 
Buddha that walked on earth to teach the Dharma, 
for there were already seven Buddhas before him, nor 
was he the last one that would appear among us, for 

1 For a description of these marks see the Dhqrmasangraha, 
pp. 53 ff. A process of mystifying or deifying the person of 
Buddha seems to have been going on immediately after the 
death of the Master; and the Mahayanistic conception of 
Nirmanakaya and Sambhogakaya is merely the consummation 
of this process. Southern Buddhists who are sometimes supposed 
to represent a more "primitive" form of Buddhism describe 
just as much as Mahayanism the thirty-two major and eighty 
minor exellent physical marks of a great man as having been 
possessed by Qakyamuni, (for instance, see the Milindapanha, 
S.B.E. Vol. XXXV. p. 116). But any person with common 
sense will at once see the absurdity of representing any 
human being with those physical peculiarities. And this 
seems to have inspired more rational Mahayanists to abandon 
the traditional way of portraying the human Buddha with 
those mysterious signs. They transfered them through the 
doctrine of Trikaya to the characterisation of the Sambho- 
gakaya Buddha, that is, to the Buddha enjoying in a celestial 
abode the fruit of his virtuous earthly life. The Buddha who 
walked in the flesh as the son of King Suddhodana was, 
however, no more than an ordinary human being like ourselves, 
because he appeared to us in a form of Nirmanakaya, i. e. 
as a Body of Transformation, devoid of any such physical 
peculiarities known as thirty-two or eighty laksanas. 
Southern Buddhists, so called, seem, however, to have overlook- 
ed the, ridiculousness of attributing these fantastic signs to the 
human Buddha; and this fact explains that as soon as the 
memory of the personal disciples of Buddha about his person 
vanished among the later followers, intense speculation and 
resourceful imagination were constantly exercised until the 
divers schools settled the question each in its own way. 

272 CHAPTER X. 

a Bodhisattva by the name of Maitreya is now in 
heaven and making preparations for the attainment 
of Buddhahood in time to come. But here stopped 
the Pali writers, they did not venture to make any 
further speculation on the nature of Buddhahood. 
Their religious yearnings did not spur them to a 
higher flight of the imagination. They recited simple 
sutras or gathas, observed the cilas (moral precepts) 
as strictly and literally as they could, and thought 
the spirit of their Master still alive in these instruc- 
tions ; — let alone the personality of the Tathagata. 
But there was at the same time another group of 
the disciples of the Buddha, whose religious and intel- 
lectual inclinations were not of the same type as their 
fellow-believers ; and on that account a simple faith in 
the Buddha as present in his teachings did not quite 
satisfy them. They perhaps reasoned in this fashion : 
"If there were seven Buddhas before the advent of 
the Great Muni of £akya and there would be one 
more who is to come, where, let us ask, did they 
derive their authority and knowledge to preach ? How 
is it that there cannot be any more Buddhas, that 
they do not come to us much oftener? If they were 
human beings like ourselves, why not we ourselves 
be Buddhas?" These questions, when logically carried 
out, naturally led them to the theory of Dharmakaya, 
that all the past Buddhas, and those to come, and 
even we ordinary mortals made of clay and doomed 
to die soon, owe the raison d'etre of their existence 
to the Dharmakaya, which alone is immortal in us 

CHAPTER X. 273 

as well as in Buddhas The first religious effort we 
have to make is, therefore, to recognise this archetype 
of all Buddhas and all beings. But the Dharmakaya 
as such is too abstract for the average mind to become 
the object of its religious consciousness ; so they 
personified or rather materialised it. In other words, 
they idealised Qakyamuni, endowed him not only with 
the physical signs (laksas) of greatness as in the 
Pali scriptures, but with those of celestial transfiguration, 
and called him a Body of Bliss of the Tathagata ; while 
the historical human Buddha was called a Body of 
Transformation and all sentient beings Bodhisattvas, 
that is, beings of intelligence destined to become 
Buddhas. 

This idealised Buddha, or, what is the same thing, 
a personified Dharmakaya, according to the Mahayana 
Buddhists, not only revealed himself in the particular 
person of Siddhartha Gautama in Central Asia a few 
thousand years ago, but is revealing himself in all 
times and all places. There is no specially favored 
spot on the earth where only the Buddha makes his 
appearance ; from the zenith of Akanista heaven down 
to the bottom of Naraka, he is manifesting uninterrupt- 
edly and unintermittently and is working out his ideas, 
of which, however, our limited understanding is unable 
to have an adequate knowledge. The Avatamsaka 
Sutra (Buddhabhadra's translation, fas. 45, chap. 34) 
describes how the Buddha works out his scheme of 
salvation in all possible ways. (See also the Saddharma 

18 

274 CHAPTER X. 

pundarika, Kern's translation, chap. 2, p. 30 et seq., 
and also pp. 413-411.) 

"In this wise the Buddha teaches and delivers all 
sentient beings through his religious teachings whose 
number is innumerable as atoms. He may reveal some- 
times in the world of devas, sometimes in that of 
Nagas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras, 
Mahoragas, etc., sometimes in the world of Brahmans, 
sometimes in the world of human beings, sometimes 
in the palace of Yamaraja (king of death), sometimes 
in the underworld of damned spirits, ghosts, and beasts. 
His all-swaying compassion, intelligence, and will would 
not rest until all beings had been brought under his 
shelter through all possible means of salvation. He may 
achieve his work of redemption sometimes by means 
of his name, sometimes by means of memory, sometimes 
of voice, sometimes of perfect illumination, sometimes 
of the net of illumination. Whenever and wherever 
conditions are ripe for his appearance, he would never 
fail to present himself before sentient beings and also 
to manifest views of grandeur and splendor. 

4 'The Buddha does not depart from his own region, 
he does not depart from his seat in the tower; yet 
he reveals himself in all the ten quarters of the globe. 
He would sometimes emanate from his own body the 
clouds of Nirmanakayas, or sometimes reveal himself 
in an undivided personality, and itinerating in all 
quarters would teach and deliver all sentient beings. 
He may assume sometimes the form of a (Jravaka, 
sometimes that of a Brahmadeva, sometimes that of 

CHAPTER X. 275 

an ascetic, sometimes that of a good physician, some- 
times that of a tradesman, sometimes that of a Bhiksu 
[or honest worker], sometimes that of an artist, some- 
times that of a deva. Again, he may reveal himself 
sometimes in all the forms of art and industry, sometimes 
in all the places of congregation, such as towns, cities, 
villages, etc. And whatever his subjects for salvation 
may be, and whatever his surroundings , he will accom- 
modate himself to all possible conditions and achieve 
his work of enlightenment and salvation" * .... 

The practical sequence of this doctrine of Trikaya 
is apparent; it has ever more broadened the spirit 
of tolerance in Buddhists. As the Dharmakaya uni- 
versally responds to the spiritual needs of all sentient 
beings in all times and in all places and at any stage 
of their spiritual development, Buddhists consider all 
spiritual leaders, whatever their nationality and perso- 
nality, as the expressions of the one omnipotent 
Dharmakaya. And as the Dharmakaya always manifests 
itself for the best intere<5ts of sentient creatures, even 
those doctrines and their authors that are apparently 
against the teachings of Buddhism are tolerated through 
the conviction that they are all moving according to the 
Spontaneous Will that pervades everywhere and works 
all the time. Though, superficially, they may appear 
as evils, their central and final aim is goodness and 
harmony which are destined by the Will of the Dhar- 
makaya to overcome this world of tribulations and 

1 Cf. I Cor. xi. 19 et seq. 

276 CHAPTER X. 

contradictions. The general intellectual tendency of 
Buddhism has done a great deal towards cultivating 
a tolerant spirit in its believers, and we must say that 
the doctrine of Trinity which appears sometimes too 
radical in its pantheistic spirit has contributed much 
to this cause. 

CHAPTER XL 

THE BODHISATTVA. 

EXT to the conception of Buddha, what is impor- 
tant in Mahayana Buddhism is that of Bodhisattva 
(intelligence-being) and of that which constitutes its 
essence, Bodhicitta, intelligence- heart. As stated above, 
the followers of Mahayanism do not call themselves 
£ravakas or Pratyekabuddhas or Arhats as do those of 
Hmayanism; but they distinguish themselves by the 
title of Bodhisattva. What this means will be the 
subject-matter of this chapter. 

Let us begin with a quotation from the Saddharma- 
pundarika Sutra, in which a well-defined distinction 
between the Qr^vakas and the Pratyekabuddhas and 
the Bodhisattvas is given. ! 

The Three Ydnas. 

"Now, Qariputra, the beings who have become wise, 
have faith in the Tathagata, the father of the world, and 
consequently apply themselves to his commandments. 

"Amongst them there are some who, wishing to 
follow the dictate of an authoritative voice, apply 
themselves to the commandment of the Tathagata to 

1 Kern's English translation (S.B.E. Vol. XXI), Chap. Ill, p. 80. 

278 CHAPTER XI. 

acquire the knowledge of the Four Great Truths, 
for the sake of their own complete Nirvana. These, 
one may say, to be those who, seeking the vehicle 
of the (Jravaka, fly from the triple world 

"Other beings desirous of the unconditioned know- 
ledge, of self-restraint and tranquillity, apply themselves 
to the commandment of the Tathagata to learn to 
understand the Twelve Chains of Dependence, for the 
sake of their own complete Nirvana. These, one may 
say, to be those who, seeking the vehicle of the 
Pratyekabuddha, fly from the triple world 

"Other beings again desirous of omniscience, Buddha- 
knowledge, absolute knowledge, unconditioned know- 
ledge, apply themselves to the commandment of the 
Tathagata and to' learn to understand the knowledge, 
powers, and conviction of the Tathagata, for the sake 
of the common weal and happiness, out of compassion 
to the world, for the benefit, weal and happiness_of 
the world at large, of both gods and men, for the 
sake of the complete Nirvana of all beings. These, 
one may say, to be those who seeking the Great 
Vehicle (Mahay ana) fly from the triple world. Therefore, 
they are called Bodhisattva-mahasattvas." 

This characterisation of the Bodhisattvas as distinct 
from the £ravakas and Pratyekabuddhas constitutes 
one of the most significant features of Mahayana 
Buddhism. Here the Bodhisattva does not exert 
himself in religious discipline for the sake of his 
own weal, but for the sake of the spiritual bene- 
fit of all his fellow-creatures. If he will, he could, 

CHAPTER XI. 279 

like the £ravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, enter into 
eternal Nirvana that never slides back ; he could enjoy 
the celestial bliss of undisturbed tranquillity in which 
all our worldly tribulations are forever buried ; he could 
seclude himself from the hurly-burly of the world, and, 
sitting cross-legged in a lonely cave, quietly contemplate 
on the evanescence of human interests and the frivolity 
of earthly affairs, and then self-contentedly await the 
time of final absorption into the absolute All, as 
streams and rivers finally run into one great ocean 
and become of one taste. Butr in spite of all these 
self-sufficient blessings, the Bodhisattva would not 
seek his own ease, but he would mingle himself in 
the turmoil of worldly life and devote all his energy 
to the salvation of the masses of people, who, on 
account of their ignorance and infatuation, are forever 
transmigrating in the triple world, without making 
any progress towards the final goal of humanity. 

Along this Bodhisattvaic devotion, however, there 
was another current of religious thought and practice 
running among the followers of Buddha. By this I 
mean the attitude of the £ravakas and the Pratyeka- 
buddhas. Both of them sought peace of mind in 
asceticism and cold philosophical speculation. Both of 
them were intently inclined to gain Nirvana which may 
be likened unto an extinguished fire. It was not theirs 
to think of the common weal of all beings, and, 
therefore, when they attained their own redemption 
from earthly sins and passions, their religious disci- 
pline was completed, and no further attempt was 

28O CHAPTER XI. 

made by them to extend the bliss of their personal 
enlightenment to their fellow-creatures. ' They recoiled 
from mingling themselves among vulgar people lest 
their holy life should get contaminated. They did not 
have confidence enough in their own power to help 
the masses to break the iron yoke of ignorance and 
misery. Moreover, everybody was supposed to exert 
himself for his 6wn emancipation, however unbearable 
his pain was for others could not do anything to 
alleviate it. Sympathy was of no avail; because 
the reward of his own karma good or evil could be 
suffered by himself alone, nor could it be avoidable 
even by the doer himself. Things done were done 

1 It should be noted here that the idea of universal salva- 
tion was lacking altogether in the followers of Hinayanism. 
But what distinguished it so markedly from Mahayanism is 
that the former did not extend the idea wide enough, but 
confined it to Buddhahood only. Buddha attained omniscience 
in order that he might deliver the world, but we, ordinary 
mortals, are too ignorant and too helpless to aspire for Bud- 
dhahood; let us be contented with paying homage to Buddha 
and faithfully observing his precepts as laid down by him for our 
spiritual edification. Our knowledge and energy are too limit- 
ed to cope with such a gigantic task as to achieve a univer- 
sal salvation of mankind; let a Buddha or Bodhisattva attempt 
it while we may rest with a profound confidence in him and 
in his work. Thoughts somewhat like these must have been 
going about in the minds of the Hinayanists, when their 
Mahayana brethren were making bold to strive after Buddha- 
hood themselves. The difference between the two schools oi 
Buddhism, when most concisely expressed, is this: While one 
has a most submissive confidence in the Buddha, the other 
endeavors to follow his example by placing himself in his 
position. The following quotation ("the Story of Sumedha," 

CHAPTER XI. 28l 

once for all, and their karma made an indelible mark 
on the pages of his destiny. Even Buddha who was 
supposed to have attained that exalted position by 
practising innumerable pious deeds in all his former 
lives, could not escape the fruit of evil karma which 
was quite unwittingly commited by him. This iron 
arm of karma seizes everybody in person and does 
not allow any substitute whatever. Those who wish 
to give a halt to the working of karma could do so 
only by applying a counter-force to it, and this with 
no other hand than his own. The Mahayanist concep- 
tion of Bodhisattvahood may be considered an effort 
somewhat to mitigate this ruthless mechanical rigidity 
of the law of karma. 

a Jataka tale, from Warren's Buddhism, p. 14) in which Su- 
medha, one of the Buddha's former incarnations, expresses 
his resolve to be a Buddha, may just as well be considered 
as that of a Mahayanist himself, while the Hinayanists would 
not dare to make this wish their own: 

"Or why should I, valorous man, 
The ocean seek to cross alone? 
Omniscience first will I achieve, 
And men and gods convey across. 

"Since now I make this earnest wish, 
In presence of this Best of Men, 
Omniscience sometime I'll achieve, 
And multitude convey across. 

t "I'll rebirth' circling stream arrest, 

Destroy existence's three modes; 
I'll climb the sides of Doctrine's ship, 
And men and gods convey across." 

282 CHAPTER XI. 

Strict Individualism. 

The Buddhism of the (Jravakas and the Pratyeka- 
buddhas is the most unscrupulous application to our 
ethico-religious life of the individualistic theory of 
karma. All things done are done by oneself ; all things 
left undone are left undone by oneself. They would 
say: "Your salvation is exclusively your own business, 
and whatever sympathy I may have is of no avail. 
All that I can do toward helping you is to let you 
see intellectually the way to emancipation. If you do 
not follow it, you have but to suffer the fruition of 
your folly. I am helpless with all my enlightenment, 
even with my Nirvana, to emancipate you from the 
misery of perpetual metempsychosis." But with the 
Buddhism of the Mahayana Bodhisattvas the case is 
"entirely different. It is all-sympathy, it is all-compassion, 
it is all-love. A Bodhisattva would not seclude himself 
into the absolute tranquillity of Nirvana, simply because 
he wishes to emancipate his fellow-creatures also from 
the bondage of .ignorance and infatuation. Whatever 
rewards he may get for his self-enjoyment as the 
karma of his virtuous deeds, he would turn them 
over (parivarta) towards the uplifting of the suffering 
masses. And this self-sacrifice, this unselfish devotion 
to the welfare of his fellow-beings constitutes the 
essence of Bodhisattvahood. The ideal Bodhisattva, 
therefore, is thought to be no more than an incarnation 
of Intelligence and Love, of Prajna and Karuna. 

The irrefragability of karma seems to be satisfactory 

CHAPTER XI. 283 

from the intellectual and individualistic standpoint, for 
the intellect demands a thorough application of logic, 
and individualism does not allow the transfering of 
responsibility from one person to another. From this 
viewpoint, therefore, a rigorous enforcement as demand- 
ed by Hinayanism of the principle of self-emancipation 
does not show any logical fault ; divine grace must 
be suspended as the curse of karma produced by 
ignorance tenaciously clings to our soul. But when 
viewed from the religious side of the question, this 
inflexibility of karma is more than poor mortals qan 
endure. They want something more elastic and pliable 
that yields to the supplication of the feeling. When 
individuals are considered nothing but isolated, discon- 
nected atoms, between which there is no unifying bond 
which is the feeling, they are too weak to resist 
and overcome the ever-threatening force of evil, whose 
reality as long as a world of particulars exists can- 
not be contradicted. This religious necessity felt in 
our inmost consciousness may explain the reason 
why Mahayana Buddhism proposed the doctrine of 
parivarta ' (turning over) founded on the oneness of 
Dharmakaya. 

The Doctrine of Parivarta. 

The doctrine of turning over (parivarta} of one's 
own merits to others is a great departure from that 
which seems to have been the teaching of "primitive 
Buddhism." In fact, it is more than a departure, it 

284 CHAPTER XI. 

is even in opposition to the latter in some measure. 
Because while individualism is a predominant feature in 
the religious practice of the (Jravakas and the Pratye- 
kabuddhas, universalism or supra-individualism, if I am 
allowed to use these terms, is the principle advocated 
by the Bodhisattvas. The latter believe that all beings, 
being a manifestation of the Dharmakaya, are in their 
essence of one nature ; that individual existences are 
real so far as subjective ignorance is concerned ; and 
that virtues and merits issuing directly from the Dhar- 
makaya which is intelligence and love, cannot fail to 
produce universal benefit and to effect final emanci- 
pation of all beings. Thus, the religion of the Bodhi- 
sattvas proposes to achieve what was thought impos- 
sible by the £ravakas and the Pratyekabuddhas, that 
is, the turning over of one's own merits to the service 
of others 

It is in this spirit that the Bodhisattvas conceive 
the seriousness of the significance of life ; it is in this 
spirit that, pondering over the reason of their ex- 
istence on earth, they come to the following view 
of life : 

"All ignorant beings are daily and nightly perform- 
ing evil deeds in innumerable ways; and, on this 
account, their suffering beggars description. They do 
not recognise the Tathagata, do not listen to his 
teachings, do not pay homage to the congregation of 
holy men. And this evil karma will surely bring them 
a heavy crop of misery. This reflection fills the heart 
of a Bodhisattva with gloomy feelings, which in turn 

CHAPTER XI. 285 

gives rise to the immovable resolution, that he himself 
will carry all the burdens for ignorant beings and 
help them to reach the final goal of Nirvana. Inesti- 
mably heavy as these burdens are, he will not swerve 
nor yield under their weight. He will not rest until 
all ignorant beings are freed from the entangling mesh- 
es of desire and sin, until they are uplifted above 
the darkening veil of ignorance and infatuation ; and 
this his marvelous spiritual energy defies the narrow 
limitations of time and space, and will extend even 
to eternity when the whole system of worlds comes 
to a conclusion. Therefore, all the innumerable meri- 
torious deeds practised by the Bodhisattvas are dedi- 
cated to the emancipation of ignorant beings. 

"The Bodhisattvas do not feel, however, that they 
are being compelled by any external force to devote 
their lives to the edification and uplifting of the mass- 
es. They do not recognise any outward authority, 
the violation of which may react upon them in the 
form of a punishment. They have already passed be- 
yond this stage of world-conception which implies a 
dualism ; they are on the contrary moving in a much 
wider and higher sphere of thought. All that is done 
by them springs from their spontaneous will, from the 
free activity of the Bodhicitta, which constitutes their 
reason of existence ; and thus there is nothing compulso- 
ry in their thoughts and movements. [To use Laotzean ter- 
minology, they are practising non-action, wu wei, and 
whatever may appear to the ignorant and unenlightened 
as a strenuous and restless life, is merely a natural 

, 

286 CHAPTER XI. 

P overflow from the inexhaustible fount of energy called 
Bodhicitta, heart of intelligence ]" 1 

Bodhisattva in "Primitive" Buddhism. 

The notion of Bodhisattva was not entirely absent 
in "primitive" Buddhism, only it did not have such a 
wide signification. All Buddhas were Bodhisattvas in 
their former lives. The Jataka stories minutely des- 
cribe what self-sacrificing deeds were done by them 
and how by the karma of these merits they finally 
attained Buddhahood. Qakyamuni was not the only 
Buddha, but there had already been seven or twenty- 
four Buddhas prior to him, and the coming Buddha 
to be known as Maitreya is believed to be disciplining 
himself in the Tusita heaven and going through the stages 
of Bodhisattvahood. The one who is thus destined to 
be the future Buddha must be extraordinarily gifted in 
spiritual energy. He must pass through eons of self-disci- 
pline, must practise deeds of non-atman with unflinching 
courage and fortitude through innumerable existences. 

The following quotation from the Jataka tales will 
be sufficient to see what ponderous and exacting 
conditions were conceived by the so-called Hfnayanists 
to be necessary for a human being to become a 
fully qualified Buddha. 2 

1 This is a very rough summary of the doctrine that is known 
as Parivarta and expounded in the Avatamsaka Sutra, fas. 21-22 
where ten lorms of Parivarta are distinguished and explained 
at length. 

2 Warren's Buddhism in Translations, the "Story of Sumedha," 
pp. 14-15. 

CHAPTER XI. 287 

"Of men it is he, and only he, who is in a fit 
condition by the attainment of saintship in that same 
existence, that can successfully make a wish to be 
a Buddha. Of those in a fit condition it is only he 
who makes the wish in the presence of a living 
Buddha that succeeds in his wish ; after the death of 
a Buddha a wish made at a relic shrine, or at the 
foot of a Bo-tree, will not be successful. Of those 
who make the wish in the presence of a Buddha it 
is he and only he who has retired from the world 
that can successfully make the wish, and not one 
who is a layman. Of those who have retired from 
the world it is only he who is possessed of the Five 
High Powers and is master of the Eight Attainments 
that can successfully make the wish, and no one can 
do so who is lacking in these excellences. Of those, 
even, who possess these excellences, it is he, and 
only he, who has such firm resolve that he is ready 
to sacrifice his life for the Buddhas that can success- 
fully make the wish, but no other. Of those who 
possess this resolve it is he, and only he, who has 
great zeal, determination, strenuousness, and endeavor 
in striving for the qualities that make a Buddha that 
is successful. The following comparisons will show the 
intensity of the zeal. If he is such a one as to think : 
"The man who, it all within the rim of the world 
were to become water, would be ready to swim 
across it with his own arms and get further shore, — 
he is the one to attain the Buddhaship : or, in case 
all within the rim of the world were to become a 

288 CHAPTER XI. 

jungle of bamboo, would be ready to elbow and 
trample his way through it and get to the further 
side, — he is the one to attain the Buddhaship ; or, in 
case all within the rim of the world were to become 
a terra Jirma of thick-set javelins, would be ready 
to tread on them and go afoot to the further side, — 
he is the one to attain the Buddhaship ; or, in case 
all within the rim of the world were to become live 
coals, would be ready to tread on them and so get 
to the further side, — he is the one to attain the 
Buddhaship,' — if he deems not even one of these 
feats too hard for himself but has such great zeal, 
determination, strenuousness, and power of endeavor 
that he would perform these feats in order to attain 
the Buddhaship, then, but not otherwise, will his 
wish succeed." 

From this it is apparent that everybody could not 
become a Buddha in "primitive" Buddhism ; the highest 
aspiration that could be cherished by him was to 
believe in the teachings of Buddha, to follow the 
precepts laid down by him, and to attain at most to 
Arhatship. The idea of Arhatship, however, was 
considered by Mahayanists cold, impassionate, and 
hard-hearted, for the saint calmly reviews the sight 
of the suffering masses; and therefore Arhatship was 
altogether unsatisfactory to be the object for the 
Bodhisattvas of their high religious aspirations. 

The Mahayanists wanted to go even beyond the 
attainment of Arhatship, however exalted its spirituality 
may be. They wanted to make every humble soul 

CHAPTER XI. 289 

a being like £akyamuni, they wanted lavishly to 
distribute the bliss of enlightenment ; they wanted 
to remove all the barriers that were supposed to lie 
between Buddhahood and the common humanity. But 
how could they do this when the iron handsjpf karma 
held tight the fate of each individual! How was it 
possible for him to identify his being with the ideal 
of mankind? Perhaps this serious problem could not 
very well be solved by Buddhists, when their memory 
of the majestic personality of (Jakyamuni was still 
vivid before their mental eyes. It was probably no 
easy task for them to overcome the feeling of awe 
and reverence which was so deeply engraved in their 
hearts, and to raise themselves to such a height as 
reached by their Master, even ideally. This was certainly 
an act of sacrilege. But, as time advances, the personal 
recollection of the Master would naturally wane and 
would not play so much influence as their own religious 
consciousness which is ever fresh and active. Generally 
speaking, all great historical characters that command 
the reverence and awe of posterity do so only when 
their words or acts or both unravel the deepest 
secrets of the human heart. And this feeling of awe 
and reverence and even of worship is not due so 
much to the great characters themselves as to the 
worshiper's own religious consciousness. History passes, 
but the heart persists. An individual called (Jakyamuni 
may be forgotten in the course of time, but the sacred 
chord in the inmost heart struck by him reverberates 
through eternity. So with the Mahayana Buddhists, 

19 

29O CHAPTER XI. 

the religious sentiment at. last asserted itself in spite 
of the personal recollection and reverential feeling for 
the Master. And perhaps in the following way was 
the reasoning then advanced by them relative to the 
great problem of Buddhahood. 

We are all Bodhisatlvas. 

As (Jakyamuni was a Bodhisattva in his former 
lives destined to become a Buddha, so we are all 
Bodhisattvas and even Buddhas in a certain sense, 
when we understand that all sentient beings, the 
Buddha not excepted, are one in the Dharmakaya. 
The Dharmakaya manifests in us as Bodhi which is 
the essence of Buddhas as well as of Bodhisattvas. 
This Bodhi can suffer no change whatever in quantity 
even when the Bodhisattva attains finally to the highest 
human perfection as (Jakyamuni Buddha. In this spirit, 
therefore, the Buddha exclaimed when he obtained 
enlightenment, "It is marvelous indeed that all beings 
animate and inanimate universally partake of the nature 
of Tathagatahood." The only difference between a 
Buddha and the ignorant masses is that the latter 
do not make manifest in them the glory of Bodhi. 

JThey only are not Bodhisattvas who, enveloped in 
the divine rays of light in a celestial abode, philo- 
sophically review the world of tribulations. Even we 
mortals made of dust are Bodhisattvas, incarnates ot 
the Bodhi, capable of being united in the all-embracing 
love of the Dharmakaya and also of obliterating the 

CHAPTER XI. 2Q1 

individual curse of karma in the eternal and absolute 
intelligence of the Dharmakaya. As soon as we come 
to live in this love and intelligence, individual existences 
are no hindrance to the turning over (parivarta) of 
one's spiritual merits (punyd) to the service of others. 
Let us only have an insight into the spirituality of 
our existence and we are all Bodhisattvas and Buddhas. 
Let us abandon the selfish thought of entering into 
Nirvana that is conceived to extinguish the fire of 
heart and leave only the cold ashes of intellect. Let 
us have sympathy for all suffering beings and turn 
over all our merits, however small, to their benefit 
and happiness. For in this way we are all made the 
Bodhisattvas. ! 

The Buddha's Life. 

This spirit of universal love prevails in all Mahayana 
literature, and the Bodhisattvas are everywhere re- 
presented as exercising it with utmost energy. The 
Mahayanists, therefore, could not rest satisfied with 
a. simple, prosaic, and earthly account of Qakyamuni, 

1 It may be interesting to Christian readers to note in this 
connection that modern Buddhists do not reject altogether 
the idea of vicarious atonement, for their religious conviction 
as seen here admits the parivarta of a Bodhisattva's merits 
to the spiritual welfare of his fellow-creatures. But they will 
object to the Christian interpretation that Jesus was sent 
down on earth by his heavenly father for the special mission 
to atone for the original sin through the shedding of his innocent 
blood, for this is altogether too puerile and materialistic 

2Q2 CHAPTER XI. 

they wanted to make it as ideal and poetic as possible, 
"illustrating the gospel of love, as was conceived by 
them, in every phase of the life of the Buddha. 

The Mahayanists first placed the Buddha in the 
Tusita heaven before his birth, (as was done by the 
Hinayanists,) made him feel pity for the distressed 
world below, made him resolve to deliver it from 
"the ocean of misery which throws up sickness as 
its foam, tossing with the waves of old age, and rush- 
ing with the dreadful onflow of death," and after 
his Parinirvana, they made him abide forever on the 
peak of the Mount Vulture delivering the sermon of 
immortality to a great assemblage of spiritual beings. 
In this wise, they explained the significance of the 
appearance of £akyamuni on earth, which was noth- 
ing but a practical demonstration of the "Great Lov- 
ing Heart" (mahdkarundcitta). 

The Bodhisattva and Love. 

Nagarjuna in his work on the Bodhicitta * elucidates 
the Mahayanist notion of Bodhisattvahood as follows : 

"Thus the essential nature of all Bodhisattvas is a 
great loving heart (mahdkarundcitta}, and all sentient 
beings constitute the object of its love. Therefore, 
all the Bodhisattvas do not cling to the blissful taste 

1 The full title of the work is A Treatise on the Transcen- 
dentality of Bodhicitta (Nanjo, No. 1304). It is a little book 
consisting of seven or eight sheets in big Chinese type. It 
was translated into Chinese by Danapala (Shih Hu) during 
the tenth century of the Christian Era. 

CHAPTER XI. 293 

that is produced by the divers modes of mental 
tranquilisation (dkydna), do not covet the fruit of 
their meritorious deeds, which may heighten their own 
happiness. 

"Their spiritual state is higher than that of the 
(Jravakas, for they do not leave all sentient beings 
behind them [as the (Jravakas do]. They practise al- 
truism, they seek the fruit of Buddha-knowledge 
[instead of (Jravaka-knowledge]. 

''With a great loving heart they look upon the 
sufferings of all beings, who are diversely tortured 
in Avici Hell in consequence of their sins — a hell 
whose limits are infinite and where an endless round 
of misery is made possible on account of all sorts of 
karma [committed by sentient creatures] The Bodhi- 
sattvas filled with pity and love desire to suffer 
themselves for the sake of those miserable beings. 

"But they are well acquainted with the truth that 
all those diverse sufferings causing diverse states of 
misery are in one sense apparitional and unreal, while 
in another sense they are not so. They know also 
that those who have an intellectual insight into the , 
emptiness (cunyata) of all existences, thoroughly un- 
derstand why those rewards of karma are brought 
forth in such and such ways [through ignorance and 
infatuation]. 

"Therefore, all Bodhisattvas, in order to emancipate 
sentient beings from misery, are inspired with great 
spiritual energy and mingle themselves in the filth of 
birth and death. Though thus they make themselves 

2Q4 CHAPTER XI. 

subject to the laws of birth and death, their hearts 
are free from sins and attachments. They are like 
unto those immaculate, undefiled lotus-flowers which 
grow out of mire, yet are not contaminated by it. 

"Their great hearts ot sympathy which constitute the 
essence of their being never leave suffering creatures 
behind [in their journey towards enlightenment]. Their 
spiritual insight is in the emptiness (cunyata) of 
things, but [their work of salvation] is never outside 
the world of sins and sufferings " 

The Meaning of Bodhi and Bodhicitta. 

What is the meaning of the word "Bodhisattva" ? 
It is a Sanskrit term consisting of two words, "Bodhi," 
and "sattva." Bodhi which comes from the root 
budh meaning "to wake/' is generally rendered 
"knowledge" or "intelligence." Sattva(sat-tva) literally 
means "state of being" ; thus "existence," "creature," 
or "that which is," being its English equivalent. 
"Bodhisattva" as one word means "a being of intelli- 
gence," or "a being whose essence is intelligence." Why 
the Mahayanists came to adopt this word in contradis- 
tinction to (Jravaka is easily understood, when we see 
what special significance they attached to the conception 
of Bodhi in their philosophy. When Bodhi was used 
by the (Jravakas in the simple sense of knowledge, it 
did not bear any particular import. But as soon as 
it came to express some metaphysical relation to the 
conception of Dharmakaya, it ceased to be used in 
its generally accepted sense. 

CHAPTER XI. 295 

Bodhi, according to the Mahayanists, is an expres- 
sion of the Dharmakaya in the human consciousness. 
Philosophically speaking, Suchness or Bhutatathata is 
an • ontological term, and Dharmakaya or Tathagata 
or Buddha bears a religious significance ; while all 
these three, Bodhi, Bhutatathata, and Dharmakaya, and 
their synonyms are nothing but different aspects of one 
and the same reality refracting through the several 
defective lenses of a finite intellect. 

Bodhi, though essentially an epistemological term, 
assumes a psychological sense when it is used in 
conjunction with citta, i.e. heart or soul. Bodhicitta, 
or Bodhihrdaya which means the same thing, is more 
generally used than Bodhi singly in the Mahayana 
texts, especially when its religious import is empha- 
sised above its intellectual one. (Bodhicitta, viz. intelli- , 

^•fr ^ r....jLMi • ' '" VttttLte 

gence-heart is a reflex in the human heart of its 
religious archetype, the Dharmakaya. 

Bodhicitta when further amplified is called anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhicitta, that is, "intelligence-heart that 
is supreme and most perfect." 

It will be easily understood now that what consti- 
tutes the essence of the Bodhicitta is the very same 
thing that makes up the Dharmakaya. For the former 
is nothing but an expression of the latter, though 
finitely, fragmentarily, imperfectly realised in us. The 
citta is an image and the Dharmakaya the prototype, 
yet one is just as real as the other, only the two must not 
be conceived dualistically. There is a Dharmakaya, 
there is a human heart, and the former reflects itself 

CHAPTER XI. 

in the latter much after the fashion of the lunar 
reflection in the water: — to think in this wise is not 
perfectly correct; because the fundamental teaching 
of Buddhism is to view all these three conceptions, 
the Dharmakaya, human heart, and the reflections of 
the former in the latter, as different forms of one and 
the same activity. 

Love and Karund. 

The Bodhicitta or Intelligence-heart, therefore, like 
the Dharmakaya is essentially love and intelligence, 
or, to use Sanskrit terms, karund and prajnd. Here 
some may object to the use of the term "love" for 
karuna, perhaps on the ground that karuna does not 
exactly correspond to the Christian notion of love, 
as it savors more of the sense of commiseration. But 
if we understand by love a sacrifice of the self for 
the sake of others (and it cannot be more than that), 
then karuna can correctly be rendered love, even in 
the Christian sense. Is not the Bodhisattva willing to 
abandon his own Nirvanic peace for the interests of 
suffering creatures? Is he not willing to dedicate the 
karma of his meritorious deeds performed in his suc- 
cessive existences to the general welfare of his fellow- 
beings ? Is not his one fundamental motive that governs 
all his activities in life directed towards a universal 
emancipation of all sentient beings? Is he not per- 
fectly willing to forsake all the thoughts and passions 
that arise from egoism and to embrace the will of 
the Dharmakaya? If this be the case, then there is 

CHAPTER XI. 297 

no reason why karun& should not be rendered by love. 

Christians say that without love we are become 
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal; and Buddhists 
would declare that without karuna we are like unto 
a dead vine hanging over a frozen boulder, or like 
unto the cold ashes left after a blazing fire. 

Some may say, however, that the Buddhist sym- 
pathy or commiseration somewhat betrays a sense of 
passive contemplation ojf- evils. When Christians say 
that God loves his creatures, the loyje implies activity 
and shows God's willingness to do whatever for the 
actual benefits of his subject -beings. Quite true. Yet 
when the Buddha is stated to have declared that all 
sentient beings in the triple world are his own child- 
ren or that he will not enter into his final Nirvana 
unless all beings in the three thousand great chilio- 
cosms, not a single soul excepted, are emancipated 
from the misery of birth and death, his self-sacrificing 
love must be considered to be all-comprehensive and 
at the same time full of energy and activity. What- 
ever objections there may be, we do not see any 
sufficient reason against speaking of the love-essence 
of the Dharmakaya and the Bodhicitta. 

Ndgdrjuna and Sthiramati on the Bodhicitta. 

Says Nagarjuna in his Discourse on the Transcen- 
dentahty of the Bodhicitta: "The Bodhicitta is free 
from all determinations, that is, it is not included 
in the categories of the five skandhas, the twelve 
ayatanas, and the eighteen dhatus. It is not a particular 

298 CHAPTER XI. 

existence which is palpable. It is non-atmanic, universal. 
It is uncreate and its self-essence is void [funya, 
immaterial, or transcendental]. 

"One who understands the nature of the Bodhicitta 
sees everything with a loving heart,, for love is the 
t essence of the Bodhicitta. 

"The Bodhicitta is the highest essence. 

"Therefore, all Bodhisattvas find their raison d'etre 
of existence in this great loving heart. 

"The Bodhicitta, abiding in the heart of sameness 
(samatd) creates individual means of salvation (upay a). l 

1 Upaya, meaning "expedient," "stratagem," "device," or 
"craft," has a technical sense in Buddhism. It is used in 
contrast to intelligence (prajna) and is synonymous with love 
(karuna). So, Vimalakirti says in the sutra bearing his name 
(chap. 8, verses i— 4): "Prajna is the mother of the Bodhisattva 
and Upaya his father; there is no leader of humanity who is 
not born of them." Intelligence (prajna) is the one, the univer- 
sal, representing the principle of sameness (samatd}. while 
Upaya is the many, being the principle of manifoldness (ndndtva). 
From the standpoint of pure intelligence, the Bodhisattvas 
do not see any particular suffering existences, for there is 
nothing that is not of the Dharmakaya: but when they see 
the universe from the standpoint of their love-essence, they 
recognise everywhere the conditions of misery and sin that 
arise from clinging to the forms of particularity. ^To remove 
these, they devise all possible means that are directed towards 
the attainment of the final aim of existencejJThere is only 
one religion, religion of truth, but there are many ways, many 
means, many upayas, all issuing from the all-embracing love 
ot the Dharmakaya and equally efficient to lead the masses 
to supreme enlightenment and universal good. Therefore, 
ontologically speaking, this universe, the Buddhists would say, 
is nothing but a grand display of Upayas by the Dharmakaya 
that desires thereby to lead all sentient beings to the ultimate 

CHAPTER XI. 299 

One who understands this heart becomes emancipated 
from the dualistic view of birth and death and performs 
such acts as are beneficial both to oneself and to others.'* 
Sthiramati advocates in his Discourse on the Mahay dna- 
Dharmadhdtu * the same view as Nagarjuna's on the 
nature of the Bodhicitta, which I summarise here : 
"Nirvana, Dharmakaya, Tathagata, Tathagata-garbha, 
Paramartha, Buddha, Bodhicitta, or Bhutatathata,— all 
these terms signify merely so many different aspects 
of one and the same reality ; and Bodhicitta is the 
name given to a form of the Dharmakaya or Bhutatathata 
as it manifests itself in the human heart] and its 
perfection, or negatively its liberation from all egoistic 
impurities, constitutes the state of Nirvana." r^ 

Being a reflex of the Dharmakaya, the Bodhicitta 
is practically the same as the original in all its char- 
acteristics; so continues Sthiramati: "It is free from 
compulsive activities ; it has no beginning, it has no 
end ; it cannot be defiled by impurities, it cannot be 
obscured by egoistic individualistic prejudices; it is 
incorporeal, it is the spiritual essence of Buddhas, 

realisation of Buddhahood. In many cases, thus, it is extremely 
difficult to render upaya by any of its English equivalents 
and yet to retain its original technical sense unsuffered. This 
is also the case with many other Buddhist terms, among which 
we may mention Bodhi, Dharmakaya, Prajila, Citta, Parivarta, 
etc. The Chinese translators have fang p'ien for upaya which 
means "means-accommodation." 

1 Its full title is A Discourse on the Non-duality of the Ma- 
hay ana- Dharmadhdtu. It consists of less than a dozen pages 
in ordinary Chinese large print. It was translated by Deva- 
prajna and others in the year 691 A. D. 

3OO CHAPTER XI. 

it is the source of all virtues earthly as well as transcen- 
dental; it is constantly becoming, yet its original 
purity is never lost. 

"It may be likened unto the ever-shining sunlight 
which may temporarily be hidden behind the clouds. 
All the modes of passion and sin arising from egoism 
may sometimes darken the light of the Bodhicitta, 
but the Citta itself forever remains free from these 
external impurities. It may again be likened unto all- 
comprehending space which remains eternally identical, 
whatever happenings and changes may occur in things 
enveloped therein. When the Bodhicitta manifests 
itself in a relative world, it looks as if being subject 
to constant becoming, but in reality it transcends all 
determinations, it is above the reach of birth and 
death (samsdra). 

"So long as it remains buried under innumerable 
sins arising from ignorance and egoism, it is pro- 
ductive of no earthly or heavenly benefit. Like the 
lotus-flower whose petals are yet unfolded, like the 
gold that is deeply entombed under the debris of 
dung and dirt, or like the light of the full moon 
eclipsed by Acura; the Bodhicitta, when blindfolded 
by the clouds of passion, avarice, ignorance, and folly, 
does not reveal its intrinsic spiritual worth. 

"Destroy at once with your might and main all 
those entanglements ; then like the full-bloomed lotus- 
flower, like genuine gold purified from dirt and dust, 
like the moon in a cloudless sky, like the sun in its 
full glory, like mother earth producing all kinds of 

CHAPTER XI. 3OI 

cereals, like the ocean containing innumerable treasures, 
the eternal bliss of the Bodhicitta will be upon all 
sentient beings. All sentient beings are then emanci-, 
pated from the misery of ignorance and folly, their 
hearts are filled with love and sympathy and free 
from the clinging to things worthless. 
^"However defiled and obscured the Bodhicitta may 
find itself in profane hearts, )j£ is essentially the same 
as that in all Buddhas.lTherefore, says the Muni of 
£akya: 'O £ariputra, the world of sentient beings is 
not different from the Dharmakaya ; the Dharmakaya 
is not different from the world of sentient beings. 
What constitutes the Dharmakaya is the world of 
sentient beings; and what constitutes the world of 
sentient beings is the Dharmakaya.' 

"As far as the Dharmakaya or the Bodhicitta is 
concerned, there is no radical distinction to be made 
between profane hearts and the Buddha's heart; yet 
when observed from the human standpoint [that is, 
from the phenomenal side of existence] the following 
general classification can be made: 

"(i) The heart hopelessly distorted by numberless 
egoistic sins and condemned to an eternal transmi- 
gration of birth and death which began in;the timeless 
past, is said to be in the state of profanity. 

"(2) The heart that, loathing the misery of wandering 
in birth and death and taking leave of all sinful 
and depraved conditions, seeks the Bodhi in the ten 
virtues of perfection (pdramita) and 84.000 Buddha- 
dharmas and disciplines itself in all meritorious deeds, 

3O2 CHAPTER XI. 

is said to be the [spiritual] state of a Bodhisattva. 
"(3) The state in which the heart is emancipated 
from the obscuration of all passions, has distanced 
all sufferings, has eternally effaced the stain of all 
sins and corruptions, is pure, purer, and purest, 
abides in the essence of Dharma, has reached the 
height from which the states of all sentient beings are 
surveyed, has attained the consummation of all 
knowledges, has realised the highest type of manhood, 
has gained the power of spiritual spontaneity which 
frees one from attachment and hesitation, — this 
spiritual state is that of the fully, perfectly, enlight- 
ened Tathagata". 

The Awakening of the Bodhicitta. 

The Bodhicitta is present in the hearts of all 
sentient beings. Only in Buddhas it is fully awakened 
and active with its immaculate virility, while in 
ordinary mortals it is dormant and miserably crippled 
by its unenlightened intercourse with the world of 
sensuality. One of the most favorite parables told by 
the Mahayanists to illustrate this point is to compare 
the Bodhicitta to the moonlight in the heavens. When 
the moon shines with her silvery light in the clear, 
cloudless skies, she is reflected in every drop and 
in every mass of water on the earth. The crystal 
dews on the quivering leaves reflect her like so many 
pearls hung on the branches. Every little water-pool; 
probably formed temporarily by heavy showers in 
the daytime, reflects her like so many stars descended 

CHAPTER XI. 3O3 

on earth. Perhaps some of the pools are muddy and 
others even filthy, but the moonlight does not refuse 
to reflect her immaculate image in them. The image 
is just as perfect there as in a clear, undisturbed, 
transparent lake, where cows quench their thirst and 
swans bathe their taintless feathers. Wherever there 
is the least trace of water, there is seen a heavenly 
image of the goddess of night. Even so with the 
Bodhicitta: where there exists a little warmth of the 
heart, there it unfailingly glorifies itself in its best 
as circumstances permit. '„ 

Now, the question is : How should this dormant 
Bodhicitta in our hearts be awakened to its full 
sense? This is answered more or less definitely in 
almost all the Mahayana writings, and we may here 
recite the words of Vasubandhu from his Discourse 
on the Awakening of the Bodhicitta, * for they give 
us a somewhat systematic statement of those con- 
ditions which tend to awaken the Bodhicitta from its 
lethargic inactivity. (Chap. II.) 

The Bodhicitta or Intelligence-heart is awakened in 
us (i) by thinking of the Buddhas, (2) by reflecting 
on the faults of material existence, (3) by observing M 
the deplorable state in which sentient beings are living, 
and finally (4) by aspiring after those virtues which 
are acquired by a Tathagata in the highest enlight- 
enment. 

1 This work was translated by Kumarajiva into Chinese at 
the beginning of the fifth century A. D. It is divided into two 
fascicles, each consisting of about one score of Chinese pages. 

3O4 CHAPTER XI. 

To describe these conditions more definitely : 

(1) By thinking of the Buddhas. "All Buddhas in 
the ten quarters, of the past, of the future, and of 
the present, when first started on their way to enlight- 
enment, were not quite free from passions and sins 
(kle$ a) any more than we are at present ; but they 
finally succeeded in attaining the highest enlightenment 
and became the noblest beings. 

"All the Buddhas, by strength of their inflexible 
spiritual energy, were capable of attaining perfect 
enlightenment. If enlightenment is attainable at all, 
why should we not attain it? 

"All the Buddhas, erecting high the torch of wis- 
dom through the darkness of ignorance and keeping 
awake an excellent heart, submitted themselves to 
penance and mortification, and finally emancipated 
themselves from the bondage of the triple world. Fol- 
lowing their steps, we, too, could emancipate ourselves, 

"All the Buddhas, the noblest type of mankind, 
successfully crossed the great ocean of birth and death 
and of passions and sins ; why, then, we, being crea- 
tures of intelligence, could also cross the sea of trans- 
migration. 

"All the Buddhas manifesting great spiritual power 
sacrificed the possessions, body, and life, for the attain- 
ment of omniscience (sarvajna); and we, too, could 
follow their noble examples." 

(2) The faults of the material existence. "This our 
bodily existence consisting of the five skandhas and 
the four mahats (elements) is a perpetuator of innu- 

CHAPTER XI. 3O5 

merable evil deeds ; and therefore it should be cast 
aside. This our bodily existence constantly secretes 
from its nine orifices filths and impurities which are 
truly loathsome ; and therefore it should be cast aside. 
This our bodily existence, harboring within itself anger, 
avarice, and infatuation, and other innumerable evil 
passions, consumes a good heart ; and therefore it 
should be destroyed. This our bodily existence is like 
a bubble, like a spatter, and is decaying every minute. 
It is an undesirable possession and should be aban- 
doned. This our bodily existence engulfed in ignorance 
is creating evil karma all the time, which throws us 
into the whirlpool of transmigration through the six 
gatis." 

(3) The miserable conditions of sentient beings which 
arouse the sympathy of the Bodhisattvas. "All sentient 
beings are under the bondage of ignorance. Spell-bound 
by folly and infatuation, they are suffering the severest 
pain Not believing in the law of karma, they are 
accumulating evils; going astray from the path of 
righteousness, they are following false doctrines ; sink- 
ing deeper in the whirlpool of passions, they are 
being drowned in the four waters of sin. 

"They are being tortured with all sorts of pain. 
They are needlessly haunted by the fear of birth and 
death and old age, and do not seek the path of 
emancipation. Mortified with grief, anxiety, tribulation, 
they do not refrain from committing further foul deeds. 
Clinging to their beloved ones and being always 
afraid of separation, they do not understand that there 

20 

3O6 CHAPTER XI. 

is no individual reality, that individual existences are 
not worth clinging to. Trying to shun enmity, hatred, 

pain, they cherish more hatred." 

(4) The virtues of the Tathdgata. "All the Tatha- 
gatas, by virtue of their discipline, have acquired a 
noble, dignified mien which aspires every beholder 
with the thought that dispels pain and woe. The Dhar- 
makaya of all the Tathagatas is immortal and pure 
and free from evil attachments. All the Tathagatas 
are possessed of moral discipline, tranquillity, intelli- 
gence, and emancipation. They are not hampered by 

intellectual prejudices and have become the sanctuary 

/ 
of immaculate virtues. They have the ten balas (powers), 

four abhayas (fearlessness), great compassion, and the 
three smrtyupasthanas (contemplations). They are om- 
niscient, and their love for suffering beings knows no 
bounds and brings all creatures back to the path of 
righteousness, who have gone astray on account of 
ignorance." 

* * 
* 

In short, the Intelligence-heart or Bodhicitta is awa- 
kened in us either when love for suffering creatures 
(which is innate in us) is called forth, or when our 
intellect aspires after the highest enlightenment, or 
when these two psychical activities are set astir under 
some favorable circumstances. As the Bodhicitta is a 
manifestation of the Dharmakaya in our limited con- 
scious mind, it constantly longs for a unification with 

CHAPTER XI. 

its archetype, in spite of the curse of ignorance heav- 
ily weighing upon it. When this unification is not ef- 
fected for any reason, the heart (citta) shows its dis- 
satisfaction in some way or other. The dissatisfaction 
may take sometimes a morbid course, and may result 
in pessimism, or misanthropy, or suicide, or asceticism, 
or some other kindred eccentric practices. But if pro- 
perly guided and naturally developed, the more intense 
the dissatisfaction, the more energetic will be the 
spiritual activity of a Bodhisattva. 

The Bodhisattva 's Pranidhdna. 

Having awakened his Bodhicitta from its unconsci- 
ous slumber, a Bodhisattva will now proceed to make 
his vows. 

Let me remark here, however, that "vow" is not 
a very appropriate term to express the meaning of 
the Sanskrit pranidhdna. Pranidhana is a strong wish, 
aspiration, prayer, or an inflexible determination to 
carry out one's will even through an infinite series 
of rebirths. Buddhists have such a supreme belief in 
the power of will or spirit that, whatever material 
limitations, the will is sure to triumph over them and 
gain its final aim. So, every Bodhisattva is considered 
to have his own particular pranidhanas in order to 
perform his share in the work of universal salvation. 
His corporeal shadow may vanish as its karma is ex- 
hausted, but his pranidhana survives and takes on a 
new garment, which procedure being necessary to 

3O8 CHAPTER XI. 

keep it ever effective. All that is needed for a Bo- 
dhisattva to do this is to make himself a perfect in- 
carnation of his own aspirations, putting everything 
external and foreign under their controlling spiritual 
power Buddhists are so thoroughly idealistic and their 
faith in ideas and ideals is so unshakable that they 
firmly believe that whatever they aspire to will come 
out finally as real fact; and, therefore, the more in- 
tense and permanent and born of the inmost needs 
of humanity, the more certain are our yearnings to 
be satisfied. (This belief, by the way, will help to ex- 
plain the popular belief among the Buddhists that 
any strong passion possessed by a man will survive 
him and take a form, animate or inanimate, which 
will best achieve its end.) 

According to Vasubandhu whom we have quoted 
several times, the Bodhisattvas generally are supposed 
to make the following 'ten pranidhanas, which natu- 
rally spring from a great loving heart now awakened 
in them: * 

(1) " Would that all the merits I have accumulated 
in the past as well as in the present be distributed 
among all sentient beings and make them all aspire 
after supreme knowledge, and also that this my pra- 
nidhana be constantly growing in strength and sustain 
me throughout my rebirths. 

(2) "Would that, through the merits of my work, 

1 The above is a liberal rendering of the first part of the 
Chapter III, in Vasubandhu's Bodhicitta. 

CHAPTER XI. 3O9 

I may, wherever I am born, come in the presence of 
all Buddhas and pay them homage. 

(3) "Would that I be allowed all the time to be 
near Buddhas like shadow following object, and never 
to be away from them. 

(4) "Would that all Buddhas instruct me in religious 
truths as best suited to my intelligence and let me 
finally attain the five spiritual powers of the Bodhi- 
sattva. 

(5) "Would that I be thoroughly conversant with 
scientific knowledge as well as the first principle of 
religion and gain an insight into the truth of the Good 
Law. 

(6) "Would that I be able to preach untiringly the 
truth to all beings, and gladden them, and benefit them, 
and make them intelligent. 

(7) "Would that, through the divine power of the 
Buddha, I be allowed to travel all over the ten quar- 
ters of the world, pay respect to all the Buddhas, 
listen to their instructions in the Doctrine, and univer- 
sally benefit all sentient beings. 

(8) "Would that, by causing the wheel of immacu- 
late Dharma to revolve, all sentient beings in the ten 
quarters of the universe who may listen to my teach- 
ings or hear my name, be freed from all passions and 
awaken in them the Bodhicitta. 

(9) "Would that I all the time accompany and pro- 
tect all sentient beings and remove for them things 
which are not beneficial to them and give them innu- 
merable blessings, and also that through the sacrifice 

3IO CHAPTER XI. 

of my body, life, and possessions I embrace all crea- 
tures and thereby practise the Right Doctrine. 

(10) "Would that, though practising the Doctrine 
in person, my heart be free from the consciousness 
of compulsion and unnaturalness, as all the Bodhisat- 
tvas practise the Doctrine in such a way as not prac- 
tising it yet leaving nothing unpractised ; for they have 
made their pranidhanas for the sake of all sentient 
beings." 

CHAPTER XII. 

TEN STAGES OF BODHISATTVAHOOD 
Gradation in our Spiritual Life. 

'THEORETICALLY speaking, as we have seen 
above, the Bodhi or Bodhicitta is in every sentient 
being, and in this sense he is a Bodhisattva. In profane 
hearts it may be found enveloped in ignorance and 
egoism, but it can never be altogether annulled. For the 
Bodhi, when viewed from its absolute aspect, transcends 
the realm of birth and death (samsdra), is beyond 
the world of toil and trouble and is not subject to 
any form of defilement. But when it assumes a relative 
existence and is only partially manifested under the 
cover of ignorance, there appear various stages of 
actualisation or of perfection. In some beings it may 
attain a more meaningful expression than in others, 
while there may be even those who apparently fail on 
account of their accursed karma to show the evidence 
of its presence. This latter class is usually called "Icchan- 
tika," that is, people who are completely overwhelmed 
by the passions. They are morally and religiously a 
mere corpse which even a great spiritual physician finds 
it almost impossible to resuscitate. But, philosophically 
considered, the glory of the Bodhi must be admitted 

312 CHAPTER XII. 

to . be shining even in these dark, ignorant souls. Such 
souls, perhaps, will have to go round many a cycle 
of transmigration, before their karma loses its poign- 
ancy and becomes susceptible to a moral influence 
with which they may come in contact. 

This accursed force of karma is not the same in 
all beings, it admits of all possible degrees of strength, 
and causes some to suffer more intensely than others. 
But there is no human heart or soul that is absolutely 
free from the shackle of karma and ignorance, because 
this very existence of a phenomenal world is a product 
of ignorance, though this fact does not prove that 
this life is evil. The only heart that transcends the 
influence of karma and ignorance and is all-purity, 
all-love, and all-intelligence, is the Dharmakaya or the 
absolute Bodhi itself. The life of a Bodhisattva and 
indeed the end of our religious aspiration is to unfold, 
realise, and identify ourselves with the love and intel- 
ligence of that ideal and yet real Dharmakaya. 

The awakening of the Bodhicitta (or intelligence- 
heart) marks the first step towards the highest good 
of human life. This awakening must pass through sev- 
eral stages of religious discipline before it attains 
perfection. These stages are generally estimated by the 
Mahayanists at ten. They appear, however, to our 
modern sceptical minds to be of no significant con- 
sequence, nor can we detect any very practical and 
well-defined distinction between successive stages. We 
fail to understand what religious necessity impelled 
the Hindu Buddhists to establish such apparently un- 

CHAPTER XII. 313 

important stages one after another in our religious 
life. We can see, however, that the first awakening 
of the Bodhicitta does not transform us all at once 
to Buddhahood ; we have yet to overcome with stren- 
uous efforts the baneful influence of karma and ig- 
norance which asserts itself too readily in our prac- 
tical life. But the marking of stages as in the grada- 
tion of the Dagabhumi in our spiritual progress seems 
to be altogether too artificial. Nevertheless I here take 
pains as an historical survey to enumerate the ten 
stages and to give some features supposed to be most 
characteristic of eachBhumi (staged as expounded in 
the Avatamsaka Sutra. ProDably they will help 
us to understand what moral conceptions and what 
religious aspirations were working in the establishment 
of the doctrine of Dagabhumi, for it elaborately de- 
scribes what was considered by the Mahayanists to be 
the essential constituents of Bodhisattvahood, and also 
shows what spiritual routine a Buddhist was expected 

to pursue. 

r (.,.. -.••• 

The ten stages are: (i) Pramudita, (2) Vimala, (3) 
Prabhakari, (4) Arcismati, (5) Sudurjaya, (6) Abhimukhi, 
(7) Durangama, (8) Acala, (9) Sadhumati, (10) Dhar- 
mamegha. 

(i) The Pramudita. 

Pramudita means "delight" or "joy" and marks the 
first stage of Bodhisattvahood, at which the Buddhists 
emerge from a cold, self-sufficing, and almost nihilistic 
contemplation of Nirvana as fostered by the Qravakas 

314 CHAPTER XII. 

and Pratyekabuddhas. This spiritual emergence and 
emancipation is psychologically accompanied by an 
intense feeling of joy, as that which is experienced 
by a person when he unexpectedly recognises the 
most familiar face in a faraway land of strangers. For 
this reason the first stage is called "joy." 

Even in the midst of perfect tranquillity of Nirvana 
in which all passions are alleged to have died away 
as declared by ascetics or solitary philosophers, the 
inmost voice in the heart of the Bodhisattva moans 
in a sort of dissatisfaction or uneasiness, which, though 
undefined and seemingly of no significance, yet refuses 
to be eternally buried in the silent grave of annihilation. 
He vainly gropes in the darkness ; he vainly seeks 
consolation in the samadhi of non-resistance or non- 
activity ; he vainly finds eternal peace in the gospel 
of self-negation ; his soul is still troubled, not exactly 
knowing the reason why. But as soon as the Bodhicitta 
(intelligence-heart) is awakened from its somnolence, 
as soon as the warmth of love (mahakaruna) pene- 
trates into the coldest cell of asceticism, as soon as 
the light of supreme enlightenment (mahdprajna) dawns 
upon the darkest recesses of ignorance, the Bodhisattva 
sees at once that the world is not made for self- 
seclusion nor for self-negation, that the Dharmakaya 
is the source of "universal effulgence," that Nirvana 
if relatively viewed in contrast to birth-and-death is 
nothing but sham and just as unreal as any worldly 
existence; and these insights finally lead him to feel 
that he cannot rest quiet until all sentient beings are 

I 
CHAPTER XII. 315 

emancipated from the snarl of ignorance and elevated 
to the same position as now occupied by himself. 

(2) The Vimald. 

Vimala means "freedom from defilement," or, affir- 
matively, "purity." When the Bodhisattva attains, 
through the spiritual insight gained at the first stage, 
to rectitude and puntyof heart, he reaches the 
second stage. His heart is now thoroughly spotless, 
it is filled with tenderness, he fosters no anger, no 
malice. He is free from all the thoughts of killing 
any animate beings. Being contented with what belongs 
to himself, he casts no covetous eyes on things not 
his own. Faithful to his own betrothed, he does not 
harbor any evil thoughts on others. His words are 
always true, faithful, kind, and considerate. He likes 
truth, honesty, and never flatters. 

(3) The Prabhdkari. 

Prabhakart means "brightness," that is, of the intel- 
lect. This predominantly characterises the spiritual 
condition of the Bodhisattva at this stage. Here he 
gains the most penetrating insight into the nature of 
things. He recognises that all things that are created 
are not permanent, are conducive to misery, have no / 
abiding selfhood (atmari], are destitute of purity, and 
subject to final decay. He recognises also that the 
real nature of things, however, is neither created nor 
subject to destruction, it is eternally abiding in the 
selfsame essence, and transcends the limits of time 

3l6 CHAPTER XII. 

and space. Ignorant beings not seeing this truth are 
always worrying over things transient and worthless, 
and constantly consuming their spiritual energy with 
the fire of avarice, anger, and infatuation, which in 
turn accumulates for their future existences the ashes 
of misery and suffering. This wretched condition of 
sentient beings further stimulates the loving heart of 
the Bodhisattva to seek the highest intelligence of 
Buddha, which, giving him great spiritual energy, ena- 
bles him to prosecute the gigantic task of universal 
emancipation. His desire for the Buddha-intelligence 
and his faith in it are of such immense strength that 
he would not falter even for a moment, if he is only 
assured of the attainment of the priceless treasure, 
to plunge himself into the smeltering fire of a volcano. 

(4) The Arcismati. 

Arcismati, meaning "inflammation," is the name 
given to the fourth stage, at which the Bodhisattva 
consumes all the sediments of ignorance and evil 
passions in the fiery crucible of the purifying Bodhi. 
He practises here most strenuously the thirty-seven 
virtues called Bodhipaksikas which are conducive to 
the perfection of the Bodhi. These virtues consist of 
seven categories : 

(I) Four Contemplations (smrtyusthdna): I. On the 
impurity of the body; 2 On the evils of sensuality; 
3. On the evanescence of the wordly interests ; 4. On 
the non-existence of atman in things composite. 

(II) Four Righteous Efforts (samyakprahdna) : i To 

CHAPTER XII. 317 

prevent evils from arising ; 2. To suppress evils already 
existing; 3. To produce good not yet in existence; 
4. To preserve good already in existence. 

(III) Four Forces of the Will (tddhipdda): i. The 
determination to accomplish what is willed; 2. The 
energy to concentrate the mind on the object in view ; 

3. The power of retaining the object in memory ; 4. 
The .intelligence that perceives the way to Nirvana. 

(IV) Five Powers (indrya), from which all moral good 
is produced: I. Faith; 2. Energy ; 3. Circumspection; 

4. Equilibrium, or tranquillity of mind ; 5 Intelligence. 

(V) Five Functions (bala) : Same as the above. * 

(VI) Seven Constituents of the Bodhi (bodkyanga) : 
I. The retentive power; 2. Discrimination; 3. Energy ; 
4. Contentment; 5. Modesty; 6. The balanced mind; 
7. Large-heartedness. 

(VII) The Eightfold Noble Path (aryamarga): I. 
Right view; 2. Right resolve; 3. Right speech; 4. 
Right conduct; 5. Right livelihood; 6 Right recollec- 
tion ; 8 Right tranquilisation, or contemplation. 

J The distinction between the five indriyas and the five 
balas seems to be rather redundant. But the Hindu philosophers 
usually distinguish actor from action, agent from function or 
operation. Thus the sense-organs are distinguished from sensa- 
tions or sense-consciousnesses, and the manovijnana (mind) 
from its functions such as thinking, attention, memory, etc. 
The atman has thus come to be considered the central agent 
that controls all the sensuous and intellectual activities. Though 
the Buddhists do not recognise this differentiation of actor 
and action in reality, they sometimes loosely follow the 
popular usage. 

3l8 CHAPTER XII. 

(5) The Sudurjaya. 

Sudurjaya means "very difficult to conquer." The 
Bodhisattva reaches this stage when he, completely 
armed with the thirty-seven Bodhipaksikas and guided 
by the beacon-light of Bodhi, undauntedly breaks 
through the column of evil passions. Provided with the 
two spiritual provisions, love and wisdom, and being 
benefitted by the spirits of all the Buddhas of the past, 
present, and future, the Bodhisattva has developed an 
intellectual power to penetrate deep into the system of 
existence. He perceives the Fourfold Noble Truth in 
its true light; he perceives the highest reality in the 
Tathagata ; he also perceives that the highest reality, 
though absolutely one in its essence, manifests itself 
in a world of particulars, that relative knowledge 
(samvrtti) and absolute knowledge (paramarthd) are 
two aspects of one and the same truth, that when 
subjectivity is disturbed there appears particularity, 
and that when it is not disturbed there shines only 
the eternal light of Tathagatajna (Tathagata-knowledge). 

(6) The Abhimukhi. 

Abhimukhi means "showing one's face," that is, 
the presentation of intelligence (prajHa) before the 
Bodhisattva at this stage. 

The Bodhisattva enters upon this stage by reflecting 
on the essence of all dharmas which are throughout of 
one nature. When he perceives the truth, his heart 
is filled with great love, he serenely contemplates on 

CHAPTER XII. 319 

the life of ignorant beings who are constantly going 
astray yielding themselves to evil temptations, clinging 
to the false conception of egoism, and thus making 
themselves the prey of eternal damnation. He then 
proceeds to contemplate the development of evils 
generally. There is ignorance, there is karma ; and in 
this fertile soil of blind activity the seeds of conscious- 
ness are sown ; the moisture of desire thoroughly soaks 
them, to which the water of egoism or individuation 
is poured on. The bed for all forms of particularity 
is well prepared, and the buds of namarupas (name- 
and-form) most vigorously thrive here. From these we 
have the flowers of sense-organs, and which come in 
contact with other existences and produce impressions, 
feel agreeable sensations, and tenaciously cling to them. 
From this clinging or the will to live as the principle 
of individuation or as the principle of bhava as is 
called in the Twelve Nidanas, another body consisting 
of the five skandhas comes into existence, and, passing 
through all the phases of transformation, dissolves and 
disappears. All sentient beings are thus kept in a per- 
petual oscillation of combination and separation, of 
pleasure and pain, birth and death. But the insight 
of the Bodhisattva has gone deeply into the inmost 
essence of things, which forever remains the same and 
in which there is no production and dissolution. 

(7) The Durangamd. 

Durangama means "going far away." The Bodhisat- 
tva enters upon this stage by attaining the so-called 

32O CHAPTER XII. 

Upayajna, i e. the knowledge that enables him to 
produce any means or expediency suitable for his 
work of salvation. He himself abides in the principles 
of gunyata (transcendentality), animitta (non-individu- 
ality), and apranihita (desirelessness), but his loving- 
kindness keeps him busily engaged among sentient 
beings. He knows that Buddhas are not creatures 
radically and essentially different from himself, but he 
does not stop tendering them due homage. He is al- 
ways contemplating on the nature of the Absolute,- 
but he does not abandon the practice of accumulating 
merits. He is no more encumbered with worldly thoughts, 
yet he does not disdain managing secular affairs. He 
keeps himself perfectly aloof from the consuming fire 
of passsion, but he plans all possible means for the 
sake of sentient beings to quench the enraging flames 
of avarice (lobka), anger (dvesa), and infatuation (moha). 
He knows that all individual existences are like dream, 
mirage, or the reflection of the moon in the water, 
but he works and toils in the world of particulars 
and submits himself to the domination of karma. He 
is well aware of the transcendental nature of Pure 
Land (sukhdvati), but he describes it with material 
colors for the sake of unenlightened masses. He knows 
that the Dharmakaya of all the Buddhas is not a 
material existence, but he does not refuse to dignify 
himself with the thirty-two major and eighty minor 
excellent features of a great man or god (makdpurusa). 
He knows that the language of all the Buddhas does 
not fall within the ken of human comprehension, but 

CHAPTER XII. 321 

he endeavors with all contrivances (upaya) to make 
it intelligible enough to the understanding of people. 
He knows that all the Buddhas perceive the past, pre- 
sent, and future in the twinkling of an eye, but he 
adapts himself to divers conditions of the material 
world and endeavors to help sentient beings to under- 
stand the significance of the Bodhi according to their 
destinies and dispositions. In short, the Bodhisattva 
himself lives on a higher plane of spirituality far remov- 
ed from the defilements of worldliness ; but he does 
not withdraw himself to this serene, unmolested sub- 
jectivity ; he boldly sets out in the world of particu- 
lars and senses; and, placing himself on the level of 
ignorant beings, he works like them, he toils like 
them, and suffers like them ; and he never fails all 
these times to practise the gospel of loyingkindness 
and to turn over (parivarta) all his merits towards 
the emancipation and spiritual edification of the mas- 
ses, that is, he never gets tired of practising the ten 
virtues of perfection (paramita). ^^ 

That is to say, (i) the Bodhisattva practises the 
virtue of charity (dana] by freely giving away to all 
sentient creatures all the merits that he has acquired 
by following the path of Buddhas. (2) He practises 
the virtue of good conduct (fila) by destroying all 
the evil passions that disturb serenity of mind. (3) 
He practises the virtue of patience (ksdnti), for he 
never gets irritated or excited over what is done to 
him by ignorant beings. (4) He practises the virtue 
of strenuousuess (vriya), for he never gets tired of 

21 

322 CHAPTER XII. 

accumulating merits and of promoting good-will among 
his fellow-creatures. (5) He practises the virtue of 
calmness (dhyana), for his mind is never distracted 
in steadily pursuing his way to supreme knowledge. 
(6) He practises the virtue of intelligence (prajna), 
for he always restrains his thoughts from wandering 
away from the path of absolute truth. (7) He practises 
the virtue of tactfulness (updya), for he has an inex- 
haustible mine of expediencies ready at his command 
for the work of universal salvation. (8) He practises 
the virtue of will-to-do (pranidhdnd) by determinedly 
following the dictates of the highest intelligence. (9) 
He practises the virtue of strength (bala), for no evil 
influences, no heretical thoughts can ever frustrate 
or slacken his efforts for the general welfare of peo- 
ple. (10) Finally, he practises the virtue of knowledge, 
(jndna), by truthfully comprehending and expounding 
the ultimate nature of beings. 

(8) The Acald. 

Acala, ''immovable," is the name for the eighth 
stage of Bodhisattvahood. When a Bodhisattva, tran- 
scending all forms of discursive or deliberate knowledge, 
acquires the highest, perfect knowledge called anut- 
pattikadharmaksanti, he is said to have gone beyond the 
seventh stage. Anutpattikadharmaksanti literally means 
"not-created-being-forbearance"; and the Buddhists 
use the term in the sense of keeping one's thoughts in 
conformity to the views that nothing in this world 

CHAPTER XII. 323 

has ever been created, that things are such as they 
are, i e. they are Suchness itself. This knowledge is 
also called non-conscious or non-deliberate knowledge 
in contradistinction to relative knowledge that consti- 
tutes all our logical and demonstrative knowledge. 
Strictly speaking, this so-called knowledge is not 
knowledge in its ordinary signification, it is a sort of 
unconscious or subconscious intelligence, or immediate 
knowledge as some call it, in which not only willing 
and acting, but also knowing and willing are one 
single, undivided exhibition of activity, all logical 
or natural transition from one to the other being 
altogether absent. Here indeed knowledge is will 
and will is action; "Let there be light," and there 
is light, and the light is good; it is the state of a 
divine mind. 

At this stage of perfection, the Bodhisattva's spiri- 
tual condition is compared to that of a person who, 
attempting when in a dreamy state to cross deep waters, 
musters all his energy, plans all schemes, and, while 
at last at the point of starting on the journey, sudden- 
ly wakes up and finds all his elaborate preparations 
to no purpose. The Bodhisattva hitherto showed untir- 
ing spiritual efforts to attain the highest knowledge, 
steadily practised all virtues tending to the acquirement 
of Nirvana, and heroically endeavored to exterminate 
all evil passions, and at the culmination of all these 
exercises, he enters all of a sudden upon the stage 
of Acala and finds the previous elaboration myste- 
riously vanished from his conscious mind. He cherishes 

324 CHAPTER XII. 

now no desire for Buddhahood, Nirvana, or Bodhicitta, 
much less after worldliness, egoism, or the satisfaction 
of evil passions. The conscious striving that distin- 
guished all his former course has now given way to a 
state of spontaneous activity, of saintly innocence, 
and of divine playfulness. He wills and it is done. 
He aspires and it is actualised. He is nature herself, 
for there is no trace in his activity that betrays any 
artificial lucubration, any voluntary or compulsory res- 
traint. This state of perfect ideal freedom may be 
called esthetical, which characterises the work of a 
genius. There is here no trace of consciously follow- 
ing some prescribed laws, no pains of elaborately 
conforming to the formula. To put this poetically, the 
inner life of the Bodhisattva at this stage is like the 
lilies of the field whose glory is greater than that of 
Solomon in all his human magnificence. 

Kant's remarks on this point are very suggestive, 
and I will quote the following from his Kritik der 
Urteilskraft (Reclam edition, p. 173): 

"Also muss die Zweckmassigkeit im Produkte der 
schonen Kunst, ob sie zwar absichtlich ist, doch nicht 
absichtlich scheinen : d. i , schone Kunst muss als Natur 
anzusehen sein , ob man sich ihrer zwar als Kunst 
bewusst ist. Als Natur aber erscheint ein Produkt 
der Kunst dadurch, dass zwar a^le Piinktlichkeit in 
der Uebereinkunst mit Regeln, nach denen allein das 
Produkt das werden kann, was es soil sein, angetroffen 
wird, aber ohne Peinlichkeit, d. i., ohne eine Spur 
zu zeigen, dass die Regel dem Kiinstler vor Augen 

CHAPTER XII. 325 

geschwebt und seinen Gemiithskraften Fesseln ange- 
legt haben," J 

(9) The Sadhumati. 

Sadhumati, meaning "good intelligence," is the name 
given to the ninth stage of Bodhisattvahood. All the 
Bodhisattvas are said to have reached here, when 
sentient beings are benefitted by the Bodhisattva's 
attainment of the highest perfect knowledge, which 
is unfathomable by the ordinary human intelligence. 
The knowledge leads them to the Dharma of the 
deepest mystery, to the Samadhi of perfect spirituality, 
to the Dharani of divine spontaneity, to Love of 
absolute purity, to the Will of utmost freedom. 

The Bodhisattva will acquire at this stage the four 
Pratisamvids (comprehensive knowledge), which are 
(i) Dharmapratisamvid, (2) Arthapratisamvid, (3) Nir- 
uktipratisamvid, (4) Pratibhanapratisamvid. By the 
Dharmapratisamvid, the Bodhisattvas understand the 

1 In this connection it is very interesting also to note that 
Carlyle expresses the same sentiment about the greatness of 
Shakespeare in his Hero Worship. "If I say that Shakspeare 
is the greatest of Intellects, I have said all concerning him. 
But there is more in Shakspeare's intellect than we have yet 
seen It is what I call an unconscious intellect ; there is more 
virtue in it that he himself is aware of. Novalis beautifully 
remarks of him, that those dramas of his are Products ol 
Nature too, as deep as Nature herself. I find a great truth in 
this saying, Shakspeare's Art is not Artifice ; the noblest worth 
of it is not there by plan or precontrivance. It grows from 
the deeps of Nature, through this noble sincere soul, who is a 
voice of Nature." 

326 CHAPTER XII. 

self- essence (sv.abhava) of all beings; by the Artha- 
pratisamvid, their individual Attributes ; by the Nirukti- 
pratisamvid, their indestructibility ; by the Pratibhana- 
pratisamvid, their eternal order. Again, by the first 
intelligence they understand that all individual dharmas 
have no absolute reality ; by the second, that they 
are all subject to the law of constant becoming; by 
the third, that they are no more than mere names ; 
by the fourth, that even mere names as such are of 
some value. Again, by the first intelligence, they com- 
prehend that all dharrnas are of one reality which is 
indestructible ; by the second, that this one reality 
differentiating itself becomes subject to the law of 
causation; by the third, that by virtue of a superior 
understanding all Buddhas become the object of ad- 
miration and the haven of all sentient beings ; by the 
fourth, that in the one body of truth all Buddhas 
preach infinite lights of the Dharma 

(10) The Dharmameghd. 

Dharmamegha, "clouds of dharma," is the name of 
the tenth and final stage of Bodhisattvahood. The 
Bodhisattvas have now practised all virtues of purity, 
accumulated all the constituents of Bodhi, are fortified 
with great power and intelligence, universally practise 
the principle of great love and sympathy, have deeply 
penetrated into the mystery of individual existences, 
fathomed the inmost depths of sentiency, followed 
step by step the walk of all the Tathagatas. Every 
thought cherished by the Bodhisattva now dwells in 

CHAPTER XII. 327 

all the Tathagatas' abode of eternal tranquillity, and 
every deed practised by him is directed towards the 
ten balas (power), l four vaigaradyas (conviction), 2 
and eighteen avenikas (unique characteristics), 3 of the 
Buddha. By these virtues the Bodhisattva has now 
acquired the knowledge of all things (sarvajna), is 
dwelling in the sanctum sanctorum of all dharanis 
and samadhis, have arrived at the summit of all 
activities. 

'The ten powers of the Buddha are: (i) The mental power 
which discriminates between right and wrong, (2) The know- 
ledge of the retribution of karma, (3) The knowledge of all 
the different stages of creation, (4) The knowledge of all the 
different forms of deliverance, (5) The knowledge of all the 
different dispositions of sentient beings, (6) The knowledge 
of the final destination of all deeds, (7) The knowledge 
of all the different practices of meditation, deliverance, and 
tranquilisation, (8) The knowledge of former existences, (9) 
The unlimited power of divination, (10) The knowledge of the 
complete subjection of evil desires (a$ravd) 

2 The four convictions (vaif&radyas) of the Buddha are: (i) 
That he has attained the highest enlightenment, (2) That he 
has destroyed all evil desires, (3) That he has rightly described 
the obstacles that lie in the way to a life of righteousness, 
(4) That he has truthfully taught the way of salvation. 

3 The eighteen unique characteristics which distinguish the 
Buddha from the rest of mankind are: (i) He commits no 
errors. Since time out of mind, he has disciplined himself in 
morality, meditation, intelligence, and lovingkindness, and as 
the result his present life is without faults and free from all 
evil thoughts. (2) He is faultless in his speeches. Whatever he 
speaks comes from his transcendental, eloquence and leads 
the audience to a higher conception of life. (3) His mind is 
faultless. As he has trained himself in samadhi, he is always 
calm, serene, and contented. (4) He retains his sameness of 
heart (samahztacitta), that is, his love for sentient beings is 

328 CHAPTER XII. 

The Bodhisattva at this stage is a personification 
of love and sympathy, which freely issue from the 
fount of his inner will. He gathers the clouds of 
virtue and wisdom, in which he manifests himself 
in manifold figures; he produces the lightnings of 
Buddhi, Vidyas, and Vaicaradyas ; and shaking the 
whole world with the thunder of Dharma he crushes 
all the evil ones ; and pouring forth the showers of 
Good Law he quenches the burning flames of ignorance 

universal and not discriminative. (5) His mind is free from 
thoughts of particularity (nanatvasamjna), that is, it is abiding 
in truth transcendental, his thoughts are not distracted by 
objects of the senses. (6) Resignation (upeksa). The Buddha 
knows everything, yet he is calmly resigned. (7) His aspiration 
is unfathomable, that is, his desire to save all beings from the 
sufferings of ignorance knows no bounds. (8) His energy is 
inexhaustible, which he applies with utmost vigor to the sal- 
vation of benighted souls. (9) His mentation (smrti) is inex- 
haustible, that is, he is ever conscious of all the good doc- 
trines taught by all the Buddhas of the past, present, and 
future. (10) His intelligence (prajna) is inexhaustible, that is, 
being in possession of all-intelligence which knows no limits, 
he preaches for the benefits of all beings, (u) His deliverance 
(vimuktt) is permanent, that is, he has eternally distanced all 
evil passions and sinful attachments. (12) His knowledge of 
deliverance (vimuktijnand) is perfect, that is, his intellectual 
insight into all states of deliverance is without a flaw. (13) 
He possesses a wisdom which directs all his bodily movements 
towards the benefit and enlightenment of sentient beings. (14) 
He possesses a wisdom which directs all his speeches toward 
the edification and conversion of his fellow-creatures. (15) He 
possesses a wisdom which reflects in his clear mind all the 
turbulent states of ignorant souls, from which he removes the 
dark veil of nescience and folly. (16) He knows all the past. 
(17) He knows all the future. (18) He knows all the present. 

CHAPTER XII. 329 

and passion in which all sentient creatures are being 
consumed. 

# * 
* 

The above presentation of the Dagabhumi 4 of 
Bodhisattvahood allows us to see what ideal life is 
held out by the Mahayanists before their own eyes 
and in what respect it differs from that of the 
(Jravakas and Pratyekabuddhas as well as from that 
of other religious followers. Mahayanism is not con- 
tented to make us mere transmitters or "hearers" 
of the teachings of the Buddha, it wants to inspire 
with all the religious and ethical motives that stirred 
the noblest heart of Qakyamuni to its inmost depths. 
It fully recognises the intrinsic worth of the human 
soul; and, holding up its high ideals > and noble 
aspirations, it endeavors to develop all the possibili- 
ties of our soul-life, which by our strenuous efforts 
and all-defying courage will one day be realised even 
on this earth of impermanence. We as individual 
existences are nothing but shadows which will vanish 
as soon as the conditions disappear that make them 
possible; we as mortal beings are no more than the 

1 For an elaborate exposition of the Dacabhumi, see the 
Avatamsaka (sixty volume edition, fas. 24-2?), the £urangama, 
Vasubandhu's Commentary on Asanga's Comprehensive Treat- 
ise on Mahayanism (fas. 10— n), the Vijnanamatra ^astra 
(fas. 9), etc., and for a special treatment of the subject 
consult the sutra bearing the name, which by the way exists 
in a Sanskrit version and whose brief sketch is given by 
Rajendra Mitra in his Nepalese Buddhist Literature, p. 81 et seq. 

33O CHAPTER XII. 

thousands of dusty particles that are haphazardly and 
powerlessly scattered about before the cyclone of 
karma; but when we are united in the love and 
intelligence of the Dharmakaya in which we have our 
being, we are Bodhisattvas, and we can immovably 
stand against the tempest of birth and death, against 
the overwhelming blast of ignorance. Then even an 
apparently insignificant act of lovingkindness will lead 
finally to the eternal abode of bliss, not the actor 
alone, but the whole community to which he belongs. 
Because a stream of love spontaneously flows from 
the lake of Intelligence-heart (Bodhicitta) which is fed 
by the inexhaustible spring of the Dharmakaya, while 
ignorance leads only to egoism, hatred, avarice, 
disturbance, and universal misery. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

NIRVANA. 

, according to Mahayana Buddhism, is 
not understood in its nihilistic sense. Even with 
the (Jravakas or Hinayanists, Nirvana in this sense is not 
so much the object of their religious lifgvas the recog- 
nition of the Fourfold Noble Truth, or the practise 
of the Eightfold Path, or emancipation from the yoke 
of egoism. It is mostly due, as far as 1 can see, to 
non-Buddhist critics that the conception of Nirvana 
has been selected among others as one of the most 
fundamental teachings of Buddha, declaring it at 
the same time to consist in the annihilation of all 
human passions and aspirations, noble as well as 
worthless. 

In fact, Nirvana literally means "extinction" or 
"dissolution" of the five skandhas, and therefore it 
may be said that the entering into Nirvana is tanta- 
mount to the annihilation of the material existence 
and of all the passions. Catholic Buddhists, however, 
do not understand Nirvana in the sense of emptiness, 
for they say that Buddhism is not a religion of death 
nor for the dead, but that it teaches how to attain 
eternal life, how to gain an insight into the real 
nature of things, and how to regulate our conduct 

332 CHAPTER XIII. 

in accordance with the highest truth. Therefore, 
Buddhism, when rightly understood in the spirit of 
its founder, is something quite different from what 
it is commonly supposed to be by the general public. 
I will endeavor in the following pages to point out 
that Nirvana in the sense of a total annihilation of 
human activities, is by no means the primary and sole 
object of Buddhists, and then proceed to elucidate in 
what signification it is understood in the Mahayana Bud- 
dhism and see what relative position Nirvana in its 
Mahayanistic sense occupies in the body of Buddhism. 

Nihilistic Nirvana not the First Object. 

In order to see the true signification of Nirvana, 
it is necessary first to observe in what direction 
Buddha himself ploughed the waves in his religious 
cruise and upon what shore he finally debarked. This 
will show us whether or not Nirvana as nihilistic 
nothingness is the primary and sole object of Bud- 
dhism, to which every spiritual effort of its devo- 
tees is directed. 

If the attainment of negativistic Nirvana were the 
sole aim of Buddhism, we should naturally expect 
Buddha's farewell address to be chiefly dealing with 
that subject. In his last sermon, however, Buddha 
did not teach his disciples to concentrate all their 
moral efforts on the attainment of Nirvanic quietude 
disregarding all the forms of activity that exhibit them- 
selves in life. Far from it. He told them, according 
to the Mahanibbdna sutta (the Book of the Great 

CHAPTER XIII 333 

decease, S. B. E. Vol. XL p. u4) that "Decay is 
inherent in all component things ! Work out your sal- 
vation with diligence !" This exhortation of the strenuous 
life is quite in harmony with the last words of Buddha 
as recorded in Agvaghosa's Buddhacarita (Chinese 
translation, Chap. xxvi). They were : 

"Even if I lived a kalpa longer, 
Separation would be an inevitable end. 
A body composed of various aggregates, 
Its nature is not to abide forever. 

"Having finished benefiting oneself and others, 
Why live I longer to no purpose ? 
Of gods and men that should be saved, 
Each and all had been delivered. 

"O ye, my disciples ! 

Without interruption transmit the Good Dharma! 
Know ye that things are destined to decay ! 
Never again abandon yourselves to grief! 

"But pursue the Way with diligence, 

And arrive at the Home of No-separation! 

I have lit the Lamp of Intelligence, 

That shining dispels the darkness of the world. 

"Know ye that the world endureth not! 
As ye should feel happy [when ye see] 
The parents suffering a mortal disease 
Are released by a treatment from pain; 

"So with me, I now give up the vessel of misery, 
Transcend ' the current of birth and death, 

1 Literally, "to advance against." 

334 CHAPTER XIII. 

And am eternally released from all pain and suffering. 
This too must be deemed blest. 

"Ye should well guard yourselves! 
Never give yourselves up to indulgence! 
All that exists finally comes to an end! 
I now enter into Nirvana." 1 

In this we find Buddha's characteristic admonition 
to his disciples not to waste time but to work out 
their salvation with diligence and rigor, but we fail 
to find the gospel of annihilation, the supposedly fun- 
damental teaching of Buddhism. 

Did then Buddha start in his religious discipline to 
attain the absolute annihilation of all human aspirations 
and after a long meditation reach the conclusion that 
contradicted his premises ? Far from it. His first and 
last ambition was nothing else than the emancipation 
of all beings from ignorance, misery, and suffering 
through enlightenment, knowledge, and truth. When 
Mara the evil one was exhausting all his evil powers 
upon the destruction of the Buddha in the beginning 
of his career, the good gods in the heavens exclaimed 
to the evil one : 2 

"Take not on thyself, O Mara, this vain fatigue, — 
throw aside thy malevolence and retire to thy home. 
This sage cannot be shaken by thee any more than 
the mighty mountain Meru by the wind. 

1 Cf. Beal's translation in the S. B. E. Vol XIX. pp. 
306 — 307, vs- 2095—2101. Beal utterly misunderstands the 
Chinese original. 

2 The Buddhacarita, Cowell's translation in the S. B. E. Vol. 
ILIX. p. 145. 

CHAPTER XIII. 335 

"Even fire might lose its hot nature, water its fluid- 
ity, earth its steadiness, but never will he abandon 
his resolution, who has acquired his merit by a long 
course of actions through unnumbered eons. 

"Such is the purpose of his, that heroic effort, that 
glorious strength, that compassion for all beings, — un- 
til he attains the highest wisdom [or suchness, tattvd\> 
he will never rise from his seat, just as the sun does 
not rise without dispelling the darkness. 

"Pitying the world lying distressed amidst diseases 
and passions, he, the great physician, ought not to be 
hindered, who undergoes all his labors for the sake of 
the remedy-knowledge. 

"He, who, when he beholds the world drowned in 
the great flood of existence and unable to reach the 
further shore, strives to bring them safely across, — 
would any right-minded soul offer him wrong? 

"The tree of knowledge, whose roots go deep in 
firmness, and whose fibres are patience, — whose flowers 
are moral actions and whose branches are memory 
and thought, — and which gives out the Dharma as its 
fruit, — surely when it is growing it should not be cut 
down." 

These words of the good gods in the heavens truth- 
fully echo the motive that stirred (Jakyamuni to take 
up his gigantic task of universal salvation, and we are 
unable here as before to perceive a particle of the 
nihilistic speculation which is supposed to characterise 
Nirvana. The Buddha from the very first of his reli- 
gious course searched after the light that will illumi- 

336 CHAPTER XIII. 

nate the whole universe and dispel the darkness of 
nescience. 

What enlightenment, then, did the Buddha, pursuing 
his first object, finally gain ? What truth was it that 
he is said to have discovered under the Bodhi tree 
after six years' penance and deep meditation? As is 
universally recognised, it was no more than the Four- 
fold Noble Truth and the Twelve Chains of Depen- 
dence, which are acknowledged by the Mahayanists as 
well as by the Hinayanists as the essentially original 
teachings of the Buddha. What then was his subjec- 
tive state when he discovered these truths ? How did he 
feel in his inmost being after this intellectual triumph 
over egoistic thoughts and passions ? According to the 
Southern tradition, the famous Hymn of Victory is 
said to be his utterance on this occasion. It reads 
(The Dharmapada, 153): 

"Many a life to transmigrate, 

Long quest, no rest, hath been my fate, 

Tent-designer inquisitive for; 

Painful birth from state to state. 

"Tent-designer, I know thee now; 
Never again to build art thou; 
Quite out are all thy joyful fires, 
Rafter broken and roof-tree gone; 
Into the vast my heart goes on, 
Gains Eternity— dead desires." ! 

In this Hymn of Victory, the "tent-designer" means 
1 From A. J. Edmunds's translation of Dhammapada. 

CHAPTER XIII. . 337 

the ego that is supposed to be a subtle existence be- 
hind our mental experiences. As was pointed out else- 
where the negative phase of Buddhism consists in 
the eradication of this ego-substratum or the "designer" 
of eternal transmigration. The Buddha now finds out 
that this ego-soul is a fantasmagoria and has no final 
existence ; and with this insight his ego-centric desires 
that troubled him so long are eternally dead ; he feels 
the breaking up of their limitations ; he is absorbed i/ 
in the Eternal Vast, in which we all live and move 
and have our being. No shadow is perceptible here 
that suggests anything of an absolute nothingness 
supposed to be the attribute of Nirvana. 

Before proceeding further, let us see what the 
Mahayana tradition says concerning this point. The 
tradition varies in this case as in many others. 
According to Beal's Romantic History of Buddha, 
which is a translation of a Chinese version of the 
Buddhacarita (Fo pen king ching), ! Buddha is reported 
to have exclaimed this : 

"Through ages past have I acquired continual merit, 

That which my heart desired have I now attained, 

How quickly have 1 arrived at the ever-constant condition, 

And landed on the very shore of Nirvana. 

The sorrows and opposition of the world, [/ 

The Lord of the Kamalokas, Mara Pisuna, 

These are unable now to affect, they are wholly destroyed; 

By the power of religious merit and of wisdom are they cast away. 

1 P. 225. Beal's translation is not always reliable, and I 
would have my own if the Chinese original were at all accessible. 

22 

33^ CHAPTER XIII. 

Let a man but persevere with unflinching resolution, 

And seek Supreme Wisdom, it will not be hard to acquire it; 

When once obtained, then farewell to all sorrows, 

All sin and guilt are forever done away." * 

Viewing the significance of Buddhism in this light, 
it is evident that Buddha did not emphasise so much 
the doctrine of Nirvana in the sense of a total abnegation 
of human aspirations as the abandonment of egoism 
and the practical regulation of our daily life in accord- 
ance with this view. Nirvana in which all the passions 
noble and base are supposed to have been "blown 
out like a lamp" was not the most coveted object of 
Buddhist life. On the contrary, Buddhism advises all 
its followers to exercise most strenuously all their 
spiritual energy to attain perfect freedom from the 
bondage of ignorance and egoism ; because that is the 
only way in which we can conquer the vanity of 
worldliness and enjoy the bliss of eternal life. The 
following verse from the Visuddhi Magga (XXI) prac- 

1 The gathas supposed to be the first utterance of the 
Buddha alter his enlightenment, according to Rockhill's Life 
of the Buddha (p. 33) compiled from Tibetan sources, give 
an inkling of nihilism, though I am inclined to think that the 
original Tibetan will allow a different interpretation when 
examined by some one who is better acquainted with the 
• spirit of Buddhism than Rockhill. Rockhill betrays in not a 
few cases his insufficient knowledge of the subject he treats. 
His translation of the gathas is as follows: 

"All the pleasures of the worldly joys, 
AH which are known among the gods, 
Compared with the joy of ending existence, 
Are not as its sixteenth part. 

CHAPTER XIII. 339 

tically sums up the teaching of Buddhism as far as 
its negative and individual phase is concerned : 

"Behold how empty is the world, 

Mogharaja! In thoughtfulness 

Let one remove belief in self, 

And pass beyond the realm of death. 

The king of death will never find 

The man who thus the world beholds." 2 

Nirvana is Positive. 

It is not my intention here to investigate the historical 
side of this question ; we are not concerned with the 
problem of how the followers of Buddha gradually 
developed the positive aspect of Nirvana in connection 
with the practical application of his moral and religious 

"Sorry is he whose burden is heavy, 
And happy he who has cast it down; 
When once he has cast off his burden, 
He will seek to be burthened no more. 

"When all existences are put away, 
When all notions are at an end, 
When all things are perfectly known, 
Then no more will craving come back." 

In the Udana, II., 2, we have a stanza corresponding to the 
first gatha here cited, but the Udana does not say "the joy 
of ending existence," but "the destruction of desire." 

According to the Lalita Vistara, the Buddha's utterance of 
victory is (Rajendra Mitra's Edition p. 448): 

"Cinna vartmopac.anta rajah guska ac,rava na punah c,ra- 
vanti. Chinne vartmani varttate duhkhasyaisonta ucyate." 

2 Warren's Buddhism in Translations, p. 376. 

34O CHAPTER XIII. 

teachings ; nor are we engaged in tracing the process 
of evolution through which Buddha's noble resolution 
to save all sentient beings from ignorance and misery 
was brought out most conspicuously by his later 
devotees. What I wish to state here about the positive 
conception of Nirvana and its development is this : 
The Mahayana Buddhism was the first religious teach- 
ing in India that contradicted the doctrine of Nirvana 
as conceived by other Hindu thinkers who saw in it 
a complete annihilation of being, for they thought 
that existence is evil, and evil is misery, and the only 
way to escape misery is to destroy the root of existence, 
which is nothing less than the total cessation of human 
desires and activities in Nirvanic unconsciousness The 
Yoga taught self-forget fulness in deep meditation ; the 
Samkhya, the absolute separation of Purusa from 
Prakrti, which means undisturbed self-contemplation ; 
the Vedanta, absorption in the Brahma, which is the 
total suppression of all particulars ; and thus all of 
them considered emancipation from human desires 
and aspirations a heavenly bliss, that is, Nirvana. 
Metaphysically speaking, they might have been correct 
each in its own way, but, ethically considered, their 
views had little significance in our practical life and 
showed a sad deficiency in dealing with problems of 
morality. 

The Buddha was keenly aware of this flaw in 
their doctrines. He taught, therefore, that Nirvana 
does not consist in the complete stoppage of existence, 
but in the practise of the Eightfold Path. This moral 

CHAPTER XIII. 341 

practise leads to the unalloyed joy of Nirvana, not 
as the tranquillisation of human aspirations, but as 
the fulfilment or unfolding of human life. The word 
Nirvana in the sense of annihilation was in existence 
prior to Buddha, but it was he who gave a new 
significance to it and made it worthy of attainment 
by men of moral character. All the doctrinal aspects 
of Nirvana are later additions or rather development 
made by Buddhist scholars, according to whom their 
arguments are solidly based on some canonical passages. 
Whatever the case may be, my conviction is that 
those who developed the positive significance of 
Nirvana are more consistent with the spirit of the 
founder than those who emphasised another aspect of 
it. In the Udana we read (IV., 9): 

"He whom life torments not, 

Who sorrows not at the approach of death, 

If such a one is resolute and has seen Nirvana, 

In the midst of grief, he is griefless. 

The tranquil-minded Bhikkhu, who has uprooted the 

thirst for existence, 

By him the succession of births is ended, 
He is born no more." ! 

According to the Mahayanistic conception Nirvana 
is not the annihilation of the world and the putting 
an end to life; but it is to live in the whirlpool of 
birth and death and yet to be above it. It is affir- 
mation and fulfilment, and this is done not blindly 
and egoistically, for Nirvana is enlightenment. Let 
us see how this is. 

1 General D. M. Strong "s translation, p. 64. 

342 CHAPTER XIII. 

The Mahdydnistic Conception of Nirvana. 

While the conception of Nirvana seems to have 
remained indefinite and confused as far as Hinayanism 
goes, the Mahayana Buddhists have attached several 
definite shades of meaning to Nirvana and tried to 
give each of them some special, distinctive character. 
When it is used in its most comprehensive metaphy- 
sical sense, it becomes synonymous with Suchness 
(tattva} or with the Dharmakaya. When we speak 
of Buddha 's entrance into Nirvana, it means the end 
of material existence, i. e., death. When it is used 
in contrast to birth and death (samsdra) or to passion 
and sin (klega), it signifies in the former case an 
eternal life or a state of immortality, and in the latter 
case a state of consciousness that follows from the 
recognition of the presence of the Dharmakaya in 
individual existences. Nirvana has thus become a very 
comprehensive term, and this fact adds much to the 
confusion and misunderstanding with which it has 
been treated ever since Buddhism became known to 
the Occident. The so-called "primitive Buddhism" 
is not altogether unfamiliar with all these meanings 
given to Nirvana, though in some cases they might 
have been but faintly foreshadowed. Most of European 
missionaries and scholars have ignored this fact and 
wanted to see in Nirvana but one definite, stereotyped 
sense which will loosen or untie all the difficult knots 
connected with its use, One scholar would select a 
certain passage in a certain sutra, where the meaning 

CHAPTER XIII. 343 

is tolerably distinct, and taking this as the key 
endeavor to solve all the rest ; while another scholar 
would do the same thing with another passage from 
the scriptures and refute other fellow-workers. The 
majority of them, however, have found for missionary 
purposes to be advantageous to hold one meaning 
prominently above all the others that may be considered 
possibly the meaning of Nirvana This one meaning 
that has been made specially conspicuous is its negati- 
vistic interpretation. 

According to the Vijnanamatra gastra (Chinese 
version Vol. X.), the Mahayana Buddhists distinguish 
four forms of Nirvana. They are : 

(i) Absolute Nirvana, as a synonym of the Dhar- 
makaya. It is eternally immaculate in its essence and 
constitutes the truth and reality of all existences. 
Though it manifests itself in the world of defilement 
and relativity, its essence forever remains undefiled. 
While it embraces in itself innumerable incomprehen- 
sible spiritual virtues, it is absolutely simple and 
immortal ; its perfect tranquillity may be likened unto 
space in which every conceivable motion is possible, 
but which remains in itself the same. It is universally 
present in all beings whether animate or inanimate 1 
and makes their existence real. In one respect it can 
be identified with them, that is, it can be pantheisti- 
cally viewed ; but in the other respect it is transcen- 

1 The text does not expressly say "animate or inanimate", 
but this is the author's own interpretation according to the 
general spirit of Mahayanism. 

344 CHAPTER XIII. 

dental, for every being as it is is not Nirvana. This 
spiritual significance is, however, beyond the ken of 
ordinary human understanding and can be grasped 
only by the highest intelligence of Buddha. 

(2) Upadhigesa Nirvana, or Nirvana that has some 
residue. This is a state of enlightenment which can 
be attained by Buddhists in their lifetime. The Dhar- 
makaya which was dormant in them is now awakened 
and freed from the "affective obstacles," 1 but they 
are yet under the bondage of birth and death; and 
thus they are not yet absolutely free from the misery 
of life : something still remains in them that makes 
them suffer pain. 

(3) Anupadhigesa Nirvana, or Nirvana that has no 
residue. This is attained when the Tathagata-essence 
(the Dharmakaya) is released from the pain of birth 
and death as well as from the curse of passion and 
sin. This form of Nirvana seems to be what is gene- 
rally understood by Occidental missionary-scholars as 
the Nirvana of Buddhists. While in lifetime, they have 
been emancipated from the egoistic conception of the 
soul, they have practised the Eightfold Path, and they 

1 There are two obstacles to final emancipation: (1) affec- 
tive, and (2) intellectual. The former is our unenlightened af- 
fective or emotional or subjective life and the latter our intel- 
lectual prejudice. Buddhists should not only be pure in heart 
but be perfect in intelligence. Pious men are of course saved 
from transmigration, but to attain perfect Buddhahood they 
must have a clear, penetrating intellectual insight into the 
significance of life and existence and the destiny of the uni- 
verse. This emphasising of the rational element in religion is 
one of the most characteristic points of Buddhism. 

CHAPTER XIII. 345 

have destroyed all the roots of karma that makes 
possible their metempsychosis in the world of birth 
and death (samsdra), though as the inevitable sequence 
of their previous karma they have yet to suffer all 
the evils inherent in the material existence. But at 
last they have had even this mortal coil dissolved away, 
and have returned to the original Absolute from which 
by virtue of ignorance they had come out and gone 
through a cycle of births and deaths. This state of 
supramundane bliss in the realm of the Absolute is 
Anupadigesa Nirvana, that is, Nirvana that has no 
residue. 

(4) The Nirvana that has no abode. In this, the 
Buddha-essence has not only been freed from the curse 
of passion and sin (kle$a}, but from the intellectual 
prejudice, which most tenaciously clings to the mind. 
The Buddha-essence or the Dharmakaya is revealed 
here in its perfect purity. All-embracing love and all- 
knowing intelligence illuminate the path. He who has 
attained to this state of subjective enlightenment is 
said to have no abode, no dwelling place, that is to 
say, he is no more subject to the transmigration of 
birth and death (samsdra), nor does he cling to Nir- 
vana as the abode of complete rest ; in short, he is 
above Samsara and Nirvana. His sole object in life is 
to benefit all sentient beings to the end of time ; but 
this he proposes to do not by his human conscious 
elaboration and striving Simply actuated by his all- 
embracing love which is of the Dharmakaya, he wishes 
to deliver all his fellow-creatures from misery, he does 

346 CHAPTER XIII. 

not seek his own emancipation from the turmoil of 
life. He is fully aware of the transitoriness of worldly 
interests, but on this account he desires not to shun 
them. With his all-knowing intelligence he gains a 
spiritual insight into the ultimate nature of things and 
the final course of existence. He is one of those reli- 
gious men "that weep, as though they wept not ; that 
rejoice as though they rejoiced not ; that buy, as though 
they possessed not ; that use this world, as not abusing 
it ; for the fashion of this world passes away." Nay, 
he is in one sense more than this ; his life is full of 
positive activity, because his heart and soul are devo- 
ted to the leading of all beings to final emancipation 
and supreme bliss. When a man attains to this stage 
of spiritual life, he is said to be in the Nirvana that 
has no abode. 

A commentator on the Vijndnamdtra fdstra adds 
that of these four forms of Nirvana the first is pos- 
sessed by every sentient being, whether it is actual- 
ised in its human perfection or lying dormant in posse 
and miserably obscured by ignorance ; that the second 
and third are attained by all the (Jravakas and Pra- 
tyekabuddhas, while it is a Buddha alone that is in 
possession of all the four forms of Nirvana. 

Nirvana as the Dharmakdya, 

It is manifest from the above statement that in 
Mahayanism Nirvana has acquired several shades of 
meaning psychological and ontological. This apparent 
confusion, however, is due to the purely idealistic 

CHAPTER XIII. 347 

tendency of Mahayanism, which ignores the distinc- 
tion usually made between being and thought, object 
and subject, the perceived and the perceiving. Nirvana 
is not only a subjective state of enlightenment but 
an objective power through whose operation this 
beatific state becomes attainable. It does not simply 
mean a total absorption in the Absolute or of emanci- 
pation from earthly desires in lifetime as exemplified 
in the life of the Arhat. Mahayanists perceive in 
Nirvana not only this, but also its identity with the 
Dharmakaya, or Suchness, and recognise its universal 
spiritual presence in all sentient beings. 

When Nagarjuna says in his Mddhyamika fdstrav 
that : "That is called Nirvana which is not wanting, 
is not acquired, is not intermittent, is not non-inter- 
mittent, is not subject to destruction, and is not 
created;" he evidently speaks of Nirvana as a synonym 
of Dharmakaya, that is, in its first sense as above 
described. Chandra Kirti, therefore, rightly comments 
that Nirvana is sarva-kalpand-ksaya-riipam, 2i. e., that 
which transcends all the forms of determination, 

1 This is one of the most important philosophical texts of 
Mahayanism. Its original Sanskrit with the commentary of 
Chandra Kirti has been edited by Satis Chandra Acharya 
and published by the Buddhist Text Society of India. The 
original lines run as follows (p. 193) : 

"Aprahinam, asampraptam, anucchinnam, acagvatam, 
Aniruddham, anutpannam, evam nirvanam ucyate." 

2 Literally, that which is characterised by the absence of all 
characterisation. 

348 CHAPTER XIII. 

Nirvana is an absolute, it is above the relativity of 
existence (bkdva) and non-existence (abhdva). 1 

Nirvana is sometimes spoken of as possessing four 
attributes ; (i) eternal (nityd], (2) blissful (sukka), 
(3) self-acting (dtman), and (4) pure (fUft). Judging 
from these qualities thus ascribed to Nirvana as its 
essential features, Nirvana is here again identified with 
the highest reality of Buddhism, that is, with the 
Dharmakaya. It is eternal because it is immaterial ; it 
is blissful because it is above all sufferings ; it is 
self-acting because it knows no compulsion; it is 
pure because it is not defiled by passion and error. a 

1 Cf. the following from the Madhyamika: 
"Bhaved abbavo bhavac ca nirvanam ubhayam katham: 
Asamskrtam ca nirvanam bhavabhavai ca samskrtam." 
Or, "Tasmanna bhavo nabhavo nirvanamiti yujyate " 

* In the Visuddhi-Magga XXI. (Warren's translation, p. 
376 et seq.), we read that there are three starting points of 
deliverance arising from the consideration of the three predom- 
inant qualities of the constituents of being : i. The conside- 
ration of their beginnings and ends leads the thoughts to the 
unconditioned ; 2. The insight into their miserableness agitates 
the mind and leads the thoughts to the desireless ; 3. The 
consideration of the constituents of being as not having an 
ego leads the thoughts to the empty. And these three, we 
are told, constitute the three aspects of Nirvana as uncondi- 
tioned, desireless, and empty. Here we have an instance in 
the so-called Southern "primitive" Buddhism of viewing 
Nirvana in the Mahayanistic light which I have here explained 
at length. 

En passant, let us remark that as Buddha did not leave 
any document himself embodying his whole system, there 
sprang up soon after his departure several schools explaining 

CHAPTER XIII. 349 

Nirvana in its Fourth Sense. 

No further elucidation is needed for the first signifi- 
cation of Nirvana, for we have treated it already 
when explaining the nature of the Dharmakaya. Nor 
is it necessary for us to dwell upon the second and 
the third phases of it. The Occidental missionary- 
scholars and Orientalists, however one-sided and often 
biased, have almost exhaustively investigated these 
points from the Pali sources. What remains for us 
now is to analyse the Mahayanistic conception of 
Nirvana which was stated above as its fourth signifi- 
cation. 

Nirvana, briefly speaking, is a realisation in this life 
of the all-embracing love and all-knowing intelligence 
of Dharmakaya. It is the unfolding of the reason of 
existence, which in the ordinary human life remains 
more or less eclipsed by the shadow of ignorance and 
egoism. It does not consist in the mere observance 
of the moral precepts laid down by Buddha, nor in 
the blind following of the Eightfold Path, nor in 
retirement from the world and absorption in abstract 
meditation The Mahayanistic Nirvana is full of energy 
and activity which issues from the all-embracittg love 
of the Dharmakaya. There is no passivity in it, nor 
a keeping aloof from the hurly-burly of worldliness. 

the Master's view in divers ways, each claiming the legitimate 
interpretation; that in view of this fact it is illogical to 
conclude that Southern Buddhism is the authoritative represen- 
tation par excellence of original Buddhism, while the Eastern 
or the Northern is a mere degeneration. 

35O CHAPTER XIII. 

He who is in this Nirvana does not seek a rest in 
the annihilation of human aspirations, does not flinch 
in the face of endless transmigration. On the contrary, 
he plunges himself into the ever-rushing current of 
Samsara and sacrifices himself to save his fellow-crea- 
tures from being eternally drowned in it. 

Though thus the Mahayana Nirvana is realised only 
in the mire of passions and errors, it is never con- 
taminated by the filth of ignorance. Therefore, he 
that is abiding in Nirvana, even in the whirlpool of 
egoism and in the darkness of sin, does not lose his 
all-seeing insight that penetrates deep into the ultimate 
nature of being. He is aware of the transitoriness of 
things. He knows that this life is a mere passing 
moment in the eternal manifestation of the Dharmakaya, 
whose work can be realised only in boundless space 
and endless time. As he is fully awake to this knowledge, 
he never gets engrossed in the world of sin. He lives 
in the world like unto the lotus-flower, the emblem 
of immaculacy, which grows out of the mire and 
yet shares not its defilement. He is also like unto a 
bird flying in the air that does not leave any trace 
behind it. He may again be likened unto the clouds 
that spontaneously gather around the mountain peak, 
and, soaring high as the wind blows, vanish away 
to the region where nobody knows. In short, he is 
living in, and yet beyond, the realm of Samsara and 
Nirvana. 

We read in the Vimalakirti Sutra (chap. VIII.) : 
"Vimalakirti asks Manjucri: 'How is it that you 

CHAPTER XIII. 351 

declare all [human] passions and errors are the seeds 
of Buddhahood?' 

"Manjugri replies : kO son of good family ! Those 
who cling to the view of non-activity [asamskrita\ 
and dwell in a state of eternal annihilation do not 
awaken in them supremely perfect knowledge [anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi\ Only the Bodhisattvas. who dwell 
in the midst of passions and errors, and who, passing 
through the [ten] stages, rightly contemplate the ulti- 
mate nature of things, are able to awaken and attain 
intelligence [prajnd]. 

*' 'Just as the lotus-flowers do not grow in the dry 
land, but in the dark-colored, waterly mire, O son 
of good family, it is even so [with intelligence (prajnd 
or bodhi)\ In non-activity and eternal annihilation which 
are cherished by the Qravakas and the Pratyekabuddhas, 
there is no opportunity for the seeds and sprouts of 
Buddhahood to grow. Intelligence can grow only in 
the mire and dirt of passion and sin. It is by virtue of 
passion and sin that the seeds and sprouts of Buddha- 
hood are able to grow. 

" 'O son of good family ! Just as no seeds can grow 
in the air, but in the filthy, muddy soil, — and 
there even luxuriously, — O son of good family, it is 
even so [with the Bodhi]. It does not grow out of 
non-activity and eternal annihilation. It is only out 
of the mountainous masses of egoistic, selfish 
thoughts that Intelligence is awakened and grows to 
the incomprehensible wisdom of Buddha-seeds. 

" VO son of good family ! Just as we cannot ob- 

352 CHAPTER XIII. 

tain priceless pearls unless we dive into the depths 
of the four great oceans, O son of good family, it is 
even so '[with Intelligence] If we do not dive deep 
into the mighty ocean of passion and sin, how could 
we get hold of the precious gem of Buddha-essence ? 
Let it therefore be understood that the primordial 
seeds of Intelligence draw their vitality from the midst 
of passion" and sin.' ' In a Pauline epistle we read, 
"From the foulness of the soil, the beauty of new 
life grows." And Emerson sings : 

"Let me go where'er I will, 
I hear a sky-born music still. 
'Tis not in the high stars alone, 

Nor in the cup of budding flowers, 
Nor in the redbreast's mellow tone, 

Nor in the bow that smiles in showers, 
But in the mud and scum of things. 
There always, always, something sings " 

Do we not see here a most explicit statement of 
the Mahayanistic sentiment? 

Nirvana and Samsdra are One. 

The most remarkable feature in the Mahayanistic 
conception of Nirvana is expressed in this formula : 
"Yas klegas so bodhi, yas samsaras tat nirvanam." 
What is sin or passion, that is Intelligence, what is 
birth and death (or transmigration), that is Nirvana. 
This is a rather bold and revolutionising proposition 
in the dogmatic history of Buddhism. But it is no 
more than the natural development of the spirit that 
was breathed by ks founder. 

CHAPTER XIII. 353 

In the Vigesacinta-brahma-pariprccha Sutra* it is 
said that (chap. II): 

"Samsara is Nirvana, because there is, when viewed 
from the ultimate nature of the Dharmakaya, nothing 
going out of, nor coming into, existence, [samsara 
being only apparent]: Nirvana is samsara, when it is 
coveted and adhered to.^ 

In another place (pp. cit.) the idea is expressed in 
much plainer terms : "The essence of all things is 
in truth free from attachment, attributes, and desires ; 
therefore, they are pure, and, as they are pure, we 
know that what is the essence of birth and death 
that is the essence of Nirvana, and that what is the 
essence of Nirvana that is the essence of birth and 
death (samsara). In other words, Nirvana is not to 
be sought outside of this world, which, though tran- 
sient, is in reality no more than Nirvana itself. 
Because it is contrary to our reason to imagine that 
there is Nirvana and there is birth and death (samsara,) 
and that the one lies outside the pale of the other, 
and, therefore, that we can attain Nirvana only after 
we have annihilated or escaped the world of birth 
and death. If we are not hampered by our confused 
subjectivity, this our worldly life is an activity of 
Nirvana itself." 

Nagarjuna repeats the same sentiment in his Mddhy- 
amika fdstra, when he says: 

1 There are three Chinese translations of this Mahayana 
text, by Dharmaraksa, Kumarajiva, and Bodhiruci, between 
265 and 517 A. D. 

23 

354 CHAPTER XIII. 

"Samsara is in no way to be distinguished from Nirvana: 
Nirvana is in no way to be distinguished from Samsara." l 

Or, 

"The sphere of Nirvana is the sphere of Samsara: 
Not the slightest distinction exists between them." * 

Asanga goes a step further and boldly declares 
that all the Buddha-dharmas, of which Nirvana or 
Dharmakaya forms the foundation, are characterised 
with the passions, errors, and sins of vulgar minds. 
He says in Mahay dna-Sangr aha fdstra (the Chinese 
Tripitaka, Japanese edition of 1 88 1, wang VIII., p. 84) : 

"(i) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with 
eternality, for the Dharmakaya is eternal. 

"(2) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with 
an extinguishing power, for they extinguish all the 
obstacles for final emancipation. 

"(3) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with 
regeneration, for the Nirmanakaya [Body of Transfor- 
mation] constantly regenerates. 

"(4) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with the 
power of attainment, for by the attainment [of truth] 
they subjugate innumerable evil passions as cherished 
by ignorant beings. 

"(5) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with the 
desire to gain, ill humor, folly, and all the other 

1 Samsarasya ca nirvanat kincid asti vigesanam: 
Na nirvanasya samsarat kincid asti vigesanam. 

2Nirvanasya ca ya kotih kotih samsarasya ca, 
Vidyadanantaram kincit susuksnam vidyate. 

CHAPTER XIII. 355 

passions of vulgar minds, for it is through the Buddha's 
love that those depraved souls are saved. 

"(6) All Buddha-dharmas are characterised with non- 
attachment and non-defilement, for Suchness which 
is made perfect by these virtues cannot be defiled 
by any evil powers 

k'(7) All Buddha-dharmas are above attachment and 
defilement, for though all Buddhas reveal themselves 
in the world, worldliness cannot defile them." l 

Buddha-dharma means any thing, or any virtue, or 
any faculty, that belongs to Buddhahood. Kon -attach- 
ment is a Buddha-dharma, love is a Buddha-dharma, 
wisdom is a Buddha dharma, and in fact anything 
is a Buddha-dharma which is an attribute of the 
Perfect One, not to mention the Dharmakaya or 
Nirvana which constitutes the very essence of Buddha- 
hood. Therefore, the conclusion which is to be drawn 
from those seven propositions of Asanga as above 
quoted is this : Not only is this world of constant 
transformation as a whole Nirvana, but its apparent 
errors and sins and evils are also the various phases 
of the manifestation of Nirvana. 

The above being the Mahay anistic view of Nirvana, 
it is evident that Nirvana is not something transcen- 
dental or that which stands above this world of birth 

1 Concerning the similarity in meaning of this statement to 
the one just preceding, a commentator says that the sixth 
is the statical view of Suchness (or Dharmakaya) and the 
seventh its dynamical view. One explains what the highest 
reality of Buddhism is and the other what it does or works. 

356 CHAPTER XIII. 

and death, joy and sorrow, love and hate, peace and 
struggle. Nirvana is not to be sought in the heavens 
nor after a departure from this earthly life nor in 
the annihilation of human passions and aspirations. 
On the contrary, it must be sought in the midst of 
worldliness, as life with all its thrills of pain and 
pleasure is no more than Nirvana itself. Extinguish 
your life and seek Nirvana in anchoretism, and your 
Nirvana is forever lost. Consign your aspirations, 
hopes, pleasures, and woes, and everything that makes 
up a life to the eternal silence of the grave, and you 
bury Nirvana never to be recovered. In asceticism, 
or in meditation, or in ritualism, or even in meta- 
physics, the more impetuously you pursue Nirvana, the 
further away it flies from you. It was the most 
serious mistake ever committed by any religious 
thinkers to imagine that Nirvana which is the complete 
satisfaction of our religious feeling could be gained 
by laying aside all human desires, ambitions, hopes, 
pains, and pleasures. Have your own Bodhi (intelli- 
gence) thoroughly enlightened through love and knowl- 
edge, and everything that was thought sinful and 
filthy turns out to be of divine purity. It is the same 
human heart, formerly the fount of ignorance and 
egoism, now the abode of eternal beatitude — Nirvana 
shining in its intrinsic magnificence. 

Suppose a torch light is taken into a dark cell, 
which people had hitherto imagined to be the abode of 
hideous, uncanny goblins, and which on that account 
they wanted to have completely destroyed to the 

CHAPTER XIII. 357 

ground. The bright light now ushered in at once 
disperses the darkness, and every nook and corner 
therein is perfectly illumined. Everything in it now as- 
sumes its proper aspect. And to their surprise people 
find that those figures which they formerly considered 
to be uncanny and horrible are nothing but huge 
precious stones, and they further learn that every 
one of those stones can be used in some way for 
the great benefit of their fellow-creatures. The dark 
cell is the human heart before the enlightenment of 
Nirvana, the torch light is love and intelligence. When 
love warms and intelligence brightens, the heart finds 
every passion and sinful desire that was the cause of 
unbearable anguish now turned into a divine aspiration. 
The heart itself, however, remains the same just as 
much as the cell, whose identity was never affected 
^either by darkness or by brightness. This parable 
nicely illustrates the Mahayanistic doctrine of the 
identity of Nirvana and Samsara, and of the Bodhi 
and Kleca, that is, of intelligence and passion. 

Therefore, it is said: 

"All sins transformed into the constituents of enlightenment! 
The vicissitudes of Samsara transformed into the beatitude 

of Nirvana! 
All these come from the exercise of the great religious 

discipline (upaya)\ 
Beyond our understanding, indeed, is the mystery of all 

Buddhas." 1 

1 The Discourse on Buddha-essence by Vasubandhu. The 
Japanese Tripitaka edition of 1881, fas. II., p. 84, where the 
stanza is quoted from the Sutra on the Incomprehensible. 

358 CHAPTER XIII. 

The Middle Course. 

In one sense the Buddha always showed an eclectic, 
conciliatory, synthetic spirit in his teachings. He refused 
to listen to any extreme doctrine which elevates one 
end too high at the expense of the other and culmi- 
nates in the collapse of the whole edifice. When the 
Buddha left his seat of enlightenment under the Bo- 
dhi tree, he made it his mission to avoid both ex- 
tremes, asceticism and hedonism. He proved through- 
out his life to be a calm, dignified, thoughtful, well- 
disciplined person, and at no time irritable in char- 
acter, - - in this latter respect being so different from 
the sage of Nazareth, who in anger cast out all the 
tradesmen in the temple and overthrew the tables of 
the money-changers, and who cursed the fig tree on 
which he could not find any frjuit but leaves unfit to 
appease his hunger. The doctrine of the Middle Path 
(Madhyamdrga), whatever it may mean morally and 
intellectually, always characterised the life and doctrine 
of Buddha as well as the later development of his 
teachings. His followers, however different in their 
individual views, professed as a rule to pursue stead- 
ily the Middle Path as paved by the Master. Even 
when Nagarjuna proclaimed his celebrated doctrine 
of Eight No's which seems to superficial critics nothing 
but an absolute nihilism, he said that the Middle 
Path could be found only in those eight no's. 1 

1 This is expressed in the first verse of the Madhyamika 
fdstra, which runs as follows: 

CHAPTER XIII. 359 

Mahayanism has certainly applied this synthetic 
method of Buddha to its theory of Nirvana and 
ennobled it by fully developing its immanent signifi- 
cation. In the Discourse on Buddha-essence, Vasu- 
bandhu quotes the following passage from the frimala 
Sutra, which plainly shows the path along which the 
Mahayanists traveled before they reached their final 
conclusion : "Those, who see only the transitoriness 
of existence are called nihilists, and those who see 
only the eternality of Nirvana are called eternalists. 
Both views are incorrect." Vasubandhu then proceeds 
to say: "Therefore, the Dharmakaya of the Tathagata 
is free from both extremes, and on that account it 
is called the Great Eternal Perfection. When viewed 
from this absolute standpoint of Suchness, the logical 
distinction between Nirvana and Samsara cannot in 
reality be maintained, and hereby we enter upon the 
realm of non-duality." And this realm of non-duality 
is the Middle Path of Nirvana, not in its nihilistic, 
but in its Mahayanistic, significance. 

How to Realise Nirvana. 

How can we attain the Middle Path of Nirvana? 
How can we realise a life that is neither pessimistic 
asceticism nor materialistic hedonism ? How can we 
steer through the whirlpools of Samsara without being 

"Anirodham anutpadam anucchedam acacvatam 
Anekartham ananartham anagamam anirgamam." 
Literally translated these lines read: 

"No annihilation, no production, no destruction, no persistence, 
No unity, no plurality, no coming in, no going out." 

360 CHAPTER XIII. 

swallowed up and yet braving their turbulent gyra- 
tion ? The answer to this can readily be given, when 
we understand, as repeatedly stated above, that this 
life is the manifestation of the Dharmakaya, and that 
the ideal of human existence is to realise within the 
possibilities of his mind and body all that he can 
conceive of the Dharmakaya. And this we have found 
to be all-embracing love and all-seeing intelligence. 
Destroy then your ignorance at one blow and be 
done with your egoism, and there springs forth an 
eternal stream of love and wisdom. 

Says Vasubandhu : "By virtue of Prajna [intelligence 
or wisdom], our egoistic thoughts are destroyed : by 
virtue of Karuna [love], altruistic thoughts are cherish- 
ed. By virtue of Prajna, the [affective] attachment 
inherent in vulgar minds is abolished; by virtue of 
Karuna, the [intellectual] attachment as possessed 
by the (Jravakas and Pratyekabuddhas is abolished. 
By virtue of Prajna, Nirvana [in its transcendental 
sense] is not rejected; by virtue of Karuna, Samsara 
[with its changes and transmigrations] is not rejected. 
By virtue of Prajna the truth of Buddhism is attained ; 
by virtue of Karuna, all sentient beings are matured 
[for salvation]." 

The practical life of a Buddhist runs in two opposite, 
though not antagonistic, directions, one upward and 
the other downward, and the two are synthesised in 
the Middle Path of Nirvana. The upward direction 
points to the intellectual comprehension of the truth, 
while the downward one to a realisation of all-embra- 

CHAPTER XIII. 36l 

cing love among his fellow-creatures. One is comple- 
mented by the other. When the intellectual side is too 
much emphasised at the expense of the emotional, 
we have a Pratyekabuddha, a solitary thinker, whose 
fountain of tears is dry and does not flow over the 
sufferings of his fellow-beings. When the emotional 
side alone is asserted to the extreme, love acquires 
the egoistic tint that colors everything coming in 
contact with it. Because it does not discriminate and 
takes sensuality for spirituality. If it does not turn 
out sentimentalism, it will assume a hedonistic form. 
How many superstitious, or foul, or even atrocious 
deeds in the history of religion have been committed 
under the beautiful name of religion, or love of God 
and mankind ! It makes the blood run cold when we 
think how religious fanatics burned alive their rivals 
or opponents at the stake, cruelly butchered thousands 
of human lives within a day, brought desolation and 
ruin throughout the land of their enemies, — and all 
these works of the Devil executed for sheer love of 
God ! Therefore, says Devala, the author of the 
Discourse on the Makdpurusa (Great Man) : "The wise 
do not approve lovingkindness without intelligence, 
nor do they approve intelligence without loving- 
kindness ; because one without the other prevents us 
from reaching the highest path." Knowledge is the eye, 
love is the limb. Directed by the eye, the limb knows 
how to move; furnished with the limb, the eye can 
attain what it perceives. Love alone is blind, knowl- 
edge alone is lame. It is only when one is supplement- 

362 CHAPTER XIII. 

ed by the other that we have a perfect, complete man. 

In Buddha as the ideal human being we recognise 
the perfection of love and intelligence; for it was in 
him that the Dharmakaya found its perfect realisation 
in the flesh. But as far as the Bodhisattvas are con- 
cerned, their natural endowments are so diversified 
and their temperament is so uneven that in some the 
intellectual elements are more predominant while in 
others the emotional side is more pronounced, that 
while some are more prone to practicality others 
preferably look toward intellectuaiism. Thus, as a 
matter of course, some Bodhisattvas will be more of 
philosophers than of religious seers. They may tend 
in some cases to emphasise the intellectual side of 
religion more than its emotional side and uphold the 
importance of prajna (intelligence) above that of 
karuna (love). But the Middle Path of Nirvana lies in 
the true harmonisation of prajna and karuna, of bodhi 
and upaya, of knowledge and love, of intellect and 
feeling. 

Love Awakens Intelligence 

But if we have to choose between the two, let us 
first have all-embracing love, the Buddhists would say ; 
for it is love that awakens in us an intense desire 
to find the way of emancipating the masses from 
perpetual sufferings and eternal transmigration. The 
intellect will now endeavor to realise its highest 
possibilities ; the Bodhi will exhibit its fullest strength. 
When it is found out that this life is an expression 
of the Dharmakaya which is one and eternal, that 

CHAPTER XIII. 363 

individual existences have no selfhood (atman or 
svabhdva) as far as they are due to the particular - 
isation of subjective ignorance, and, therefore, that 
we are true and real only when we are conceived 
as one in the absolute Dharmakaya, the Bodhisattva's 
love which caused him to search after the highest 
truth will now unfold its fullest significance. 

This love, or faith in the Mahayana, as it is some- 
times called, is felt rather vaguely at the first awake- 
ning of the religious consciousness, and agitates the 
mind of the aspirant, whose life has hitherto been 
engrossed in every form of egocentric thought and 
desire. He no more finds an unalloyed satisfaction, 
as the (Jravakas or the Pratyekabuddhas do, in his 
individual emancipation from the curse of Samsara. 
However sweet the taste of release from the bond 
of ignoranee, it is lacking something that makes the 
freedom perfectly agreeable to the Bodhisattva who 
thinks more of others than of himself; to be sweet 
as well as acceptable, it must be highly savored with 
lovingkindness which embraces all his fellow-beings 
as his own children. The emancipation of the (Jravaka 
or of the Prayekabuddha is like a delicious food 
which is wanting in saline taste, for it is no more 
than a dry, formal philosophical emancipation. Love 
is that which stimulates a man to go beyond his own 
interests. It is the mother of all Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas. The sacred motive that induces them to 
renounce a life of Nirvanic self-complacency, is noth- 
ing but their boundless love for all beings. They do 

364 CHAPTER XIII. 

not wish to rest in their individual emancipation, they 
want to have all sentient creatures without a single 
exception emancipated and blest in paradisiacal hap- 
piness. Love, therefore, bestows on us two spiritual 
benefits: (i) It saves all beings from misery and (2) 
awakens in us the Buddha- intelligence 

The following passages quoted at random from 
Devala's Mahdpurusa will help our readers to under- 
stand the true signification of Nirvana and the value 
of love (karund) as estimated by the Mahayanists. 

"Those who are afraid of transmigration and seek 
their own benefits and happiness in final emancipation, 
are not at all comparable to those Bodhisattvas, who 
rejoice when they come to assume a material existence 
once again, for it affords them another opportunity to 
benefit others. Those who are only capable of feeling 
their own selfish sufferings may enter into Nirvana [and 
not trouble themselves with the sufferings of other 
creatures like themselves] ; but the Bodhisattva who 
feels in himself all the sufferings of his fellow-beings 
as his own, how can he bear the thought of leaving 
others behind while he is on his way to final emanci- 
pation, and when he himself is resting in Nirvanic 

quietude ? Nirvana in truth consists in rejoicing 

at other's being made happy, and Samsara in not so 
feeling. He who feels a universal love for his fellow- 
creatures will rejoice in distributing blessings among 
them and find his Nirvana in so doing. 1 

1 Compare this Buddhist sentiment of universal love with 
that of the Christian religion and we shall see the truth that 

CHAPTER XIII. 365 

"Suffering really consists in pursuingjme's egotistic^ 
happiness^while Nirvana is found in sacrificing one's 
welfare for the sake of others. People generally think 
that it is an emancipation when they are released 
from their own pain, but a man with loving heart 
finds it in rescuing others from misery. 

"With people who are not kindhearted, there is 
no sin that will not be committed by them. They 
are called the most wicked whose hearts are not 
softened at the sight of others, misfortune and 
suffering. 

"When all beings are tortured by avarice, passion, 
ill humor, infatuation, and folly, and are constantly 
threatened by the misery of birth and death, disease 

and decay how can the Bodhisattva live among 

them and not feel pity for them? 

"Of all good virtues, lovingkindness stands fore- 
most. . It is the source of all merit. . . It is the 

all religions are one at the bottom. We read in Thomas a 
Kempis's Imitation of Christ (ch. XIII): "My son, I descended 
from heaven for thy salvation ; I took upon me thy sorrows, 
not necessity but love drawing me thereto; that thou thyself 
mightest learn patience and bear temporal sufferings without 
repining For from the hour of my birth, even until my 
death on the cross, I was not without suffering of grief." 
This is exactly the sentiment that stimulates the Bodhisattvas 
to their gigantic task of universal salvation. Those who are 
free from sectarian biases will admit without hesitation that 
there is but one true religion which may assume various 
forms according to circumstances. "Many are the roads to 
the summit, but when reached there we have but one universal 
moonlight." 

366 CHAPTER XIII. 

mother of all Buddhas. . . It induces others to take 
refuge in the incomparable Bodhi. 

"The loving heart of a Bodhisattva is annoyed by 
one thing, that all beings are constantly tortured and 
threatened by all sorts of pain." 

Let us quote another interesting passage from a 
Mahayana sutra. 

When Vimalakirti was asked why he did not feel 
well, he made the following reply, which is full of 
religious significance : "From ignorance there arises 
desire and that is the" cause of my illness. As all 
sentient beings are ill, so am I ill. When all 'sentient 
beings are healed of their illness, I shall be 'healed 
of my illness, too. Why? The Bodhisattva suffers 
birth and death because of sentient beings. As there 
is birth and death, so there is illness. When sentient 
beings are delivered from illness, the Bodhisattvas 
will suffer no more illness. When an only son in 
a good family is sick, the parents feel sick too: 
when he is recovered they are well again. So it 
is with the Bodhisattva. He loves all sentient 
beings as his own children. When they are sick, he 
is sick too. When they are recovered, he is well 
again. Do you wish to know whence this [sympathetic] 
illness is? The illness of the Bodhisattva comes from 
his all-embracing love (makakarund"). 

This gospel of universal love is the consummation 
of all religious emotions whatever their origin. Without 
this, there is no religion — that is, no religion that 
is animated with life and spirit. For it is in the fact 

CHAPTER XIII. 367 

and nature of things that we are not moved by 
mere contemplation or mere philosophising. Every 
religion may have its own way of intellectually in- 
terpreting this fact, but the practical result remains 
the same everywhere, viz. that it cannot survive with- 
out the animating energy of love. Whatever sound 
and fine reasoning there may be in the doctrine of 
the £r&vaka and the Pratyekabuddha, the force that 
is destined to conquer the world and to deliver us 
from misery is not intellection, but the will, i. e. the 
purvapranidhana of the Dharmakaya 

Conclusion. 

We now conclude. What is most evident from what 
we have seen above is that the Mahayana Nirvana is 
not the annihilation of life but its enlightenment, that 
it is not the nullification of human passions and 
aspirations but their purification and ennoblement. 
This world of eternal transmigration is not a place 
which should be shunned as the playground of evils, 
but should be regarded as the place of ever-present 
opportunities given to us for the purpose of unfold- 
ing all our spiritual possibilities and powers for the 
sake of the universal welfare. There is no need for us 
to shrink, like the snail into his cozy shelter, before 
the duties and burdens of life. The Bodhisattva, on 
the contrary, finds Nirvana in a concatenation of 
births and deaths and boldly faces the problem 
of evil and solves it by purifying the Bodhi from 
subjective ignorance. 

368 CHAPTER XIII. 

His rule of conduct is: 

"Sabba papassa akaranam, 
Kusalassa upasampada, 
Sacitta pariyodapanam ; 
Etam buddhanu sasanam." ' 

His aspirations are solemnly expressed in this, 
which we hear daily recited in the Mahayana Buddhist 
temples and monasteries and seminaries : 

"Sentient beings, however innumerable, I take vow to save ; 
Evil passions, however inextinguishable, I take vow to destroy; 
The avenues of truth, however numberless, I take vow to study ; 
The way of the Enlightened, however unsurpassable, I take 
vow to attain." 

And an indefatigable pursuit of these noble aims 
will finally lead to the heaven of the Buddhists, Nirvana, 
which is not a state of eternal quietude, but the 
source of energy and intelligence. 

By way of summary, and to avoid all misconcep- 
tions, let me repeat once more that Nirvana is thus 
no negation of life, nor is it an idle contemplation 
on the misery of existence. The life of a Buddhist 
consists by no means in the monotonous repetition 
of reciting the sutras and going his rounds for meals. 
Far from that. He enters into all the forms of life- 
activity, for he does not believe that universal emanci- 

1 The Dharmapada, XIV. 5. Mr. A. J. Edmunds's translation is, 
"Ceasing to do all wrong, 
Initiation into goodness, 
Cleansing ,the heart: 
This the religion of the Buddhas." 

CHAPTER XIII. 369 

ipation is achieved by imprisoning himself in the 
cloister. 

Theoretically speaking, Nirvana is the dispersion of 
the clouds of ignorance hovering around the light of 
Bodhi. Morally, it is the suppression of egoism and 
the awakening of love (karuna). Religiously, it is the 
absolute surrender of the self to the will of the 
Dharmakaya. When the clouds of ignorance are dis- 
persing, our intellectual horizon gets clearer and 
wider ; we perceive that our individual existences are 
like bubbles and lightnings, but that thay obtain 
reality in their oneness with the Body of Dharma. 
This conviction compels us to eternally abandon our 
old egoistic conception of life. The ego finds its 
significance only when it is conceived in relation to 
the not-ego, that is, to the alter ; in other words, self- 
love has no meaning whatever unless it is purified 
by love for others. But this love for others must not 
remain blind and unenlightened, it must be in harmony 
with the will of the Dharmakaya which is the norm 
of existence and the reason of being. The mission of 
love is ennobled and fulfilled in its true sense when 
we come to the faith that says "thy will be done." 
Love without this resignation to the divine ordinance 
is merely another form of egoism : the root is already 
rotten, how can its trunk, stems, leaves, and flowers 
make a veritable growth? 

Let us then conclude with the following reflections 
of the Bodhisattva, in which we read the whole 
signification of Buddhism. 

24 

37O CHAPTER XIII. 

"Having practised all the six virtues of perfection 
(pdramita) and innumerable other meritorious deeds, 
the Bodhisattva reflects in this wise: 

u 'All the good deeds practised by me are for the 
benefit of all sentient beings, for their ultimate puri- 
fication [from sin]. By the merit of these good deeds 
I pray that all sentient beings be released from the 
innumerable sufferings suffered by them in their 
various abodes of existence. By the turning over 
(parivarta) of these deeds I would be a haven for 
all beings and deliver them from their miserable 
existences; I would be a great beacon-light to all 
beings and dispel the darkness of ignorance and make 
the light of intelligence shine.' 

"He reflects again in this wise : 

" 'All sentient beings are creating evil karma in 
innumerable ways, and by reason of this karma they 
suffer innumerable sufferings. They do not recognise 
the Tathagata, do not listen to the Good Law, do 
not pay homage to the congregration of holy men. 
All these beings carry an innumerable amount of 
great evil karma and are destined to suffer in innu- 
merable ways. For their sake I will in the midst of 
the three evil creations surfer all their sufferings and 
deliver every one of them. Painful as these sufferings 
are, I will not retreat, I will not be frightened, I will 
not be negligent, I will not forsake my fellow-beings. 
Why? Because it is the will [of the Dharmakaya] 
that all sentient beings should be universally eman- 
cipated.' 

CHAPTER XIII. 371 

"He reflects again in this wise: 

" 'My conduct will be like the sun-god who with 
his universal illumination seeks not any reward, who 
ceases not on account of one unrighteous person to 
make a great display of his magnificent glory, who 
on account of one unrighteous person abandons not 
the salvation of all beings. Through the dedication 
(parivarta) of all my merits I would make every one 
of my fellow-creatures happy and joyous.' " (The 
Avatamsaka Sutra, fas XIV). 

APPENDIX 

HYMNS OF MAHAYANA FAITH. 

DHARMAKAYA (TATHAGATA). 1 

In all beings there abideth the Dharmakaya; 

With all virtues dissolved in it, it liveth in eternal 

calmness. 

It knoweth nor birth nor death, coming nor going; 
Not one, not two ; not being, not becoming ; 
Yet present everywhere in worlds of beings: 
This is what is perceived by all Tathagatas. 
All virtues, material and immaterial, 
Dependent on the Dharmakaya, are eternally pure in it. 

Like unto the sky is the ultimate nature of the Dhar- 
makaya ; 

Far away from the six dusts, it is defilement-free. 

Of no form and devoid of all attributes is the Dhar- 
makaya, 

In which are void both actor and action : 

The Dharmakaya of all Buddhas, thus beyond com- 
prehension, 

Quells all the struggles of sophistry and dialectics, 

Distances all the efforts of intellection, 

Thoughts all are dead in it, and suchness alone abideth. 

376 APPENDIX. 

THE DHARMAKAYA OF TATHAGATA. 2 

In all the worlds over the ten quarters, 

O ye, sentient creatures living there, 

Behold the most venerable of men and gods, 

Whose spiritual Dharma-body is immaculate and pure. 

As through the power of one mind, 
A host of thoughts is evolved : 
So from one Dharma-body of Tathagata, 
Are produced all the Buddha-bodies. 

In Bodhi nothing dual there existeth, 

Nor is any thought of self present: 

The Dharma-body, undenled and non-dual, 

In its full splendor manifesteth itself everywhere. 

Its ultimate reality is like unto the vastness of space ; 
Its manifested forms are like unto magic shows; 
Its virtues excellent are inexhaustible, 
This, indeed, the spiritual state of Buddhas only. 

All the Buddhas of the present, past, and future, 

Each one of them is an issue of the Dharma-body 

immaculate and pure ; 

Responding to the needs of sentient creatures, 
They manifest themselves everywhere, assuming cor- 
poreality which is beautiful. 

They never made the premeditation 
That they would manifest in such and such forms. 
Separated are they from all desire and anxiety. 
And free and self-acting are their responses. 

APPENDIX. 377 

They do not negate the phenomenality of dharmas, 
Nor do they affirm the world of individuals : 
But manifesting themselves in all forms, 
They teach and convert all sentient creatures. 

The Dharma-body is not changeable, 
Neither is it unchangeable; 
All dharmas [in essence] are without change, 
But manifestations are changeable. 

The Sambodhi knoweth no bounds, 
Extending as far as the limits of the Dharmaloka itself; 
Its depths are bottomless, and its extent limitless ; 
Words and speeches are powerless to describe it. 

Of all the ways that lead to Enlightenment 
The Tathagata knoweth the true significance; 
Wandering freely all over the worlds, 
Obstacles he encountereth nowhere. 

THE TATHAGATA. (i)3 

The Tathagata appeared not on earth, 
Nor did he enter into Nirvana; 
By the supreme power of his inmost will, 
He reveals himself freely as he wills. 4 

This fact is beyond comprehension, 

Belongs not to the sphere of a limited consciousness, 

Only an intelligence perfect and gone beyond 

Is able to have an insight into the realm of Buddhas. 

378 APPENDIX 

The material body is not the Tathagata, 

Nor is the voice, nor the sound : 

Yet he is not beyond the visible and the audible: 

The Buddha has indeed a power miraculous. 

People of little faith are unable to know 

The inmost adytum of Buddhahood. 

It is by the perfecting of primordial karma-intelligence 

That the realm of all Buddhas is revealed. 

All Buddhas come from nowhere, 

And depart for nowhere: 

The Body of Dharma that is pure, immaculate, and 

incomprehensible, 
Is invested with a power miraculously free. 

In infinity of worlds, 

Revealing itself in the body of Tathagata, 

It universally preaches the Law supremely excellent, 

And in its heart no attachment lingers. 

An intellect that knows no limits or bounds 
Perceives no obstacles in all dharmas, 
And penetrates into the depths of the Dharmaloka, 
Revealing itself with a power miraculously divine. 

All sentient beings and all creatures, 
It understandeth thoroughly without difficulty : 
Its Bodies of Transformation are innumerable, 
And universally revealed in all the worlds. 

Those who seek after All-knowledge 

May in course of time attain perfect enlightenment; 

Let them above all purify the heart 

And complete their discipline in Bodhisattvahood. 

APPENDIX. 379 

And then they will see the Tathagata's 
Immeasurable power that comes from his free will; 
Devoid of all doubts they are, and accompanied 
With sages whose virtue is unsurpassable. 

THE TATHAGATA (2). 5 

The Tathagata, in pure golden color, 
And in person resplendent and majestic, 
In innumerable ages past, 
All merits hath accumulated. 

With bliss and wisdom all in perfection, 
And the highest enlightenment attaining. 
And with great loving heart animated, 
He now appeareth in this world of endurance. 

Men and devas and the eight hosts of demons, 
All pay him homage most reverent, 
Who, from his inmost self-being, 
Preacheth the deepest spiritual Dharma. 

Which is so unfathomably deep, 
That Buddha alone can understand it: 
Multitudes of beings, ignorant and blind, 
Listening to it, are unable to comprehend. 

The Tathagata is the great leader of beings ; 
With skill that is excellent and marvellous, 
Guiding all those ignorant souls, 
By degrees bringeth them to Enlightenment. 

380 APPENDIX. 

The heart of all beings is miraculously bright, 
And eternally calm in its being. 
Pure and immaculate and defilement-free, 
It is replenished with all merits. 

Its essence is like unto the sky: 

Devoid of all liminations, 

Knoweth neither birth nor death, 

And there is neither coming nor departing. 

Eternally abiding in the Dharma-essence, 
It is immovable as the Mount Sumeru; 
The oneness in it of all beings 
Is indeed beyond finite knowledge. 

Vulgar minds from time immemorial, 
Blindly clinging to all passions, 
Are thrown deep into the ocean of pain, 
And know not how to escape. 

The most profound doctrine of Tathagata, 
Full of meaning, spiritual and transcendental, 
With recipient intellects in all degrees, 
In harmony unfoldeth he the Law. 

A shower of one taste from above 
Covering all the ten quarters, 
Grasses and trees, woods and forests, 
Roots and trunks, large and small, 

Of all growing on this vast earth, 

Nothing is there that thereby itself benefiteth not. 

The Law delivered by the Tathagata 

May even be likened unto it. 

APPENDIX. 381 

With one voice which is wondrous, 
He giveth utterance to thoughts innumerable, 
That are received by audience of all sort, 
Each understanding them in his own way. 

In this wise among the assemblage, 

None is there but that enters upon Buddha-knowledge 

Such is Buddha's miraculous power, 

Truly called "Incomprehensible." 

REPENTANCE. 6 

Those who repent as prescribed by the Dharma, 
Altogether their earthly sins uproot; 
As fire on doomsday the world will consume, 
With its mountain peaks and infinite seas. 

Repentance burns up of earthly desires the fuel; 
Repentance to heaven the sinners is leading ; 
Repentance the bliss of the four Dhyanas imparteth ; 
Repentance brings showers of jewels and gems ; 

Repentance a holy life renders firm as a diamond; 
Repentance transports to the palace of bliss everlasting; 
Repentance from the triple world's prison releases ; 
Repentance makes blossom the bloom of the Bodhi. 

382 APPENDIX. 

ALL BEINGS ARE MOTHERS AND FATHERS. 

All senient beings in transmigration travel through the six gatis, 
Like unto a wheel revolving without beginning and end, 
Becoming in turn fathers and mothers, men and women: 
Generations and generations, each owes something to others. 

Ye should then regard all beings as fathers and mothers; 
Though this truth is too hidden to be recognised without 

the aid of Holy Knowledge, 
All men are your fathers, 
All women are your mothers. 

While not yet requiting their love received in your prior lives, 
Why should ye, thinking otherwise, harbor enmity? 
Ever thinking of love, endeavor ye to benefit one another ; 
And provoke ye not hostility, quarreling and insulting. 

THE TEN PARAMITAS. 

O ye, sons of Buddha, in the Holy Way trained, 
With the Heart of Highest Intelligence awakened, 
And living in seclusion at the Aranyaka, 
Should practice the ten paramitas. 

At daily meal think ye first of almsgiving, 
And also distribute among beings the Treasure of Law; 
When the three rings 7 are pure, it is called true charity ; 
Through this practice perfected are the merits of discipline. 

APPENDIX. 383 

Would ye understand the merits of almsgiving? 

Know ye that it comes from the heart pure, and not from 

the wealth given ; 

A precious treasure with a heart unclean, 
Is surpassed by a mite with a heart clean. 

Wealth giving is a dana-paramita, 
And there are other dana-paramitas : 
To give away one's life, wife, or children, 
This is called blood-giving. 

Should a man of good family come and ask for the Law 
Let him have all the Mahayana sutras explained, 
And awaken in him the Heart of Highest Intelligence; 
This is called a true paramita. 

With sympathy and pure faith and conscience, 
Embrace ye all beings and befree them from greed, 
That they might attain to the highest intelligence of the 

Tathagata : 
The giving of wealth and of the Law is the first paramita. 

Firmly observing the three sets of the Bodhisattva-gilas, 8 
O ye, evolve the Bodhi, distance birth-and-death, 
Guard the Law of Buddha and make it long live in the world, 
Repent the violation of the c,ilas, and be always mindful 
of the true ones. , 

Subdue ye anger and hate and cultivate in your heart love 

and sympathy; 
Mindful of the karma past, harbor ye not evil thoughts 

against offenders ; 

Be not reluctant for the sake of all beings to sacrifice life : 
This is called the paramitii of meekness. 

In practicing what is hard to practice, hesitate ye not awhile ; 
With ever-increasing energy through three asankheya kalpas, 
Defile not yourselves, but always discipline the heart; 
And for the sake of all creatures seek ye salvation. 

384 APPENDIX. 

Entering into and rising from the Samadhi, spiritual freedom 

is obtained : 

Transforming yourselves and travelling in all the ten quarters, 
Have for all beings the cause of evil desire removed, 
And let them seek deliverance in the doctrine of Samadhi. 

Would ye desire to attain to True Intelligence? 
Friendly approach Bodhisattvas and Tathagatas ; 
Gladly listening to the doctrine transcendental and sublime, 
Attain ye the three disciplines 9 and remove the two obstacles 10. 

Recognising difference in the disposition of beings, 
Apply the medicine proper for each disease : 
Love and sympathy, skill and expediency, each fitting the case, 
Try the proper means for the benefit of the multitudes. 

Would ye know the true meaning of existence? 

The middle path lies in non-attachment, neither "yea" 

nor "nay" ; 

Intelligence pure is unfathomable and unites in Suchness ; 
Identify mine with thine, embracing the whole. 

By the force of intellect, grasping the nature of beings, 

Teach the masses each in accord with his capacity; 

The force of intellect penetrating through the heart of all 

beings, 
Destroys the root of transmigration in birth and death. 

Intelligently judging between black and white, 
Conscientiously take hold of one and put the other aside, 

and let each rest in its place ; 

Samsara and Nirvana are but one in their essence ; 
Fulfilling the meaning of existence, cherish ye not self-conceit. 

These ten deeds of excellence 
Comprise all eighty-four thousand virtues ; 
Each in its class excels all the others, 
And is called the Paramita of Bodhisattva. 

APPENDIX. 385 

Eighty-four thousand samadhis 

Becalm the disturbant mind of all beings; 

Eighty-four thousand dharanis 

Keep away all the prejudices and evil influences. 

The Great Sage, King of Dharma, with marvellous skill, 
Teacheth the Law in three ways and converteth all beings ; 
Casting the net of the Doctrine in the ocean of birth and death, 
He draweth out men and gods to the abode of bliss. 

THE BODHI. " 

All things are of the Bodhi, 

The Bodhi is in all things ; 

The Bodhi and all things are one: 

Who knoweth this is called the World- honored. 

NIRVANA ANDvTHE THREE EVILS. 

Greed is Nirvana; 

So is hate, and folly; 

In these three passions 

There dwells a Buddha-dharma inexpressible. 

Who severalises, thinking, 
xVThere's greed, and hate, and folly, '* 
He is as far from Buddha, 
As heaven from earth. 

The Bodhi and greed, 

They're one, not two : 

Out of one Dharma-gate cometh all; 

Here's sameness, no diversity. 

25 

386 APPENDIX. 

This hearing, the vulgar stand aghast; 
Far from the Buddha-path are they. 
The heart, when innocent of greed, ia 
Is never troubled. 

In whose mind self is lurking still, 
And who imagines that something he has, 
Greedy is this man called, 
And he is bound for hell. 

What is the true nature of greed, 
That is the nature of Buddha-dharma ; 
What is the nature of Buddha-dharma, 
That is the nature of greed. 13 

These two are of one nature ; 
That is, of no-nature; 
Who knoweth this truth, 
Would be the world-leader. 

NON-ATMAN AND PREJUDICE. 14 

There once was an ignorant man ; 

So afraid of the sky was he 

That piteously crying he wandered away. 

Of its sudden collapse he was fearful. 

But the sky has no boundary, 

And to nobody 't will be harmful. 

It was due to his ignorance 

That he trembled so fitfully. 

With the Bhikshus and Brahmans 

It is even so, who are prejudiced. 

Learning that empty is the world, 

Alarmed are they at heart; 

And wrongly imagine that if empty were the nature of Atman 

Nothingness would be the end of all work. 

APPENDIX. 387 

NON-ACTION. 

As the vacuity of sky, 

Being so clear and free of cloud and fog, 

bpon the earth below, 

Betrays no signs a shower to give: 

So the enlightened 

Betray no learning, no intelligence: 

And we, sentient beings, 

Can trace no efforts in their deliverance of the Law. 16 

SELF-E>ELUSION. 

There lived once a painter, 

Who such a monstrous Yaksha painted 

That he himself was terrified 

And losing all his senses on the ground he fell: 

'Tis even so with vulgar minds; 

Infatuated, self-deluded by the senses, 

Of their own error they are unaware, 

And go from birth to birth without an end. 

ALL IN ONE. 

As all the waters in the valley 

Are emptied in the ocean 

Which is of one and the same taste : 

So the enlightened, 

Whatever is 

Good and beneficial, 

Turn over to the Bodhi 

And to that Reality 

In which all things become of one and the same taste. 

388 APPENDIX. 

NIHILISM. 

The vast vacuity of space, 

How limitless and measureless! 

But in the midst of the void 

How could a farmer sow his seeds? 

'Tis even so with Nihilism: 

The past is gone forever, 

The future's not here yet, 

And in the present no Buddha-seeds have they. 

THE NIHILIST. 

A man who suffers from a disease incurable, 

However excellent his treatment be, 

Impossible he will find his health to gain, 

For his defies all means of remedy. 

'Tis even so with them who walk in the way of emptiness ; 

No matter whereso'er they be, 

How blindly they are clinging unto it! 

Such I declare to be incurable. 

THE BUDDHA'S DHARMA (i) 

As in its oneness the element earth 

Embraces diversities of objects, 

And discriminates not this or that; 

Even so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

As in its oneness the element fire 

Burns everything on earth, 

And discriminates not in its nature ; 

Even so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

APPENDIX. 389 

As waters in the vast ocean, 

Absorbing hundreds of streams, 

Are of the same taste forever; 

Even so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

As the dragon-god with thunder and lightning 

Brings showers on the earth all over, 

And the rain-drops discriminate not; 

Even so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

THE BUDDHA'S DHARMA. (2) 

As in her oneness mother earth 

Creates diversities of seeds 

And in her inmost no discrimination knows; 

E'en so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

As in the cloudless sky the sun 
O'er the ten quarters all illuminates, 
And in its brightness shows no difference; 
E'en so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

As high up in the heavens is the moon 
Beheld by all beings on earth, 
And there's nowhere her glory reaches not; 
E'en so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

The Brahma-raja great 

In thousands of worlds himself all manifests 
And knows in his being no diversities; 
E'en so is it with all the Buddha's Dharma. 

39O APPENDIX. 

THE PASSIONS AND WISDOM. 

Only in the filthiness of soil, 

Could the seed be sown and grow; 

Even so in the mire of passion 

Cherished by all sentient beings 

All over the world, 

If by the sons of Buddha well attended to, 

There will grow the seed of Buddha-dharma. 

Just as in filth and mud 

The lotus grows and blooms, 

Even so in a heart defiled with evil karma 

The seeds of Buddha-dharma are growing. 

IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT, (i) 

A mansion there was once which was a hundred thousand 

years of age ; 

No occupant was there, nor doors nor windows; 
Devas and men, all of a sudden, 
There came and burned a lamp; 
And the darkness that dwelt so long 
Departed instantly without a word. 
The inky darkness that the mansion filled 
Resisted not, "I've lived here for ages, 
And I'll never be removed from here." 
Even with karma-consciousness and the horde of passions 

in the heart, 
The analogy holds true. 

Though there abiding many hundred thousand kalpas, 
Their ultimate nature is not true nor real. 
When a traveler, day or night, 
Enters upon the truthful path, 
The lamp of wisdom burns in its full splendor; 
And the horde of evil passions 
Cannot tarry there, even for a moment. 

APPENDIX. 391 

IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT. (2) 

Bright shines the lamp, 

And the inky night is gone. 

But with the darkness 

The quarters vanish not; 

Yet this illuminating lamp, 

If not in the dark, nowhere doth shine : 

For light and dark depend upon each other; 

No selfhood having, 16 they're empty. 

'Tis even so with enlightenment. 

In comes enlightenment, 

And out goes ignorance of its own accord 

But both are like unto the flowers in the air, 

For neither by itself exists ; 

Impossible is one alone, either to keep or to forego. 

THE BODHISATTVA AND ALL BEINGS 17 

Great Mother Earth 

All creatures 

Provides and nourishes, 

But from none of them 

She seeks a favor special, nor is she to any partial: 

So is the Bodhisattva. 

Since his awakening of the Heart, 

Until he gains the depths of the Law 

And realises the highest knowledge, 

He toils to save all creatures, 

Himself no favor seeking, nor to others granting any; 

Regardless of friend and enemy, 

Embracing all with single heart, 

He fashions one and all for Bodhi. 

* * 
* 

392 APPENDIX 

The element Water 

All permeating 

Makes herbs and trees 

In luxury grow, 

Yet any favor special it nor shows nor seeks; 

So is the Bodhisattva; 

With a pure heart of love 

All sentient beings equally embraces he; 

All permeating gradually, universally, 

The seeds immaculate he nourishes, 

Which, breaking down all evils powerful, 

Obtain the fruit of Buddha-knowledge. 

* * 
* 

The element Fire 

Matures and ripens all 

The tender shoots of the cereals; 

Yet the element fire 

From those young plants 

No favor seeks, nor any shows to them; 

So is the Bodhisattva : 

With knowledge-fire 

Matures he all 

The tender shoots of creatures ; 

Yet he from them 

No favor special seeks, nor shows he any. 

* * 
* 

The element Air, 
By reason of its virtue, 
Pervades all over Buddha-lands; 
With the Bodhisattva 
'Tis even so, 

Who with consummate skill 
'To Buddha's children 
Preaches the Doctrine Holy. 

APPENDIX. 393 

THE BODHISATTVA. 
* 

His FIRMNESS. 

As Mara, the evil one, 

Commanding his four armies, 

Even by the devas in the Kamaloka, 

Cannot be overwhelmed; 

So is the Bodhisattva, 

Whose heart, pure and clean, 

By all the hosts of Evil, 

Cannot be tempted, nor confused. 

His PROGRESS. 

As the new moon, 

In size increasing gradually, 

Becomes perfect and full in the end; 

Even so the Bodhisattva, 

With a heart defilement-free, 

All the good dharmas seeking and performing, 

In virtue gradually progresses, 

And finally obtains the Law of Purity, perfect and full. 

His ENLIGHTENMENT. 

The rising sun, 

All illumining, 

All forms and images in the world 

In glory are revealed; 

So is the Bodhisattva : 

The light of knowledge emitting, 

And sentient beings illumining, 

Bringeth he all to wisdom. 

394 APPENDIX. 

His FEARLESSNESS. 

Lion, the king of beasts, 
Majestic, overpowering, 
And in the forest wandering, 
Knows he no fear, no terror; 
So is the Bodhisattva : 
Calmly abiding in Learning, 
Intelligence, and Morality, 
Throughout the universe, 
Wherever he wanders about, 
Knows he no fear, no doubt. 

f His ENERGY. 

The giant elephant, 

With energy wondrous, 

A burden heavy carrying, 

Shows not the least fatigue; 

So is the Bodhisattva: 

Bearing, for the sake of the masses, 

The misery of the flesh, 

He shows not the least apathy. 

His PURITY. 

The lotus-flower, 

Though growing in the marshy land, 

By dirt, or mire, or filth 

Is not defiled; 

So is the Bodhisattva: 

Though living in this world, 

No form of passion 

Ever touches him. 

APPENDIX. 395 

His SELF-SACRIFICE. 

There lived once a man 

Who craftily and skillfully 

Felled the trunks of trees, 

But left the roots untouched, 

That after due time 

They might once more be growing; 

'Tis even so with the Bodhisattva : 

With the upaya that is excellent, 

Desires and passions down he fells, 

But leaves their seed unscathed 

By reason of his all-embracing love, 

And thereby ever and anon comes he on earth. I8 

THE BODHISATTVA'S HOMELESS LIFE. 19 

The homeless Bodhisat regards the home life [or the world 

at large] 

As a hurricane that abates not awhile, 
Or as the moon's illusive image in water cast, 
Which the imagination takes deliberately for the real. 

The water in itself contains no lunar image [real] ; 
The real moon, dependent on water clear, a shadow casts ; 
So are all beings unreal ; only conditionally they exist ; 
Yet 'tis imagined by the vulgar that an Atman they have. 

The Atman is the product of conditions, and real it is not ; 

But for a reality the imagination it takes. 

Have the two prejudices ao removed, 

And we perceive Intelligence most high and peerless. 

396 APPENDIX. 

Our confused imagination is like unto a black storm, 
Blowing over the woods of birth and death, stirs up the 

leaves of consciousness : 

By the four winds of fallacy 'tis haunted all the time, 
And five damnation-causes it produces, 
Entwining are indeed the roots of evil, which are three, 
Through birth and death doth transmigration ever 

onward move. 

Who to the Sutras listen and in them devoutly believe, 
The right view they acquire, removing all the thoughts 

which are fallacious, 

And every instant growing are Seeds of Intelligence, 
And the Samadhi of knowledge great and of spirituality 

is awakened. 

When well disciplined in speculation deep and subtle, 
In the dark no more we grope, nor do we reap the crop 

of pain; 

Perceiving Suchness in the ultimate nature of things, 
Subject and object both gone, and vanished are all sins. 

Female and male, they're attributes, and they are void 

essentially : 
The ignorant imagine and create the two which only 

relatively exist. 
The Buddha has destroyed permanently the cause of 

ignorance, 
And in the ultimate reality nothing particular sees he, 

male or female. 

The excellent fruit of wisdom, if ever attained, remains 

the same for aye; 
The vulgar nathless imagine wrongly and see therein a 

thing concrete and definite. 

The Buddha's features thirty-two are after all no-features ; 
Who sees no-features in the features, the feature true he 

understands. 

APPENDIX. 397 

To wander homeless, and immaculate deeds to practise, 
Over the heart to watch, in solitude quietly to sit: 
This is the rightful way the Bodhisattva cleanses his heart ; 
Erelong will he attain the fruit of enlightenment. 

THE BUDDHIST. 21 

Encourage not, for your self-interests, 

Heterodoxy and false doctrines; 

A merciful heart for all have ye ; 

Remove stupidity and untruth from your minds; 

Be ye Tathagata's most faithful servants; 

And teach the masses who are ignorant, 

To them the Bodhi impart, on yourselves it practising; 

And thereby make the Buddha's name resound on earth ; 

Deliver the multitudes from sin and initiate them 

To the perfect enlightenment of the Buddha: 

Ye by these virtues firmly stand, 

And your Intelligence-heart doth never fail. 

HYMN TO THE BODHISATTVA. 22 

With lovingkindness, a Great Being who saves and protects, 
Regards all beings impartially as his only child; 
Energetically, cheerfully, and without stint, 
His life he sacrifices, uprooting pain, and bringing bliss 
unspeakable. 

Surely he will attain the height of truth and beauty, 
Forever be freed from the entanglement of birth and death. 
And erelong will he the fruit of enlightenment obtain, 
Eternally peaceful, and in the Uncreate joy finding. 

398 APPENDIX. 

A VOW OF THE BODHISATTVA. 23 

For the sake of all sentient beings on earth, 

I aspire for the abode of enlightenment which is most high ; 

In all-embracing love awakened, and with a heart steadily 

firm, 
Even my life I will sacrifice, dear as it is. 

In enlightenment no sorrows are found, no burning desires ; 

'Tis enjoyed by all men who are wise. 

All sentient creatures from the turbulent waters of the 

triple world, 
I'll release, and to eternal pease them I'll lead. 

THE TRUE HOMELESS ONE. 24 

Though not wearing the yellow robe, 
Whose heart is free from defilement, 
In the doctrine of Buddhas, 
He is the true homeless one. 

Though not devoid of showy ornaments, 

Who has cut off all entanglements, 

And in whose heart exists neither knottiness nor looseness, 

He is the true homeless one. 

Though not initiated by the Rules, 

Whose heart is clean of all evil thoughts, 

And open only to tranquillity, intelligence, and virtuous 

deeds, 
He is the true homeless one. 

Though not instructed in the Law, 
Whose insight goes deep into the ultimate, 
And is no more deluded by sham appearances, 
He is the true homeless one. 

APPENDIX. 399 

The mind that takes no thought of the ego, 
That goes beyond the illusory phenomena, 
Yet sinks not into stupidity 
Truly awakened to Intelligence it is. 

Whose mind, awakened to Intelligence, 
Sees no substantiality in the ego, 
And, not seeing, yet remains firm, 
This man cannot be injured. 

THE BODHISATTVA'S SPIRITUAL LIFE. 

Like unto the vast ocean that receives 
All the waters, and yet overflows not; 
Even so is the Bodhisattva, 

Who knoweth no fatigue in seeking the merits of the 
Dharma. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that absorbs 

All the streams, and yet shows no increase; 

Even so is the Bodhisattva, 

Who, receiving the deepest Dharma, nothing gaineth. ' 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that refuses to take filth, 
And wherein when absorbed doth foulness change to purity; 
Even so is the Bodhisattva, 
Whom all the filth of passion cannot tarnish. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean whose bottom is unfath- 
omable ; 

Even so is the Bodhisattva, 

Whose virtues and wisdom are so immeasurable 
That none ever knows their limits. 

4OO APPENDIX . 

Again, like unto the vast ocean in which there's no diversity, 
All the waters and streams pouring thereinto become of 

one taste alone; 
Even so is the Bodhisattva, 
Who listeneth to one note of Dharma. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that existeth not 

For the interests of one individual ; 

Even so is the Bodhisattva, 

Whose aspirations are for the benefit of all. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that embosoms the jewel 

called "all-jewel." 
Of which all jewels are produced ; 
Even so is the jewel-treasure of the Bodhisattva, 
For it is through this that all the other jewels shine. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that produces the three 

kinds of jewel, 

And yet discriminates not between them ; 
Even so is the teaching of the Bodhisattva, 
Who, equally delivering the three yanas, maketh not any 

distinction. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that by degrees becomes 

deeper ; 

Even so is the Bodhisattva, 
Who, practising virtues for the sake of all, 
Forever aspireth after the deepest omniscience. 

Again, like unto the vast ocean that harbors not a corpse ; 
Even so is the Bodhisattva, 

Who. with the heart of purity and the vow of Bodhi, 
Harboreth not a passion, nor the thought of the Qravaka. 

APPENDIX. 4OI 

THE BODHISATTVA'S FAITH, (i) 27 

Perceiving all in one, 

And one in all, 

The Bodhisattva diligent in his work 

Is never given up to indolence. 

Pain he shunneth not, to pleasure he clingeth not, 
As he is ever bent on the deliverance of all beings; 
To him all Buddhas will themselves reveal, 
And of their presence he is never weary. 

He is in the deepest depths Of the Dharma, 

Where is found the inexhaustible ocean of merit. 

All sentient beings in the fivefold path of existence, 

He loveth as his own child; 

Removing things unclean and filthy, 

Supplying them with dharmas pure and immaculate. 

THE BODHISATTVA'S FAITH. (2) 28 

While to the doctrine most high listening, 

The Light of Pure Intelligence within me glows, 

That shining over all the universe 

All the enlightened ones to me reveals. 

Who think there are individuals 
They put themselves in the position most difficult; 
Dharmas have no ego-master which is real, 
For they are merely names and expressions. 

The vulgar and ignorant know not 

That within themselves they have a reality true and real, 
That the Tathagata is not of any particular form; 
Therefore the Tathagata they see not. 

4O2 APPENDIX. 

Dirt and dust obscuring their intelligence-eye, 
Enlightenment perfect and true they see not; 
And throughout kalpas immeasurable and innumerable, 
In the stream of birth and death they go arolling. 

Wandering and rolling is Samsara, 
No-more-arolling is Nirvana; 
Yet Samsara and Nirvana, 
Absolutely, exists neither of them. 

To believer in falsehood and sophistry, 

Samsara is here and Nirvana there ; 

Clearly they grasp not the Dharma of ancient sages, 

Nor understand the Path Incomparable. 

Those who thus cling to forms individual, 

Of Buddha's universal enlightenment, though they hear, 

Themselves negate, and away they wander from th( 

right course of thought; 
Therefore, they cannot see the Buddha. 

Who the Dharma of Truth perceive, 
Serene they are for aye, and abide in Suchness ; 
Enlightenment most truthful they understand, 
Transcending words and all the modes of speech. 

Illusory are all forms individual; 

No such thing as dharma here exists: 

No enlightened ones 

Seek Truth in things particular. 

Whose insight to the past extends, 

To the future and over the present, 

And who fore'er abides in serenity of Suchness, 

He's said to be a Tathagata. 

APPENDIX. 4O3 

THE BODHISATTVA'S FAITH. (3) 29 

I would rather suffer sufferings innumerable 
That I might listen to the voices of Buddhas, 
Than enjoy all sorts of pleasure 
And not hear Buddhas' names. 

The reason why since ages out of mind 
We suffer sufferings countless 
And transmigrate through birth and death, 
Is that we have not heard Buddhas' names 

A reality that exists in things unreal, 
A perfect Intellect synthetising truth and falsehood, 
And that which transcends all the modes of relativity, 
This is called the Bodhi. 

Buddhas of the present are not products of composite 

conditions, 

Nor are those of the past, nor those of the future. 
What is formless in all forms, 
That is the true essence of Buddhas. 

Who thus perceives 

The deepest significance of all existences, 

In innumerable Buddhas, he will see 

The truth and reality of the Dharma-body. 

The Dharma-body knows truth as true, 
And falsehood as false, 
And well understands the realm of reality; 
Therefore, it is called perfect intellect. 

The enlightened has nothing enlightened, 
Which is the true spirituality of all Buddhas: 
And in this wise they behave, 
Neither to be one nor to be two. 

4O4 APPENDIX. 

They see the one in the many, 

They see the many in the one 

The Dharma has nothing to depend upon; 

How could it be a product of combination? 

The actor and the action, 

Neither, really subsists: 

Who can understand this, 

Seeks not reality in either of them. 

And here where reality is unseekable, 
Buddhas find there the resting abode 
The Dharma has nothing to depend upon ; 
And the enlightened have nothing to cling to. 

NOTES 
TO THE APPENDIX 

1 This and the following are translations from some Maha- 
yana texts in the Buddhist Tripitaka, which were rendered 
into the Chinese language at various times from Sanskrit 
mostly through the co-operation of the Hindu missionaries 
and Chinese scholars. A detailed analysis of these texts is 
most urgently needed, as they contain many informations of 
great importance not only concerning the history of Buddhism 
in India but also concerning early Hindu culture generally. 
A rather incomplete idea as to their contents and material and 
general character will be attained by the perusal of Rev. 
Nanjo's Catalogue of the Chinese Tripitaka, Oxford, 1883. 

Mahayana-mulajata-hrdayabhumi-dhyana Sutra, (Nanjo, no. 
955,) fas. iii. 

8 The Avatamsaka, fas. xiv., p. 73. 

3 The Avatamsaka, (Buddhabhadra's translation), fas. xiv, p. 72. 

4 To conceive the Tathagata as a personal being who appear- 
ed on earth for a certain limited time and then eternally dis- 
appeared is not Mahayanistic. He reveals himself constantly 
and of his own will in this world of particulars. 

5 Sarvadharma-pravrtti-nirdefa Sutra (Nanjo, no. 1012) <- 

6 Mahayana-mulajata-hrdavabhumi-dhyana Sutra (Nanjo 955), 
fas. iii, p. 75. 

7 The three rings are: i. the giver, 2. the receiver, and 3. 
the thing given, material or immaterial. 

8 Precepts. The three sets are: i. one relating to good behavior, 
2. to the accumulation of merit, and 3. to lovingkindness toward 
all beings. 

406 NOTES. 

9 The mental (subjective), physical (objective), and oral. 

10 The intellectual and the affective. 

11 Sarvadharma-pravrtti-nirde^a Sutra. 

12 Literally, "when greed is neither born nor dead." This 
means, to live in the world as not living in it. This subjective 
divine innocence is thought by Buddhists the essence of 
the religious life. The consciousness of one's worth, or self- 
conceit, is a great obstacle in the path of perfect virtue. 
As in the case of mechanical work or physical exercise, we 
attain perfect skillfulness only when the work is involuntarily 
done, i.e., without any conscious effort on the part of the 
performer; so in our moral and spiritual life we attain the 
height of virtuousness or saintliness when we identify our- 
selves with the reason of our being. This is Laotze's doctrine 
of non-action or non-resistance, and also the teaching of 
the Bhagavadgita. As remarked elsewhere, when a man 
reaches this stage of religious life, he ceases to be human, 
but divine, in the sense that he transcends the world of good 
and evil and eternally abides in the realm of the beautiful. 

19 This is a very radical statement and is enough to frighten 
timid moralists and "God-fearing" pietists. Therefore, it is 
said that "Give not that which is holy to the dogs, neither 
cast ye your pearls before swine." But think not that this 
is expounding antinomianism. 

"This and all the following are taken from the Kasyapa- 
Parivarta (Nonjo, 805). 

15 This gatha may not be very intelligible to our readers. 
The sense is: Whatever is done by a Buddha or Bodhisattva 
does not come from logical calculation or deliberate premedi- 
tation, but immediately from his inmost heart, which, in 
most natural and freest manner, responds to the needs of 
the suffering. This response is altogether free from all human 
elaboration, for the Buddha shows no painful and struggling 
efforts in so doing. Everything he does is like the work of 
nature herself. His life is above the narrow sphere of human 
morality which is marked with a desperate struggle between 
good and evil. His is in the realm of the divinely beautiful. 

NOTES . 4O7 

16 "Having no selfhood" (svabhavd), means that things have 
no independent existence, no self-nature which will eternally 
preserve their thingish identity. This theory has been ex- 
plained in the chapter dealing with the doctrine of non-atman. 
To state summarily, darkness and light are conditioned by 
each other; apart from darkness there is no light, and con- 
versely, without light darkness has no meaning. Even so with 
enlightenment and ignorance: one independent of the other, 
they have no existence, they cannot be conceived. They are 
like imaginary flowers in the air projected there by a confused 
subjectivity. They are nothing but our ideal fabrication. To 
cling to God only, forgetting that we are living in the world 
below, in the world of relativity, is just as much one-sided 
as to lose ourselves in the whirlpool of earthly pleasures 
without the thought of God. Life, however, is not antithetic, 
but synthetic. Truth is never one-sided, it is always in the 
middle. Therefore, seek enlightenment in ignorance and truth 
in error. A dualistic interpretation of the world and life is 
not approved by Buddhists. Compare the sentiment expressed 
herein with Emerson's poem as elsewhere quoted, in which 
these lines occur: 

"But in the mud and scum of things, 
There always, always, something sings." 

11 The Kasyapaharivarta Sutra (Nonjo, 805.) 

18 The sense is: The Bodhisattva never desires a complete 
absorption in the Absolute, in which no individual existences 
are distinguishable, fie always leaves the "Will to live" 
unhurt, as it were, so that he could come in this world of 
particulars ever and anon. What he has destroyed is the 
egoistic assertion of the Will, for the aim of Buddhism is 
not to remove the eternal principle of life, but to manifest 
it in its true significance. The wishes of the Bodhisattva, 
therefore, are never egocentric ; he knows that transmigration 
and rebirth are painful, but as it is by rebirth alone that he 
could mingle himself in the world of sin and save the suffering 
creatures therein, he never shuns the misery of life. His 
work of revelation is constant and eternal. 

19 The Mahayana-midajati-hrdayabhumi-dhyana Sutra, fas. IV. 

408 NOTES 

20 The two prejudices or obstacles that lie in our way to 
enlightenment are: i that which arises from intellectual 
shortsightedness; 2. that which arises from impurity of heart. 

31 Sutra on Makdkdsyapa's Question Concerning the Absolute. 

22 Suvarna-Prabha Sutra. 

23 Suvarna-Prabha Sutra, Chap. 26 

24 Padmapani Sutra, Fas. 8. 

25 The Avalamsaka Sutru. 

28 This means that the heart of the Bodhisattva which is 
pure and eternal in its essential nature has nothing added 
externally to it by studying the Dharma; for the Dharma is 
nothing else than the expression of his own heart. 

27 The Avatamsaka^ fas. IX, p. 48. This pantheistic thought 
of the One-All is generally considered to be Buddhistic; but 
the truth is that every genuine religious sentiment inevitably 
leads us to this final conviction. Even in the so-called trans- 
cendental monotheistic Christianity, we find the pantheistic 
thought boldly proclaimed and put in contrast to the idea 
of "our Father which art in Heaven." For instance, read the 
following passage from Thomas a Kempis: "He to whom all 
things are one, he who reduceth all things to one, and seeth 
all things in one, may enjoy a quiet mind, and remain at 
peace in God." (Chap. III.) The passage in the Gospel of 
John declaring that "the Father is in me and I in him," when 
logically carried out, comes to echo the same sentiment 
entertained by Buddhists, who recognise a manifestation of 
the Dharmakaya in all beings, animate as well as inanimate. 
The Christianity of to-day is that of Paul as expounded in 
his letters, but the future one will advance a few steps more 
and will be that of John. 

78 From the Avatamsaka Sutra. 

29 From the Avatamsaka Sutra. 

INDEX. 

Abhimuki (sixth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 318. 

Acala (eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 322. 

Agoka, King, 49. 

Agrava (evil), explained, 249 ft. 

Agunya, 22, 95. 

Agvaghosha, 4, 8, 61 ft., 65 ft., m; 115; on Alaya, 66ft. 
I2Q. 139 ft- ; Awakening of Faith, 7; on Suchness, 99; 
on Ignorance, 118; and Dionysius, 102 ft. ; Buddhacarita, 
quoted, 147; on Mahayanism, 246 ; on the Sambhogakaya, 

258, 333- 

Agnosticism, 25. 

Alaya (or Alaya-vijnana), All-conserving Soul, 66 ; as depos- 
itory of "germs", 66 ; creator of the universe, 68 ; and 
the Garbha, 125 et seq ; its evolution, 128 ; and the 
soul, 165 ; and the twelve nidanas, 183. 

Amitabha, 207, 219, 269 

Ananartha (non-particularisation), 72. 

Ananda attempts to locate the soul, 157. 

Anapanam, exercise in breathing, 53 ft* 

Arada, 146. 

Arcismati (fourth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 316, 

Arhatship and Mahayanism, 288. 

Aryadeva, 3 ft., 8, 60. 

Asanga (and Vasubandhu), 4, 62, 65, 69, 87, 88, 153, 231, 
234, 263, 354. 

41O INDEX. 

Asceticism repudiated, 52, 53. 

Atman, and Samkhyan Lingham, 38 ; and the Vedantic garira, 
38 ; and Vijnana, 39 ; and unity of consciousness, 
40 ; and karma, 41 ; and impermanency, 43 ; and egoism, 
44; and the "old man", 165. (See also uego" and "soul".) 

Atonement, vicarious, 291 ft. 

Avatamsaka Sutra, The, on Bodhisattva's reflections, 369 
et seq. 

Avenikas (unique features), 327 ft. 

Avidya (ignorance), 35 et seq., 115. 

Balas, Ihte ten, of the Buddha, 327. 

Beal, Samuel, refuted, 20 et seq. Catena of Buddhist 

Scriptures, quoted, 157 ft.; Romantic History of Buddha, 

quoted, on Buddha's enlightenment, 337. 
Bhagavadgzta, quoted, 126 ft. 
Bhutatathata (Suchness), 99 et seq ; and Mahayana, 7 ; and 

perfect knowledge, 92. 
Bodhi (wisdom), 46 ; and Prajna etc., defined, 82 ft. ; as 

perfect knowledge, 92 ; its meaning explained, 294 ; by 

Nagarjuna, 297 ; as a reflex of Dharmakaya, 299 ; how 

awakened in human heart, 302. 

Bodhicitta (Intelligence-heart), 52. (See also "Bodhi.") 
Bodhi-Dharma, of Dhyana sect, 103, 149, 155. 
Bodhipakshikas, the seven, 316 et seq. 
Bodhisattva, above samsara and nirvana, 72 ; in the three 

yanas, 277 ; the conception of, in primitive Buddhism, 

286 ; we are, 290 ; and love, 292 ; his ten pranidhanas, 

308 ; his reflections, 369. 

Bodhisattvahood, ten stages of, 70, 311 et seq. 
Bodhisattva-yana, 9. 
Brahdaranyaka Upanishad, quoted, 102 ft. 

INDEX. 411 

Buddha, and his self-relying spirit, 57; culmination of good 
karma, 215; in the Mahayana texts, 243; the idealisation 
of, historically treated, 249 et seq.; in the Trikaya;252; 
the human, and the spiritual Dharmakaya, 255 ; his 32 
major and 80 minor marks of greatness, 271 ; in the 
process of idealisation, 289 ; in the Mahayanism, 291 ; 
and Mara, 334; on the ego-soul in the beginning of his 
religious career, 337. 

Buddhacarita, quoted, 57. 

Buddhadharma, 355. 

Buddha- Essence, Discourse on, 357 ft. 

Buddha-intelligence, 364. 

Buddhism(s), geographically divided, 3,4; two, 4 et seq. ; 
and atheism, 31 ; and the soul problem, 31 et seq. ; and 
agnosticism, 35 ; and modern psychology, 40; intellectual, 
56 et seq. ; liberal, 56 et seq. ; and speculation, 81 et 
seq. ; and science, 97. 

Buddhist(s) classified, 8 et seq. ; life and love, 52 ; ideal, 
53; aspiration, 368; rule of conduct, 368. ^ 

(Jakyamuni contrasted to Devadatta, 200. 

Carlyle's Hero- Worship, quoted, 325 ft. 

Causation,uni versa! j aqH pmpHness. 176.^ 

Christ and Buddha, compared, 57, 58. 

Christian conception of the ego-soul, 166. 

Christianity, the growth of, compared with Mahayanism, 

12 et seq.; and its founder, 13; not intellectual, 79. 
Qikshas (moral rules), ten, 70 ft. 
Confucius, 63 ft. 
Consciousness, subliminal, 201. 
Conservation of energy, and karma, 34. 
Convictions, the four, of the Buddha, 327. 

412 INDEX. 

Qravaka, 277. 
(Jravaka-yana, 9. 
frimdla Sutra, quoted, 127. 

Qunyata, (or gunya), 22, 95; and Christian critics, 105; 
explained, 173; and universal causation, 176. 

Dagabhumi, (see "ten stages of Bodhisattvahood"), 311,329 

Deussen, P., quoted, 107. 

Devala, 361, 364. 

Dharma, its meaning, 21, 221. 

Dharmadhatu, 115 ft, 193. 

Dharmakaya, Mahayana, 7 ; briefly explained, 20, 45 et 
seq. ; the highest principle, 35 ; and Brahman, 46 ; and 
Paramatman, 46 ; and God of Christians, 46 ; as love 
and wisdom, 46, 54, 55 > and non-ego, 47; and the Gol- 
den Rule, 48; and Bodhisattvas, 61 ; its universal incar- 
nation, 63 ft. 5 in the Trikaya, 73,257; as perfect know- 
ledge, 92 ; and prajna, 94 ; as a cosmic mind, 123 ; a 
unity, 193; and Suchness, 217; as God, 219; as religious 
object, 222 ; in the Avatamsaka Sutra, 223 ; its detailed 
characterisation, 224; in the phenomenal world, 231; as 
love, 232 ; as a loving heart in the Avatamsaka, 233 ; 
its seven characteristics, 234 ; by Asanga and Vasubandhu, 
234; its five modes of operation, 235 ; its freedom, 236; 
its purvanidhanabala, 237; as rational will, 238; as father, 
239; and its perpetual revelation, 259; the evolution of 
its conception, 272 ; all beings are one in, 290 ; and the 
Bodhi, 295. 

Dharmapada, The, quoted, 34, 145, 336, 368. 

Dharmamegha (tenth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 326. 

Dharmapala, the Anagarika, 3 ft. 

Discourse on Buddha- Essence, The, by Vasubandhu, 357. 

Durangama (seventh stage of Bodhisattvahood), 319. 

INDEX. 413 

Ego, not the source of energy, 55 ; noumenal, 145, 163 ; 
phenomenal, 145 ; empirical, 163. 

Egoism and the evolution of Manas, 134. 

Ego-soul, and its attributes, 147 ; and the five skandhas, 
149; located by Ananda, 157; and the Christian flesh, 
1 66 ; and the Vedantic conception, 167 et seq. ; and 
Nagarjuna, 168 ; and svabhava, 171; and Christians, 212; 
as conceived by Buddha when he started on his religious 
career, 337. (See also "Ego", "atman" and "soul"). 

Ekacitta, (one mind or thought), 70 ft. 

Elders, the School of, 248 et seq. 

Elephant and the blind, 100. 

Emerson, quoted, 29 

Enlightenment, 55, 119; and manas, 134; two obstacles to, 
344 ft. 

Faith, its contents vary, 27 et seq. 
Fatalism, 196. 

Gautama and Christ, 29. (See also '-Buddha"), 
God, the Buddhist, 219. (See also "Dharmakaya"). 
Goethe's Faust, quoted, 181. 
Golden Rule, the, universal, 54. 
Great Council School, the, 248 et seq. 
Guyau, French sociologist, 50 ft., 84. 

Hartmann's Unbewusste, 137. 

Hetus and Pratyayas, 33, 41, 142, 148. 

Hinayanism, I, 60, 63, 280. 

Hugo, Victor, quoted, 58 

Hui-K'e, second patriarch of Zen sect, 148. 

41 4 INDEX. 

Iccantika (incapable of salvation), 311. 

Ignorance, 35 et seq. ; and evolution, 115; and conscious- 
ness, 120; no evil, 122; when evil ? 124; and Tathagata- 
Garbha, 126; and Manas, 133; and Prakrit, 138 ft. 

Imitation of Christ, 365 fn. 

Immortality, 38 ; and Dharmakaya, 54 ; karmaic and not 
individual, 214. 

Injustice, social, and karma, 186 

Intelligence, awakened by love, 362. 

Jataka Tales, the, quoted, 156. 
Jesus, 6. 
Jivatman, 145, 

Kant, 6; Critique of Pure Reason., quoted, 324. 

Karma, and the law of causation, 33 ; briefly explained, 
33 et seq. ; and non-atman, 42 ; and suchness, 181 ; de- 
nned, 181 ; the working of, 183; irrefragable, 184; and 
injustice, 186; and the moral laws, 189; an individualistic 
view, 192 ; and the desire to communicate, 195 ; ami 
determinism, 196 ; not like a machine, 198 ; and immor- 
tality, 203 ; and Walt Whitman (quoted), 203 ; how trans- 
mitted, 205 ; and Dharmakaya, 207 ; and productions of 
^rt.2o8 : and invention, 210; and "seeds of activity," 

KarmT-seeds, 134. 

Karuna (love), 46, 82, 238, 296; and Prajna, 360. 

Kathopanishad, quoted, 4/. 

Knowledge (sambodhi), 3 ft. ; three kinds of, 67, 87. 

Kugalamula, 199. 

Lalita Vistara, quoted, on Nirvana, 339 fn. 

INDEX. 4l5 

Lankavatara Sutra, quoted, 41, 130. 

Laotze, 63 ft. 

Laotzean Wn wei, 285. 

Love, and ego, 55 ; and Nirvana, 362. 

Madhyamika, The, on Nirvana, 347. 

Madhyamika school, 21, 62, 66; and the Yogacarya, on 

truth, 95. 

Mahapurusa, Discourse on the, 361. 
Mahasangika, I ft. 
Mahayana, I et seq ; its original meaning, 7 ; and Bodhisat- 

tvas, 61 ; and Hinayana, 70 ; and spiritual life, 71 ; and 

Samkhya, 136. 

Mahayana-Abhisamaya Sutra, quoted, 45. 
Mahay ana-Sangr aha fdstra, 354. 
Mahayanism, (Mahayana Buddhism), defined, 10 et seq. ; is 

it genuine? n et seq.; as a living faith, 14 et seq.; 

and its Christian critics, 15; misunderstood, 16 et seq.; 

historically treated, 60 et seq. ; and Sthiramati, 61 et seq. ; 

its seven features, 62 et seq. ; and metempsychosis, 64 > 

ten essential features, 65 et seq.; in its two phases, 76 

et seq.; no nihilism, 135 ft.; the development of, 247; 

and individualism, 282. 
Maitreya, 272. 

Manas (self-consciousness). 132. 
Manjugri, 106. 

Manovijnana (ego-consciousness), 67, 69, 
Masashige, Kusunoki, 213, 
Maudsley, H., quoted, 80. 
Max Mueller, quoted, 108 ft, in ft,, 221. 
Maya, subjective ignorance, 47. 
Merits, the accumulation of, 199. 

4 1 6 INDEX. 

Middle path, Doctrine of the, 59, 358 ; of Eight No's, 103. 
Milinda-Panha^ quoted, 203. 
Mitra, Rajendra, referred to, 329 ft. 
Monier Monier- Williams, refuted, 18 et seq. 

Nagarjuna, 3 ft, 4, 8, 21, 60, 66, 95, 96, 100, 103, 168, 
171, 173, 292, 297, 353- 

Nagasena and King Milinda, 153. 

'<Na iti," 102. 

Nanatva, (difference), 72 ft. 

Nidanas, the twelve, 36 et seq., 179, 182. 

Nirmanakaya, (Body of Transformation), 73, 257, 268. 

Nirvana, 19 ; and its non-Buddhist critics, 49 ; briefly ex- 
plained, 49 et seq. ; and the surrender of ego, 50 ; and 
Dharmakaya, 51; and love, 51, 58; and pessimism, 52; 
and ethics, 53; and Parinishpanna (knowledge), 94; what 
is> 33 ! et seq. ; not nihilistic, 332 ; Mahayanistic, 341 ; 
and Dharmakaya, 342 ; the Mahayanistic conception of, 
342 et seq. ; absolute, 343 ; four forms of, 343 ; upadhic.esa, 
344 ; Anupadhic.esa, 344 , that has no abode, 345 ; and 
i Cor. 7, 30—31, 346; as synonym of Dharmakaya, 846 
by Chandra Kirti, 347 ; its four attributes, 348 ; its religi- 
ous phase, 349; and Emerson, 352; and samsara are 
one, 352 ; and St. Paul, 352 ; and the Eight No;s of 
Nagarjuna, 358 ; the realisation of, 360 ; as the Middle 
Path, 362 ; comprehensively treated, 367 et seq. 

Non-atman, 37 et seq.; in things, 41 et seq, 170; and 
impermanence of things, 141, (see also "non-ego", "self, 
"soul", "ego"). 

Non-duality, the Dharma of, 106. 

Non-ego and Dharmakaya, 47 ; and the Ganges water, 
156. 

INDEX. 417 

No's, The Eight, of Nagarjuna, 358. 
"Old man" and Atman, 165. 

Paramartha-satya (absolute truth), 91 et seq. 

Paramatman, 145. 

Paramita, 3 ft. ; six, 68 ; ten, 321. 

Paratantra (relative knowledge), 67 ; explained, 89, 

Parikalpita (illusion), 67 ; explained, 88. 

Parinishpanna (perfect knowledge,), 67 ; explained, 91. 

Parivarta, (turning over), 19, 194 ; doctrine of, 283. 

Paul, Apostle, quoted, 48, 166, 260, 262. 

Pingalaka, Nagarjuna's commentator, quoted, 172. 

Prabhakari (third stage of Bodhisattvahood), 315. 

Prajna (and Bodhi), defined, 62 ft.; 82, 97, 119, 238, 360. 

Prakrti (Samkyan primordial matter), 67 ft. 

Pramudita (first stage of Bodhisattvahood), 313. 

Pranidhana, a Bodhisattva's, 307. 

Pratisamvids, the four, 325. 

Pratyayasamutpada, (Nidanas), 36 et seq. 

Pratyekabuddha, 278. 

Pratyekabuddha-yana, 9. 

Precepts, the ten moral, 70 ft. 

Pudgala (ego), 42, 143 ft. 

Punyaskandha, 199. 

Pure Lands, 269. 

Purusha (Samkyan soul), 67 ft. 

Purvanidhanabala, 237. 

Religion, its significance, 22 et seq.; not revealed, 23; and 
mystery, 24 ; its intellectual and emotional sides, 25 et 
seq. ; and science, 26 ; intellect and feeling in, 77 ; and 

41 8 INDEX. 

philosophy, 78 ; subjective, 81 et seq. ; not a philoso- 
phical system, 85. 
Rockhill's Life of the Buddha, quoted, on Nirvana, 338 fn. 

Saddharma Pundarika, quoted, 260 ft., 274, 277. 

Sadhumatt, (ninth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 325. 

Samata (sameness), 72 ft. 

Sambodhi, (see "Bodhi''). 

Sambhogakaya (Body of Bliss), 65 ft., 73, 257 ; in Agva- 

ghosha, 258 ; its six features, 264 ; a mere subjective 

existence, 266. 
Samkhya philosophy, and Yogacarya school, 67 ft ; referred 

to, 146 ft. ; on Nirvana, 340. 
Samvrtti-satya (conditional truth), 95 et seq. 
Samyukta Nikaya, quoted, 156, 185. 
Sanskaras, enumerated, 151 et seq. 
Schopenhauer, 181. 
Skandhas, the five, 32 ft., 149. 
Soul-substance, denied, 164. 
Sthavira, I ft. 

Sthiramati, on Mahayanism, 61 et seq.; on Bodhicitta, 299. 
Suchness, (see also Bhutatathata), 3 ; the first principle of 

Buddhism, 99 et seq. ; indefinable, 101 ; conditioned, 

109; in history, no; in the world, 113 ; and the Bodhi, 

114; and ignorance, 117; in its various modes, 125; and 

Dharmakaya, 127; and karma, 181. 
Sudurjaya, (fifth stage of Bodhisattvahood), 318. 

Sukhavati sect, the, 4, 240. 

i 

Sumedha, the story of, 280. 

Surangama Sutra, quoted, 157. 

Suvarna Prabha Sutra, 253 ft. 

Svabhava, and non-ego, 170 et seq.; and emptiness, 175. 

INDEX. 419 

"Tat tvam asi," 47, 136 ft. 

Tathagata-Garbha, 125, 145. 

Teleology, 86. 

Tennyson, quoted, 82. 

Tirthakas, 8. 

Tolstoi, quoted, in connection with karma, 207 ft. 

Trikaya, (trinity), 73, 242, 256, 275. 

Truth (satya), conditional and transcendental, 95. 

Udana, quoted, 52, 339 ft, 341. 
Universe, a mind, 122. 

Upaya (expediency), 64, 261 ft.; its meaning explained, 
298 ft 

Upayajna, 320. 
^ 

Vaigaradyas (convictions), the four, 327 ft. 

Vairocana, 219. 

Vasubandhu, 87, 153; his Abhidharmakofa , referred to, 
37 ; on Mahayana, 66 ; On the Completion of Karma, 
quoted, 194 ; The Distinguishing of the Mean, quoted, 
195 ; on llodhicitta, 303 ; on Nirvana, 357, 359, 360. 

Vasumitra, on Various Schools of Buddhism, I ft. 

Vedanta philosophy, and the Mahayanism, 108 ft.; on Nir- 
vana, 340-; on Atman, 144. 

Vicesacinta-brahma-Pariprccha Sutra, 353. 

Victory, the hymn of, 336. 

Vijnana, and atman, 39. 

Vijnanamatra, (nothing but ideas), 70. 

Vijnanamatra fastra, 265 ft., 343. 

Vimala (second stage of Bodhisattvahood), 315. 

Vimalakirti, 106, 350, 366. 

Visuddhi Magga, quoted, 339, 348 ft. 

42O INDEX. 

Waddell, refuted, 21 et seq. 
Whitman, Walt, quoted, 155 ft., 197. 
Wilson, Dr. G. R., quoted, 201. 

Yoga philosophy, The, on Nirvana, 340. 
Yogacarya school, 62, 65, 87, 92, 95. 
Yogavasistka} a vedantic book, quoted, 167. 

', > 

ro 

YB 70510 

LIBRARY USE 

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 

LOAN DEPT. 

THIS BOOK IS DUE BEFORE CLOSING TIME 
ON LAST DATE STAMPED BELOW 

- 

-f^fr 

- ^