JAPANESE BUDDHISM 

BY THE LATE 

SIR CHARLES ELIOT 

P.C., G.C.M.G., C.B. 

SOMETIME H.M. AMBASSADOR AT TOKYO 
AUTHOR OF “HINDUISM AND BUDDHISM”, ETC., 

■ 

< 1 ^ 

LONDON 

EDWARD ARNOLD & CO. 

ETC. 

COPYRIGHT 

FIRST PUBLISHED 1935 

CONTENTS 

v/ 

In Piam Memoriam. By Sir Harold Parlett . 

BOOK I. A SURVEY OF BUDDHISM IN INDIA 
AND CHINA. 

Page 

vii 

Chap. 

I. The Canons 
II. The Doctrines 

III. Buddhism IN India 

IV. The Pantheon . 

V'. Buddhism in China 

3 

30 

62 

09 

M2 

■•>v 

4 - 

t 

BOOK II. HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM. 

VI. Prefatory Remarks . . . . \ 179 

VII. Introduction of Buddhism .... 197 

VIII. Nara Period ; — The Older Sects . . . 218 

IX. Heian Period : — Tendai and Shingon . . 233 

X. Rise of New Sects : — Jodo and Shinshu . . 254 

XI. Rise of New Sects : — ^Nichirbn and Zen . 275 

XII. The Dark Ages 289 

XIII. Tokugawa Period : — Crystallization of the 

' Church . 306 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

Japanese Buddhism is complementary to Sir Charles Eliot’s earher 
work, Hinduism and Buddhism, which appeared in 192 Id It may 
be asked what influenced him m the selection of this particular 
field for investigation, why his choice did not instead fall on China, 
Tibet, Burma, or Siam, older adherents to the faith and closer to 
its cradle. A partial answer is perhaps to be found in certain 
advantages which Japan offered for his xjurpose. Eor although in 
all these countries alike a vast wealth of material existed, — canonical 
writiugs, exegetical literature, and the hke, — the accumulation 
of centuries of patient and pious toil, not in every one was it equally 
accessible ; and in China, in fact, it was scattered over a very wide 
area. In Japan, however, not only was this material available in 
a form both compact and complete ; but also, owing to the insular 
position of the coimtry, to its entire immunity from invasion, and 
to a practical isolation from the rest of the world extending over 
more than two hundred years, the practices, ritual, documents, 
and iconography of Mahayanist Buddhism had been preserved in 
singular integrity. To quote the author’s own words, the Buddhism 
of Japan was “the lineal and recognized descendant of the creed 
held by Nagfirjuna, Vasubandhu, and ^fintideva ”. Moreover, 
its history offered phenomena of peculiar interest to the student 
of religion in Europe, — the conflict between Church and State, 
the growth of protestant sects “ casting aside ritual to offer 
the common man salvation by faith” or preaching national or 
universal religion, the evolution of an Established Church lapsing 
finally into comfortable torpor, — ^to mention only a few examples. 
We may conjecture that these were all material factors in shaping 
his choice. To them might be added a deep and abiding interest 
in Japan itself and its people, the unique opportunities which his 
position offered for the collection of the data required, and, finally, 
the fact that he had been obhged, for reasons beyond his control, 
materially to abridge the section of his work on the religions of 
India devoted to the discussion of the history and development 
of Buddhism m Japan. For when Sic Charles Eliot wrote 
Hinduism and Buddhism he was still, so to speak, a private individual, 
responsible to none for his opinions or their expression ; but before 

* Published by Messrs. Edward Arnold and Co„ London. 

viii IN PIAM MB3I0RIAM 

the- moment arrived for its publication lie bad been appointed 
Ambassador in Tokyo ; and/feeling that be was no longer a free 
lance, at liberty to write as be pleased, be decided that tbe cbapters 
deabng with Japanese Buddhism must be drastically cut down and 
the subject treated only in tbe most general manner. Tbe survey 
in Hinduism uwd BtuUMsm was therefore very brief. Tbe material 
be bad accumulated was nevertheless not to be lost ; for be 
determined to make it tbe foundation of an entirely separate work, 
to be written in tbe distant future when bis ofibcial connection with 
Japan should be severed. 

It is on these rejected cbapters, supplemented by a mass of 
additional information gathered during his six years’ residence in 
tbe country, that Japanese B'uddMsm is based. The actual writing 
of it was begun in the autumn of 1926 at Kara, some months after 
bis retirement, and, except for a brief interruption, when be 
turned aside to prepare two articles for tbe new edition of tbe 
Encyclopsedia Britannica,^ occupied most of bis time till the spring 
of 1928. There followed a short visit to Europe ; but early in 1929 
be was back at work again in Nara ; and by tbe close of the next 
year only the last chapter of tbe book, which deals with the 
Nicbiren sect, remained unwritten. His task thus almost ended, 
he began to naake arrangements to return to England, proposing 
to complete at home the final preparation of bis MS. for the printer. 
But this was not to be. In December of 1930 be bad a severe 
attack of influenza ; and although be succeeded eventually in shaking 
it off, the disease bad in tbe meantime wholly undermined a 
constitution never robust and abeady gravely impaired by another 
malady. He was thus really unfit to face the long and tedious 
voyage before him; but, despite the advice of bis friends, be was 
determined to keep to bis plans ; and, accordingly, in February of 
1931 be sailed from Kobe, travelling, as was bis habit, via Suez m 
a J apanese steamer. At the start bis health showed signs of 
improvement; but this, alas, was only momentary, and by the 
tune tbe ship reached Singapore bis condition bad become so serious 
that it was clear to ail that he would never live to reach bis 
destination. Even then be insisted on continuing bis journey. 
Two days later, on tbe 16tb of March, be died and was buried at sea 
in tbe Straits of Malacca. 

^ He had already contributed to the 11th edition articles on Asia (History), 
Esthonia (in part), Hungary (language), the Tartars (in part), the Turks, etc. 

IN PIAM MEMOEIAM ix 

It was at the close of the chapter on the Zen sect that he laid 
down his pen, not to take it np again. His executors have thus 
been faced with a dilemma. Must the book be published as it stood, 
incomplete, or should the missing chapter be added, written by 
another hand 1 It was decided after careful consideration that the 
latter was probably what he himself would have preferred ; and 
thereupon Mr. G. B. Sansom,^ of the British Embassy in Tokyo, 
who had read the manuscript in its draft form and had also supplied 
Sir Charles Ehot with a considerable amount of information on 
points relating to Japanese history and art, was asked to undertake 
the task. The last chapter is therefore his. He, too, has been 
responsible for the arrangement of the manuscript for the printer 
and, in particular, for the editing of the notes, many of which, as is 
indicated by marginal comments, the author meant to cut out 
entirely or greatly to abbreviate. The chapter headings and the 
index have been prepared under the superintendence of the 
publishers. It seems, however, almost superfluous to remark 
that Japanese BvddMsm as it now leaves the printer’s hands 
is not what it would have been had Sir Charles Eliot lived to 
complete it and to make those revisions he certainly contemplated ; 
but at least it may be said that nothing has been added, nothing 
taken away, without careful study of all notes and other evidence 
which could be interpreted as showing his intention ; and, except 
perhaps for two-thirds of the chapter on the Mchiren sect, the book 
is in his own words. 

In the preparation of this work its author doubtless had frequent 
occasion to seek advice from friends and other scholars ; but on this 
point our information is unfortunately incomplete. Among those, 
however, to whom he was certainly indebted are Professor Masaharu 
Anesaki and Professor Junjiro Takakusu, — ^those two great 
authorities on the religions and philosophies of the Ear East, — 
Dr. Teitaro Suzuki, of the Otani University in Kyoto, the Beverend 
Kokai Kitagawara, of the Todaiji monastery at Nara, Professor 
Shoun Togao, of the Koyasan University, Mr. Sansom himself, 
as we have shown, and, last but by no means least, Mr. Shuten 
Inouye, of His Majesty’s Consulate-General in Kobe. He must 
also have obtained much valuable material from the authorities 
of the innumerable temples and monasteries which he visited in the 
course of his travels in Japan ; but here we have no names to guide 

^ Author of Japan, a Short Cultural History, the Cresset Press, London, 1931. 

X 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

us. To all tliose friends, known and unknown, who helped Mm 
he would unquestionably have wished to express his indebtedness. 

^ ^ ^ 

It is perhaps not unfitting that the preface of his last work should 
contain some account, however brief and imperfect, of the life and 
career of this great scholar and distinguished servant of the Empire. 

He came of old and honourable stock, claiming on Ms father’s 
side a distant kinship with two well-known houses of the west 
country,— St. Germans and Mount Bdgeumbe, — and, on his 
mother’s, descent from that Sir Thomas Wyatt, poet and courtier, 
who was sometime Ambassador of King Henry the Eighth at the 
Court of the Emperor Charles the Fifth and whose son, another 
Sir Thomas Wyatt, of name more famihar, died on the scaffold m 
the reign of Queen Mary. The family would appear to have 
remained through many generations closely connected with the 
county of its origin ; but little is known of its fortunes. Towards 
the end of the eighteenth century, however, an Edward Eliot was 
Vicar of Maker, a village between Port Eliot and Mount Edgeumbe 
in Cornwall. His son Edward became a Fellowr of Exeter College, 
Oxford, held for some years the post of Archdeacon of Barbados 
in the West Indies, then, returning to England, settled down 
finally as Vicar of Horton Bavant near Warminster in Wiltshire, 
a living in the gift of the Lord Chancellor. This BHot in turn had 
a son, also named Edward, who, after a distinguished University 
career ending with a Fellowship at Hew College, decided to adopt 
the law as a profession, but, abandoning his intention before he had 
been called to the Bar, followed the family tradition and took Holy 
Orders instead. At Tredington in Worcestershire, where he was 
later curate, he fell in love with and married a very beautiful and 
clever girl, Elizabeth Harriet Wyatt Watling, the youngest daughter 
of the Rector of the parish. From Tredington the newly married 
pair w^ent to live at Sibford Gower, a small independent cure in 
Oxfordshire ; and, here, on the 8th of January, 1862, was born the 
subject of this memoir, Charles Horton Edgeumbe Eliot, the third, 
in direct descent, of a line of scholars, and destined to be by far the 
most distinguished. Shortly afterwards the family again moved, 
on this occasion to the living of Horton Bavant, — son thus 
succeeding father ; and there the greater part of young Eliot’s 
boyhood was passed. 

At a very early age he began to show signs of mental ability 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM si 

quite out of the ordinary ; but be was delicate and bigbly strung, 
and for tlxis reason bis education during its early stages was left 
almost entirely in tbe bands of bis father. Under tbe latter’s 
scholarly guidance tbe boy made rapid progress, and not only 
mastered with ease tbe grammar of tbe two great dead languages, 
but in his leisure devoured as well tbe contents of every book upon 
wbicb be could lay bands ; so that when be finally left borne for 
school be was already equipped with a store of knowledge, classical 
and other, far beyond bis years. It is told of him, for instance, 
among other things, that be then abeady knew by heart most, if not 
all, of tbe Odes of Horace. 

In 1872, at tbe age of ten and a half, be was sent to Cheltenham 
College, tbe Headmaster of wbicb was at that time tbe Reverend 
Herbert Snow,^ one of tbe finest classical scholars of tbe day. 
Here be quickly made bis mark in form, the cleverest boy, so it was 
said, that Cheltenham bad bad within its walls for many a long day ; 
but be lacked some of those qualities wbicb are essential for success 
and popularity in an English public school, where tbe unusual is 
viewed with distrust and tbe athlete more esteemed than the scholar. 
He was studious and shy, already showing signs of that aloofness 
wbicb was to become so conspicuous a characteristic later, and he had 
neither liking nor aptitude for games. Tbe latter disability he 
never overcame ; and throughout life his attitude towards sport in 
any shape or form was one of slightly amused contempt. Readers 
of Turkey in Europe will remember bis gibe at tbe “ peculiar 
pleasures ” of that harmless personality, tbe angler. “I am no 
sportsman myself,” he writes, “ and cannot conceive why anybody 
should try to catch a big fish with a rod when he can pay a fisherman 
to catch him with a net.” This idiosyncrasy is tbe more remarkable 
because be was quite devoid of effeminacy and, as his subsequent 
wanderings in remote and barbarous regions of the earth amply 
demonstrated, both wilbng and able, when the need arose, to endure 
physical hardship and discomfort. But to each his limitations ; 
and on tbe Honours Boards of his school, at all events, no name, 
not even that of the boy who was later to become Lord Chancellor 
and Earl Loreburii, is so conspicuous as that of Charles Eliot. 
Outside the classroom be lived his own life and w'ent his own way, 
occupying his leisure with the study of natural history or of strange 
languages and religions. 

^ He later changed his name to Kynaston. 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

sii 

In 1879 jhe won an open scliolarsliip at Balliol College ; but tliis 
success was followed almost immediately by a serious nervous break- 
down, and on tbe advice of a great specialist of tbe day, Sir James 
Cricliton Browne, lie was sent on a voyage to tlie West Indies. 
Brom this lie returned speaking Spanisb fluently. In 1880 be went up 
to Oxford, a contemporary of Sir Edward Grey,^ tbe Hon. George 
Natlianiel Curzon,'^ Cecil Spring-Rice,^ J. A. Hamilton,^ W. R. 
Hardie,-'' F. W. Pember, Anthony Hope Hawkins,® Leonard Huxley,’’ 
Oliver Elton, D. S. MacCoIl, and Michael E, Sadler.^ Tbe last 
four, particularly Leonard Huxley, at whose home be was at this 
period a frequent visitor, were to become tbe most intimate of bis 
friends, as far as intimacy was possible with one who wailred so 
much in a world remote. He was very young, not yet runeteen, 
when be went into residence, but already an arresting personality. 

A slim, willowy youth,” so Dr. MacColl describes him, “ bright- 
eyed (‘ like a hawk on its good behaviour ’ is Sadler’s word), 
mobile-lipped and speaking with an anxious courtesy, punctuated 
with a laughing inflexion of tbe breath.” ^ The “anxious courtesy ” 
and the “ laughing uiflexion of the breath ” were still noticeable 
forty years later. He was “ full of the best jests (rather coniiden- 
tially communicated),” writes Sir Michael Sadler, “ but with a grave, 
sad look about his smile. . . . Perfectly unassuming, yet formid- 
able, cordial but hardly ever intimate. . . . Anima naiumliter 
intellectualis, but sad, though without accidie ; questing, critical, 
secretly ill at ease ; cynical only when offended by pretentiousness 
or cocksureness ; feeling his great power, but uncertain how to use 
it. Inwardly very old for his age ; outwardly a gentle, rather 
diffident youth.” 

His career at Oxford was one of unusual brilliance, almost a 
triumphal progress, yet marked by no outward signs of the industry 
which is an expected ingredient of success. He seemed in fact to 
float effortless, the fortunate possessor of some magic tahsman, 
from distinction to distinction. He took a First Class in Modera- 
tions ; in 1881 he won the Hertford Scholarship, in 1883 the Boden 

^ The late Lord Grey of Fallodon. 

® The late Lord CuTzon of Kedleston. 

® The late Sir Cecil Spring-Rice, at one time H.M. Ambassador at Washington. 

* The late Lord Sumner. 

® Late Professor of Humanity in the University of Edinburgh ; no longer living. 

«. ’ Both died in 1933. 

® How Sir Michael Sadler. 

® From an article in the Wee/c-JStid Jtevietv, 9th May, 1931. 

Xlll 

IN PI AM MEMORIAM 

Sanskrit and tke Ireland Sckolarsliips, in 1884 the CraTen Scliolar- 
skip and tke Syriac Prize, and in 1886 tlie Derby Seholarsliip. 
In 1884 lie secured a First Class in Literae Humaniores, and almost 
immediately afterwards was made an Official Fellow of Trinity 
CoUege, before be bad taken bis degree. There followed a year 
during wbicb be took pupils in Classics ; then be was nominated 
to a Besearcb FeUowsbip, with tbe duty of studying Turkish or 
Arabic (subsequently, on bis appointment to St. Petersburg, altered 
to Finnish) ; and when this expired be was elected to an ‘' Extra- 
ordinary ’’ Fellowship. He was thus greatly beholden to Trinity. 
Indeed be never severed bis connection with that College, for be 
repeatedly revisited it on bis return from bis various wanderings ; 
and finally, in 1924, it elected him to an Honorary Fellowship. 

Beneath bis seeming indolence, however, be was in reality 
ceaselessly industrious ; but bis brain was so acute and bis memory 
so retentive (it has not inaptly been compared with a fly-paper) 
that no subject, however abstruse, held terrors for him ; and what 
others accomplished only with heavy travail he took unconcernedly 
in his stride. Pie once said to a friend that a single thorough 
scanning of the page of a strange grammar was sufficient to 
imprint the contents on his memory. And his mind was as ready as 
it was keen. A story is tdld of him that, being on one occasion 
called upon by the Master of his college, the great Professor Jowett, 
to read an essay which had been set him but which he had neglected 
to prepare, he took up his note-book and without hesitation 
extemporized a faultless composition. Only when he was called 
upon to repeat a passage, and could not, was it discovered that the 
pages of the note-book were blank. 

Many years later, on the occasion of his presentation for the 
Honorary Degree of Doctor of Letters at Oxford, to be described in 
an official oration as “ was already, while 

an undergraduate, an accomplished linguist, witli a predilection, 
however, for the philological side of a language rather than 
the ordinary and conversational. It is uncertain how many 
languages he learnt in the course of his life, at least more 
than twenty, ranging from Finnish to Swahili, from Pali to 
Chinese. Before he left Oxford he was probably conversant 
with ten, among them Sanskrit, Pali, Hebrew, Syriac, and 
Eussian. Arabic, Turkish, Persian, Hindustani, and others were 
to be acquired later. Chinese he began to study at an early 
stage of his travels in the Far East, and he is said to have acquired 

xiv IN PI AM MEMOBIAM 

a sound knowledge of tke “mandarin” dialect and of tke 
ideograpks during Ms residence at Hongkong ; but be came too late 
in life to tkat most difficult and complicated of Oriental languages, 
Japanese; and althougb lie mastered its elements, lie made com- 
paratively Httle furtker progress in it. Various anecdotes, adorned 
percliance at times witk arabesques of legend, are told in illustration 
of Ms uncanny familiarity with, strange, exotic tongues. It is said, . 
for instance, that once, wMle traveUing in Central Asia, he and his 
coiiipanions spent the night round the camp fixes of a band of nomad 
Kurds, and were asked by their hosts to contribute to the enter- 
tainment by singing songs. Eliot replied that he could not sing, 
but that he would instead recite ; and thereupon, to the delight of 
the company, he rendered into Kurdish Andrew Lang’s Marie of 
Cain. Again, long afterwards, when he was High Commissioner 
in Siberia, he visited Ekaterinburg after the temporary expulsion 
of the Bolsheviks, and was taken to see the house in which the ill- 
fated Imperial family had a little earlier been done to death. On the 
walls of the rooms were scribbled in the Hebrew character scandalous 
lampoons in Yiddish, and, turrdng to his guides, he asked if they 
could decipher them. They shook their heads ; whereupon, to 
their amazement, he translated the inscriptions into fluent Russian. 

In 1886 he left Oxford, with inclination vacillating between an 
academic life and one of action, but with no clear plans for the 
future. At tMs moment of indecision he paid a visit to India, 
where he was the guest of Sir Mountstuart Grant Duff, then 
Governor of Bombay, whose son, Arthur Grant Duff, had been a 
close friend of his at Oxford ; and while in India he met Lord 
Dufferin. This meeting is believed to have turned Ms thoughts 
towards diplomacy as a career ; at all events when he returned to 
England it was with Ms mind definitely made up in favour of the 
Diplomatic Service. A nomination was obtained for Mm through 
the late Lord Rosebery ; and having passed the entrance competitive 
examination, he was appointed an Attache at St, Petersburg under 
that remarkable and mspiring personality, Sir Robert Morier. 
His first step on arriving at Ms post was to qualify for the official 
Language Allowance for knowledge of Russian ; and from that he 
proceeded to the study of Emnish, producing in 1890 Ms Finnish 
Grammar,'^ a work wMeh attracted considerable attention at the 
time among philologists both for its own merits and because it was 

^ Published by the Clarendon Press. 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

XV 

the first study by an Englishman of the Ugro-Einnish languages. 
In 1888 he was made a Third Secretary. 

At St. Petersburg he lived in close contact with the Ambassador 
and was in fact at one time the latter’s personal Secretary ; but 
in the intervals of his official and social duties he appears to have 
travelled over the greater part of the Russian Empire and of Central 
Asia as well, even to the remote frontiers of China. When in 1891 
Prince Galitzin, the Governor-General of Russian Turkestan, made 
an expedition to the Pamirs, a region then beginning to attract the 
attention of the Chanceries of Emope, Eliot wa,s one of the party ; 
and, once, in the depth of whiter, he made a journey to Obdorsk 
in Eastern Siberia to meet Mr. Victor Morier,^ a member of the 
Wiggins expedition, who had left his ship in the Arctic Ocean to 
make his way overland to Europe. But with that capacity for 
silence, which was one of his marked characteristics (Sir Mount- 
stuart Grant Duff once exclaimed to him : “ You are the most 

silent young man I have ever met ”), he has left no record of his 
experiences in Russia or of his impressions of the country and 
its people. 

In 1892, after a residence of nearly six years, he was transferred 
to Tangier to act as Charge d’ Affaires during the interregnum 
between the departure of Sir Charles Euan Smith and the arrival of 
Sir West Ridgeway, who had been appointed a Special Envoy on 
a temporary mission to the Sultan of Morocco. His sojourn at 
Tangier, however, was brief, little more than long enough to enable 
him to qualify for the Language Allowance for Arabic ; and, in 
1893, having in the meanwhile been promoted to the rank of Second 
Secretary, he was moved to Constantinople. In the following 
autumn he passed the official examination in Turkish. With 
intervals, durmg which he was in charge of the Agency at Sofia 
and of the Legation at Belgrade, he remained in Turkey about four 
years, a participant in most of the stirring events then occurring. 
When the Imperial • Ottoman Bank at Galata in Constantinople 
was seized in 1896 by a band of Armenian revolutionaries, he took 
an active part in the work of rescuing the fugitives in the 
massacre which followed this rash adventure ; and he was a 
member of the International Commission sent to Thessaly in 1897, 
during the war between Greece and Turkey, to investigate the 
accusations made by the Greek inhabitants against the Turkish 

1 A son of Sir Robert Morier. 

XVI 

m PIAM MEMORIAM 

soldiery of pillaging and atrocities. On this occasion the Turk 
would appear not to have lived up to his accepted reputation ; for 
the Commission came to the conclusion that the real culprits were 
Albanian irregulars or the Greek troops themselves. This task 
accomplished, Eliot was next instructed to draw up a census of 
the Greeks who would come under Turkish rule when, as a result 
of the terms of peace, Thessaly was ceded. For these and other 
services he was in 1898 created a Companion of the Order of 
the Bath. 

The same year saw him transferred to Washington as Second 
Secretary in charge of the Embassy Chancery there ; but he had 
bareW settled down in his new post before he was again moved, 
this time to Samoa in the distant South Pacific, where trouble had 
arisen over the succession to the “ kingship ”, These islands had 
already some ten years earlier been the scene of a similar dispute 
between two rival chieftains named Mafietoa Tanu and Mataafa, 
which had eventually terminated in foreign intervention and the . 
conversion of the group into a virtual Protectorate under the joint 
control of Great Britain, the United States, and Germany. Mafietoa 
Tanu was at the same time proclaimed king ; and Mataafa, perma- 
nently debarred from aU right to the succession, was banished to 
Jaluit in the Marshall Islands. But when Mafietoa died in 1899, 
Mataafa, notwithstanding the ban, promptly returned to dispute 
the possession of the vacant “ throne ” with the rightful heir, the 
late king’s son. Unable to compose their quarrel, both sides 
requested the European Chief Justice of the islands to act as 
arbitrator ; but when he gave his verdict against Mataafa the latter 
refused to accept it, and, appealing to arms, succeeded in defeating 
his rival and seizing the reins of power. At this point the three 
Powers again intervened ; and a Commission, of which Eliot was 
a member, was despatched to assume control and to make arrange- 
ments for the fiiture. Arriving in Samoa early in 1899, the 
Commission decided, after investigation, that the most satisfactory 
solution of the dfficulty would be to abolish the kingship entirely, 
substitute for the existing system of joint control that of a single 
Power, and entrust the actual work of government to an Adminis- 
trator assisted by a Council and a subordinate body of native chiefs. 
The first of these proposals was unanimously approved by the 
Governments interested, and to the second Great Britain, compensated 
elsewhere, offered no objection; but Germany and the United 
States were unable to come to terms, neither being willing to yield 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

xvii 

to the other, with the result that in the end the islands were divided 
into two zones, one under the asgis of the United States and the other 
under that of Germany. For his services on this occasion Eliot 
was made in 1900 a Knight Commander of the Order of St, Michael 
and St. George. 

In the autumn of 1900 was published over the nom de ‘plume of 
“ Odysseus ” his Turkey in Europe ^ ; and with its appearance he at 
once took his place among the foremost authorities on the Near 
East. It is a remarkable work, alike for its erudition, its singular 
freedom from prejudice, and the accuracy and shrewdness of its 
comment. The title hardly does it justice ; for it is not merely 
a record of the doings of the Turks but an epitome as well 
of the history of the motley of peoples inliabiting , that cockpit of 
south-eastern Europe — the Balkan Peninsula — with illuminating 
sidelights in the shape of brilliant little essays on the fall of 
the Byzantine Empire, the schisms of the Orthodox Church, 
Mohammedanism, and various other subjects, and punctuated at 
intervals with excursions into recondite problems of philology. 
The author is signally fair in his treatment of the Turk, who emerges 
from the ordeal, if not a model of all the virtues, at least as less 
“ unspeakable ’’ than repute had pictured him, and, indeed, as in 
certain respects a more refreshing character than some of his 
Christian victims. And with all its learning the book is easy reading, 
terse, graphic, and vigorous in style, — like all the author's work, — 
and flavoured with a number of most amusing anecdotes. Who 
having once read them will forget, for instance, the story of the 
Albanian Bey and his gargantuan entertainment which opened 
with a fat goose, sent by way of hors d’amvre to meet the approaching 
guest, or the tale of the Imam Khoja Nasreddin Effendi, or the vivid 
thumb-nail sketch of the secretariat in the Yildiz palace, or, last 
and perhaps best, the inimitable interview between the bagman 
and the Vali, which forms the introductory chapter to the book ? 

But a fresh field was about to open for his energies. In the 
autumn of 1900 he was appointed Consul-General at Zanzibar and 
Commissioner for the British East Africa Protectorate ; and there, 
occupied in laying the foundations of a new colony, he was now to 
spend what he afterwards described as perhaps the four “ happiest 
and most interesting ’■ years of his life. The task awaiting him was 
one completely unfamiliar and beset with difficulties; for the 

^ Published by Messrs. Edward Arnold and Co„ London. 

xviii IN PMM MEMORIAL! 

Protectorate was almost virgin territory, not even properly surveyed, 
tlie administrative service was too small for the duties it was 
expected to fulfil, and the funds urgently needed for development 
were entirely inadequate. But from the outset he found the work 
congenial, nay more, so absorbing that before he had been a year 
in Africa he declared that he wished for none but colonial appoint- 
rnents in future. Its charm, he wrote in one of his letters to Lady 
Elcho,^ whose acquaintance he had made a httle earlier and "who 
was to prove for the rest of his life one of his staunchest friends, lay 
in its extreme variety “ the law, the church, military matters, 
commerce, administration occupy me one after another, and I seem 
to become successively a judge, a clergyman, a soldier, a merchant, 
and a Governor.” 

Nor was this the sum of his activities. In the intervals of his 
official duties he contrived to find leisure to learn Swahih, even to 
write a grammar of that language,^ and to take up again the studies 
of Buddhism which he had commenced at school ; while from time 
to time he made those esdjensive tours through his territory which 
were later to furnish most of the material for his work on the 
Protectorate.® Indeed, so deep was his interest in these compara- 
tively unknown regions of Africa that once, when going home on 
leave, he even travelled overland from Mombasa into Egypt. 
“I started,’^he writes, “ from Mombasa by train at the end of 
June, 1903, crossed Lake Victoria in the Steamer Winifred, then 
drove in a buckboard right across Uganda and Ungoro from Lake 
Victoria toJ^Lake Albert. Here I took a sailing boat at Butiaba and 
went by river to Nimule, where began the highest rapids of the 
Nile. As no boat can pass through these the traveller has to march 
about six days from Nimule to Gondokoro, where the rapids 
terminate, io. the hope of meeting there a small steamer to take him 
through the swamps of the Southern Sudan to Khartum. In all 
the journey to Khartum occupied about six weeks.” 

The years which began with such happy auspices were fated 
nevertheless to end disastrously in his tragic and premature retire- 
ment from the public service. A difference of opinion with the 
Foreign Office over certain grants of land was the immediate cause ; 

^ The present Countess of Womyss and March. 

® He also wrote a preface to Mr. (now Sir Claude) Hollis’s Grammar of the Masai 
Language. 

® The East African Protectoraie, published by Messrs. Edward Arnold and Co., 
Ltondon. 

IN PIAM ME3I0EIAM 

XIX 

but in tbe background a question of polic7 was at issue. Sir Charles 
Eliot’s plans for the development of the territory committed to Ms 
charge may be summed up in the two words “ white settlement 
He wished to see the country thrown open to colonization by 
Europeans ; and for the attainment of that object he laboured 
unceasingly from the moment of his arrival in Africa. In tMs he 
had the support of the Government at home ; but there were 
practical difficulties in the way. The only part of the Protectorate 
adapted for permanent habitation by Europeans was the high 
plateau land in the interior ; and there the region most attractive 
to prospective settlers, the Great Kift Valley, was already occupied 
by nomadic pastoral tribes of Masai, whose rights must admittedly 
be protected. How to secure this and yet at the same time satisfy 
the legitimate needs of the colonists was the problem which con- 
fronted him. Must the Eift Valley become a native Reserve, 
closed for ever to the white man, or was there room in it for both 
races ? And the situation was still farther complicated by the fact 
that the Foreign Office, under the administration of which the 
Protectorate then lay, had only a little earlier made a grant of five 
hundred square miles of land iu the very heart of the country to 
a corporation called the East Africa Syndicate. The position of the 
native occupants was thus at the outset already compromised. 

Sic Charles Eliot himself was opposed to the creation of a Reserve, 
except as a last resource, because he believed that it would only 
confirm the Masai in their revolting social habits and help to 
perpetuate a tribal organization which he wished to see broken 
up ; and, while admitting that native rights must be safeguarded, 
he also maintained that the interests of the wMte population must 
always remain paramount. He considered moreover that the 
Masai were wasteful in their methods, occupying more land . than 
they could properly utilize, and that even when their reasonable 
requhements had been satisfied a substantial balance available for 
other purposes would still remain. For these reasons he favoured 
opening the valley to white settlement. With his view the Foreign 
Office at first on the whole agreed ; but the applications for grants, 
sometimes of considerable extent, m the coveted area increased 
so rapidly that the Government began to fear that the rights of the 
native occupants might be endangered ; and it was accordingly 
suggested to him that it would be “more prudent to postpone 
consideration of further grants on a large scale ”. 

Out of this arose the difference which ended in his retirement. 

XX 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

He had a little earlier received two separate applications for thirty- 
two thousand acres of land, mainly, yet not entirely, in the Masai 
territory ; hut with the immense grant to the East Africa Syndicate 
in his mind, he did not interpret these comparatively insignificant 
areas as coming within the proscribed limits set by his instructions ; 
and he therefore allowed negotiations to proceed, practically 
agreeing that, subject to conditions, the applications would be 
granted. It happened, however, that at this moment two District 
Officers of the Protectorate who held views on the land question, 
and particularly on the Masai problem, opposed to his own, were 
in England on leave ; and the Foreign Office, already perturbed, 
was so uifiuenced by their arguments that it suddenly repudiated 
the policy it had hitherto countenanced, and decided not only to 
create a Eeserve but also to refuse all further grants of land. This 
decision was thereupon communicated to Sir Charles Eliot, with 
instructions to reject the two applications just mentioned. Deeply 
hurt at this unexpected rebuff and resentful of the action of the 
Authorities in London in allowing themselves to be guided by the 
advice of his subordinates rather than by his own, he declined 
to comply. Sooner than acquiesce in such treatment or stultify 
himself by refusing land in one case while giving ten times as much 
in another,^ he preferred, he said, to resign from the public service. 
His resignation was accepted ; and a few weeks afterwards, in the 
early summer of 1904, he returned to England. 

Before his departure he made a vain appeal to the Prime Minister 
for a public inquiry ; but a little later a collection of documents 
bearing on the case was published in the form of a White Paper ^ ; 
and it is from this, practically the sole source of information now 
available, that these facts are taken. It should, however, be added 
that he himself steadfastly refused to accept this official presentation 
of the incident, protesting that it was in some directions inaccurate 
and in others one-sided.^ The whole story of this unhappy episode 
has never been told, probably never will be, and at that it must 
rest ; but there is reason to believe that his original appointment 

^ The two rejected applications were for 50 square miles each ; but in a dispatch 
to the Foreign Office on the 5th March, 1904, he said that they woxild probably 
be reduced. 

® Africa, No. 8, 1904. Sir Charles Eliot’s own version of the circumstances 
leading up to his retirement was given in a letter to The Times on the 4th August, 
1904, and a brief statement on the same subject apjjears in the preface to his 
work on the East African Protectorate. 

* Of. the preface to The East African Protectorate. 

PIAM MEMOEIAM xxi 

as Cominissioiier was unwelcome in certain quarters at home, that 
he knew this and resented it, and that it was not without influence 
on the subsequent course of events. Be the facts as they may, it 
was not less than a tragedy that so brilliant an intellect should have 
been lost to the state at the very moment when it was approaching 
its fullest maturity. On the arrival of his successor preparations 
for the creation of a native Keserve were at once started ; but it 
quickly became evident that the Masai could not live in proximity 
to Europeans without friction ; and as they were willing to move 
elsewhere if given suitable land in exchange, two new Eeserves were 
estabhshed for their accommodation in other parts of the Pro- 
tectorate. Thither they were transferred ; and the Rift Valley was 
then thrown open to white settlement as Sir Charles Eliot had 
consistently advocated. 

Cut now adrift from the public service and without private fortune 
of his own, it was necessary for him to find other occupation. 
For this he had not long or far to seek. In 1906 the University of 
Edinburgh conferred on him the Honorary Degree of Doctor of 
Laws ; and a little later in the year he was offered and accepted the 
Vice-Chancellorship of the University of ShefiS.eld, which had just 
been founded by Royal Charter. The post was one of considerable 
responsibility, for on the wisdom with which the new institution was 
guided through its infancy much depended ; but in Sir Charles 
EKot the University Authorities had secured precisely the type of 
Vice-Chancellor required, — a scholar yet also a man of action, of 
broad vision and an open mind, and with a wide knowledge of affairs. 
To these qualities were added a record of brilliant achievement in 
the service of the Crown. He was quick to realize that on his 
prudence and tact depended the success of his administration, that 
he must ride with a loose rein, be content to deal with main issues 
only, and, above aU, allow teachers the fullest freedom in their own 
departments to foster original research. On these principles 
accordingly he based his governance ; and the steady growth in the 
prosperity and the repute of the young University during the seven 
years of his Vice-Chancellorship proved how wise and prudent was 
his policy. 

But he was of too energetic a temperament to rest content with 
the direction of affairs alone. He shared in the duties of the 
class-room as well ; and, going beyond the University walls, he 
played an active part in the educational work of the city outside, 
delivered from time to time courses of lectures for the general public 

xxii IN PI AM MEMORIAM 

on the peoples and the religions of the East, and once, in 1909, 
even served on a Eoyal Commission for Electoral Reform. His 
conception of hospitality was Oriental ; and in Shefl5.eld, as later 
in Tokyo, he kept open house for his friends and all wandering 
scliolars. The Long Vacation he spent as a rule in India, China, 
or Japan, collecting material for his great life work on Hinduism 
and Buddhism ; and it was during one of these visits, made in 1906, 
that he wrote, for the ephemeral purposes of a London daily paper, 
the series of articles which were later pubhshed in book form under 
the title of Letters from the Far East! They are, alas ! all too brief, 
covering less than two hundred pages of large type ; but whatever 
their subject,— personal experiences on the journey, descriptions 
of places visited, or dissertations on the languages, religions, 
literature, or national characteristics of the peoples of those remote 
regions, — ^they are unfaihngly entertaining and full of information 
of absorbing interest to the student of things Oriental. The author 
has no prejudices and assumes no airs of Western superiority ; to 
him there is notliing - inscrutable and mysterious” in Eastern 
mentahty ; and he boldly avows that he would “ as soon trust 
a Chinaman as an Englishman Beneath the staid surface of the 
scholar he is full too of boyish laughter and hawk-eyed to mark the 
whimsical and the ludicrous, whether he is motoring in Cochin 
China, feasting in the Hall of Concentrated Fragrance, discoursing 
with the maker of images who did not worship the gods because he 
knew what they were made of, or watching, spectator ah extra, the 
pranks of a sudden whirlwind on the city dyke at Hankow. Among 
the multitude of works oh the Far East this slim volume is of the 
small and elect number of those which are worthy to be read and 
re-read again and again. 

Much of his leisure at Sheffield was occupied with the preparation 
and arrangement of the material gathered on his journeys ; for 
relaxation he would turn to his laboratory and the study of marine 
zoology. Here is a notable illustration of the variety of his talent 
and the wide range of his intellectual curiosity. Interested from 
boyhood in natural history, his attention was drawn during his 
visit to Samoa to the shell-less molluscs found in the seas of the 
islands ; and he became so fascinated by their unusual forms that 
he made a collection of specimens and wrote a monograph on them, 
which was published in 1899. From this ho proceeded to specialize 

^ Published by Messrs. Edward Arnold and Co., London, 1907. 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

xxm 

in one particular branch, of the family, the Nudibranchiata, and 
during the next three years wrote seven papers on the forms 
found in Bast African waters and in the Maidive and Laccadive 
archipelagos. By that time he had become recognized as the 
leading British authority on the group. This, however, was only 
a beginning ; and between 1903 and 1918, when his appointment as 
High Commissioner in Siberia forced him to put aside his studies, 
more than forty papers appeared over his name dealing with 
collections made in all parts of the world, from the Antarctic Ocean in 
the south through the seas of the tropics to Japan in the north. But 
his most important contribution to scientific literature was the mono- 
graph published by the Ray Society in 1910, a large quarto volume, 
admirably illustrated, in which he reviewed the whole field of 
research in this subject and at the same time discussed critically 
in the light of modern knowledge and his own investigations the 
work of his two most distinguished predecessors in England, 
Joseph Aider and Albany Hancock. It is on the results of the 
labours of these three students that all future research into British 
forms of the Nudibranchs must admittedly be based. Altogether 
it was a notable achievement for one who was only an amateur, 
without any training in natural history or marine zoology, and 
moreover already deeply immersed in other affairs. In scientific 
circles abroad the value of his work was equally recognized ; and 
as early as 1909 his name, bracketed with that of another distin- 
guished student of the Mollusca, had been given to a new specimen, 
the ‘‘ Eliotia Souleyeti ”, discovered by the French naturalist, 
Vayssiere, in the Gulf of Lyons. 

Yet, with all these outward activities, in secret he chafed. His 
environment was uncongenial. .After the burning suns of Africa 
and its great empty spaces the bleak atmosphere and the crowded 
ways of the grim northern manufacturing city were infinitely 
depressing, and his spirit wilted in his new surroundings. The work 
itself, too, was distasteful, not of his choice but thrust upon him by 
unavoidable circumstance, and his heart was not in it. Instead his 
thoughts reverted constantly to the service he had left, with its 
wider horizons and its greater opportunities for conspicuous achieve- 
ment, and, confident in the justice of his case, he could not abandon 
the hope that a way would open for his return. Official memories, 
however, are long, and all the efforts of his friends, foremost 
among them and indomitable Lady Elcho, to procure his reinstate- 
ment were fruitless. Then unexpectedly in 1911 came a qualified 

XSIV 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

release iii tlie shape of the offer of the Vice-Chancellorship of the 
newly founded University of Hongkong. Tliis was not the road 
of his desire, and the prospect of further indefinite confinement 
in an educational groove was distasteful ; but at least it meant return 
to the East that he loved, and after a little hesitation he accepted. 

In the summer of the following year he arrived in Hongkong, 
to find a formidable task awaiting him, with financial difficulties 
its dominant feature. The total revenue of the new University 
amounted to barely ninety thousand dollars, a sum so hopelessly 
inadequate that when the fijst session opened in the autumn of the 
year only two Faculties were working ; and even those were 
practically without permanent teaching staffs. There was a Pro- 
fessor of Engineering and a Lecturer in Physics ; but that was all. 
None of the Chairs in the Faculty of Medicine had been filled because 
funds were lacking ; and for a considerable period the University 
Authorities were in consequence obhged to rely for instruction in 
this branch of knowledge on such help as could be obtained from 
medical practitioners in the Colony. In other directions prepara- 
tions were similarly inadequate. The University was in fact still 
in the embryonic stage ; and, as only limited assistance could be 
expected from the Colonial Treasury, this threatened to be 
protracted unless fresh sources of income were quickly discovered. 

To this work accordingly the Vice-Chancellor directed his energies. 
His first step was to enhst the sympathy of the many wealthy 
Chinese living in Hongkong ; and from them and their compatriots 
in Malaya and the Netherlands East Indies he succeeded in obtaining 
substantial contributions. Generous help was also given by some 
of the great British merchant houses interested in the China trade ; 
but the sum total even then was far short of the University’s needs. 
With the approval therefore of the Governor, Sir Henry May, ho 
sent the Professor of Engineering on a special mission to England 
to appeal for a grant from the Boxer Indemnity Fund ; but 
although the Government was sympathetic it professed itself 
unable to help, and the mission was unsuccessful. Eepulsed in this 
direction, he turned to the Cliincse in their own country. It was 
his custom to spend the Long Vacation in Peking, studying the 
language ; and he now made these visits an occasion for propaganda, 
losing no opportunity to impress on every Chinese official he met on 
his wanderings the duty of supporting an institution which had been 
founded for the express benefit of their countrymen and which stood 
at their very doors. Thanks in no small measure to his personal 

M PIAM MEMORIAM zxv 

prestige as an Oriental scliolar, his efforts were not unsnccessful. 
A number of scholarships were founded with funds subscribed by 
the Chinese Government ; and as the name and the reputation 
of the University spread, students from the most distant parts of 
the country were gradually attracted to it, until at last all the 
Eighteen Provinces were represented on its roll. 

Yet, despite his utmost endeavours, he was never able to place 
its finances on a stable basis ; and even when he left Hongkong 
in 1918 it was still in great difficulties. These, however, have now 
happily vanished. The work which Sir Charles Eliot started his 
successors carried on ; and as the cultural value of the University 
became more evident, new and more substantial endowments were 
created, among them the vainly sought grant from the Boxer 
Indemnity Fund, with the result that to-day the revenues of the 
institution are ten times as great as they were in 1911. But 
although others completed what he had begun, to him still is the 
chief credit due ; and in a memorial address shortly after his death 
in 1931 the present Head of the University, Sir William Hornell, 
confessed that he had “ sometimes wondered if the institution would 
have survived the dangerous years of its neglected infancy, had it 
not been for the personahty and reputation of its first Vice- 
Chancellor — a doubt which is shared by others also well quaMed 
to form an opinion. 

In the class-rooms nt . Hongkong he was less often seen than he 
had been at SheffieTd, and although he lectured at intervals, mainly 
on Chinese history, he took no part in the routine work of the 
University. But his eye was always watchful for the backward 
student who showed signs of promise. Of these there were a number, 
youths who had come from remote provinces of the Republic, with 
a knowledge of English lamentably inadequate for their needs ; 
and for them, in their struggles with an alien tongue, he had always 
time and sympathy to spare, helping them individually with their 
studies, correcting their essays, and even on occasion, particularly 
in the early days, when the teaching staff was very small, stooping 
to give them exercises in so humble a subject as spelling. He was 
too remote to court or to win personal popularity ; but in China 
learning has always been reverenced, and in the reputation of their 
Vice-Chancellor as a scholar the students took an intense and 
personal pride. An amusing exhibition of this occurred on the 
occasion of his presentation in 1924 for the Honorary Degree of 
Doctor of Laws, when, at the end of the ceremony, he was mobbed 

m 

XXVI 

IN PIAM MEMORIAM 

by an excited crowd of undergraduates, bustled into a motor-car, 
and, to bis infinite discomfort and embarrassment, drawn in 
procession tbrougb tbe streets of tbe city. 

Outside tbe University walls in tbe Vice-Cbancellor’s Lodge 
be led a detached and tranquil existence, accessible always and to 
bis friends anxiously hospitable, but immersed as a rule in bis own 
private studies, in which tbe Chinese language now took an important 
place. At home in tbe meanwhile bis friends still continued their 
efforts on bis behalf, with so little result, however, that some were 
beginning to despond. “I have,” wrote Lord Curzon to him in the 
winter of 1917, “ on many occasions recommended you for posts 
{among them Bengal). . . . I have never been successful.” At that 
very moment hope, so long deferred, was on tbe eve of fulfilment. 

It was then tbe fourth year of the war, and tbe Allied Powers 
were embarking on their ill-fated attempt to stem tbe tide of 
Bolshevism. A British Commissioner bad already been installed 
at Archangel, the base of operations in European Eussia ; and 
His Majesty’s Government were now looking for some one to fill 
the corresponding post of High Commissioner in Siberia, the eastern 
base, whither an Allied Expeditionary force was beiag dispatched. 
At this moment they bethought themselves of Sir Charles Eliot 
m Hongkong, and, with the acquiescence of the Authorities of the 
University, offered him the post. The appointment was only 
temporary, for the duration of the war ; and it thus left the future 
still uncertain ; but to him it meant a step in the direction of his 
desire, and he accepted it with alacrity. In the sumrner of 1918 
he left for the north. 

For the next twelve months he led the life of a nomad, at tunes 
in the security and comparative ease of Vladivostock or Harbin, 
once, for a brief period and at a hazardous moment, even as a 
householder at Omsk/ but for the most part in the cramped space 
of a railway carriage, and not infrequently in conditions of consider- 
able physical discomfort. But his work kept him occupied ; and 
he accepted everything, even the arctic rigours of the interminable 
Siberian winter, with pessimistic philosophy. 

There is space here for no more than the most cursory survey of 
the events in which he played a part, or of which he was a despairing 
and helpless spectator. When he arrived in Siberia a Provisional 

^ He rented a, honse at Omsk at the moment when Admiral Kolchak’s front 
had actually crumbled, and this courageous action helped to allay the general 
panic which then prevailed. 

IN PI AM MmOMIAM xxvii 

Goyennnentj the precursor, it was hoped, of something more 
permanent which would embrace all Russia, was already established 
at Omsk under the eegis of the Allies and of the Czech troops, who 
had marched across Asia from Europe. Even at this early stage, 
however, dissension was rife among the discordant elements 
of which it was composed or by which it was supported ; 
and in the autumn of 1918, to prevent a debacle. Admiral 
Kolchak, the Minister of War, was persuaded, much against 
his will, to assume the post of Dictator, A gallant man, able, 
honest, and single-hearted in his devotion to his country, he might 
in happier circumstances have accomplished much for Russia ; but 
Fate had loaded the dice against him. The virus of Bolshevism was 
already spreading into Siberia ; the Dictator himself was surrounded 
by a horde of dishonest and greedy place-hunters and of rabid 
reactionaries to whom bitter experience and adversity had taught 
nothing ; some of his subordinate commanders, so-called, were 
completely beyond his control ; and between him and the Czechs 
relations were always unhappy. Well might he exclaim in black 
moments of despair: ‘‘Who will deliver me from this cross? ” 
From the outset he was doomed to disaster. “ I regard myself,’ ' 
wrote Sir Charles Eliot to Lady Elcho in the winter of that year, 
“ as one of a medical staff Watching a patient who has a virulently 
infectious disease. I hope he may be prevented from infecting 
others and perhaps cured of Bolshevism but I have little hope of 
his being restored to normal general health.” 

Notwithstanding, therefore, a successful offensive on the Ural 
front in the spring of 1919, the position of the new Government was 
precarious ; and the suspicion and distrust with which it had from 
the beginning been regarded by the mass' of the population was 
quickly turned into bitter hostility by the excesses of Ivanoff 
Rinoff— the commander of the Russian tropps in Eastern Siberia— - 
and of the two Cossack Atamans, Semenoff and Kalmikoff. 
Adherents in name of the Omsk Government, they were in reality 
independent freebooters and brigands, each playing his own hand, 
and, when occasion demanded, not hesitating to defy the authority 
to which he owed allegiance. For a regime which depended on such 
allies there could be no permanency ; but it was left to the Czechs 
to deliver the blow which precipitated its downfall. Only indirectly 
interested in the cause in which they found themselves entangled, 
and discontented with the conditions around them, they suddenly 
declared that they would fight no longer, and demanded to be 

xxviii IN PI AM MEMOBIAM 

repatriated. Tlie front along the Urals had already given way; 
hut with their defection aU was lost ; the Bolshevik armies poured 
unresisted into Siberia ; and the Government at Omsk collapsed 
like a house of cards. With its fall ended the chapter of interven- 
tion. At the beginning of 1920 the foreign Missions and troops 
were in full retreat towards the sea; a few weeks later the ill- 
starred Admhal Kolchak, deserted by his alKes, was handed over 
by the French general Janin and the C^iechs to the Bolsheviks to 
meet his inevitable fate ^ ; and before March closed British, French, 
American, and Czech forces had all been withdrawn. Alone the 
Japanese remained behind, involved in an adventure of their own 
against the Reds.^ 

In the closing scenes of this ill-fated and barren enterprise 
Sic Charles Eliot had no part. Early in the summer of 1919 he was 
offered the Embassy in Tokyo ; and almost immediately afterwards 
he sailed for England to prepare to take up his new post. The 
years of exile had ended. 

Hinduism and Buddhism, on which he had spent so many years 
of patient labour, was now at last in the press, though it did not 
■actually leave the hands of the pubhshers till the autunm of 1921, 
In this, his magnum opus, the author traces the history and develop- 
ment of the two great indigenous rehgions of India from then- 
origin almost up to the present day, reviewing with an ample wealth 
of reference every important phase of each, and in the case of 
Buddhism carrying his investigations -far beyond the confines of 
India to the remotest regions into which that great missionary 
religion has penetrated. The field covered is vast both in space 
and time ; but to those who would object that it is “ too large, that 
to attempt a historical sketch of the two faiths in their whole 
duration and extension over Eastern Asia is to choose a scene 
unsuited to any canvas which can be prepared at the present day ”, 
he rej)lies that “ wide surveys may sometimes be useful and are 
needed in the present state of Oriental studies. ^ For the reality 
of Indian influence in Asia — ^from Japan to the frontiers of Persia, 
from Manchuria to Java, from Burma to Mongoha— is undoubted 

^ He died bravely,— in the words of his executioner, “ straight up, like an' 
Englishman.” 

2 Por most of the information here recorded the writer is indebted to Sir Bernard 
Pares, the Head of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in the 
UniverBity of London. A detailed acoount of the Siberian expedition will be 
found in The Far Eastern Republic of Siberia, by H. Norton (publishers, Messrs. 
G. Allen and Unwin, Ltd.). 

TKXS. 

I N PI AM MEMOEIA M 

and the influence is one. You cannot separate Hinduism from 
Buddliism. . . . Neither is it convenient to separate the fortunes 
of Buddhism and Hinduism outside India from their history 
within it . . 

His method of approach to the stupendous task he had set himself 
is worthy of his great reputation as a scholar. He is without bias, 
consistently cautious, dispassionate, and critical. Though himself 
sceptical in temperament and devoid of any ingredient of mysticism, 
he is never less than tolerant in his attitude towards the mysticism 
and occultism which are so conspicuous a feature of Indian thought 
or religion ; and he is just even when dealing with aspects of 
Hinduism repellent to the Western mind. Towards Buddhism, to 
which he was profoundly attracted by the breadth of its conceptions, 
its humanity, and its almost complete freedom from dogma and 
sectarian spirit, he is unreservedly sympathetic. Indeed, the key- 
notes of his work are sympathy, tolerance, and a complete absence 
of spiritual or intellectual arrogance. “Religion,” he writes, 
“ depends on temperament,” ^ and “ in studying Oriental religions 
sympathy and a desire to agree if possible are the first requisites”.^ 
And again : — “ I cannot share the confidence in the superiority of 
Europeans and their ways which is preva,lent in the West. . , . 
In fact European civilization is not satisfying, and Asia can still 
offer something more attractive to many who are far from Asiatic 
in spirit.” ^ 

It is difficult to determine what most compels admiration in this 
book,— the infinite industry, the eneyolopsedic knowdedge, the 
austere accuracy, the conciseness and clarity of statement, or the 
unerring skill with which the author sifts the grain from the chaff 
ill the confused mass of fact, theory, and doctrine before him. 
Truly it is, as the late Sir Richard Temple declared, “a mighty 
work of the deepest research and insight.” A 

In November of 1919 he was sworn a member of the Privy Council ; 
and in the spring of the year following he arrived in Tokyo to take 
up his appointment. It was not without apprehension that some 
at least of those about to work under him welcomed this Ambassador 
who was already a legendary figure. Tall and rather heavily built, 
younger in appearance than his years, but walking a little uneasily, 

^ Hinduism and Buddhism, x, p. xcvii. 

® Ibid., I, p. Ixiv, 

® Ibid., I, p. xevi. 

* Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1921. 

XXX IN PIAM MBMORIAM 

the result of an injury to a kneecap during his early days in Russia, 
with thick dark hair growing in a level line low across his forehead, 
full, searching, critical eyes, and of a somewhat frosty address, 
he looked remote and redoubtable, a “chief” who might prove 
exigent in his standards of efficiency and hard to satisfy. And first 
experiences seemed to justify this impression. 

He came to Japan at the moment when the fate of the Angio- 
Japanese Alliance hung in the balance. For nearly twenty years 
this great stabilising influence had been in existence, to the material 
benefit of both parties and to the general advantage of the world 
at large; now, in the changed conditions following the war, its 
future had suddenly become uncertain. Was it to continue or must 
it lapse ? In England, and notably among those best acquainted with 
the Far East, the general feeling was in favour of its maintenance, 
with such modffications as altered circumstances might necessitate ; 
and this was the course which Sir Charles Eliot himself advocated. 
But powerful forces were also arrayed in opposition,— public 
sentiment in one at least of the Dominions, American hostility, and 
the new internationalism working through the League of Nations 
at Geneva. In the end these prevailed ; and at Washington in the 
winter of 1921 the Alliance was abrogated. It can hardly be said 
that the path of peace in Eastern Asia has been made smoother by 
its disappearance. In Japan the dissolution of a bond which had 
been confidently regarded as permanent was received with dismay 
and profound disappointment ; but the Japanese are a proud 
people, and, deeply though their feehngs were wounded, they 
accepted the accomplished fact, outwardly at least, with dignity 
and restraint. The blow was a httle softened by the timely visit 
of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in 1922 ; but the position 
was nevertheless uncomfortable, and that not least for the new 
Ambassador, on whom now fell the duty of building up relations 
afresh on an entirely altered basis. With signal success he accom- 
plished this delicate and difficult task ; and to his skill, to his 
intimate knowledge of the East, and to the undeviating friendhiiess 
and understanding which marked all his relations with the Govern- 
ment and the people of the country to which he was accredited is it 
mainly due that the years following the abrogation of the Alliance 
were so smoothly traversed and so substantial a measure of the 
ancient friendship between the two nations preserved. Truly 
a “ soMd if not outwardly brilliant achievement 

^ Obituaiy notice in Thf. Times, 17th March, 1931. 

IN HAM MEMORIAM xxxi 

Witli more intimate acquaintance first impressions of Mm changed, 
and the earlier cMli respect for Ms talents gradually gave place 
to a warmer feeling of genuine admiration and affection. The mask 
of aloofness wMck discouraged approack at tke outset, and tke air 
of cynical disillusionment Md in reality a very human personality, 
with an unsuspected capacity for winning the attachment of those 
who worked close to Mm. He gave Ms confidence very slowly, 
almost indeed grudgingly; but to those whom he trusted he was 
unswervingly loyal; he was impatient of delay, witheringly 
contemptuous of the sHghtest slovenliness in thought or expression, 
and often exacting ; and he demanded industry unrelenting with 
impeccable accuracy ; but he was at the same time intensely, 
almost pathetically, appreciative of service rendered, and he thought 
no effort too great if thereby he could prevent merit in a subordinate 
passing unregarded. And to any in trouble he was always accessible 
and generous. In Ms personal relations, too, with Ms staff he had 
habits of formal courtesy, inherited &om a generation more 
punctihous in ceremonial than this, which were as engaging as they 
were unusual ; and despite Ms great intellectual gifts and Ms 
immense learning he was completely unaffected and unassuming. His 
modesty indeed was one of the most attractive traits in Ms character. 

Apart from the question of post- Alliance relations the term of 
Sir Charles Eliot's Ambassadorship was comparatively uneventful. 
Following his usual habit, he commenced immediately on his arrival 
in Japan to learn the language ; and while Ms progress fell short of 
Ms hopes, the knowledge he acquired proved of material value to 
him in Ms work. In his leisure he travelled much about the country, 
generally m search of material for the present work ; but, with the 
exception of isolated visits to Korea and Formosa, Ms journeys 
were within a narrow radius, rarely extending north of Tokyo or west 
of Kyoto ; and he could never be persuaded to follow the traditional 
practice of migrating to the hills in the summer months. A confirmed 
lover of heat and sunlight, he preferred to remain in the capital even 
during the torrid dog-days and to make at intervals short visits to 
resorts like Kamakura, Miyanoshita, or the mineral springs of 
Shusenji in the Idzu peninsula. His way lay often outside the 
beaten track with its amenities of Europeanized hotels ; but this 
was no hardsMp to one of such varied experience ; and although 
he chafed under some of its taboos and inhibitions, he took on the 
whole very kindlj' to the national mode of life, and even to the stark 
simplicity of some of its domestic arrangements. 

xxxn 

IN PIAM MMMORIAM 

His reputation for learning liad long preceded him ; and with his 
arrival in Tokyo the Embassy became at once a centre of attraction 
to scholars. In 1921 the Asiatic Society of Japan, an association 
founded under foreign auspices in 1872 for purposes of research, 
elected him as its President ; and this post he retained until he left 
Tokyo in 1926, taking an energetic part in all the Society’s activities 
and, except during his absence on leave, almost invariably throwing 
open his house for its meetings. 

His conception of his duty as Ambassador, particularly towards 
the people of the country in which he lived, was strict, and he was at 
infinite pains to gain their goodwill and their confidence. In his 
own habits of life simple, and in secret averse from social pomps with 
their burdensome paraphernalia of ceremonial, he nevertheless 
more than worthily upheld the hospitable traditions of the Embassy, 
though it must also be confessed that in an atmosphere of banalities 
he was prone to become abstracted and to retire within himself. 
He could speak wittily and well when occasion or duty demanded ; 
but he preferred silence to speech-making ; and he was probably 
at his best and happiest in limited gatherings of his more intimate 
friends and acquaintances, when he would readily expand, to delight 
his listeners with the infinite variety of his information, his pungeUt 
comment, and the humour and fecundity of his anecdote. 

Yet in one respect his intellectual equipment seemed curiously 
lacking ; he was almost completely indifferent to the appeal of the 
visual arts. In matters of form and colour his predilection inclined 
to the ornate and, perhaps, shghtly barbaric,™ a cause, in Tokyo, of 
not infrequent heartburning and mortification to a household bred 
in the austere simplicity of the Japanese canon ; and although so 
much of his life was spent in countries renowned for the achieve- 
ments of their craftsmen, he would seem to have remained unmoved 
and completely uncovetous in the presence of the procession of 
beauty which passed before his eyes. .Through all his Odyssean 
wanderings he acquired no treasures of bronze, or painted scroll, 
or porcelain ; and a small collection of Medici reprints, regarded 
somewhat contemptuously as furniture, represented practically his 
only adventure in the realms of the artistic. 

Towards the end of the spring of 1926 he left for England on leave, 
and while at home was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order 
of St. Michael and St. George and given the Honorary Degree of 
Doctor of Letters by the University of Oxford. In October he 
returned to the East and a scene of pitiful desolation. On the 

IN PIABl MEMORIAM 

XXXlll 

1st of September occurred one of tliose catastrophic disasters of 
earthquake and lire to which Japan seems fated to be periodically 
a victim ; and in a few short hours a prosperous countryside was 
devastated, the city of Yokohama reduced to a heap of smoking ashes, 
and more than a third of the capital destroyed. In the Embassy 
itself not a building remained securely standing ; two were burnt 
to the ground ; and the Ambassador’s own house narrowly escaped 
the same fate. Fortunately this danger was averted ; and of his 
posvsessions only a few comparatively unimportant manuscripts 
in his valuable library were slightly damaged.^ But he was 
homeless. A temporary lodging was, however, found for him close 
at hand while a bungalow of lath and plaster was hurriedly put up 
for his permanent accommodation on a lawn in the Embassy grounds ; 
and in these coniined yet not uncomfortable quarters he lived during 
the last two years of his official stay in Japan. 

There is little more to add. The term of his Ambassadorship 
ended in 1925 ; but he remained at his post awaiting the appoint- 
ment of his successor, his many friends hoping the while that his 
appointment might be renewed. Their hope was not realized ; 
and in February of 1926 he bade a final farewell to the public service, 
though not to Japan. The rest has already been told elsewhere 
in this memoir. 

So ended a career of great distinction and notable achievement, 
though perhaps, in the opinion of some, fallen short of its opening 
promise. Almost, if not quite, the most brilliant student of his 
generation at Oxford and, as he was later to prove, endowed in 
addition with administrative capacity of a very high order, he might 
reasonably have aspired, when he entered the public service, to 
its most coveted prizes. Certainly the augury of those earlier years 
was of the happiest ; to be Governor of a vast territory at the age 
of thirty-eight is good fortune snch as befalls few. Yet at the very 
moment when the future seemed most auspicious, disaster irremedi- 
able overtook him, and all his hopes and ambitions were shattered. 

“ Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight . . 
Many years later he was recalled, to do useful work for his country in 
Siberia and Japan ; hut it was then too late ; the ground lost could 
not he recovered or the days spent in exile retrieved. For him the 
end came not in 1926 but in 1904. It is therefore by his contribu- 
tions to knowledge, and they are outstanding, that Sir Charles 

^ His library was later acquired by the Imperial University of Tokyo. 

SXXIV 

IN PIAM MEMOBIAM 

Eliot will best be remembered. This was perhaps not where his 
early ambitions lay ; but who shall say that in Hinduism and 
Buddhism he may not have raised to himself a monument more 
enduring than the fame of a satrapy ? 

H. P. 

Note . — To all those who have generously supplied him with 
material the writer of this preface wishes to offer his grateful 
acknowledgments, — in particular to the relatives of the late Sir Charles 
Eliot, to the Countess of Wemyss and March (who kindly allowed 
him access to a long series of letters), to Professor Oliver Elton 
(Honorary Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford), Dr. Ponsonby 
Fane, Mr, W. J. Hinton, Sir William Hornell (Vice-Chancellor of the 
University of Hongkong), Dr. D. S, MacColl, Dr. C. H, O’Donoghue 
(Department of Zoology in the University of Edinburgh), Dr. F. W. 
Pember, Mr. J. U. Powell (Fellow and Tutor of St. John’s College, 
Oxford), Brigadier F. S. G, Piggott, D.S.O. (a member of Chelten- 
ham College Council), Professor C. A. Middleton Smith (University 
of Hongkong), and to Mr. Stephen Gaselee, C.B.E. (Librarian of 
the Foreign Office). 

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

The following are the principal abbreviations used : — 
B.E.F.E.O. Bulletin de VJ^cole Fmngaise F Extreme Orient. 
J.A. . Journal Asiatique. 

J.R.A.E. . Journal of the Royal Asiaiic Society. 

N. . . Nanjio^s Catalogue of the Buddhist Tripitaha. 

S. B.E. . Sacred Books of the East (Ol&xeTidoTi'Pxess). 

T. A.S.J. . Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan. 

BOOK I 

A SURVEY OF 
BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA 

CHAPTER I 

THE CANONS 

Christians and Mohammedans are alike in acknowledging the 
authority of one sacred book, the Bible or Koran. Sects may differ 
as to its interpretation and as to the authority possessed by 
tradition apart from scripture, but they all appeal to the same texts 
which they regard as a dmne revelation. But in Buddhism there 
are not only different sects, but they use different scriptures 
composed in different languages, and though some of those works 
are obviously later than others, they are not related to one another 
as are the Old and New Testaments, for in the New Testament 
a new teacher appears who changes and develops the old law. 
But in the Buddhist scriptures there is no such avowed change. 
All important tenets are referred back to the Buddha himself and 
he is represented as having preached on the same sacred mountain 
in India doctrines which seem to be of very different ages and 
provenance. 

The ideas of India and Eastern Asia about scripture and 
revelation are more fluid than those prevalent in Europe at any 
period. Not that dogmatism is wanting : the four Vedas are 
said to be the divine word, existing before the universe came into 
being and from time to time revealed to human sages. The text 
has been most carefully preserved by memory, but it is almost 
universally admitted that these ancient scriptures of the golden 
age are not suited to the needs of degenerate modern times, and 
century after century Indian writers have not failed to produce 
new revelations and to meet with respectful acceptance. These 
works often take the form of discourses put into the mouth of some 
deity, such as Krishna or ^iva, but no historical justification is 
either attempted by the writer or expected by the readers. The 
Bhagavad Gita and even the Bh^gavata Purapa are relatively 
ancient works, but the Ramayapa of Tulsi Das and the Prem 
Sagar ^ and many others are modern. All, however, have millions 
of devout readers at the present day and are unhesitatingly accepted 

^ Ttilsi Das lived from 1632 to 1623. The Prem Sagar is a free translation of the 
tenth book of the Bhagavata Purana made in 1803. 

4 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND [oh. i 

as ’R^liat we call revelation.^ Nor is it merely popular works wkicli 
attain tliis liigh. position. The Braiima-sutras, a set of aphorisms 
containing a compendium of Upanishadic philosophy, are for most 
sects of unquestioned authority. 

Buddhists, Indian and other, have shown a similar readiness 
to accept new scriptures. Even in the Pali Pitakas we hear of 
new sayings claiming to he the word of the Buddha and of the 
standards by which they are to be judged. These standards are 
not always the same. Sometimes ^ the Buddha is represented as 
declaring that such sayings must be tested by comparing them 
with the Sutta and the Vinaya, which seems to imply that at the 
time when these passages were composed there were already 
collections of sayings and rules, recognized though doubtless 
unwritten, which could be used for reference and comparison. 
But in other passages® he is made to state emphatically that a 
doctrine is not to be judged by its conformity to tradition and 
scripture or by intellectual tests, but by the moral sense of the 
hearers — does it tend to remove covetousness, ill-will, and folly 
or to increase them ? 

Similarly on different occasions he is represented as taking very 
different attitudes as to private judgment and the questioning 
spirit in disciples. Once when a disciple asked an apparently 
reasonable though perplexing question about the soul and its 
deeds ^ he received no answer but brought upon himself a most violent 
rebuke. “Is it possible that _ some senseless fellow sunk in 
ignorance and led astray by greed may think to go beyond the 
Master’s teaching, etc.” And the Kitagiri-sutta ® insists on the 
necessity of absolute obedience. Yet m another discourse ® we 

^ Thus Maliik in his book called The Philosophy of the Vaishnava Eeligion (1927) 
states categorically that the Eh%avata Purana possesses “ supremo authoritative- 
iiess ” and “ if one wishes to acquire true definite knowledge of the Absolute he 
should look to this Purana” (p. 39). 

2 Ang. Nik., iv, 180 {= vol. ii, p, 167) ; Dig. Nik., xvi, 7 {== vol. ii, p, 124). 

® Ang. Nik., iii, 65 ; iii, 66 ; iv, 193. The wording is the same but the hearers 
are different in these three suttas. Compare, too, the advice given to Mah^pajapati 
in Cullavag., x, § 5. Whatever teachings conduce to a good life, you may say 
of them Eso dhammo eso vinayo, etam satthu sdsanam t This is the doctrine, this 
the discipline, this the message of the Master”. 

* Saifi. Nik., xxii, 82 = vol. iii, p. 103. The whole passage is extremely 
curious and interesting. 

® For the faithful follower it is a principle that “ the Lord is Master and I his 
disciple : the Lord knows and I do not know ”. Satthd Bhagavd sdvakd'ham mmi : 
jdndti Bhagavd ndham jdndmi. Maj, Nik., Ixxii. 

Maj. Nik., xxxviii. 

THE CANONS 

5 

CH. I 

read ; Will you say that you affirm this out of reverence for your 
teacher ? Ko, Lord. Do you affirm only v’-hat you have of 
yourselves known, seen and discerned ? Yes, Lord, Quite 
right.’’ On the whole, the view expressed in the Pitakas is that 
doctrines and precepts are not to be judged too strictly by the 
standards of traditional orthodoxy or of reasoning but rather by 
their results as shown in a good life, such a life including spiritual 
experiences which are beyond the comprehension of ordinary men. 
Thus in the Sandaka-sutta Ananda lays it down that both orthodoxy 
and pure rationalism are imcertaiii guides. They are both “ partly 
sound and partly unsound : right here and wrong there ” Whereas 
a natural ecclesiastical instinct, conunon to all churches, prompts 
the Buddhist clergy to say like Asoka ^ that all the words of the 
Buddha are well said, this liberality and willingness to recognize 
good wherever it is found lead to the admission that everything 
which is well said may be considered as a word of the Buddha, 
a principle which is actually laid down in Mahayanist works ^ and 
clearly prepares the way for a very extensive canon. 

At the present day Buddhists in Ceylon, Burma, Siam, and 
Cambodja accept the three Pitakas in the Pali text and do not 
recognize or even know of the Mahayanist works venerated as 
scripture in the Far East. The Mahayanists are more liberal. 
In China and Japan large monasteries generally possess a copy of 
the Chinese Tripitaka which contains among other things trans- 
lations of works similar to the first four Nikayas, though not 
identical with them and originally composed in Sanskrit, not 
in Pali, But this Tripitaka, though treated with external 
reverence,'^ is not really equivalent to the scriptures of other 
religions. It is a vast collection of theological literature consisting 
of more than 1,600 works mostly in many volumes made by order 
of the Emperor of China (or to be strictly accurate it is one of many 
such collections), and it represents not the books approved by any 
section of Buddhists for purposes of devotion or doctrine but the 
treatises which learned Chinese thought worth preserving for any 
reason. Thus it often contains several translations of one Indian 

: * In the Bhabra Edict. ; 

* t§ikshasamuocaya, j). 15 (BendaU’s edition), quoting the Adhyasayasam- 
codana-Butra : “ Everything that is well said, Maitreya, is a word of the Buddha.” 

* For instance, it is often placed in a revolving bookcase, which the devout 
reverently turn round, hoping to acquire the same merit as if they had read the 
contents. 

6 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. i 

text, and includes witli wide tolerance both Hinayanist and 
Mahayanist writings of all schools. One considerable section 
consists of works composed by Chinese authors and obviously 
corresponding to what we should call Church history. But certain 
books contained in this library have a reputation and influence 
far greater than that enjoyed by any text known in the lands of 
the Hinayana. It must be confessed that in those countries, though 
the Tripitaka is studied by the clergy and read to the laity on 
certain occasions, it has not the same influence as the Bible or 
Koran in Christian or Mohammedan countries. But in the Far 
East and within the limits of certain sects, some books such as the 
Lotus ^ and the three treatises about the Paradise of Amitabha,® 
do enjoy a somewhat similar position. This high status is 
occasionally accorded to Chinese and Japanese compositions. 
Thus Honen, the founder of the Jodo sect, expressly declares 
that the writings of the Chinese teacher Zendo (Shan-tao, a.d. 613- 
681) are the direct teaching of Amitabha and of the same value 
as sutras. So, too, the Shoshinge and Wasan of Shinran are 
revered by millions in Japan.^ But most Mahayanist sacred books 
which have influenced the Far East are Chinese translations of 
Indian originals. They arrived from the West claiming to be the 
word of the Buddha and a revelation of the truth and had been 
accepted as such in their native land according to the easy-going 
principles described above. But the Chinese have more of the 
critical spirit than the Hindus, and their scholars were accustomed 
to discuss the history and authenticity of classical texts. They 
could not fail to be struck by the fact that the various discourses 
put into the mouth of the Buddha obviously teach very different 
doctrines. The T'ien-t'ai sect devised an explanation of these 
divergences which is in substance accepted by most Buddhists 
in China and Japan. It is that the Buddha’s teaching was 
progressive and that at different periods of his life he taught various 

1 The Saddharmapundarika-sttra commonly called Holdie-kyo in Japan, 
N.,.,Nos.. 134-9. : 

“ The Long and Short Sukhavati-vyuhas and the Amitayurdhy5.na-sutra, see 
N., No. 23 (5), Nos. 199, 200, and 198. 

® In his book called Sonchakushu. Compare Honen the Buddhist Saint, tr. by 
Coates and Ishiyulia, p. 347. 

* The Shoshinge is written in Chinese but the Wasan or hymns are in Japanese. 
.Rennyo, a celebrated doctor of the Shinshu, quotes in one of his Epistles (i, 2) the 
Sxxkhavati-vyuha and the Wasan as if they were of the same authority, and these 
Epistles are read in Shinshu temples as St. Paul’s are in Christian churches. 

CH. Ij 

7 

THE CANONS 

doctrmeSj none of course erroneous, but some suited to tbe compre- 
hension of simple hearers and others approximating more and more 
nearly to absolute truth. Five periods^ are distinguished in the 
teaching of the Master and are called by the names of the sutras 
in which the special doctrine revealed in each period is supposed 
to be preserved. The first period, extending for three weeks after 
he attained enlightenment, is known as ^ Kegon or 
Avatarnsaka. In these days of ecstasy he is supposed to have 
preached the complete truth to nine assemblies of spirits and mortals, 
appearing miraculously in different places while his body remained 
motionless under the Bo tree. But he found that only the liigher 
intelligencies among superhuman beings could grasp his meaning 
and accordingly he entirely changed his style of preaching. During 
the next twelve years, known as the jJi^' ^ Agon period, he expounded 
the doctrine now contained in the Agamas, that is the four treatises 
roughly corresponding to the Pali Nilcayas. In the third period, 
which lasted eight years, he preached the ^ Ho-do or Vaipulya- 
sutras, and in the fourth, which lasted no less than twenty-two, 
the jR ^ Hannya or Prajnaparamit^. In the fifth and last 
period, estimated as eight years, he revealed the Lotus or ^ 

Hokke-kyo, regarded as the crown and quintessence of all 
revelation.^ These five phases are compared to the five forms which 
milk may assume, namely, ordinary milk, cream, fresh butter, 
clarified butter, and the ultimate essence or extract of milk. 

Only a robust faith can beheve that the Avatamsaka-sutra, 
which teaches a thorough-going idealism and is obviously a product 
of mature Mahayanism, can represent the first teaching of the 
Buddha. But the oldest accounts of that teaching contain two 
traditions which seem to be undisputed and in themselves probable. 
The texts which describe the Enlightenment agree in saying that 
at first he hesitated, to preach because he thought the truth which 
he had learnt was too hard for mankind to grasp. It was only after 
an internal struggle— described in the legend as an appeal made 

Go-ji in Japanese. A common phrase is 3T ^ /k ^ Go-ji hak-kyS. The 
live periods and eight, methods of teaching. The theory is explained in vols. i and x 
of the ^ ^ ^ ^ MiaOrfa-lien-hua-ching-hsuan-i, a commentary 

on the Lotus written by Ohih-I (Nahji^, 1634). See also Nanjio, Nos. 1568-9 
and 1551. Also the ^ "p E9 ^ ^ ^ ^ T'ien-t'ai-ssu-chiao-i-chi-chu of 
Mang Jim (Nanjio, 1635). 

. ® In the last day and night of his life he is said to have revealed the Mahapari- 
nirvana-sutra (see Nanjio’s catalogue, class v, Nos. 113 to 126). This is not the same 
work as No. xvi in the Pali Digha Nikaya. 

8 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA {cm. i 

by Bralimfi — ^tbat he resigned himself to the heavy task of making 
difficult truths intelligible to minds of very various capacities. 
Secondly, many expressions in the oldest documents imply that he 
Imew more than he thought it wise to teach.^ His persistent refusal 
to reply to several fundamental questions — such as are space and 
time finite or infinite and what is the condition of a Buddha after 
death— seems to indicate that there are subjects with which human 
language is inadequate to deal. Taking such passages into 
consideration, it is perhaps not illegitimate to imagine that after 
the Enlightenment he believed he had a full and complete vision 
of the truth, but that, when he was confronted with the practical 
problem of preaching, he felt that much of the vision was above and 
beyond all human speech and deliberately circumscribed his 
teacliing, limiting his message to what ordinary men could make 
use of and understand.^ 

At first sight, too, it does not seem unreasonable to suppose that 
during the Buddha^s long career as a teacher his views underwent 
some change and development or, as the orthodox would prefer 
to put it, that his disciples grew in wisdom and spirituality and were 
able to receive more and more of the truth. Certainly such a 
supposition would be necessary if, fike Ear Eastern Buddhists, 
we were to accept the great Mahayanist sutras, the Lotus, the 
Prajnaparamita, and so bn, as accounts of what he actually said. 
But the unanimous verdict of European scholars is that these works 
were composed many centuries after his death and that, if we 
desire historical information about his preaching, our only chance 
is to seek for it in the older parts of the Pali Pitakas and in the 
Cliinese translations of those Sanskrit works which cover much the 
same ground. It is generally agreed that these older parts are the 
four Nikayas and some works (e.g. the Sutta Nipata) included in the 
fifth Mkaya, as well as portions of the Vinaya. If we limit ourselves 

^ In the Sani. Nik., Ivi, .^1, it is related how he once when walking in a forest 
plucked a hunch of leaves. The truths, he said, which he had taught his disciples 
were like the leaves which he held in his hand, while those which he knew but 
had not taught were as many as the leaves of the forest. The parable of the blind 
men and the elephant (Udana, vi, 4) seems to imply that ordinary human intelligence 
is incapable of grasping the Universe as a whole. 

® The well-known passage in the Mahaparinibbana-sutta (ii, § 25) in which the 
Buddha says that there was no such thing as a closed fist in his teaching and 
that he had made no distinction between esoteric and exoteric may seem to contradict 
these ideas of gradual or partial revelation. But the saying may he fairly interpreted 
as applying to useful knowledge only. The Pali texts distinctly represent the 
Buddha as refusing to answer apparently important questions when he felt 
that the answer would merely perplex the questioner, e.g. Saip. Nik., xHv, 10. 

THE CANONS 

9 

OH. l] 

to them, we find that they contain little which supports the idea 
that the later sayings of the Buddha as compared with the earlier 
show growth, advance, or progress. It is true that the account of 
the last months of his life represents him as using constantly a new 
formula ^ which extols the blessedness of virtue, meditation, and 
wisdom when found together, but except for the prominence given 
to panna or wisdom— the prajna which plays so prominent a part 
in later works— there is no approximation to Mahayanist doctrine. 
Nor does the discourse which he is said to have preached in the hall 
at Mahfivana near Vesali^ and which is apparently intended as 
a last epitome of his teaching show any tendency towards tran- 
scendental or idealistic views. It lays stress on mindfulness, energy, 
and meditation : it emphasizes the idea that the spiritual life is 
a struggle (padhana, vayama) and also emphasizes wisdom (panna) 
and joy (piti), but it cannot be said to give any revelation of the 
final truth which is not contained in earlier discourses. 

Some passages give a picture of him in his youth as a man of 
boundless intellectual activity who spared neither mind nor body 
in the work of testing by practice as well as argument any system 
which seemed worthy of his attention. But when once he had made 
up his mind and beheved that he had discovered the truth, he is 
represented as filled with a calm confidence in his own power and 
knowledge which left no room for change or development. He 
taught, but did nob consult. There is no indication that he accepted 
and worked into his system ideas derived from either intelligent 
disciples to whom he gave explanations or opponents with whom 
he argued. Nor need this assurance and self-sufficiency seem 
strange. It is probably a gift natural to great teachers, for, like 
the Buddha, Christ and Mohammed do not seem to have been 
influenced during their ministry by either friends or opponents. 
They said what they felt they had to say. 

But if the most ancient texts do not indicate that the Buddha 
changed his teaching durmg his lifetime, still they do nob give 
a simple and continuous narrative. Though the varied materials 
of which they are composed may be all relatively old, they present 
obvious differences of style and date : they contain inconsistencies,^ 

^ D.N., xvi, 1, § 12 (= ii, p. 81). 

® D.N,, xvi, iii, § 50. The same summary is also given in Maj. Nik., ciii, and 
Dig. Nik., xxviii, § ,3. 

® e.g. it is both stated and denied that women can become saints. Contrast 
CuUavag., xi, 1, 3, with MaJ. Nik., cxv, near the end. 

10 BUmiimM IN INDIA AND CHINA [on. i 

so that the question at once arises what part of them, if any, can be 
regarded as the ipsissima verba of the Master or even a correct 
statement of the original teaching. 

We talk of the Mahayana showing growth, or perversion, but 
do we know the starting point 1 What is the original doctrine 
by which we test what we consider to be later developments ? 
In order to answer this question it will be well to state briefly the 
httle which we know about the history of the Pali Canon and our 
even more meagre information respecting the origin of the version 
now known in Chinese translations. 

The Vinaya Pitaka professes to describe the collection and 
composition of the Canon, for the last two chapters of the Cullavagga 
contain accounts of the Councils of Rajagaha and VesMi. The 
first 1 was held immediately after the Buddha’s death, in order to fix 
what was his teaching both as to the discipline to be observed 
by his followers and as to doctrine : the second, which met a hundred 
years later, considered and ultimately condemned certain innovations 
in discipline. This passage was obviously written some time after 
the second Council which it describes, but it is introduced without 
any intimation that it is later than the rest of the Vinaya. But we 
know that the Vinaya received additions. The authenticity of the 
work called Parivara was disputed in Ceylon in the first century 
B.C., and though it was accepted by the orthodox, it was apparently 
composed in the island about that time. The last chapters of the 
Cullavagga may have a similar origin.^ 

European scholars have received the story of the Councils with 
much scepticism, but there is nothing improbable in its main outlines. 
There can be no doubt as to the respect felt for the rule of life and 
the doctrine enjoined by the Buddha. After his death, what more 
natural than to fix what that rule and doctrine were while those 
who had lived in the Master’s company were still alive and could 
relate their experiences ? The procedure said to have been followed 
by the Council was eminently reasonable. They fi.rst examined 
UpMi as an acknowledged expert in the Vinaya and asked him when 
and in what circumstances each rule had been laid down. Then 
in the same way they proceeded to question Ananda " through the 

^ See especially Le Coricile da Bajagaha by Przyluski in the series Buddhica. 

® Many books of the Pali Canon, particularly some (though not all) which are 
included in the Khuddaka Nikaya, are undoubtedly lafce. e.g. the Peta-vatthu 
alludes to a king called Pingalaka who lived about two cent\xries after the Buddha’s 
death. S, Levi (in Etudes AsicUiquas, E. F. d’Ex. Or., 1925) thmka thesre is proof 
that the ISfiddesa was composed “ entre la fin du Jer siecle et la fin du iu”^® ”. 

TEE CANONS 

11 

GH. l] 

five Nikayas ”, kis replies about tke first two suttas of the Digha 
Nikaya being quoted as an example. There is some resemblance 
between the style of the Buddhist suttas and of the philosophic 
discourses or dialogues reported in the Upanishads, but whereas 
these latter are interested only in the doctrines of Yajnavalkya and 
others and not in those sages themselves, it is the personality of the 
Buddha which dominates the Pali scriptures. Did He say this and, 
if so, when and where ? This importance attached to a personahty 
is without parallel in Indian literature, which is singularly lacking 
in human detail and has preserved no portrait of kings like Asoka 
or philosophers like Sanlcara. It seems reasonable to believe that 
the words of the Master who made such an impression on his age 
have been correctly preserved, though it is also only too certain 
that innovators used his name to give authority to their ne-w 
doctrines. Oral tradition and trained memories such as are common 
in India can preserve ancient texts with wonderful accuracy, but 
there is a universal tendency to enlarge them with later additions. 

The Cullavagga itself indicates that the authority of the first 
Council was not undisputed. When the members had finished 
reciting the Dhamma and Vinaya in the form approved by them, 
an elder called Purana arrived with a large following. They asked 
him to accept their version but he politely refiised.^ “ The Dhamma 
and Vinaya have been well recited by the Theras. Nevertheless, 
as I heard them and received them from the very mouth of the 
Lord, in that form will I keep them (in my memory).” According 
to the Cullavagga, the first Council was concerned only with the 
Dhamma and Vinaya,^ but in the account of the second Council 
the Matikas or indexes are mentioned. They doubtless represent 
the beginnings of what was afterwards known as the Abhidhamma 

or third Pitaka. The name 
of the Nilcayas,® but there is 

Abhidhamma occurs in the Pali text 
abundant e-vidence to show that this 
Pitaka is later than the others and different sects included quite 
different works under this title. 

Of the second Council one may say as of the first that the account 
given, though not confirmed by external evidence and though 

^ Culiavag., xi, i, ii. 

^ But the Asoka vadana, the Vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadins, and the Chia- 
ye-chie-ching 'Mm mm. (Nanjic, 1363) mention also the third Pitaka which 
is said to have been recited by Kasyapa. 

® e.g. Dig. Nik., xxxiii, 10; Maj. Nik,, xxxii, Ixix, ciii ; Ang. Nik., vi, 50. 
It is often in the compound form abhidhammakathd, talk about the higher or more 
abstruse parts of the doctrine. 

12 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND OHINA^ 

containing some exaggerations, ^ is in its general outlines eminently 
probable. It is natural that changes and relaxations of discipline 
should have arisen and that a meeting should have been summoned 
to consider them. Two points deserve notice. First the Cullavagga 
emphasizes the differences between the Bhikkhus of the East and 
the West, 2 indicating that there were already two schools with, 
geographical limits. Secondly, Ceylonese tradition as reported 
in the Dipavamsa ® adds to the account given in the Yinaya the 
statement that the defeated party held a council of their own called 
the Mahasangiti which compiled a new version of the scriptures and 
w’as the origin of the important Mahasanghika sect, apparently 
the precursor of the Mahay^na. The Chinese pilgrims Fa-Hsien 
and Hsiian-Tsang also know of this sect, but connect it with the 
first not with the second Council. Hsiian-Tsang says,^ apparently 
on the strength of information received in Magadha, that the 
schismatic Council included laymen as well as monies and accepted 
as scripture additional matter including dharapis or spells. Though 
these traditions present inconsistencies, the substance of them is 
probable enough, namely, that in opposition to the strict monasticism 
of the TheravMa, the sect which edited the Pah PifakaSj there 
was a large (Mahasangha) and popular party, which was disposed 
to tolerate mythologj?^ and magic.® 

The reign of Asoka, say about 260 b.o., is an important epoch 
for the history of the Buddhist scriptures. Among his inscriptions 
is one known as the edict of Bhabra or Bhabru in which he 
recommends the clergy to study seven passages, most of which 
have been identified witli parts of the Pah Pitakas, The passages 
are not quoted but are referred to by descriptive titles such as 
Future Dangers, the Discourse to Kahula beginning with the subject 
of lying and the verses about the Sage. Though some of the titles 
are rather vague, it is noticeable that they all suggest topics famihar 

^ e.g. the age of some of the participants, 

® Cullavag., xii, 2, 2 IF. 

® Dip., 32-S. The monks of the Great Council are said to have made a Sutta 
Pitaka and Vinaya Pitaka of their own and to have rejected certain works. But 
those rejected works are all relatively late. 

^ Watters, PiJaw Chwang, 2, pp. 159 ~t161. 

® The Mahavastu describes itself as belonging to the Lokuttara branch of the 
Mahasanghikas. It apparently corresponds to the Vinaya but, unlike the Pali 
text, consists chiefly of miraculous narratives, not of monastic rules. Fa-Hsion 
thought that the Vinaya of the Mahasanghikas was the fullest and most complete 
of all the versions and he translated it into Chinese in collaboration with Buddha- 
bhadra. 

THE CANONS 

13 

CH, l] 

to tlio Pali Pitakas as we know tkem. We cannot, of course, 
conclude tliat Asoka kad before him the present text of the 
Majjhima Nikaya in which the Buddha begins his admonition to 
Rahula by dwelling on the dangers of untruth, but it is clear that 
he was acquainted with some version of such a discourse and could 
refer to a collection of discourses attributed to the Buddha and 
regarded as scriptm'e. 

According to Ceylonese tradition,^ Asoka also summoned a Council 
which examined the scriptures and established the Canon. But no 
confirmation of this has been found in India. The Council is not 
mentioned in the inscriptions where Asoka records his services 
to religion nor in Sanskrit works ^ nor by the Chinese pilgrims. 
Hence many scholars regard it as a late invention. ^ But in enumera- 
ting his own good deeds Asoka also fails to mention the missions 
which he dispatched to foreign countries, though he speaks of them 
elsewhere, and the story of the Council is extremely probable. 
Whatever difficulties the stories about a particular council may 
present, it is clear that some councils must have been held or the 
tradition about them would never have arisen. Asoka, lilce 
Kanishka and Constantine in later periods, had embraced a new 
religion : he found that its adherents were not agreed on many 
important points and we know from the Bhabra inscription that 
he was interested in the scriptures. And if this argument, that the 
action attributed to him is natural, be thought insufficient, some 
slight confirmation is afforded by the mention of the book called 
Kathavatthu in connection with the assembly. This work, which 
is reckoned as part of the Abhidhamma Pitaka, is a refutation 
of various early heresies and its religious atmosphere seems to be 
that of Asoka’s reign and not of later times when Mahayanism had 
become pominent. The commentary on it begins by stating the 
orthodox view that it was composed by the Buddha himself in a 
prophetic spirit, but subsequently it is added that Tissa Moggaliputta 
recited it at Asoka’s Council in order to crush dissentient views. 
It is hard to see why this admission of human authorship was made, 
unless the facts connected with the Council were too well known 

^ Mahavamsa, v, 228 fF. Dipavamsa, vii, 40-3, 66-9, and the introduction 
to the Commentary (ascribed to Buddhaghosa) on the Kathavatthu, translated 
in Points of Controversy, pp. 1-7. 

* The Asokavadana says that Asoka summoned 300,000 monks and gave 
them, alms, but does not speak of a council. Cf. Pivyavadana, xxvii. 

® But Vincent Smith and Thomas (in Cambridge Hialory of India) accept it 
as probably historical. 

14 

BVBBH18M IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. i 

to be denied. It is noteworthy that the author of the Kathavatthu 
makes nearly two hundred quotations from the Pali scriptures, 
which he generally cites as “ words spoken by the Lord” or the 
Suttanta. He svas apparently famihar with the Vinaya, five 
Nilniyas, and some of the Abhidhamma.^ 

In the inscriptions of Sanchi we find the words Sutakini, one who 
knows a sutta, Petaki, one who knows a Pitaka (or the Pitakas), and 
Pancanekayika, one who knows the five Nikayas. This shows 
that the writers were already familiar with the fivefold division, 
but unfortunately the date of the inscriptions is not so certain as 
could be wished. They may be of the second century b.c. or perhaps 
not earlier than the first century. 2 

The text of the Pali Pitakas current in Ceylon, Burma, Siam, and 
Cambodja professes to be that which was first committed to writing 
in Ceylon in the time of Vattagamani, who probably reigned 
from 29 to 17 b.g. and summoned a council which is said 
to have met at the Alu Vihara near Matale. It was accepted 
by the great monastery called Mahavihara but not by all the other 
religious establishments in the island, and for many centuries we 
hear of other versions of the scriptures composed by heretics, such 
as the Votulyakas. Though the task of committing the whole 
Canon to writuig was first attempted by this Council, it is obviously 
probable that portions of it existed in manuscript before a complete 
edition was contemplated, but, if so, we know nothing whatever 
about them. But this is no reason for suspecting the genuineness 
of the text, provided that there was a fixed text,^ Probably at this 
time writing was not used by the Brahmans for religious purposes 
the whole of the Vedic hterature was still preserved in memory 

and printed copies were lost, for there are stil^ many Hindus, 
in south India, who know by heart a whole Samhita 

^ Points of Contiwersy. index of quotations, pp. 401-4. 

2 Marshall (in Camb. Hist, of India, p, 682) says that the pillars bear inscriptions 
in early Brahmi probably of the first century B.G., but that the plinth dates back 
to Sunga or Maurya times. Voucher {Le Stupa de Sanchi) jmts the inscription.^ 

about 150 B.c. 

® In Maj. Mk., xxvi, the Buddha in speaking of the doctrines of Aldra and 
Udaka says twice that so far as oral recital and repetition were concerned he could 
say off both the statement of doctrine and the elders’ explanation of it {Oflhapahaia- 
mattena lapitoldpmiamattena ndnavddahca vaddmi Iheravddanca jdndmi). In 
Dig. Nik., xxvii, 23, the Pali text twice contains the expre.ssion ganthe karontd 
making books. But the corresponding passage in Chinese (Takakusu’s Tripitaka, 
col. 3) reads ||| ^ MM- 

CH. I] ^ TEE CANONS 15 

witii its accessory treatises. Writing was probably regarded with 
more favour in Bnddbist monasteries tban among Brabmans, but 
even when tbe CMnese pilgrim Fa-Hsien was in India (a.d, 405-411) 
lie found some difficulty in obtaining the manuscripts wMcb lie 
desired, because tbe various versions of tbe Vinaya were preserved 
chiefly by memory. 

Tbe text fixed in Ceylon was tbe canon of tbe school known as 
Tberavfida or Vibhajjavadins, but there w'ere other ancient sects 
who apparently recognized other versions. Thus tbe Sarvastivadins 
bad an Abbidbamma of their own : tbe Sautrantikas rejected tbe 
Abbidbamma altogether: tbe Sammitiyas, who held special views 
about tbe nature of tbe atman, rejected texts w’^bicb were unfavour- 
able to those views.^ There is also, as abeady mentioned, a very 
large collection of Indian scriptures extant in Chinese translations.^ 
Tbe works classed as Abbidbarma m tliis collection are entirely 
different from those accepted by tbe Tberavada. In tbe section 
called Vinaya there are, besides numerous smaller treatises, five 
recensions of tbe whole code, one of which, tbe Mabi^saka Vinaya, 
appears to be similar to tbe Pali version, though not identical. 
The enormous Sutra Pitaka (comprising 1,.081 works) contains not 
only several translations of tbe principal Mabayana-sutras such as 
tbe Lotus, Lankavatara, and Avatarnsaka, but also a relatively 
short section devoted to tbe Hinayana-sutras in which are trans- 
lations both complete and partial of tbe four Agamas.® These 
roughly correspond to tbe first four of tbe Pali Nikayas, tbe fifth 
being absent.^ Tbe Chinese translations were apparently made 
from Sanskrit originals ® and various Sanskrit texts have been 
discovered in Central Asia which seem to be portions of a recension 
of tbe Vinaya and suttas analogous to tbe Pali version, though 
presenting differences both in arrangement and wording. These 

^ Abhidharniakosa, ix. See roussin, vol. v, p. 251. 

® There is also an extensive thesaurus of Tibetan translations from the Sanskrit, 
contained in the Kanjur. It includes the Vinaya according to the recension of 
the Mulasarvastivadins and also a section called Mdo or Sutra. But so far as 
can be judged from the catalogues published, there are not in it any collections of 
sutras corresponding to the Agamas or Nikayas, and the translations, -which -were 
mostly made in the ninth and eleventh centuries, represent the Buddhist literature 
studied in medieval Bengal. See my Hinduism and Buddhism, iii, 373. 

® The word is found in the Pali Canon, e.g. Mahavag., x, 1, 2, -and OuUavag., xii, 
2, 1. Agatagamo, one who is well versed in the Agama. 

* As a collection, that is. Treatises corresponding to some of the books included 
in it, such as the Dhammapada, are found in other parts of the collection. 

® But see Anesaki, “ The four Buddhist Agamas in Chinese,” p. 4, in Trans. 
As. Bog. Japan, 1908. 

16 

BVBBHISM IN INBIA ANB CHINA 

Agamas have recently been studied by many Chinese and Japanese 
who are interested in modern scholarship, but they play no part in 
the religious life of cither the clergy or laity. 

We naturally thinlv of Sanslrrit and Pali as separate languages 
like French and Italian,^ but it must be remembered that in Indian 
dramas the superior characters speak Sanskrit and the inferior 
Prala’it and sometimes more than one dialect ^ of Prakrit. It is 
assumed that they understand one another and that the reader 
understands them ail According to tradition the Buddha refused 
to let his teaching bo made a series of sacred formulse like the Vedic 
verses of the Brahmans and allowed all men to learn it in their own 
language.^ It was, of com’se, laudable to record the sacred teaching 
in as lucid and elegant a style as possible, and at a certain period 
and in certain districts this meant rewriting it in Sanslrrit or some- 
thing hke Sanskrit, for Buddhist Sanskrit is far from classical and 
in verse many irregular forms were allowed to remain because they 
could not be made correct without spoihng the metre.^ We do not 
know the history of this Sanskrit recension well enough to fix the 
date accurately and the Chinese translations are relatively late.® 
But it is probable that renderings of the suttas into Sanskrit were 

1 Probably Modern Greek offers a parallel to the relationsbip of Sanskrit and 
Prakrit. When I was in the Levant thirty-five years ago (and probably at present) 
the leading articles in a Constantinople newspaper were written in a language 
which was almost that of Plutarch and could be understood by anyone who had 
learnt classical Greek in England. But a novel offered serious difficulties to such 
a person and a play written in the language of peasants was wholly unintelligible. 
But all throe compositions were supposed to be Greek, though sometimes a distinc- 
tion was drawn between Hellenic and Romaic. 

2 In Sanskrit plays discovered in Central Asia the Buddha is made to speak in 
Sanskrit and the inferior characters speak three kinds of Prakrit. See Liiders, 
Bmdistualce Buddh. Hrameri, pp. 21-69. 

® Cullavag., V, 33. I find it hard to accept Thomas’s view {Life of Buddha, 
p. 254) that sahhdya niruliiyd means that the word of the Buddha is to be mastered 
in its own grammar. The phrase occurs twice in a few lines. First it is com- 
plained that certain disciples corrupt the Bxiddha’s words Te sahkdya niruttiyd 
huddhavacanam ddsenti. Here the phrase is admitted to mean by the use of their 
own dialect or grammar. When immediately afterwards the Buddha gives 
permission to learn his teaching, sakkdya niruttiya, is he likely to be using the 
same phrase in an entirely different sense ? Sec, too, Maj. Nik., exxix (= vol. iii, 
p. 233), in which it is laid down that one should neither affect provincialism in 
speech nor depart from recognized usage. 

* Fragments of a Sanskrit version of the Sutta Nipata seem to show signs of 
being a translation made from the vernacular. See J.R.A.S., 1916, p. 719 if. 

® The complete translations of the Agamas were not made till the fourth or 
fifth centuries a.d. and none of the earlier and fragmentary renderings are ascribed 
to any date earlier than the second century. 

THE CANONS 

17 

CH, l] 

made as early as tlie first or second centuries e.c. The Pali text 
appears to represent another literary version of the Buddha’s word. 
It is nearer to the original perhaps than Sanskrit but it can hardly 
be the original. For though there is no agreement among scholars 
as to the home of Pali, it is generally admitted that it is a literary 
and not very early form of some Indian dialect. It is not the same as 
the language of Asoka’s inscriptions or, it would seem, of the 
scriptures as known to him. At the same time it is probable that 
neither Sanskrit nor Pali differed from the various Aryan vernaculars 
much more than standard English differs from the speech heard in 
Devonshire, Scotland, or Yorkshire. 

The contents of the four Agamas in the Chinese version ^ have 
been analysed by Professor Anesaki and more recently by 
Professor Alcanuma. The resemblance to the Pah version is 
greatest in the Digha Nikaya.® The Chinese has thirty sutras, of 
which twenty-eight agree more or less with the Pali. Six of the 
Pali sutras are omitted, mostly for explicable reasons,® and three 
new ones are added, the principal being the last called Shih-chi 
(Loka-dhatu), a long account of the constitution of the Universe, 
which appears to be a compilation. The order in which the suttas 
are arranged is quite different in Pali and Chinese and this is also 
the case in the Majjhima Uilraya.^ In this collection the difference 
of matter is more considerable. The Pali text has 152 suttas, the 
Chinese 221. Of the former only ninety-eight are fomid in the Chinese 
version, although thirty of those omitted are placed in other 
Agamas. Of the remaining Chinese suttas, no less than seventy-five 
correspond to portions of the Pali Anguttara. A few are found in 
the Jataka and one in the Divyavadana.® 

^ See Anesaki, “ The four Buddhist x\gamas in Chinese,” in Trans. As. Soc. 
Japasi, 1908, and Chizen Akamxma’s Comparative Catalogue of the Chinese Agamas 
and Pali Nikayas published at Nagoya in 1929. 

' ft H # * Cho Agon-kyo in Japanese pronunciation. 

® The Mahasatipatthana and Jjakkhana-suttas, the greater part of which is 
found in both the Digha and Majjhima Nikayas, are given only in the latter. 
The Subha-sutta is practically the same as the Samahnaphala-sutta. The Jaliya- 
sutta is merely a repetition of the Mahali-sutta, but it is not clear why the Chinese 
omits both. It combines the Mahaparinibbana and Mahasudassana-snttas, 
This version is not the same as the Mahayanist account of the Buddha’s last days 
(N., Nos. 113 and 114). The Atanatiya-siitta is perhaps omitted because it consists 
chiefly of a list of Indian local spirits, though the somewhat similar Mahasamaya- 
sutta is included. 

" 4' ^ Chu Agon-kyo in Japanese pronunciation. 

® No. 60 — Divyav,, pp. 210-226. An account of an Emperor called Mandhata 
or Murdhata, 

18 BVDmiSM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. i 

The third or Sarayiikta-lgama corresponding to the Samjoitta 
Nikaya is called Tsa ^ in Chinese, meaning varied or miscellaneous. 
The division of the Pali text into chapters and sections is extremely 
complicated and that of the Chinese text is not less so, though the 
arrangement is different. Anesaki states that, though none of the 
divisions and sutras can be said to be identical in the two versions, 
similarity and affinity are undeniable and he considers it certain 
that both texts are descended from one and the same source. From 
Akanuma’s comparative tables, it appears that the greater part of 
the Chinese version corresponds with passages to be found in Pali, 
to a large extent in the Samyutta but also in the other Nikayas, 
Quite a number of texts correspond with the Pali Itivuttaka. On 
the other hand, large portions of the Pali text seem not to be 
represented by any Chinese translation.^ 

The fourth Agama is called in Chinese Tseng-i,® which seems to 
represent Bkottara rather than Anguttara, though the arrangement 
of topics in numbered categories is not followed so strictly as in 
Pah. Anesaki states that the divergence from the Pali text is 
much more remarkable in this Agama than in the others : that the 
style has the chracteristics of Mahayanist texts and that the 
version belonged to some school which had very different, traditions 
from the Theravada and perhaps was a section of the Mahasanghikas. 
His analysis of the Chinese text, however, shows that parallel passages 
to all its sections can be found in the Pali, about half coming from 
the Anguttara and half from the other Nikayas. It wiH be 
remembered that seventy-five suttas of the Pali Anguttara are 
included in the Chinese Majjhima. 

The analogy of what happened to the compositions of later 
teachers warrants moderate confidence in the historical character 
of the Pali Nikayas, in so far as it shows that Indians preserve the 
original words of a teacher, though they also make large additions 
to them. Thus the hymns of Nanak, the founder of the Silchs who 

^ ^ Zo in Japanese pronunciation. There are two translations of the 
complete text mentioned in Nanjio’s catalogue. No. 644-, made by Gunabhadra 
about A.D. 440, and No. 646, made by unknown translators some time between 
350 and 431. There is also a small selection of twenty-seven Saniyukta sutras, 
N., No. 547. See Anesaki, l.c., p. 31. 

® Thus the whole or greater part of nineteen Saniyuttas out of fifty-six is missing, 
namely, xviii, xxvi-xxxiii, xxxvii, xl, xliii, and xlv-Ii. 

® ^ Japanese Z6-ichi. The translation was originally made by Dharma- 

nandin, a monk of Tukhara who arrived at Chang-an in a.p. 384. Unfortunately 
his work was throvm into confusion by local wars, he left China, and his papers 
were revised and put in order by Sanghadeva, a monk from Kabul. 

CH- I] THE mNONS ^ ^ m 

lived from 1469 to 1538, were preserved and apparently scliolars 
accept the text as authentic, hut no authorized collection 'of them 
seems to have been made until the time of Arjun (1581-1606), the 
fourth Guru or head of the Sikhs, and this collection also 
contains hymns by Nanak’s successors, including Arjun himself, 
and by other writers, for the object was avowedly to collect not 
merely the works of Nanak but any hynms in which the true 
doctrine was sung. Even later some verses by Teg Bahadur 
(c. 1670) and a distich by Govind Singh were added and eventually 
Govind Singh (1675-1708) composed a supplementary scriptme for 
his followers into which he introduced many innovations. This 
happened in an age when the use of writing was familiar, but in the 
centuries following the death of Gotama the course of evcmts may 
have been slower, though not dissimilar. On the other hand, Nanak 
was not so great an organizer as Gotama. The constitution of the 
Sikh sect, as we know it, was due less to Mm than to the fourth 
Guru Earn Das. But Gotama estabhshed in his own lifetime 
a powerful religious order and an influential congregation of lay 
believers. For the existence of these bodies it was necessary to 
have a statement of both his rule of life and his doctrine. 

He preached for some forty-five years to various audiences and 
in different places. It is probable that he repeated his discourses 
and that the Pitakas give a correct picture when they represent 
particular sermons or parables as being well known even in his hfe- 
time. We often hear that he gave them special names. “ What, 
Lord, is the name of this exposition ? ” asks Ananda. “ Let it be 
known as the exposition of the honeyed cake.” ^ So, too, he refers 
to the parable of the Colt which he had used long before and repeats 
it,^ and Sariputta quotes the Homily of the Saw, as if it were well- 
known scripture.® Nevertheless the Pali Pitaka as it stands, even 
the Vinaya and the first four Nikayas, cannot have been put together 
at the Council of Kajagaha or any meeting held about that time. 
Apart from obvious appendices like the description of the Councils 

^ Madliupindika, Maj. N., xviii. For other instancea see Dig. Nik., i and xxix, 
Maj. N., xii, xxi, xxviii, xlix, cxv, cxvii. Saip. Nik., xxxv, 194. Dhanama- 
pariyaya is apparently the oldest (as it is also the latest) name for the Buddha’s 
actual words. When a discourse had been provided with an explanation of the 
circumstances in which it was uttered, it became a sutta. 

® Maj. Nik., Ixv, 

® Maj. Nik., xxviii. The Kakacupamasutta is M.N., xxi. So, too, in Maj. Nik., 
xxii (= CuUavagga, i, .^2), ten -well-known parables are mentioned by the Buddha 
and others, seven of which are given in detail in Maj. Nik., liv. 

20 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. i 

in tlie Gullavagga, it is clear that many suttas must ha Ye been 
composed a considerable time after that date. Some aYowedly 
deal with events which took place after the Buddha’s deaths and 
a passage in the Majjhima Nikaya speaks of the country of the 
Yonas where there are no castes but only masters and slaves.^ 
This can hardly have been written until some time after Alexander’s 
invasion (326 b,c.). The discussions in the PalihTikayas about the 
authenticity of words attributed to the Buddha ® and the warnings 
against Suttantas remarkable for literary beauty rather than sound 
doctrine seem to belong to a period when several oral recensions 
of the scriptures had had time to grow up, and, though the Master 
liimseh' is represented as giving warnings and criteria to distinguish 
the true and false, he is often made to do so in a prophetic spirit 
and with reference to the future. 

Again, in the Nikayas as we have them several strata are clearly 
discernible. In the first and second Nil?ayas the suttas are 
relatively long and profess to record the discourses delivered by the 
Buddha on certain occasions, whether on one or more subjects. 
In the Samyutta Nikaya the discourses are shorter, deal with one 
matter only, and are classified according to their topics, which may 
be doctrinal, personal, geographical, etc. Thus one section deals 
•with sayings about causation, others with remarks on incidents 
concerned with the disciple Kassapa or the kingdom of Kosala. 
The Anguttara is a similar collection, but the suttas are arranged 
not according to subjects but according to nmnerical categories, the 
three messengers of the Gods, the seven conditions of welfare, and 
so on. As collections, the Samyutta ^ and Anguttara seem to be 
more artificial and recent than the first two Nikayas, but it does 
not follow that the sayings which they contain are recent. This 
is also true of the fifth or Khuddaka Nikaya, to wliich no corre- 
sponding Sanskrit Agama is known. It is late as a collection and 
includes some very late works, but on the other hand some of its 
contents, such as the Sutta Nipata, are among the most ancient 
Buddhist documents which we possess. 

^ e.g. Dig. Nik., xxiii. Maj. Nik., Ixxxiv, xciv, cviii. Ang. Nik., v, ohap. 50, 
deals with a King of Pataliputta called Munda who began to reign aboxit forty 
years after the Buddha’s death. 

^ Maj. Nik., xciii. 

See above, pp. 10-11; Saip. Nik., xx, 7 (= vol. ii, p. 266). Similarly, provisions 
for learning suttas by heart for fear they may be forgotten (e.g. Maliavagga, iii, 
5, 9) seem to point to a period after the Buddha’s death. 

^ Thus the Samyutta, xxii, § 4, quotes by name the Sakkapanha-sutta of the 
Digha Nikaya (No. xxi), which does not seem to he one of the oldest suttas. 

TEE CANONS 

21 

CH. l] 

Since so many long discourses are attributed to the Buddha, 
it is only natural to conclude that he did deliver ample homilies 
treating of various subjects and sometimes breaking into dialogue 
with his hearers. The mamier of his teaching would leave its trace 
in tradition. But the question arises, are the long sermons which 
have come down to us a fairly accurate report of what he said on 
any one occasion, or are they a later patchwork, a not unskilful 
arrangement of materials found elsewhere 1 Take, for instance, the 
Alagaddupama-sutta, the sutta of the venomous snake.^ It is one 
of the most notable discourses in the Majjhima collection. Its 
cadences have a fervour and authority which do not ring like the 
words of a compiler ; it passes from one deep theme to another, but 
the transitions, though sometimes unexpected, are not unnatm'al. 
A Bhilrkliu named Arittha obstinately held that a saint can sin and 
and still not fall from grace, and was finally summoned by the Buddha 
himself and sternly reproved for his error. No one can indulge 
in sensuality without corrupting hmiself, says the Master. Those 
who represent me as teaching the contrary are fools. They learn 
the scripture and use it for dispute and argument without really 
understanding it. They are like a man who catches a snake and 
does not know how to hold it ; so the snake bites him. A raft is 
a very useful thing when one has to cross a river, but it is foolish 
to carry it on one’s back afterwards.*^ You must learn to discard 
good things and still more bad things. There are various forms of 
the erroneous belief in an unchanging and permanent self. You 
must get rid of them all and not worry about the non-existent. 
But can one worry about the non-existent, ask the disciples ? 
Yes, you can, if you form fanciful ideas about the nature and 
destiny of the soul, for when you hear the preaching of the Buddha 
and learn that they are false, you will think that you have been 
deprived of something that you really possessed.: Then follow'S 
an eloquent exposition of the true doctrine as to these matters,^ 
a description of the peace of mind enjoyed by those who master 
it, and a most emphatic and interesting assertion that it is entirely 
false to say that this doctrine teaches annihilation. The Buddha 
is not moved by either criticism or praise, neither should you be. 

^ MaJ. Nik., No. xxii. 

^ The Parable of the Raft is alluded to by name in the MahatauhS^-sankhaya- 
sutta (Maj. Nik., xxxviii). 

® I am not attempting here to give an analysis of either the true doctrine or of 
the errors condemned, but merely to consider the literary structure of the sutta. 

22 

BUBmUSM IN INDIA AND CHINA [om i 

Put away from you all that is not yours. Here follows the cele- 
brated parable about the sticks and leaves of the Jeta-wood, and the 
peroration asserts that it is beyond human power to trace the 
course of Saints who have finished theii- life-work and laid down their 
burden, but that those who are striving towards sanctity are sure 
of a happy fiitui’e. It ends with the remarkable words “ All who 
have but faith in me and love for me are destined to Paradise 

It would be most interesting to know whether these words are 
a geniiin e utterance of Gotama, for they contain in germ the emotional 
and popular side of later Buddhism, and many other sayings in 
the discourse are of historical importance. But if we turn our 
attention not to its literary merits but to the details of its compo- 
sition, we cannot but notice that it contains an obvious inter^Dolation. 
When the Buddha speaks of the scriptures, a stock phrase is put into 
his mouth describing them as consisting of suttas, gathas, jatakas, 
etc., which is very much as if Christ were represented as mentioning 
the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles. But besides this obvious 
anachronism, the whole tone of the advice about the scriptures, 
the warnings that they may be misused, and that they have only 
a limited value (for that is apparently the meaning of the parable 
of the raft), seems natural not in the lifetime of the founder but in a 
rather later period when there was a danger that believers might 
be seduced by literary disputes and forget the great truths of 
religion. The first part of the sutta containing the story of Arittha 
is found verbatim in the Vinaya,^ and the parable of the Jeta-wood 
in two passages of the Sarnyutta Ndcaya.^ It is also curious to find 
that in another passage of the Sarnyutta ^ a parable about snakes 
is followed immediately as here by a parable about a raft, although 
the details are not the same. 

This sutra is also found in the Chinese version of the Madhyama 
.^.gama. It is called (in Japanese pronunciation) Arita-kyo and 
comes next to the Satei-kyo ( — Maj . Nik. xxxviii) doubtless because 
both relate how members of the Buddha’s order, Arittha and Sati, 
held erroneous views and were publicly reprimanded by the Master. 
The Chinese text is somewhat more concise than the Pali, but on the 

^ CuIIavagga, i, 32, and likewise in the Sutta- Vibhanga on the 68th Pacittaya 
(Oldenberg, Vinaya, vol. iv, p, 133 ff.), 

® Sam. Nik., xxii, § 33 (= vol. hi, p. 33), xxv, § 137 (= vol. iv, p. 82). It occurs 
twice with slight variations because it is given a place in the Khancla Satpyutta 
as referring to the skandhas and in the Salayatana Sainyutta as referring to the 
senses, 

® Vol. iv, p. ]72 (a= XXXV, iv, 5, § 197). 

23 

CH. I] THE GANOm: 

whole the correspondence is close. The , sequence of incidents and 
topics is the same, and almost ail the remarkable expressions which 
occur in the Pali are to be found also in the Chinese. Axittha’s ^ 
heresy is described as the doctrine that indulgence in sensual 
pleasures is not a hindrance to a holy life,^ and he is duly reproved 
first by his colleagues and then by the Buddha. Parables are 
referred to, as in the Pali, but eight and not ten are mentioned,® 
It is most remarkable that the Chinese text, as well as the Pali, 
commits the anachronism of making the Buddha enumerate the 
various classes of writings which compose the canon and the enumera- 
tion is even more elaborate, for twelve categories are mentioned.^ 
Then come the parables about catching a snake and the raft and the 
warning that one should reject good things and a fortiori had things. 
The passage describing the six erroneous views and the subsequent 
discussion are somewhat difficult,® but the conclusion is the same. 
He who has true knowledge is not confined by moats or fences or 
bolted gates. Indra, Ishana, and Brahma cannot track him down. 
The Tathagata does not preach annihilation and is above praise 
and blame. Then follow the parable of the Jeta-wood and the 
peroration as in the Pali. This translation was made in China 
between a.d. 391 and 398 by Gautama Sanghadeva, a monlr from 
Kabul. It is probable, therefore, that he used the text current 
in the north-west of India. Since the translation is so late, it 
cannot throw any light on the date of the sutra, but it seems to 
indicate that there was a very widespread tradition in the Buddhist 
community from Ceylon to the north-west of India, which related 

^ His epithet, which is in Pali GadabddMpiMa, is not translated but treated as a 
proper name: “who was originally Gadabari,” |[[ll PlS ^ ^1]. 

that those who indulge their desires have no impedi- 
ment. 

* The bone, the lump of flesh, the torch, the fire-pit, the poisonous snake, the 
dream, the loan, the hanging fruit. 

* Sho-kyo j£ ^ ; Ka-ei ^ ; Kisetsu f g ^ ; Geta ^ ; In-en 

in lit ; Sen-roku ; Hon-ki ^ ; Shisetsu |g; ; Sho-sho ^ ^ ; 

K6ge_^ Miz6-u-h6 ^ ^ ^5 Setsu-gi In the Maha- 

parinirvana-sutra (Nanjio, 114-, vol. 14) the -h z: ^ ^ Ju-ni hu-kyo, or 
Twelve parts of the scriptures, are mentioned. The names are all transliterations, 
not translations of Indian words, and correspond to Sutra, Geya, Vyakarana, 
G§,tha, TJdana, Nidana, Avadana, Itivuttaka, Vaipulya, Adbhutadharma, Upade^a. 

® Apparently the passage yam hind r4pam atitdndgatapaccuppannam, etc., at 
the bottom of p. 138, vol. i, of the Pali Test Society’s edition is transferred to the 
description of the six views on p. 135. 

24 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. i 

without material variation how the Buddha dealt with Arittha 
and what comments he made. 

Now assuming the story of Arittha to be historical, it is perfectly 
natural that it should be dealt with in both the Vinaya and the 
Suttas. The former is concerned with discipline and cites this case 
as a precedent for the penalty to be imposed on those who will not 
give up their errors when warned : the sutta reports a discourse 
of the Buddha and recounts the incident which prompted it. The 
parable of the Jeta-wood as it stands by itself in the Samyutta 
seems somewhat abrupt : it reads like an extract rather than a 
self-contained homily. But, on the other hand, its position in the 
sutta before us raises difficulties. Does it really support the 
argument which it is apparently supposed to clinch ? And further, 
though the narrative flows on persuasively, there seems to be a 
difference in the mental horizon of the first part (that which recurs 
in the Vinaya) and of the Buddha’s discourse. Arittha’s sin was 
that he misrepresented what the Buddha had said and would 
not listen to wiser people who warned him that he had misunder- 
stood it. The Buddha condemns this clearly enough but, as 
he continues, seems to regard it as a case of misinterpreting the 
scriptures. 

Have we here a composite work made with good materials but 
tacked on in later days to a well-known ancient story, or a genuine 
tradition (with some later additions no doubt) of what the Buddha 
really did and said on this occasion ? I cite this case to show the 
difficulties which beset our inquiries, not to offer a solution, for it is 
to be feared that a definite answer to such questions will never be 
possible and that the most that can be safely done is to indicate 
certain probabilities. In the first place, the Buddhist sufctantas 
are something new in Indian literature. In spite of some resem- 
blances to the Upanishads, they have a manner and style of their 
own, and the simplest and most natural explanation of this is that 
the new type is due to the appearance of a personality who 
popularized a new style of preaching. Further it seems probable 
that the summaries of doctrine attributed to the Buddha — such 
as the Noble Eight-fold Bath and the discourse on Anatta — are 
genuine. The great danger of Indian oral tradition is, as already- 
mentioned, that it adds and embellishes. But the brevity of these 
formulse is a guarantee that they have not been amplified, and 
perhaps it is not over credulous to accept in the same spirit such 
passages as the paragraphs on progress in the holy life which recur 

THE CANONS 

25 

CH. l] - 

in the Digha Nikaya ^ and some of the discourses said to have been 
delivered during his last days and recorded in the Mahapari- 
nibbana-sutta. But this instance reminds iis of the need for 
caution, for if in such matters anything is certain, it is that other 
discourses contained in that narrative — ^for instance, the long reproof 
administered to Ananda because he did not beg the Buddha to live 
on until the end of the present ason — are the products of later fancy. 
Probably many of the racy parables are authentic utterances, but 
here again we must sadly confess that many now found in the text 
might be the work of an imitator, and when the authenticity of 
a parable is a matter of real interest it is often not easy to find any 
criterion by which to judge it. Take for instance the striking story 
of the blind men who tried to describe the shape of an elephant 
after touching some one part, some another. It occurs in the 
Udana,^ probably a relatively late work, but a late work may contain 
old material. Bid the Buddha really use the simile to illustrate 
man’s efforts to understand the Universe in which he finds himself ? 
It may be so, but his other utterances on such subjects are marked 
by the severest reticence and one cannot help suspecting that some 
clever editor may have ventured to go a httle further than the 
master.' 

If we cannot be sure that any suttanta gives a correct account 
of what happened on a particular occasion, it may seem that 
everything in the life and teaching of the Buddha becomes doubtful. 
But we may set against this uncertainty the uniformity and on the 
whole the reasonableness of these ancient documents. For it is not, 
I think, an exaggeration to call the narrative contained in the older 
documents reasonable. In the East descriptions of miracles are 
no proof that a story is not contemporary or that the other events 
which it relates are untrue. Miracles were ascribed to Keshub 
Chunder Sen, Ramakrishna, and many other recent Hindus in their 
lifetime ® : to Gotama’s disciples it probably seemed perfectly 
natural to relate how he had vanished from one place and reappeared 
in another. And if the composers of the Pitakas were liberal in 
adding miracles to their narrative, they did not suppress incidents 
which showed the master as an ordinary man. Such things as his 

^ Dig. Nik., ii-xiii ; Maj. Nik., xxvii, xxviii, xxxix, Ixxix. 

® Udana, vi, 4. The parable was told to certain disciples who related to the 
Buddha the philosophic discussions which they had heard about such questions 
as the eternity and infinity of the Universe. 

® See, for instance, Dinesh Chandra Sen, Ghaitanya and his Age, p. 62, for an 
account of Brabhu Jagatbandhu of Faridpur, to whom miracles are ascribed. 

26 

BUDDBim IN INBM AND 

doubts and troubles and mistakes in Ms quest for truth must surely 
be historical, for they would never have been invented by recorders 
who were obviously disposed to glorify liim as an omniscient sage. 
It is significant that when the life of an entirely idealized Buddha 
is related— Vipassi 1 for instance, who is supposed to have lived 
ninety-one inons ago — ^though the general outline of G-otama’s 
biography is followed, there is no mention of such struggles. More- 
over, the repetition and monotony which are so distasteful to 
European students of the Nikayas are to some extent a guarantee 
of historical fidelity. Passages announcing something novel and 
striking are comparatively rare : we become weary of the endless 
elaboration of well-known themes. But this iteration is what 
might be expected in the record of a long and wandering life. 

Supposing that those who heard him preach in various places 
made and committed to memory an account of what he said, 
something like the Nik^yas would be the natural result. There 
is no reason to suppose that his teaching was seriously perverted 
in his lifetime. We read of misunderstandings like those of 
Arittha, Sati, and Yamaka, but they were publicly and clearly 
corrected. The portrait is lifelike : a teacher of wonderful energy 
even in extreme old age ^ continually impressing on the world certain 
truths which, though they might seem difficult inasmuch as they 
were new, were not complicated ® : kind and in some ways liberal 
but in everythiag that concerned Ms teaching most definite and 
tolerating no variation. Clearly such a character was likely to 
leave in the minds of his disciples a clear recollection of what he 
taught. 

It may be objected that no religion has undergone more changes 
or assimilated more foreign matter than Buddhism. This is true, 
but the process of transformation and admixture has been spread 
over wide intervals of time and space. The first great change — 
what we call Mahayanism— became evident about the time of the 
Christian era or at the earliest in the second century before that era. 
The irregularities condemned at VesS-li and the heresies confuted 
in the Kathavatthu may contain the germs of serious novelties 
but do not in themselves indicate any strMmg divergence from the 

* See Digha Nikaya, sutta xiv. 

® See the end of the Mahasihanada-sutta. MaJ. Nik., xii. 

® Though the Buddha’s doctrine is described as profound and to be understood 
only by the wise {'j[>aT(}4Ua-vedamya), yot it is also said (Maj. Nik., Ixxxv, near the 
end) that a competent pupil can master it between dawn and sunset. 

27 

OH. I] THE CANONS 

standard of tlie Nikayas. And the commotion whidi tkey caused 
indicates very clearly tkat tkere was a strictly conservative party, 
determined to allow no innovations in practice or doctrine and 
having a tradition to which they could appeal. 

I thinlc, therefore, that the earlier parts of the Pali Pitaka — that 
is, the four Nili^yas with portions of the fifth Nikaya and of the 
Vinaya; — reproduce the story of the Buddha’s life and teaching as 
current in the generations immediately following his death and that 
this story is in general outhne and sometimes verbally accurate. 
It would be unwise to attach too much importance to isolated 
utterances, but most statements of important doctrines are repeated 
many times with slight verbal differences and go back, I believe, 
to the recollections of the Master’s disciples. 

Midway between the works just mentioned and avowedly 
Mahayanist sutras stand compositions like the Lalita-vistara and 
Mahavastu. The language of both is somewhat irregular Sanslrrit 
and the style exuberant. The doctrine inculcated, though it can 
hardly be called definite Mahayanism, shows a tendency in that 
direction. The Buddha is less human : he becomes a supernatural 
being and higher than^ the gods themselves.^ His life is one long 
series of miracles, and exaggeration in the use of numbers is very 
noticeable. Nevertheless both works contain old material mixed 
with new, and the versions which they give of well-known legends 
and stanzas may be as old and worthy of attention as those found 
in Pali texts.'*^ So far as I know, Buddhists at the present day do 
not read either work, but the Lalita-vistara has had great influence 
on art. For instance, the story of the Buddha’s life as recorded 
in the sculptures of Borobudur in Java is clearly founded on its 
narrative. 

The collection of Mahayanist sutras in the Chinese Tripitaka is 
extensive and contains works of very unequal value, interest, and 
influence since it includes many late tantric treatises and spells. 
It is, however, complete— -that is to say, I am not aware that any 
important Mahayanist sutra is known to have existed in Sanskrit 
and to have disappeared entirely, though the original text has often 
been lost. In Japan the Hokke-kyo (Saddharmapufl.d,arika), the 

1 Thus in chaps, viii and x the Lalita-vistara frequently calls the young Gotama 
Devatideva and explicitly says that he is greater than all gods. 

^ For instance, the legend about Mara and tho temptation in Lal.-vist., chap, xviii, 
about Tapussa and Bhallika, chap, xxiv, and tho Sanskrit versions of tho lines 
Aparuta tesam amatassa dvara (Maj. Nik,, xxvi), said to have been uttered by the 
Buddha when he decided to preach. 

28 

BlWBimM IN INDIA. AND 

sutras about Amida’s paradise, and to some extent tbe Vajracclie- 
dika are not only well-known and venerated but extracts of tliem 
serve as books of devotion. The Vimalakirti-sutra, commonly 
called Yiiima-kyo, is also popular. The Avatamsaka (Kegon), 
Lanka vatara, Suvarnaprabhasa, Mahaparinirvana, and Dainichi- 
Iryo (Naniio, No. 530) are studied by the learned but not generally 
known. Some of them are the textbooks of special sects. 

The great Mahay^na sutras are concerned less with the life of the 
Buddha than with the doctrines which they represent him as 
preaching, but they generally open with some scene which recalls the 
no natives found in the Nikayas and Igamas. Thus at the beginning 
of the Lotus or Saddharmapundarika we are told that he was 
staying on the Vulture Peak at Bajagaha, attended by a multitude 
of disciples among whom are figures well known in the older story 
such as Sariputra and Kasyapa but also legions of Bodhisattvas, 
including Mahjusri and Maitreya, and gods hke Sakra and Surya 
with myriads of attendants. In the midst of all these hosts sits 
the Lord (for it hardly seems appropriate to call him the Buddha 
or Gotama) plunged in nieditation, when suddenly from his forehead 
there issues a ray which filuminates the most distant worlds of the 
Universe and he begins to preach. The discourse which follows 
contains a good deal of prophecy including a prediction that all 
his disciples will become Buddhas, but the mam doctrine is that 
though the truth is one and absolute, the Buddha accommodates 
it to human intelligence and preaches it in various forms to give all 
minds a chance of salvation. Then there appears in the sky a 
gigantic jewelled Stupa in which is the body of the former Buddha 
Prabhutaratna, who attained nirvana countless ages ago, but returns 
to hear the Lord and converse with him. More serjnons and 
prophecies follow. The world bursts open on all sides and from 
the clefts arises a countless host of Bodhisattvas. Profound silence 
follows which, we are told, lasted fifty «ons, though it seemed but 
an afternoon. The Lord explains that this innumerable multitude 
of beings have all been his pupils. For the good of the world he 
manifests himself from time to time in human form, but his existence 
is not limited by his apparent birth and death : it extends incon- 
ceivably far back into the past and forward into the future. After 
further discourses on the merit which comes from an understanding 
of this doctrine and the practice of piety, the two Buddhas, past 
and present, seat themselves on the throne within the magic stupa. 
Not only do the rays which issue from their persons illuminate 

THE CANONS 

29 

CH. l] 

all tlie iiiiiverse, but they stretch out their shining tongues, which 
reach as far as the heaven of Brahma. This is said to have lasted 
a thousand years and probably the original version of the sutra 
ended with a short epilogue (chap, xxvii). But the text which has 
come down to us includes several additional chapters containing 
stories and spells. One (chap, xxiv) dedicated to the praise of 
Kwamion (Avaloldtesvara) is exceedingly popular as a book of 
devotion in China and Japan. Another (chap, xxv) recounts the 
remarkable legend of an ancient Bodhisattva who burnt his body 
in honour of the Lord. 

The Lotus declares itself to be the last and most eminent of all 
sutras^ and perhaps the author felt that he could not claim antiquity 
for his ideas, ‘which show a clear resemblance to those of the 
Bhagavad Gita. At any rate we need not speculate whether we 
have here an accurate report of the Buddha’s words or not. The 
Sutra itself treats of time and space in a manner which seems to 
deprive words like when and where of their ordinary meaning. 
But it is one of the most important and influential scriptures of 
Asia. Anesaki ^ even says of it that it has “ played in Japanese 
literature a rdie nearly akin to that of the Bible in English 
literature”. 

^ Chap, xiii, 54. 

- History of Japanese Religion, -p. 169. 

CHAPTEE II 

THE HOCTEINES 

& the last chapter I inquired whether it is possible to ascertain 
what Gotama really taught and. came to the conclusion that the 
older parts of the Pali scriptures reproduce the account of his life 
and teaching current in the generation immediately following his 
death and sometimes reproduce his words. I now propose to 
inquire what that teaching was and in particular to notice how it 
sometimes leads up to the later doctrines called Mahayana and 
sometimes oJffers a contrast to them. 

The word Mahayana does not admit of an exact definition, for 
it is not the name of a religious corporation witli fixed doctrines 
like many Cluistian and Hindu sects, but is merely an honourable 
and descriptive title given to the new scriptures, beliefs, and 
practices which appear in Buddhism some time about the Christian 
era or perhaps rather earlier. These novelties are mainly Indian 
in origin, for though Mahayanism spread over all Eastern Asia, the 
various schools into which it is di^dded were as a rule evolved in 
India and sent abroad in a mature and developed form. Still some 
allowance must be made for Iranian influences in early times and 
when the Mahayana was established in China, Tibet, and Japan 
it acquired considerable local colom* in each country. If we attempt 
not to define but even to describe this tangled growth of philosophy, 
art and literature, high aspirations and strange superstitions, 
we seem as wc turn from one side of it to another to be dealing with 
different sets of ideas and institutions which have nothing in common. 
One obvious characteristic is elaboration of doctrine. Just as 
Bypiantine Christianity argued about the nature of Christ and tlie 
Trinity, so the Mahayanists argued about the Buddha nature. 
But the analogy does not hold good in detail, for there was a strong 
tendency to multiply Buddhas and leave Gotama somewhat in the 
background, to exalt new supernatural personages or new groups 
of such, and at the same time to talk of one universal, pantheistic 
Buddha spirit. Though these speculations may seem over com- 
plicated or extravagant, still they belong to the sphere of 
religion. But Mahayanism has also an enormous literature about 
dogmas and systems (for there is more than one system) which 

30 

CH. n] THE DOCTRINES 31 

deal witli metaphysics or ontology or psychology but have nothing 
to do with religion as we understand it. The reader w^onders how 
these difficult ideas, which seem, like the most paradoxical parts of 
Einstein, can ever have found a way into the brains of ordinary 
men, much less have been a moral stimulus, and then he learns with 
amazement that Zen Buddhism was not only a great force in Japan 
but specially influential among the military classes. 

In sharp contrast to this detached, complicated, and most unsenti- 
mental philosophy is the practical every day side of Mahayanism. 
The simplest human desires are its basis. We like to think that there 
are deities who can give health, wealth, and comfort. We are not 
quite sure what will happen to us when we die : we want to go to 
heaven and gladly believe that kindly powers will guide us on our 
way. From the mists of hope arise much superstition, charms and 
spells, and magical prayers, but there arise, too, beautiful figures like 
the merciful Kwannon, gracious deities whose one wish and task 
is to help suffering humanity. It is true that the paradoxical 
philosopher and the superstitious temple-goer are between them 
responsible for modern neglect of the original teaching and precepts 
— the Four Truths and the Eightfold Path. But still Mahayanist 
Buddhism has made one sohd gift to humanity. It has proclaimed 
a better code of unselfish morality than any other religion and 
illustrated it nobly in art and literature. 

These ideas— heaven and the road thither, the duty of self- 
sacrifice, and, since we cannot ignore the strange Juxtaposition, 
idealist metaphysics — are all to be found in the hfilcayas, sometimes 
as mere seeds, sometimes as well-grown plants. But betw'een early 
Buddhism and the Mahhylna there is a great difference in emphasis. 
The ideals which the Buddha held up are left oh one side as too 
difficult for ordinary humanity : aspirations which he tolerated are 
made the essence of religion. 

The accounts of the Buddha’s life agree in stating that he spent 
the period which elapsed between his departure from home and his 
attainment of Enlightenment (traditionally estimated as seven years) 
in investigation and inquiry. The iiimrediate results of this quest 
were almost entirely negative. First he studied under two teachers^ 
who appear to have taught that salvation could be obtained by 
entering into certain trances. He found their conclusions unsatis- 
factory but seems to have accepted their general scheme for leading 
a religious life, which was common at that period among inquirers 
Alara Kalama and Uddaka-Bjamaputfca. 

32 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINAS 

wlio did not follow Brahmanic observances, namely, membership 
of an order or corporation wliich held certain doctrines (dhamma) 
and obeyed a certain discipline (vinaya). Though he found, their 
teaching insufficient, because it did not lead to peace, enlightenment, 
and nirvana, yet he by no means rejected the practice of trances and 
meditation. On the contrary, his own enlightenment and that of 
ordinary saints is represented as coming after they had passed 
through the four jhinas. 

After leaving his teachers as incompetent guides, Gotama 
proceeded to test the value of asceticism. He practised the severest 
austerities until his life was in danger. So he toolc nourishment 
and reverted to a more reasonable mode of living and then passed 
through an experience commonly known as the Enlightenment or 
Sambodhi. As it was in virtue of the truths which then became 
known to him that he felt competent to come forward as a teacher 
of mankind, these truths must clearly be of paramount importance, 
but the accounts of the Enhghtenment present some discrepancies 
of detail. The simplest version, put into his own mouth in two 
discourses of the Maj jhima Niklya,^says that he sought and obtained 
the perfect peace of nirvana wherein is no birth, nor decay, no 
disease, death, sorrow nor impurity, and there arose in him the 
iaiowledge and insight that his dehverance was assured and that 
he would not be born again. In two other discourses of the same 
Nikaya ^ he relates his experiences with more detail. In the first 
watch of the night he reviewed his own xirevious births throughout 
countless {Bons. In the second watch he beheld with the eye of the 
spirit (dibbena cakkhuna) a panoramic view of the universe and saw 
how beings pass away and are reborn according to their deeds. 
In the third watch he fully understood suffermg, its origin and 
cessation, and the road that leads to that cessation : he understood, 
too, the asavas, the canlrcrs or intoxicants — ^namely, the craving for 
pleasure, the craving for new existence, and ignorance. He saw 
how they arise and how they can be stopped and he knew that his 
task was done and that he would be reborn no more. 

Other versions of the story connect the Enlightenment with the 

^ Maj. Nik., xxAa and Ixxxv. 

® Maj. Nik., iv and xxxi. In Maj. Nik., xii, these experiences are enumerated 
as Nos. 8-10 of the ten powers of the Tathagata, and in Maj. Nik,, Ixxix ad fin., 
'Dig. Nik., ii, § 93, and many other suttas they are described as possible for any 
Bhikkhu. But in Maj. Nik,, xxxviii (= vol. i, p. 265), there is a remarkable 
passage in which the Buddha exhorts his disciples not to wonder whether or w'hat 
they were in the past or will be in the future or are now. 

THE DOCTRINES 

3S 

CH. Il] 

formula known as tile Chain of Causation.^ Tims the Digha 
Nikaya in describing the Enlightenment of the ancient Buddha 
Vipassi (who is supposed to have discovered and preached the same 
doctrine as Gotama) makes him obtain it simply by thinkmg out 
the Chain of Causation, first backwa.rds and then forwards, but only 
so far as consciousness, the two earlier links being omitted.^ Accord- 
ing to the Introduction to the commentary on the Jataka,^ Gotama 
acquked knowledge of his own and others’ previous births in the 
first two watches of the night and of the Chain in the third. But 
the narrative at the beginning of tbe Mahavagga says that it was 
only after he had attained Enlightenment ^ that he thought out the 
Chain, while the Samyutta Nikaya ^ on the other hand says that 
he knew it while he was still a Bodhisattva. In spite of these 
discrepancies there is no real doubt as to what constitutes Enlighten- 
ment, It is the certain knowledge that the whole universe is a 
samsara,® a process of birth and death which is not capricious but 
is regulated by a law and which can be brought to an end. Even 
the accounts which do not expressly mention the Chain of 
Causation generally imply it, for most of them say that he discovered 
how suftering and the asavas arise and how they can be stopped. 
Of the importance attached to causal connection from the earliest 
times there can be no doubt. The celebrated stanza which brought 
about the conversion of Sariputta represents it as an epitome of 
Buddhism, and in a discourse of the Maj jhima Wikaya ® which appears 

1 Pali, Paticea-samuppada. There are several versions of it. The commonest 
and fullest (found for example at the beginning of the Mahavagga) is as follows: 
“ From ignorance come the sankharas (predispositions), from the sankharas 
consciousness, from consciousness name-and-form, from name-and-form the six 
provinces of the senses ; from these comes contact, from contact sensation, from 
sensation craving, from craving clinging, from clinging existence (or becoming), 
and from existence birth. From birth come old age and death, pain and lamenta- 
tion, suffering, sorrow and despair. This is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. 
But by the destruction of ignorance, effected by the complete absence of lust, the 
sankharas are destroyed, etc.” 

2 Dig. Nik., xiv. Mahapadana S. 

® Nidanakatha : Fausbbll’s edition, p. 75. 

^ Mahavag. at the beginning. Pathamabhisambuddho. 

® Sam. Nik., xiii, 10 (= vol. ii, p. 10). 

® In the Sabhiya S. of the Sutta Nipata a Buddha is defined as a Bhikkhu 
who has a general view of Samsara. 

’Ye dhamma hetuppabbhava, etc., Mahavag., i, 23. 

® Maj. Nik., Ixxix. So, too, in the very impressive Mahataphasankhaya S. 
(Maj. Nik., xxxviii) the Buddha recites the Chain and then applies to it this 
formula — imasmin sati, etc. Numerous other suttas dwell on the importance of 
the Chain, e.g. Dig. Nik., xv. 

u 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

to be ancient tbe Buddha says : “I will teach you the dhamma 
that is the main doctrine or essence of my teaching. “ If that is, 
this comes to pass : on account of the arising of that, this arises. 
If that is not, this does not come to pass : on account of the cessa- 
tion of that, this ceases.” This formula seems to treat of causation 
in a simple sense, perfectly intelligible to Europeans {A is the cause 
of B, for if A exists, B comes into existence, and if ^ does not exist, 
B does not come into existence). But the Pali name for the Chain 
signifies dependent origination.^ Birth is not the cause of death in 
ordinary European language but the two are interdependent, for 
there can be no death unless there has previously been birth. 
Any two Hnks of the Chain are hke two bundles of reeds ^ leaning 
against one another, either of which must fall, if the other is removed, 
and the whole Universe is a system of interdependent phenomena, 
none of wliich can exist apart from the others and each of which has 
many causes.® The Chain of ^Causation may be applied to the 
Cosmos : thus the Anguttara Nikfiya ^ states that the Buddha has 
taught how the whole world comes into being and passes away. 
But it bears a still closer relation to morahty and the holy life. 
The Buddha has discovered the causes of sutfering and evil and 
therefore he knows how to remove them. . 

But though Enlightenment is so intimately connected with the 
knowledge of causation, though its essence is to see how evil arises 
and how it can be brought to an end, yet it is not merely deductive 
logic. It has another aspect which appears alike in the early 
accounts of the Master’s experience and hi the latest developments 
of the Mahayana, Enlightenment is direct intuitive knowledge, 
superior to reasoning and discussion, and for those who receive it 
certain and incontrovertible. The Buddha had a vision in which 
with the eye of the spirit he beheld the world process and even now 
in Japan the Zen adepts suddenly obtain illumination — Satori — 
which gives them a new view of the Universe and makes them 
new men. 

y Pali, Paticca-samuppfida.^; Sanskrit, Pratitya-sanratpMa. 

® Saip, Nik., xii, 67 (= vol. ii, p. 114). 

® All Buddhist Schools agree as to this thoxigh they differ in their classification 
of hetu and pratyayaj main and accessory ; causes. The Buddhist conception 
of cause does not seem to differ much from recent scientific views. Thus B. Russell 
says (Outlines of Philosophy, p. 123) : “ What we have to substitute for force is 
laws of correlation. Events can he collected in groups by their correlations. That 
is all that is true in the old notion of causalitw.” 

OH. II] THE DOCTRINES 35 

The doctrine of causation was of course accepted bj the Mahayana 
and in so far as it is equivalent to the Law of Moral Ketribution is 
still a part of popular Buddhism, but as a speculative tenet it 
obviously does not appeal to the emotions and even in the mouth 
of the Buddha was not a stirring theme for popular sermons. 
The philosophers, however, had to deal with it and adj usted it to their 
systems of ideahst metaphysics. The old formula that all things 
are interdependent lent itself to the new theory, for if a thing exists 
only in virtue of its relations to other things, it is easy to show that 
in itself it does not exist at all. Though the Nikayas do not teach 
the unreality of the external world, they contain passages which 
can be used to support that doctrine. Thus the Samyutta Nihaya ^ 
declares that it is wrong to say either that everything exists or that 
nothing exists. The correct statement is that things exist as 
conditioned by other things. One of the arguments advanced by 
the Madhyamakas against realism was the impossibility of under- 
standing causation, but on the whole Mahayanist doctors were 
disposed to admit it as a principle regulating the phenomenal world 
but to deny that it applies to the absolute. The germ of this doctrine 
may be found in the Nikayas, for nirvana is declared to be asankhata^ 
uncompounded, that is, not produced by co-operating causes. 
After the Enlightenment, Gotama was not an ordinary man but 
a Buddha, Jina, Tathagata, or Araha,® words which are used as if 
they were well-known terms of respect needing no explanation. 
The idea that from time to time supermen appear in the world was 
common in India at this period. It appears for, instance in Jainism 

^ &'am. Kile., xii, 15. Compare, too, Sam. NilT., xn, § 67 (Nalakapiyam). 

- See especially chap, xliii of the Sam. Nik., called Asaiikhata-Sainyatta. 

® Gotama is represented as styling himself Jina (Mahavag.j i, 6, 9, and Maj. 
Nik., xxvi (~ vol. i, p. 171)), but the word is used sparingly in the Nikayas, and 
it came to be the special title of Snpernien in the Jaina sect. Bnt in later 
Mahayanist works it is frequently used, especially to designate the five Buddhas 
Vairocana, Akshobhya, Batnasambhava, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. 

Tathagata is a word of doubtful origin and meaning. For early explanations 
see Ang. Nik., iv, 23, § 3, and T)ig. Nik., xxix, §§ 28, 29, and for a late one Vajra- 
cchedika, xxix. In China and Japan it was understood as Tatha-agata and 
translated by ^0 ^ Ju-lai (Nyo-rai), which apparently means He who has come 
as his predecessors came, 

Arab a, meaning originally honourable or worthy, is a title given in the older 
literature to both Buddhas and saints. 

Bhagava or Lord seems to have been the title used by heads of religious con- 
fraternities ; Maj. Nik., Ixxvii, Ko nu kho imesam Bhagavatam. But it was 
later employed as a special divine title (e.g, Ehagavad Gita) and this undoubtedly 
influences its use in Mahayanist works lilce the Lotus, 

36 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

as well as in Buddliism, and according to a widespread belief the 
superman could be either a universal monarch or, if he rejected the 
things of this world, a sage and a teacher of mankind. Such a 
figure was probably as familiar to the imagination of ancient Indians 
as the Messiah to the Jews, but there is this characteristic difference 
between the heroes of the two nations that the Indian superman is 
thought of as one of a series not as an isolated and final figure. 
There had been Buddhas and Jinas before Gotama, and Mahavira 
and others were expected in the future. The Nikayas enumerate 
six previous Buddhas, but in the later parts of the Pali Canon we 
hear of twenty-foiu and, apart from precise lists, former Buddhas 
are often mentioned as if they were fairly numerous, as when 
Gotama speaks, to Sariputta about all the Buddhas of the past and 
future.! we do not as in Mahayanist works hear of innumerable 
hosts of Buddhas. It is more than once laid down as a principle 
that there can be only one Buddha at a time in one world system,^ 
which is interesting as poiating towards the later idea that there 
are an infinite number of world systems, each with its own Buddha. 
Though the tone of the suttas varies greatly, though we seem to be 
reading sometimes a' fantastic legend and sometimes quite probable 
narratives of a great teacher’s doings, yet the hero is always a super- 
man, He expressly deifies that he is an ordinary human being,® 
and not only in narratives that read like fairy tales but in reasoned 
discourses he is credited with superhuman powers. 

It is not necessary to suppose that any long time elapsed before 
the Buddha was deified or that this deification implies any great 
elaboration of doctrine. In later ages Caitanya was treated as a 
divine being, even ih his 1^^ and Madhva was supposed to bo an 
incarnation of Vfiyu. ; Even so it is recorded ^ that an admirer 
exclaimed : “ who am I that I should praise Gotama ? Praise upon 
praise is his due, that most excellent among Gods and men.” 
And the Greek Megasthenes who went to India about 300 b.c, says 
that Butta was honoured as a God,® In the Nikfiyas we have already 

^ Maj. Nik., cxxiii ad init., Saip. Nik;, xxxv, 83 (== vol. iv, p. 52). In Ma.j. 
Nik. we hear of 500 Paceeka Buddhas and a hundred are mentioned by name, 
but these beings, who do not preach to the world, are not on the same footing as 
real Buddhas. ' V ^ 

2 Maj. Nik., cxv ; Dig. Nik., xix, §§13, 14. 

® Ang. Nik., iv, 3G. 

* Maj. Nile., xxvii ad init. 

® Megasthenes, frag. 43. Clem. Alex. Strom., 1, xv, 71, 6. Ed. Stahlin, Leipzig, 
1905, Elat Serwv ” IvBoiv otrois Bovrra-7rei66[j,evoi, TTapo.yyeAfJi.aaLv ov Sc’ vnep^oXTjv 
aciivorrjros els $e6v renpcqKamv. 

THE DOCTRINES 

37 

CH. Il] 

the beginnings of emotional veneration and of public worship. 
Gotama promises heaven to all who have but faith and love for 
himd and in the Sutta Nipata ^ the aged Pingiya tells of his personal 
devotion in moving language ; ''' Day and night I see him with the 
mind and eye. I spend the night in worship (namassamano) . . . 
old and feeble as I am, my body cannot go to him but in thouglit 
I go to him, for on him my mind is fixed.” In the account of the 
Buddha’s death,® a compilation made with materials of various 
dates but not very late, he gives instructions as to how the remains 
of a Tathagata should be treated. Bhikkhus should not allow 
themselves to be distracted by honouring them : they should leave 
that to the pious laity. A monument (thupa) should bo erected 
and honoured with garlands, perfumes, paint, and salutations. 
Those who find cahn of heart in these ceremonies wfill be reborn 
in the happy world of heaven. 

Yet in spite of this disposition to make a God of the Buddha, 
he is not distinguished from his disciples so sharply as we might 
expect. The solemn words in which the tale of the Enlightenment 
is told make us think of it as a unique destiny, but as a matter of fact 
the same experiences — the vision of former births, the panorama 
of the cosmos, the knowledge of what evil is and how it can be cured, 
the assurance of peace and happiness — all this is promised to every 
disciple who can follow the Master’s teaching. The difference is that 
they are merely learners. The Buddha has discovered — or rather 
rediscovered — -the Truth and teaches it to others. But they can 
learn and become like him. In the Maliayanist siitras, too, the 
links between the Buddha nature and humanity arc not forgotten. 
In the Lotus SMcyamuni is a radiant spirit clad in unearthly glory, 
but he tells the crowds that throng round him, “ All my disciples 
shall become Buddhas.” ^ 

A Japanese priest of the Zen sect once described to me the religious 
instruction which he gave to his flock. He defined Enlightenment 
as the attainment by Gotama of the knowledge that all living things 
— ^men, animals, trees, and plants— can become Buddhas 
jo-butsu). This formula illustrates the difference between the 
Mahayana and the earlier creed. It can in great part be justified 
from the Nikayas, though there is probably no passage which 

^ Maj. Nik., xxii ad fin. 

° Sutta Nipata (Parayaijavagga), 1142 fF. 

® Dig, Nik., xvi, v, §§ 11, 12. 

* SaddhaTmap., chap, v, 44. 

38 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

warrants the inclusion of the vegetable kingdom. But in the oldest 
documents the Buddha has a vision of the cosmos as a series of 
successive births : every Arhat has the same experience as a Buddha 
and attains to the highest stage of existence ; any man can become 
an Arhat if he strives through successive births and an animal may 
be reborn as a man. Yet the formula is at best a restatement and 
rearrangement of ancient sayings or might be more correctly 
described as a deduction from them. As a summary of what the 
Buddha said it is doubtless unhistorical. It is presumptuous to 
guess what he may have thought luit have kept to himself. Still, 
it is not impossible that he saw a vision in which all life reached 
the highest stage and enjoyed the knowledge which he himself 
had won. On the other hand, the Nikayas hardly encourage the 
idea that the whole world is moving toward some happy 
consummation. The hope whicl.^ they hold out is rather that 
escape from the endless sarnsara is possible at any moment for 
those who really try. 

The Enlightenment is not spoken of as a revelation made by any 
deity but rather as the discovery of a law, and in many places it is 
stated that former Buddhas taught the same Law.^ Once Gotama 
compared liimself* to a man who had found the site of an ancient 
city in the jungle and caused it to be restored. In a remarkable 
passage “ he desoi’ibes how after the Enlightenment he felt the need 
to study under a teacher and to pay him respect, but could find no one 
in the world superior to himself. Then he thought, “ This Dhamnia 
in which I am supremely enlightened, what if I were to live under it 
paying it honour and respect ? ” On this Brahma appeared, 
congratulated him, and said that all previous Buddhas had done the 
same. Tliis account seems to imply that the Buddha is below the 
Dhamma, which is an immutable Law or Truth.^ 

The results of Gotama’s search for Truth up to this time are stated 
in a practical form in Hs first discourse often called the Sermon 

^ Sainyutta Nik., xii, 65, The chapter called “ The City ”, But in Mahavag., 
i, G, 23, Gotama .speaks of “ this doctrine which had formerly not been heard of", 
and in Maj. Nik., cviii, Ananda .say.s : “ The Lord made a path where path there 
was none . . . and revealed a path until then unrevealed.” Here, however, 
Anatida is drawing a distinction between, the Buddha and ordinary saints who 
have attained Eirlightenment because they followed the doctrine, which he 
found out. 

2 It occurs Sam. Nik., i, v, 1, § 2 (— vol. i, p. 138), and Ang. Nik., iv, 3, 1 
..'(.5= voL'ii, p. 20). : 

® For this conception of Dharma in Sanskrit see Manu, xii, 60. 

39 

OH. II] THE DOCTRINES 

at Benares.i Remembering no doubt Ms own experiences both as 
a prince and as an ascetic he begins by saying that those who wish 
to lead a religious life should abandon the two extremes of self- 
indulgence and self-torture, both of which are ignoble and useless. 
The right way is the Middle or Noble Eightfold Path defined as 
right views, right aims, right speech, right action, right livelihood, 
right effort, right mindfulness, and right rapture. Then he 
enumerates the Pour Truths. The first declares that all clinging 
to existence involves suffering: the second that the cause of this 
suffering is tanha, the craving for pleasure and rebirth. The third 
Truth teaches that there is a way to end suffering, for if the cause 
is known, it can be removed and its effects with it. Finally, the 
fourth Truth explains this way, wMch is the Eightfold Path as 
described above.^ 

For a European— -and for the matter of that for a Chinese or 
Japanese — ^the most disputable part of this discourse is the assertion 
that all existence ^ involves suffering, especially as there is no hint 
that this suffering must be endured as a duty or in obedience to some 
divine will. But it is impossible to doubt that this doctrine was 
part of the original teaching of Gotama. He laid more emphasis 
on the unhappiness of ordinary life than did the Brahmans, but the 
men of his age accepted his views as natural and in harmony with 
every day experience. Though the Mahay &na does not dwell on 
suffering so much as the Hinayana, yet its: philosophy, whibi'^ insists 
on the illusory character of all phenomena, suggests the corJlary 
that all is vanity, and the important sects wMeh worship Araida 
start from even more dismal premises, since they hold that man 
is such a miserable creature that he can do notHng for himself, 
whereas the older teaching at least proclaims that he can save 
himself and is capable of becoming a superman. 

The Japanese are a cheerful people nor can anyone criticize their 

^ Or Oliammacaklcappavatana-sutta. It occurs in the Malta vagga (i, 6, 17 fF.) 
and in the Samyutta Nikaya, where it is placed in Satpyutta, Ivi, called Sacca 
(= vol. V, p. 420). The yanskrit versions in the Lalita-vistara and Mahavastu 
are substantially the same. 

* In the sutta of the Noble Quest, Maj. Nik., xxvi, in which Gotama himself 
gives an account of his early experiences, though there are many mentions of 
“ the doctrine ” or “ this doctrine ”, it is not expressly defined. We are only 
told that his disciplies saw peril in all that is subject to rebirth, decay, death, 
sorrow, and impurity, and obtained the perfect peace of nirvana in which these 
evils do not exist. 

® Strictly speaking, the statement is that it is clinging to life (pane' upadana- 
kkhanda), which is suffering. 

40 

BVDBimM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. ii 

Mstory, as tte Hstory of India iniglit perhaps be criticized, for being 
wanting in personal interest. It is one long string of romances and 
valiant exploits. Yet their literature from the Nara period onward is 
dominated by a sense of the transitoriness of human life and greatness. 
This feeling (called aivare, pathos or pity), which is always ready 
to see in nature, in the scattering of cherry blossoms, and the changing 
colours of autumn leaves an image of how all that is beautiful and 
splendid passes away and fades, was probably fostered in a large 
measure by Buddhist influence. The official handbook, called 
a Synopsis of the Jodo-Shinshu Greed, ^ says that “ the first question 
which Buddhism treats of is that of pain in life ” . It goes on to discuss 
Sunyata and anatta and mentions, though only in passing, the 
Noble Eightfold Path. 

From such phrases as “ all is evil” or “all is suffering” 
Europeans ^ are apt to draw the conclusion that activity must be 
vain, that rest and peace are the only good, that it would be well if 
the world process could be arrested. But such conclusions are not 
attributed to the Buddha and his whole life was a protest against 
them. When sending forth his first missionaries he bade them travel 
for the welfare of mankind and with his last breath he charged his 
disciples to strive earnestly. He is represented as a man of excep- 
tional vigour and unselfish activity and as saying in his old age that 
he was still capable of wearing out his disciples and ready to go on 
talking and answering questions, even if he had to be carried about 
in a litter.^ The really important part of his doctrine is not the 
insistent assertion that ordinary pleasures cannot last or satisfy 
but the promise of a cure and of something better. In this he does 
not really differ much from Christianity. No one maintains that 
the world is altogether happy and all Churches are allowed to dwell 
on its evils, provided that they also offer consolation and hope. 

^ Synopsis of the Jodo-Shinshu Creed, compiled by the Education Department 
of the West Hongwanji, Kyoto, 1922. See pp. 1 and 7. 

® In reading the Buddha’s discourses we are apt to misplace the emphasis. 
Thus in welh known and eloquent words he once told his disciples that the flood 
of tears they had shed as they wandered through the long round of births is greater 
than the waters of the four seas. This makes us think of the sadness of life, but 
the emphasis is undoubtedly on the incalculable length of samsara. The whole 
section is called ananiatagga. (Saip. Nik., xv), and besides the chapter on tears 
(§ 3) there are many others giving other illustrations of this infinity extending 
back into the past without beginning. The amount of mother’s milk w'hioh we 
have drunk is greater than the waters of the four oceans. The hardships whioh 
we have experienced are innumerable {§ 11) but so are the pleasures (§ 12). 

® MaJ. Nik., xii. Mahasihanada S, 

CH. IT] THE DOCTRINES 41 

Probably in all the Buddbist scriptures there is no lament over the 
sorrows of life more strongly worded than the sentence in the 
English Burial Service, “We give Thee hearty thanks for that it 
hath pleased Thee to deliver this our brother out of the miseries 
of this sinful world.” 

The Kathavatthu controverts the proposition that all conditioned 
things are dust and ashes ^ : it argues in reply that Hfe has various 
pleasures and that following the teaching of the Buddha brings 
supreme happiness. The Dhammapada declares that the righteous 
are happy in this world and the next,^ and a volume might be filled 
with texts which describe the happiness of the religious life. One 
of the most striking is the dialogue with Mahanama ® in which Gotama 
maintains that he is happier than the King of Magadha because he 
can remain seven days and nights without speaking or moving and 
yet enjoying absolute bliss. And though it is consistently main- 
tained that monks are happier than others, yet the laity too can 
enjoy happiness. Gotama once told ^ the headman of a village 
that a good man can properly congratulate himself on being doubly 
luchy both here and hereafter in heaven, “ At this thought glad- 
ness springs up in him. In him thus glad there arises joy and as he 
rejoices his body grows calm. He feels hap^^iness and in his 
happiness his heart is at peace. This is the peace of mind that comes 
by righteousness.” Buddhist art, too (when not engaged in 
representing hell), is often full of the joy of life. The sculptors who 
decorated Sanchi obviously felt real pleasure in giving cheerful and 
sometimes humorous pictures of the doings of men and animals. 

It is remarkable that in the First sermon so little is said about 
sains§..ra and future lives.® These doctrines are indeed implied, 
for the cause of suffering is defined as craving which leads to rebirth 
and at the end the Buddha says that he knows he will not be born 

“ Mere cinder-heaps.” Kathav., ii, 8. 

^ Dhammap,, 14. 

® Maj. Nik,, xiv. F(3r a beautiful passage about the joy of the religious life 
and love for otJiers see Gula Assapura S. (Maj, Nik., xl). In the Potfchap3,da S, 
(Dig. Nik., ix) the Buddha meets the objection that one may put away evil and 
become wise and yet remain sad. No, he says, if you can do that “ the result will 
be joy, zest, peace, mindfulness, self-mastery, and a happy life ”. The Ang. 
Nik., hi, 6S, § 16 (= vol. i, p. 192), states that even if there is no other world, nor 
any future rewards or punishments, the good life is the best here. , 

^ Sam. Nik., xlii, 8, 13 {— vol. iv, p. .350), So, too, in the Lalita-vistara the 
first four of the initiatory lights of religion are said to be sraddhd, pmmda, 
pramodya, andprt/i, faith, calm, joy, and gladness. 

® But there are many emi)hatic declarations of the truth of this doctrine, e.g. the 
beginning of Maj, Nik., exxx. The Messengers of the Gods. 

42 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

again. Bnt tke goal of tlie Pa.th is simply peace, insight, enlighten- 
ment, and nirvana, without any mention of this life or another. 
But shortly afterwards we are told that in instructing laymen he 
spoke of almsgiving, moraJity, and heaven. 

The greater part of the Path confines itself to teaching a sound 
and simple morality, but the last section, samadhi, rapture or 
ecstasy, seems to leave the things of this world, without however 
mentioning another. The first seven sections are merely preliminary 
and subsidiary to it, as is made plain in a discourse of the Majjhimai 
where they are described as its concomitants. But great as is the 
importance of samadhi, it is not the goal. In the passage referred 
to and in many others it is described as leading to knowledge and 
deliverance, and in the account of the last days of the Buddha ^ he 
seems to substitute for the Eightfold Path a new formula enumera- 
ting four stages in the spiritual life, ; namely, morality, ecstasy, 
knowledge, and deliverance (sila, samadhi, pannfi, vimutti). This 
panna (the Sanskrit prajna which plays so large a part in the 
Mahayfina) does not mean logically correct views bnt immediate, 
direct, intuitive knowledge. Deliverance or nirvana is accompanied 
by such knowledge.® w ^ 

The teaching of the Pali Pitakas about nirvfina is up to a certain 
point clear and definite, although it does not altogether satisfy 
intellectual curiosity. There are two stages in nirvana, one in this 
life and one after death. Nirvana in this life means peace and 
perfect happiness, but it by no means excludes activity. The Budd fia 
attained it at the beginning of his career as a teacher,^ and though 
he is sometimes described as loving solitude and meditation, lie is 
shown to us as a busy instructor and helper of mankind, still active 

^ Cattarisaka S., Maj. Nik., cxvii. Tn Dig. Nik., xviii. § 27, the first soven 
sections are called Samfvdhi-parikkhara, the requisites for ecstasy, but Samadhi 
itself is folknved by knowledge and deliverance. See, too, Ang, Nik., vii, 4-2 
(= rol. iv, p. 40), for a categorical statement that the other sections of the Path 
are the soven requisites of Samadhi, and Ang. Nik., x, 121 (~ vol, v, p. 2.‘16), ■where 
the Path seems to be extended to ten sections ending saitund, mmddhi, sanmdMnam, 
mrnmdvimnUi. 

^ Sev^erai times in Dig. Nik., xvi. See especially the beginning of chap. iv. 
“ It is through not understanding and grasping four things that 'vve have had to 
■wander so long in this round of Samsara, you and I. What are the four ? Sila. 
samadhi, panna, and vimutti.” But the same sutra in describing the instruction 
■which he gave to his last convert Subhadda makes him emphasize the Path as the 
one way to salvation. 

® Cf. the formula Vimuttasmin vimuttam iti na.nam. 

* See, for instance, Maj. Nik., xxyi (the Sutra- of the Noble Quest), aJ4tam 
anuttaram yogakkhemam nibbanam ajjhagamam. 

CH. n] tee doctrines 43 

in old age. There is therefore some ground for the Mahayanist 
doctrine that nirvana and ordinary activity (samsara) are the same, 
or two aspects of the same world. But what happens when one 
who has attained nirvana dies ? The question was often put to 
Gotama ^ and he always replied that it did not admit of an answer. 
It is usually mentioned in connection with other problems, classed 
as avyakata, because the answer to them has not been revealed.^ 
Such are (1) Is the world infinite in space or not ? (2) Is the world 
without beginning or end in time or not ? (3) Is the life (jiva) the same 
as the body or different from it *? To none of these questions is it 
right to answer either (1) yes, or (2) no, or (3) both yes and no, 
or (4) neither yes nor no. The reason for refusing to reply is not 
ignorance, though it is often indicated that the questions are 
unprofitable, vain conundrums and philosophizings like the ditthi 
or speculations so often condemned in the Sutta Nipata and 
elsewhere.^ It is rather that human language is not capable of 
framing a proper reply and also that the questions themselves are 
not properly put. Thus the Buddha states in one passage ^ that 
people hold opinions on such subjects because of their ignorance of 
the body, of its arising, its ceasing and the manner of its ceasing, 
and in another ® it is asserted that even in this world the Tathagata 
cannot be known as really and truly existing. Since then in real 
truth there is no such thing as a being,® it is a misuse of language 
to inquire whether in certain circumstances a Tathagata exists or 
not. The idea that correct statements not merely about great 
mysteries but about the ordinary phenomena of existence cannot 
be made in human language plays a considerable part in the 
Mahay4na. It is the avowed principle of the Zen school and is also 
impHed in the negations of the Madhyamakas. The tradition 

^ It is usually in the form Hoti Tathiigato param marana na hoti. Does the 
Tathagata pass on to another existence after death or not ? The chief passages 
where this question is raised are Digha Nikaya, xv, 32 ; xxix, 30 ; Majjhima Nikaya, 
Ixiii, ixxii, XXV ; Samyutta Nikaya, chap. xliv. The Avyakata Samyutta con- 
taining eleven sutras on the subject. See, too, chaps, xvi, § 12 ; xxii, § 85 ; xxiv, 
§§ 15 -18; xxxiii, § 1 ; Anguttara Nikaya, iv, chap. 38, vii, 51 ; x, 20 ; x, 93 ; 
and 95 and 96. 

® Dig. Nik,, XV, 32 ad fin., though not very clear, .seems to state that it would 
be inappropriate to say that an Arhat does not know the answer. Tad abhinna 
vimutto bhikkhu na janati na passati iti assa di^^hi tad akallam. 

® See cspeciaily the Atthakavagga, suttas 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 13. 

* San.i. Nik,, xxxiii (= vol, iii, pp. 257-263). 

® Saip. Nik., xxii, 34. See also xliv (the Avyakata Saipyutto), § 2, and following 
sections. 

* Saip. Nik., xii, 62. Here is a mere heap of Sankharas ; there is no being. 

U BUDBHmm m INDIA and china [ch. h 

which, ascribes this attitude to Gotama himself must, I think, be 
true, for what motive can there have been to invent stories which 
represent the Omniscient Master as refusing to reveal the truth ? ^ 

The Pitakas consistently hold up nirv4na in this life as the goal 
and not the state after death. But the metaphor of blowing out 
a lamp must not be interpreted as implying annihilation, a doctrine 
which the Buddha is represented as expressly repudiating.® Indian 
ideas about the extinction of fire are not the same as ours. Thus in 
the k^vetfi^vatara Upanishad the Supreme Spirit is extolled in 
theistic and devotional language but is ultimately described as 

a fire which has burnt its fuel ”, that is apparently an unsullied 
flame, which is certainly not regarded as annihilated.® In the 
Sutta Nipata ^ the Buddha states that " as a flame blown out by the 
force of the wind disappears and cannot be defined (attham paleti 
na upeti samkham), so the sage delivered from name and form 
disappears and cannot be defined”. His questioner presses the 
point. “Has he disappeared or does he not exist or is he for ever 
free from sickness ? ” The answer is : “ For one who has disappeared 
there is no measure (attham gatassa na pamanam atthi).® He has 
nothing by which one can describe him.” It is noticeable that in 
the Mundaka Upanishad® almost the same wmrds are used of 
absorption into the Deity. “ As flowing rivers disappear in the 
ocean quitting name and form (astam gacchanti namarupe vihaya), 
so the sage throwing off his name and form goes into the highest 
heavenly Person.” 

In some passages which may be suspected of being late it is 
expressly affirmed that the state of the Tathagata after death cannot 
be described because it is infinite and unfathomable like the sands 
of the Ganges or the water of the ocean, ^ and the Udana calls it 

^ Though some of these statementg, particularly in the Sain.yntta Nik., are put 
into the mouths of disciples, the most important of them a.s related izi the Wgha 
and Majjhima are utterances of the Buddha himself. The Malunkyaputfca ,S. 
and the Vacchagotta S. (Maj. Nik,, Ixiii and Ixxii) are as vivid and as likely to be 
genuine as any discourses handed down by tradition. 

® Maj. Nik., xxii (= vol. i, p, 141), 

® !§vefcasv. Up., yi, 19, Cf,, too, Mahabh§,r., Asvamedha par., 544 ff., where 
we have again the simile of the fire without fuel, and where nirvana i.s identified 
with Brahml. But it must he remembered, that deep sleep and the turiya, which 
are blis-sful ideals for Indiana, are hardly what Europeans call conscious existence. 
Bee, too, the remarkable passage in Maj Nik., cxl (= vol. iii, pp. 2J-5~6). 

^ IJpasivamSnava puccha (No. 7 in Parayanavag). 

® iippamaria is used for boundless, e.g,. But. .Nip., 507. Mettam cittam 
bhaweyam appamanam. Cultivating an all- pervading loving spirit. 

® Mu^uJ. Up., 3, 2, 8. Cf. PraSna Up., 6, 6. Samudram prapyastam gacchanti, 

^ So the nun Khem4 in Saip* Nik., xliv, x, 1. 

CH . n ] tee doctrines 46 

a vstate (ayatanam) whicli is “ tlie end of sorrow, unborn, 
unoriginated, uncreated, uncompounded A whole section 
of the Samyutta Nikaya is devoted to sayings about this *■' uncom- 
pounded In Mahayanist works there is a tendency to make 
nirvana mean much the same as Brahman in Sanskrit. It is the 
prius of all things as well as that into which all things pass.” The 
Pali Nikayas do not go so far as this; they are concerned with 
nirvana as simply the ‘goal of the holy life. But when they touch 
on ontology and use words like unborn and uncompounded it is 
clear in which way their language points. 

The doctrine of the three bodies of the Buddha plays a considerable 
part in the Mahayana. They are first the Nirmanakaya, that is the 
human historical person called Grotama, second the Sambhogakaya,® 
the radiant presence to be seen in Paradise, and third the Dharma- 
kaya, of which the other two are partial manifestations. The term 
seems to have meant originally body of the law, but it must be 
remembered that in Pali dhamma also meant phenomena and the 
word came to be used in the sense of the cosmical body of the Buddha, 
the Buddha being the ultimate reality of which the universe is the 
phenomenal expression, a reahty to be known not by reasoning 
but by intuition. This ultimate reality is also called TathatS, 
or suchness, and an analogous word Tathatta is occasionally used 
in Pali as a synonym of nirvana.* No passage has been found in the 
Pitakas alluding to pantheistic views about the Buddha nature, 
and Gotama would probably have condemned them as he condemned 
the fancies of people who thought that their own attd was identical 
with the world soul.® Nevertheless, if it is excessive to see the 
germs of the doctrine of the Dharmakaya in the oldest records, we 
at least find there ideas and phrases which may be twisted in that 
direction. In the passages quoted above we are told that even in 
this life the Buddha is beyond the grasp of the intellect and that 
after death he is infinite and unfathomable. And when once 
nirvana is regarded not as a goal but as corresponding to the 

V Udanayvii, near the beginning. 

® See Mahayanasutralankara, xi, 61. The dharmas are originally in peace 
and in parinirvana. But the verse is missing in Sanskrit and is preserved only 
:m Tibetan.." ■ ■ 

® This idea is not absent from the Nikayas, for in the MahAparinib. Sutta, iii, 

§ 22, the Buddha says that when he appears among the gods his form and voice 
are similar to theirs. 

* e.g. Sam. Nik., xli, 6, tathattaya upaneti. Cf. Kathav., xix, 5. 

® MaJ. Nik., ii and xxii. 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. n 

Brahman of the Upanishads, it does not seem illogical to regard 
the Buddha, who has passed into nirvana, as being identical with 
ultimate reahty. The word Dhammakayo actually occurs in the 
Nikayas as an epithet of the Buddha in a difficult passage.^ 
Faithful disciples, we are told, are sons of the Buddha, born from 
his mouth, born of the Law (dhammaja), and the Buddha himself 
is dhammakayo, he whose body is the Law, brahmakayo being 
added as a synonym.^ The meaning apparently is that believers 
ai-e spiritual sons of the Buddha and the spirit or the doctrine which 
he teaches is the real essence of the Buddha. Though there is 
nothing pantheistic in this and the Buddha is merely regarded as 
what we call a world force, the point of view is becoming impersonal. 
The real significance and unportance of the Buddha is not in his 
human individuality but in his teaching, which transcends the 
limits of personality.^ 

Alter enumerating the Four Truths and describing the Eightfold 
Patli, Gotama is said to have dehvered a celebrated discourse,'^ 
maintaining that there is nothing in the world of matter or thought 
to.wliich the name of self ® can be given. This doctrine has not 
found favour with some Europeans who are otherwise admirers of 
the Buddha, but it seems impossible to dissociate him from it or to 
maintain that it is a later accretion or misunderstanding of the 
Master’s teaching. For if the doctrine is not Gotama’s own, whence 

^ Dig. Nik., sxvii, § 9. 

2 Brahrmkdyo must mean something like divine body, but doubtless not in a 
pantheistic sense, 

“ Compare Sam. Nik,, xsii, 87, where a sick disciple asks the Buddha to visit 
him. The Buddha goes but says “ He who sees the Law sees me, and he who 
sees me, sees the Law Compare, too, the words of the Buddha on his deathbed, 
“ Let the Dhamma and Vinaya which I have taught you be your teacher after 
my death.” Nor Hsuan-Tsang this had come to mean “ His spiritual presence 
abides for ever above all change ” (Watters, Yuan Chwang, %, p. 37). These 
passages clearly mean nothing more than “ It is my teaching not my person which 
is important ”, but the inclination to pantheistic iaterpretations is very strong. 

** Known as the Anattalakkhanasutta, Mahivag., i, 6, 38-46. 

The Bali text is rfipam anattS, ... vedana anatta, etc. I do not think this 
should be translated “the body is not iAe self, sensation is not iha self”, as in 
xiii, p, 100, for the use of “ the ” seems to imply that there is a self, but 
that it is not the body, sensation, etc. Rupam anatta seems to be parallel to 
ruparo aniecam and the meaiimg is that body is not permanent and is not a self : 
has none of the characteristics which are summed up in the word atta but which 
have nothing corresponding to them in reality. “ Bor if the body (or feeling, etc.) 
had the characteristics of atta (rupam oa h’idam att^ abhavissa) we should 
never be ill and should be able to be exactly what we choose.” The corresponding 
Sanskrit words in the Mahavastu (ed. Senart, iii, pp. 335 and 446) are rdpam 
anatma, vedana anatma, etc. 

OH. II] THE DOCTRINES 47 

did it come 1 Of its prominence in the Pitakas tliere can be no 
doubt, and yet no otlier Indian sect can be cited as holding it nor 
can we point to any strong tendency outside Buddhism which could 
have influenced the early Buddhist doctors in this direction.^ 
The natural inference, that anatta, as the doctrine is compendiously 
termed, was part of the original teaching, is inevitable. It is 
equally clear that it was not easy to repudiate it. In some ways 
it was not congenial to Mahayanist speculations, but it was rarely 
denied, evidently because it was supported by overwhelmingly 
strong authority, and the sect which denied it has not survived. 
Though Mahayanist writers find some difficulty in accommodating 
anatta in its technical psychological sense to their other theories 
and though their doctrine of the Dharmakaya differs little from the 
Brahmanic doctrine of the supreme Atman, they are full of the idea 
that there is no real difference between self and others and the 
self-sacrificing Bodhisattva is their highest ideal. At the present 
day the doctrine is accepted (somewhat theoretically perhaps) 
in all Buddhist countries, ^ whether they follow the Hina- or 
Mahayana, although it does not make the slightest difference in 
ordinary language or thought when such questions as salvation or 
life after death are discussed. And this is not unnatural, for there 
is no intention of denying that a human existence can be continued 
in another life. It is merely asserted that no existence in this world 
or another can rightly be called atta, that is something permanent, 
unchanging, simple, and independent. All personalities human or 
divine are impermanent, changing, compound, and dependent on 
various causes. In Gotama’s esteem the great importance of this 
doctrine seems to have been moral and practical. The Brahmans 
and Jains held the self or soul to be something permanent and 
unchangeable, but fettered and hampered by the body. They 
therefore strove to liberate and isolate it by mortifying the flesh. 
But the essence of the Buddha’s doctrine is that self or soul can 
be changed and improved. Such a view is ethically quite reasonable 
and intelligible nor in the light of modern knowledge can it be 

^ The only passage cited as referring to such a theory is Katha Up., iv, 14, -which 
condemns those who see qualities (dharmah) separately. 

® e.g., the o/ i/je /odo jS'&’resM UreecZ, published ofBcially by the 

Western Hongwahii at Kyoto in 1920, says espressly (j).: 7) : “ Buddhism denies 
the existence of the self and empirical world and finds the truth behind the denial 
of them.” For a strong statement of the Anatta doctrine in a popular Mahayanist 
sutra see the answer to the question how one should conquer the mind when sick 
given in. the Vimalakirti (Yuima) sutra, chap, iv. 

ridiculed, for it seems to agree with, the latest pronouncements of 
science^ 

After hearing the first sermon, that about the Path, the five men 
who were the Buddha’s first disciples were formally admitted as 
Bhikkhus or members of the religious order which he instituted; 
but after hearing the discourse on Anatta, we are told, they ail 
became Arhats or Saints. “ At that time there were six Arhats in 
the world,” ^ no distinction being made between the Master and his 
pupils. The sequence of events is clearly meant to emphasize the 
importance of the doctrine and the great results which follow from 
realizing its truth. In one passage ^ it is asserted that if it were 
possible to find anything which can be called an atta or self, even 
on the smallest scale, then the Buddha would not teach men to live 
the holy fife. It is just because no such individuality is possible 
that the holy life is preached. This atta whose existence is so 
emphatically denied is Self or Ego, but Self or Ego as understood 
by Indians, which is not quite the same as what Europeans mean 
by the word. When first enunciating the doctrine, the Buddha 
expressly stated that attS, is not subject to impermanence, change, 
or pain and that it can become what it pleases.^ But we use the 
word self without implying such immunities and powers. It may 
seem that a Buddha or an Ai:hat has realized this Indian idea 
of atta, for he is freed from all bonds, he can assume any form, and 
can move without heeding material obstructions, his senses 
{especially his sight and hearing) become cosmic in their power. 
Yet it would not be correct to call him atta. It was after he had 
received enlightenment and all these wondrous powers that the 
Buddha is represented as congratulating himself on having got rid 
of the notion of self.® 

^ Eertrand Russell, Outline of Philosophy, p. 254 : “ And in psychology 

equally the Ego has disappeared as an ultimate conception and the unity of a 
personality has become a peculiar causal nexus among a series of events,” and 
ib., p. 258 : “ As regards the self, he (Hume) was almost certainly right. As we 
have already argued a person is not a single entity but a series of events linked 
together by peculiar causal laws.” 

A Mahavag., i, 6, § 47. 

® Sam. Nik., xxii, §§ 96, 97. 

^ Mahavag., i, 6, § 42. 

® Mahavag., i, 3, § 4. Cf. the definition of the Buddha’s omniscienco in the 
Ahhidharmakosa, chap, ix, pp. 254-5 of Be la Vallee .Poussin’s translation, “ Par 
le mot Bouddha on designe une certaine serie ; a cette serie appartient eette 
singuliire puissance que par le seul fait de i’inflexion de la pensee se produifc 
immediatement une connaissance exacte de I’objet relativemeut auquel un desk- 
de connaissance a surgi. On appelle done cette serie du nom d’ Omniscient.” 

49 

OS. II] the doctrines 

Some passages suggest that the Buddha’s real opinion about the 
atta was not dogmatically negative. A celebrated story ^ relates 
how the wandering monk Vacchagotta asked him first whether 
a self exists (Kim nu kho bho Gotama atth’attati) and then whether 
it is non-existent ( . . . natth’attati). Both questions were 
received in silence. Knanda, who was apparently astonished, 
subsequently inquired why no reply had been given. The Buddha 
said that if he had replied yes or no, he would have seemed to support 
the views of either the eternalists (sassatavada) or of the annihila- 
tionists (ucchedavada). “ Yes ” would have been inconsistent 
with the rest of his teaching : “ no ” would have simply bewildered 
Vacchagotta, who would have said “ I used to have a self but now 
I have lost it Remarkable as this sutta is, I do not think that 
it should be regarded as giving us a better insight into his real view 
than do his other pronouncements. His own explanation of his 
silence is sufficient. He did not think it wise to enter into a 
discussion which would bewilder his untrained and inexperienced 
questioner. It is to be noted that in his early teaching he did not 
begin with the doctrine of anatta. First he taught his five disciples 
the four Truths and the Path and they became Bhikkhus. Then 
after an interval, their minds being prepared, he preached to them 
anatti and they accepted it in the right spirit. But to preach it 
abruptly and without preparation to a disputatious newcomer was 
unwise. He would mix things up and wrongly apply the new idea 
to the controversies of the day which filled his head. Elsewhere ® 
the Buddha bids his disciples not to worry about questions like 
did I exist in the past or not, shall I exist in the future or not, 
do I exist at present or not, have I a self or not (atthi me atta ... 
n’atthi me atta), but simply free themselves from the three bonds 
of individuality, doubt, and good works (silabbataparamS,sa). 
It is not, of course, meant that sila or morality is bad it is often 
declared to be indispensable, but we must not be absorbed in our 
own conduct and piety, So, too, we must get rid of the idea of 
individuality, but the proposition I have not a self (n’atthi me atta) 
is a vain and confused argument because it presupposes that there 
is an “ I ” which can possess or not possess something.^ 

^ Saiaa. Nik., xliv, 10, 

2 Of. Maj. Nik., sxii (= vol. i, p. 137). 

® Maj. Nik,, ii. The Sabbasavasutta. 

* But, of course, language beconies impossible if we are to use no words implying 
the existence of ourselves and other selves. Atta is frequently used in the Nikayas 
in the colloquial sense. Even the end of the Anatta-lakkhana sutta is not quite 

50 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. n 

At tlie same time it cannot be denied that there is an analogy 
between the question of the existence of a self and the question of the 
existence of the Tathagata after death. The answer to the latter 
is expressly declared to be unrevealed. It is wrong to answer it in 
the negative and the later phases of Buddhism show a distinct 
tendency to answer it with a practical affirmative, though they may 
avoid unorthodox terminology. It is wrong to say that a Buddha 
passes on to another existence after death, but wrong only because 
the word existence implies limitations and weaknesses which do not 
affect him. It is expressly laid down in the Samyiitta Nikaya that 
even in this life a Tathagata is not intelligible as a real existence, 
for he cannot be defined in terms of body, feeling, perception, 
activities, and consciousness, as being any one of them or all of them 
togeidier, nor yet can he be said to be without them.^ Whatever 
be the precise meaning of the word Tathagata in these passages, 
the analogy to the formulee about anatta is clear and we are left 
with the impression that though the word atta is wrong and though 
no correct substitute can be found for it, yet in an enlightened mind 
it can be replaced by an idea which such a mind can conceive, 
though it cannot express it in human language. In these ideas 
there is the seed which bears plentiful fruit in the apparently 
sophistical arguments of later Mahayanist philosophy. In a series 
of bold negations the Vajracchedika ^ declares among other 
propositions that a Bodliisattva cannot save beings because in real 
truth there is no such thing as cither a Bodhisattva or a being. 
The word sunya or void which plays so great a part in this 
philosophy occurs not infrequently in the Nikayas, especially 
in the expression sunnam attena, void of a self or soul, and similar 
phrases,® 

consistent, for it says that the disciple who xuidenstands this doctrine discards 
passion and acquires freedom and knowledge, whereas according to a previous 
statement he has abandoned the thought “ I am ” (Mahav., i, 3, 4) and ought to 
use no personal pronouns. 

^ Yamaha and Anuradha suttas in Sani, Nik., xxii, § 85 and § 86. The latter 
occurs again in xliv, § 2. The Pali commentator explains Tathagata as here 
meaning a being, Satto. 

^ Vajracchedika (diamond cutter), xvii. Even in the yam. Nik. (v. 10) the 
use of the word “ being ” is objected to : Nayidlia sattupulabbhati. 

^ e.g. Satp. Nik., xxxv, 85. Ananda asks the meaning of the phrase sunno 
loka and the Bnddha explains it as sunnam attena va attaniyena. Cf. fSaip. Nik., 
xli, § 7. Suhiiata cetovirautti, Maj. Nik., xliii (=- vol. i, p, 297 ad fin.), yufmato 
samadhi is mentioned in Sain. Nik., xliii, § 4 ( ~ vol. iv, p. 360), and in Dig. Nik., 
xsxiii, 10, 61 {= vol. iii, p. 219). 

CH. II] the doctrines 51 

The sects known as Vajjiputtakas (Vatsiputriyas) and Sam- 
initiyas believed in the real existence of a personality appealing 
to the sutta called the Burden^ which describes human life by the 
metaphors of taking hold of the burden, lifting it up and laying 
it down. Their doctrine is condemned at the beginning of the 
Kathavatthu (being no doubt considered as the most fundamental 
of all errors) and in the ninth chapter of the Abhidharmakosa. 
They were, however, numerous in India, especially in the west, and 
are often spoken of by Hsiian-Tsang. I-Ching mentions their 
presence in Champa and Sumatra. It might seem that a sect which 
avoided the difhcult doctrine of selflessness and laid stress on the 
practical importance of personality was likely to succeed in 
missionary work among races who did not relish psychological 
disputes. But as a matter of fact the Sammitiyas seem to have 
been influential in India and in countries where Hindus settled 
because their doctrines were very nearly those of ordinary Hindu 
sects, but not in countries like China where a non-Indian population 
was evangelized. It does not appear that the preaching of anatta 
created any difficulties for Buddhism in China or Japan. 

After hearing and mastering ^ the truths enunciated in the first 
sermon the five disciples were admitted as members of the order 
with the words “ Come, Bhikkhu : the doctrine is well taught : 
lead a holy life for making a complete end of pain ”. This formula 
suggests that the object of the Bhikkhu should be his own salvation, 
but the missionary and altruistic spirit was present in the very 
beginnings of Buddhism, and soon ^ after instituting the order of 

^ Sani. Nik., xxii, 22. -I do not see that this sutta is inconsistent with what is 
said about anattS in other passages. It treats of (1) Bhara, the burden ; (2) Bhara- 
hara, the taking hold of the burden, (3) Bhfi,ra-adana, the lifting up of the burden, 
(4) Bhara-nikkhepana, laying down the burden. Of these. No. 2 Bhara-hara is 
equated with puggalo~the personality, hut it is not in form a noun indicating a 
personal agent. It is simply stated that what we call personahty means taking 
hold of the burden which is formed of rupa, vedana, safina, etc. 

® The act of mastery was not immediate or simultaneous. Kondanha saw the 
truth first and hence was called Annata Kondanna ; then after further instruction 
Vappa and Bhaddiya, and after still more Mahanama and Assaji. The mastery 
is described as the Dhammacakkhu or Eye of Truth, and this is concisely defined 
as the knowledge that everything that has a beginning must also have an end. 
Yam kinci samfidayadhammam, sabbam tarn nirodhadhammam. The Buddha 
d eli vered a third remarkable discourse in this first part of his career known as the 
Eire sermon (Mahav., i, 21, and Sam. Nik., xxv, 38), but it does not contain any 
new doctrine.' 

® No date is given in terms of days and months, but the first missionaries were 
sent forth before the Buddha left Benares for Uruvela and at a time when there 
were only sixty-one Arhats in the world. Mahavag., I, ii, 1. 

52 BVBBHISM m INDIA AND CHINA [ch. n 

BMlddius, tlie Buddiia bade its members go forth, and preach. 
“ Go and wander for the gain of many, for the welfare of many, 
out of compassion for the world. . . • There are beings who are 
defiled with little dust. They are perishing through not hearing the 
Doctrine.” This exhortation is purely altruistic. It is not even 
said that to serve others is the best way to find happiness for oneself, 
though there are many other passages which assert that those who 
are loving and charitable are also happy. The motive, compassion 
for the world (lokanukampa), is the same which decided the Buddha 
to preach when he hesitated and felt discouraged by the difficulties 
of his task, and kindness, pity,^ and desire to help are feelings 
constantly attributed to him. “ All that a teacher can do for his 
disciples out of love and compassion, that for compassion’s sake 
have I done for you.” ^ And the disciple must imitate the master : 
the ideal Bhikkhu is full of kindness and compassion for everything 
that lives, ^ and the sutta of the Saw ^ preaches the doctrine of Love 
your Enemies in bold paradoxes. Should bandits carve you limb 
from, limb with a two-handled saw, even then should you give way 
to anger you would not be obeying my law, says the Buddha. 
Even then you should be full of sympathy and goodwill and feel 
love even for the bandits.® 

The sending forth of disciples to preach calls our attention to 
certain very important features already visible in early Buddhism, 
though they become much more conspicuous later. They are the 
missionary spirit, the idea of the Bodhisattva, the respect accorded 
to deities, the belief in heavens or paradises, and the position of 
laymen. There is a certain connection between these features, 
though it may not be obvious at first sight. 

The society in which the B uddha was born and to which he 
preached had peculiarities to which it is difficult to find a parallel 
in any other age or country. The level of intelligence was high but 
religion absorbed almost the whole of intellectual life, for science, 
art, and literature hardly existed except as accessories to it. There 
was a powerful hereditary priesthood who spent their time in 

^ Karujill, amikampa. Maj. Nik., iii, near the beginning. Atthi me tumhesu 
annkampa. I feel compassion for you and wish you to follow my teaching, 

® Maj, Nik., xix ad fin. Repeated in cvi ad fin. and clii ad fin. 

® Sabbapfi'nahhutahitanukampi viharati. Maj. Nik,, xxvii. 

Maj. Nik., xxi. Kakacupama-sutta. 

® The story of Pupija (Maj. Nik., xlv, and Sam, Nik., xxxv, § 88) is somewhat 
similar. It is true that according to his own statement his object was to secure 
his own salvation, but he made 500 converts. 

cH.n] THE DOCTRINES 53 

theological study or in performing sacrifices on behalf of clients 
who seem to have been numerous and generous. But besides this 
priesthood there was also a large class of enquirers, some indepen- 
dent, some members of confraternities, who, though they were not 
much liked by the Brahmans, were under no sort of stigma as being 
heretics or dangerous radicals.^ It was considered quite natural 
and proper for a man of intellectual tastes to devote himself to 
religion, abandon his wife, children, and profession and become a 
wandering student or teacher. Such a one not only incurred no 
odium but could count on finding food, lodging, and assistance 
wherever he went. If he became a teacher of any eminence, he 
collected round him a band of followers and a large company of lay 
believers who supported the Master and his disciples and to some 
extent adopted their doctrines and religious practices. In this way 
arose two important movements which became permanent religions, 
the Buddhists and the Jains. Others, such as the Ajivakas, 
disappeared after a short existence apparently because even in 
India, which is very tolerant in such matters, their doctrines 
were considered fantastic. 

In the early days of Buddhism the Bhikkhus and their supporters 
were not related to one another exactly as clergy and laity. The 
Bhikkhus were persons who devoted themselves to religion and it was 
meritorious to help them to live in comfort and to profit by their 
instruction. But it might not be possible for an ordinary family 
man to follow the steep and narrow path : it was recognized that 
less was expected of him and also that he must expect lesser 
blessings in future lives. And since the somewhat severe teaching 
of Gotama made scant provision for some things which the ordinary 
man expects of religion— for instance, kindly deities who will help 
him in the little troubles of life — ^he was not forbidden to supplement 
that teaching with beliefs and rites which strictly speaking are not 
Buddhist at aU. These conditions led to the growth of a large 
confraternity, who for want of a better word may be called monks, 
with ample leisure and disposed to develop the psychological and 
philosophic sides of Gotama’ s teaching into elaborate systems. 
These systems are not inferior to European metaphysics and merit 

^ There are many warnings in the Nikayas against becoming a monk for worldly 
motives, e.g. Ang. ?Tik., iv, 25, says that one should not lead a religions life 
with the object of being talked of and securing popular recognition or of obtaining 
gain, respect, and praise. It is remarkable that the Artha^astra seems to regard 
ascetics as the natural class to select spies from, presumably because they went 
everywhere and enjoyed everybody’s confidence. See i, xi, and many other passages. 

54 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. ii 

the attention of thinlcers, but one wonders how they ever obtained 
a hearing outside a University. On the other hand, there were 
the laity, admirers of theories which they hardly understood and 
of aspirations which they did not presume to share, more inclined 
to the devotional side of religion, and more disposed to think of 
heaven and the help of benevolent deities than of the arduous road 
to nirvana. This double outlook within the Buddhist community 
explains most of the developments which are collectively called 
Mahayanism. 

Buddliism has many remarkable features but perhaps the most 
striking of all is its missionary spirit. From the first it preached and 
practised the duty of trying to convert the whole world. This was 
a new idea. The paganisms of the ancient world were local and 
national. As the Koman Empire spread, it seemed decent to erect 
in foreign countries temples to the deities of Imperial Borne, bnt the 
idea of converting Africans or Asiatics to the Koman religion would 
hardly have been intelligible in the time of Augustus. In India 
religion had less connection with states and cities : from the begin- 
ning there was a disposition to regard it as a search for truth and to 
expect revelations. Yet in. practice these revelations were not 
regarded as divine messages to the world, and the Hindus behaved 
much like the Romans. In foreign countries where there were 
Hindu settlements there were also Hindu temples, as there are in 
Bast Africa and Singapore to-day, and the natives of Java and 
Oambodja adopted Hindu rites and beliefs as part of the imported 
civilization. But there is no record of Brahmanic missionaries. 
Much of the Bhagavad Grita reads like an appeal to all maukind, 
bnt it insists on caste and forbids those who have learnt its doctrine 
to instruct unsuitable persons.^ Even later sects such as the 
liingayats or the followers of Caitanya who gave up caste in theory 
never sent out missionaries in the Buddhist or Christian sense. 
But among the non-Brahmanic confraternities of northern India 
about the sixth century B.o. there was a clear idea that there are 
such things as Truth and the Good Life which are discovered by the 
wise but can be understood by all ; which can give salvation to all 
and therefore ought to he brought within the reach of all. The 
Jains, whose founder seems to have been a slightly older contem- 
porary of Gotama, had this idea, and their sutras are addressed. 
“ to Aryans and non- Aryans Yet though they made converts 

THE D0GTBINE8 

CH. Il] 

in India and spread in early times from tlie nortli to tlie extreme 
south it does not appear that they ever tried to evangelize foreign 
countries d But Buddhism was from the first a message to all, 
to gods and men ” : there is no hint that, like the doctrines of the 
Upanishads, it should be taught only to privileged persons. In the 
well-known sermon on the fruits of the Religious Life ^ the Buddha 
instances the case of a slave who becomes a monk and Pimna ^ 
made 500 converts among the people of Sunaparaiita who are 
represented as dangerous savages. A couple of centmies later, 
when intercourse with foreign countries had increased and 
Buddhists could invoke the help of the state, the extent and success 
of tiieir missionary enterprises form an important chapter in the 
history of Asia, Asoka in his pious zeal perhaps exaggerated the 
efforts which he made for the conversion of Europe,^ but there can 
be no doubt of his conviction that it was his duty to make the Good 
Law known tliroughout the world. Let me again emphasize the 
fact that before the rise of Christianity such an idea of religion was 
most unusual. Buddhism was preached to the Chinese and the 
Hellenistic kingdoms on the northern frontiers of India and 
accepted by them. But no Chinese or Bactrian ever dreamt of 
sending religious instructors to India. Chinese pilgrims went to 
India to obtain information : Indians went to China to teach. 

The motive which inspired this missionary work, the feeling which 
made the Buddha face the hard task of founding a new religion, 
the spirit by which he bade his disciples he animated is described as 
anukampa.^ Compassion is the usual English translation, but 
perhaps it emphasizes the idea of superiority more than does the 
original, and sympathy or kindliness would be better renderings 
in many passages. The teacher is superior to the pupil inasmuch 
as he already possesses the knowledge which he wishes to impart, 
but otherwise he is simply “ hitesin ” ® — desirous for the Welfare of 
others. In the older writings due prominence is given to this 

^ In jiastice to the Jains it must be remembered that southern India was practi- 
cally a foreign country both in race and language. 

® Buddhism did not attempt to abolish caste, but it recognized merit in any 
caste, e.g. in Lal.-vist., xii; when there is a question of the Buddha’s maniage, 
his father seeks for virtuous maidens in every caste on the ground that race and 
lineage are not important but that virtue is. 

- ® Maj. Nik., oxlv, 

^ See the last Rock Edict, 

® Etymologically the word seems to mean vibrate in sympathy with. 

® Hitesin is an epithet of the Buddha, e.g. Maj. Nik., ciii. Sain. Nik., xliii, 1, 1. 

56 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

motive, as I have shown, hut it cannot be denied that many passages 
seem to hold up one’s own personal private salvation as the goal of 
the religious life. Others ^ state that the reward is double : happiness 
for oneself and for others too. But in the Mahayana unselfishness, 
labour for others, and self-sacrifice are consistently held up as the 
ideal and this ideal is embodied in the figure of the Bodhisattva.^ 
This word occurs not infrequently in the Nikayas and is generally 
used of Gotama ^ when he was a young man and had not yet obtained 
enlightenment or of past Buddhas in similar circumstances. More 
rarely it is applied to the future Buddha when in the Tusita heaven 
and awaiting birth.^ The Kathavatthu ^ discusses the career of a 
Bodhisattva and denies that he is reborn in purgatory or as an animal 
of his own free will, thus showing that such a view existed. In the 
Jatakas we find fully developed the idea that the future Buddha 
practises through a long series of births all the virtues and more 
especially complete self-sacrifice or selflessness, giving up life, 
possessions, and everything if it will help others or evenif they merely 
ask for it. Some centuries later such a career is not regarded 
as a story of what a great man did in previous births : it is humanized 
and made the ideal of the religious life. Manuals of devotion bid 
the good man be a Bodhisattva and teach him how to set about it 
and many saints in China and Japan have earned the title. On the 
other hand, the superhuman Bodhisattva, such as Avalokitelvara 
(Kwannon) or Kshitigarbha (Jizo), is a new and most important 
figure for doctrine, art, and ritual. These great beings have no 
known historical origin, but they are believed to have struggled 
towards perfection through countless existences, like Gotama 

1 e.g. Maj. Nik., iv ad fin. Gotama says the solitary life is doubly good : 

“ I see my own well-being here and now and I have compassion on them that 
come after.” Also Sam. Nik., vii, § 2. “ Ho who when reviled reviles not again 
acts for bis own good as well as the good of others.” The transition from one ideal 
to the other is illustrated in the Asokavadana, chap, x (Przyluski’s transL, p. 423), 
where Yasas says to Asoka : “ Yotre Majeste s’est acquis des merites exclusivement 
pour elle seule. C’est pourquoi ces merites sont legers. Gelui qui exhorte tout le 
monde a acquerir des merites, celui-la est vraiment magnanime et la somme de ses 
merites est lourde.” 

2 I-Tsing long ago observed that the worship of Bodhisattvas was the chief 
point in which the Mahayanists differed from the Hinayanists. (See Takakusu’s 
translation, p. 14.) 

^ Especially in the phrase which is several times put into Gotama’s mouth : 

“ such and such a thought occurred to me in the days before my Enlightenment 
when 1 was only a BodMsattva.’^ 

^ Maj. Nik., cxxiiij and similarly of Vipassi in Pig. Nik., xiv. 

® Eathavat., xxiii, 3. 

GH. II] THE DOCTRINES ^ 67 

MmseK, and to have refused the peace of nirvana when they had 
won it in order that they might continue to help suifering humanity. 
I sliall have much to say about the development of these two aspects 
of the Bodliisattva in later times and will here merely point out 
how close is the relation of the superhuman Bodhisattvas to the 
deities who figure in the Niklyas. These deities, or Devas, are not 
quite the same as the gods of Sanskrit literature, even when they 
bear the same names. They have a place in the sacred legend 
because they are devout, though not always very intelligent, 
supporters of the Buddha and his followers ; they are not the 
governors of the world, still less teachers,^ for they themselves need 
instruction and conversion. But they are an order of beings 
happier and stronger than men (but not than Buddhas) possessing 
various magic powers and living in paradises. Neither they nor 
their residences are eternal, though they last incalculably longer 
than man and his works. They owe these privileges to their 
meritorious conduct in previous existences ^ : they practised virtue 
and have obtained their reward in their own persons. -They differ 
from future Buddhas and Bodhisattvas chiefly in not having the 
high unselfish resolve to save the world. But for all that they may 
actually be stages in the development of a Buddha. Gotama 
himself remembered having been Brahma and Sakka in previous 
existences.^ When the question of the existence of Devas is raised 
in the Nikayas ^ it is answered with an emphatic affirmative. 
Gotama declares that prosperity will come to those who support 
shrines and perform the proper offerings,*'’ and when kindly spirits 
teach his disciples a spell consisting of a list of Devas and Yakkhas 
whose protection will secure peace and happiness, he bids them use 
it.® It will thus be seen that the modern Buddhist in China or 

^ Thus it is said in Maj. Nik,, xct, that many thousands of gods have found 
refuge in G-otama. 

® In Sain. Nik,, xi, 2, § 1-3, it is said that Sakka obtained his present high 
position bjr laying down for himself and following seven rules of conduct which 
include un.selfi.shness (vigatamalamaccherena cetasa). The idea that deities have 
won their present position is not ttnlmown even in the Vedas. In jB. V., x, 167, 1, 
India is said to have won heaven by austerities (tapas). 

® In the Itivuttaka, § 22, the Buddha says he was once Brahma and thirty-six 
times Sakka. 

* e.g. Maj. Nik., xc, o, and cxxvii. This belief in Devas does not mean Theism 
or Monotheism in the European sense, that idea being unacceptable to all ordinary 
sects of both the Hina- and Mah3,yana. Even Amida is not God in the Christian and 
Mohammedan sense, that is, he is not the creator and ruler of the world. 

Dig. Nile., xvi, 1, 4. Cf. the Ratana sutta of the Sutta Nipata (223-238). 

® Dig, Nile., xxxii. Atanatiya S. 

58 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

Japan who shows respect to deities, either native or Indian, can 
easily j iistify himself from the ancient scriptures. 

In this connection the devotional exercises known as Brahma- 
viharas or divine states are of interest. They are states of emotional 
meditation which lead to the companionship of BrahmaJ that is to 
rebirth in his heaven and thus they combine the three ideas of love 
for all beings, a deity, and a paradise. They are fully recognized 
in the Nikayas and are mentioned in the Lotus.^ Though they are 
also mentioned in Brahmanic books, ^ Lord Chalmers is probably 
right in thiukijig that the emphasis laid by Buddhism on goodwill 
to mankind and all living creatures is an original and independent 
contribution to the evolution of India’s religious thought”.^ 
Brahmanic sages are often represented as irritable, and the ideal of 
the Upanishads is not so much love and kindness as self-realization. 
It is in the Mahayana rather than in early Buddhism that an 
unselfish ideal receives full recognition as the mainspring and guiding 
spirit of religion, but it is not neglected in the Nikayas. 

The Brahmaviharas are a series of four meditations not unlike 
the jhanas.® The person who practises them is said to pervade 
(pharati) all living creatures in all regions with thoughts first of 
love® (metta), then of pity (karuria), then of joy (mudita), and finally 
of equanimity (upekkhS.), that is, indifference to praise and blame, 
kindness and unidndness. These thoughts not only bring to him 
who cultivates them the blessings of calm and peace, but by a species 
of telepathy they spread joy and love among others. And since 
Brahma himself is free from all anger and malice, the man whose 

^ The rendering “ union with Brahma ”, which is used by many translators, is 
liable to iniRuiidcrstanding, as implying absorption into the supreme spirit as 
<;onteinplated by the Upanishads. The Pali expressions (Brahmanam sahavyataya 
niaggo, Brahmuno saddhim samsandati sameti, Brahmuno sahavyupago bhavis- 
sati) seem to mean aiinjjly associating with Brahma or joining his retinue. Gf. 
iSarp. Nik., xlii, 2. Pahasauam Devanam sahavyabam upapajjhati. Is reborn 
in the company of the Laughing Devas. 

2 Lotms, chap, v, verse 77. 

® In the Yoga sutras, 1, 33. But many scholars assign a late date to this work. 
In Maj. Nik., 1, it is said that the former Buddha Kakusandha taught the Erahma- 
viliaras. 

* Further Dialogues of the Buddha. Introd., p. sxiv, 

® Indeed they are sometimes called jhanaa. See Dig. Nik., xix, § 41 and § 43. 

® Metta seems to me to be the equivalent of love or charity in the New Testa- 
ment, that is 'Aydni} not "Epws. It is extolled in the Nikayas in many well-kno^vu 
passages, e.g. Dig. Nik., viii, § 15 ; Itivuttaka, iii, 7, and Sarp. Nik., xx, 4, where 
a little love is said to be better than great gifts. For a Mahayanist definition see 
i§ikRhasamuccaya, chap, xii, p. 212 (Bendairs edition). 

THE DOCTRINES 

59 

CH. U] 

thouglits are full of kindness is fit to associate with him and 
is reborn in his paradise after death. But it must not be 
supposed that heaven can be won by mere sentiment and dreamy 
benevolence — good conduct (sila) and a life religious in act as well 
as thought are expressly required as a preliminary to the 
meditations,^ 

Though the Brahma viharas are commended in the Pitakas, they 
are a by-way. The main road is the path to nirvana, wherein there 
is no rebirth, whereas loving thoughts lead only to the heaven of 
Brahma— sometimes called the humble world , of Brahm^.^ This 
is stated emphatically in the Govinda-suttanta,® where the Buddha 
relates how in a former birth he taught the Brahmaviharas to 
numerous disciples, who all, even the most backward, were reborn 
in some paradise. But, he contmues, that religious life (brahma- 
cariyam) did not lead to the cessation of craving and to nirvana, 
but only to rebirth in Brahma’s heaven, whereas the religious life 
as I now preach it — that is, the Eightfold Path — does lead to that 
happy consummation and to absolute passionlessness. 

The followers of the Mahayana do not contradict such passages, 
though they may go so far as to say that these are counsels of 
perfection, good for the hero saints of old but not for the weaklings 
of to-day. But clearly much of the popular Buddhism now to be 
seen in the Far East is identical with the brahmacariyam — ^the 
religious life — to which Gotama here gives the second place. It has 
the same ideal, namely kindness, the same aspiration, namely 
heaven, and it looks for the help of approving deities or Bodhisattvas. 
In the Digha Nikaya Brahma himself helps Govinda to reach his 
heaven.^ 

The Nikayas represent the Buddha himself as teaching the 
Brahmaviharas to lajmien. Thus he explains them to a village 
headman, apparently as a sufficient method of salvation and without 
reference to higher things, and the headman asks to be accepted 
as a lay disciple,® It is not clear that the Eightfold Path is ever 

^ e.g. Dig. Nik., xiii, 4.3-75. 

® Maj. Nik., xcvii ad fin., hine Brahmaloke. But still the bliss of heaven is 
described in unstinted terms in Maj. Nik., cxxix ad fin. i 

® Dig. Nik., xix, § 61. So, too, in Maj. Nik., vii, a Bhilckhu practises the 
Brahmaviharas and then he knows that there is a lower and a higher stage : 
deliverance lies beyond this realm of consciousness. 

^ Dig. Nik., xix, §§ 44-6. 

® Sain. Nik., xlii, § 8, called Sankha, the trumpet. See, too, Sam. Nik., xli, § 7, 
and xlii, §§ 13-44 ff. (== vol. iv, p. 351 ff.). 

60 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ii 

tauglit to tlie laity in the same way.^ This is perhaps one reason 
why the Four Truths and the Path, which are fundamental formulae 
for early Buddhism, are so little known in the Far East at the 
present day. They are not a common phrase like the Three 
Treasures. Tlie Path leads to nirvana and has nothing to do with 
Paradise or deities. Throughout the Pali Pitakas it is the 
Bhiltkhus who are regarded as the true disciples of the Buddha. ^ 
He forsook the world himself and advised others to do so. But for 
all that the good laymen had from the very first an honom'able 
position, and clearly the success of Buddhism as a missionary creed 
and the place which it fills in the religious history of the world are 
mainly due to the appeal which it made to influential persons who 
were not monks or clerics. And as time went on, the ideal of 
becoming an Arhat (like the ideal of becoming a saint in Christianity) 
seemed arduous and even presumptuous, so that the more human 
and less austere parts of the original teaching became more and more 
prominent. , 

In the discourses which the Buddha is said to have delivered 
to lay believers, the chief stress is laid on morality (sila). Morality 
is indispensable for Bhikkhus : indeed, six of the eight stages in the 
path are occupied with nothing else. But it is not sufficient for 
them whereas it is sufficient for the laity. And lay morality has 
many departments which do not concern the monk, such as the 
right use of riches and the proper relations between husbands and 
wives, parents and children- Many discourses in the Nikayas are 
addressed to laymen and describe the good layman’s life. One of 
the best known is the homily addressed to Sigala,® which deals 
with the mutual duties of (u) parents and children, ((!)) teachers and 
pupils, (c) husband and wife, (t?) friends, (c) masters and servants, 
{f) clergy and laity. Though Buddhism has won such triumphs in 
China and Japan, it is noticeable that the Buddha’s rules for conduct 

^ It is pa.rt of the instruction given to the headman Rasiya m Sarn, Nik., xlii, 
§ 12, but there, as in the Vinaya, it begins with, the formula “ There are tw'o extremes 
which should not be foUow'ed by one who has renounced the w'orld ”. Rasiya asked 
the Buddha w'hctlier it was true that he disapproved of ascetics (tapassi) w'ho 
practi.se asceticism (tapas), and the Buddha replied by explaining in what respects 
tapas is praiseworthy or blameworthy. 

® The inferiority of the laity is clearly indicated by such phrases as sikkham 
pacakkhaya hinay'avattati {Maj, Nik., Ixvii and Ixxvii), he gives up his training 
and reverts to the lower state (of a layman). Compare the parable of the three 
fields (Saip. Nik., xlii, § 7) in which the Buddhist laity rank as the moderate field 
between tho Bhikkhus (excellent) and the men of other creeds (poor). 

® Dig. Nik., xxxi (the Sigalovada S.). 

61 

CH. II] THE DOGTRINES 

contain no reference to loyaltj and political duties whicli liold tlie 
first place in the ethics of the Far East. But the moral code 
prescribed is simple, sensible, and intelligible to all nations. The 
principle whicb inspires it is the anukam pa mentioned above, and 
perhaps the verb anukampati, which occurs many times in the 
homily, is best translated ^ by love in the Bibhcal sense. In one 
passage a man is bidden to treat his friends and companions as he 
treats liimseH.^ He who follows these precepts wins happiness in 
this world and in the next. The same simple motive is approved 
in a discourse of the Anguttara,^ when the Buddha enumerates four 
things which give happiness and good repute here — ^industry, 
carefulness, a good friend, and economy — and four which bring joy 
in heaven— faith, good morals, generosity, and wisdom. Wisdom 
in this context does not mean insight into great mysteries. It 
consists, we are told, in seeing the evils which come from greed, 
iU-will, sloth, worry, and doubt and in getting rid of them. And 
faith is defiined as behef in the Buddha as being all-enlightened 
and the teacher of Grods and men. One might have expected some 
smnmary of what his teaching is, but, as a missionary appeal, the 
precept is simple and direct. 

^ So in the Sacred Books of the Buddhists, vol. ir, p. 181 if. 

® § 31, sam&nattaya. 

® Ang. Nik., -vlii-liy. See, too, Ang. Nik., Iv, where a married couple ask the 
Buddha if they can meet in heaven. He replies that they can if they are sama- 
saddha, samasM, samao%a, samapanha. 

CHAPTER III 

BUDDHISM IK INDIA 
1 

Though out literary records are copious and in part ancient, 
it is hard to feel on firm ground -when discussing the early history of 
the religious and philosophical systems comprised under the name 
of Buddhism. Books which are considered as scripture, such as the 
great Mahayanist sutras, are not associated with any human name 
or any contemporary events, and even when works are ascribed to 
a simple mortal the correctness of the ascription and the period 
when the author lived are often matters of argument. We are not 
dealing with admitted facts like the date of Plato or St. Paul and, 
in assigning a writer to a certain period, all that we can say in the 
most favourable circumstances is that our conclusion harmonizes 
with ail the available evidence. Even the history of reigns and 
dynasties is doubtful. The dif&cuities of Indian chronology are 
notorious and they are peculiarly acute for the period during which 
Buddhism underwent most change, that is from the death of the 
Buddha to the early centuries of the Christian era. Chinese 
chronology is fairly certain for events which happened in China, 
but unfortunately Chinese Buddhists made no attempt to study 
the history of India. They simply translated Indian works, and 
until the fifth century a.d., when Chinese pilgrims began to visit 
India, they have no criticisms or independent observations to offer. 

In the present chapter I shall endeavour to record in chronological 
order such facts and dates as we know concerning the development 
of Buddhism in India with special reference to its connection with 
the Far East, and in so doing I shall deal mainly with sects and 
schoolmen, reserving for the next chapter an account of the Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas of the Mah§,yana. Since these new figures and 
doctrines are of such obvious importance in the history of religion, 
it may seem strange to give them the second place and to treat first 
of relatively obscure philosophers. But it is easier to find some sort 
of historical setting for the philosophers. The date^ per- 

sonages as Asvaghosha and Tasubandhu are disputable enough, but 
still tradition connects them with certain kings and cities and some 
of the works ascribed to them seem genuine. But in seeking for the 

CH. in] BVDBHim IN INDIA 63 

origins of the worship of Amitabha and Avalokitesvara we have 
not even this modest allowance of historical detail : all is as 
unearthly as their own radiant Paradises. We know the dates 
when the Lotus and the sutras about Amitabha are said to have 
been translated into Chinese, and the style of the Sanskrit original 
may afford a basis for plausible theories. But that is all. Eegard- 
less of probability the texts represent themselves as the utterances 
of Sakyaniuni himself and no later authority is cited. Though we 
hear of many ancient sects distinguished by their rules of discipline 
and other minutim and though later in China and Japan sects were 
numerous and clearly divided, it is curious that in ancient India the 
Mahayana did not give rise to similar bodies. The worsliippers of 
Amitabha and Avalokitesvara are not spoken of as if they were a 
corporation of any kind. In Byzantine Christianity disputes about 
the nature of Christ led to the formation of parties — Nestorian, 
Monophysite, Orthodox, and so on — but though the Mahayanist 
sutras freely propound new views about the Buddha nature, these 
views remain singularly detached : they are not connected with the 
names of teachers or denominations. Hence the annals of Indian 
Buddhism seem peaceful. We hear less of quarrels and of perse- 
cution than in Europe, and that perhaps is creditable and civihzed. 
But it makes it extremely difficult to trace the birth and gro'wth of 
new ideas. It may be well to state briefly what is known of the 
political history of India in this obscure period. 

In the last days of the Buddha we see Magadha emerging as the 
chief state of Northern India, a position which it maintained for 
nearly three centuries, though until the invasion of Alexander few 
historical events can be cited. It is important, however, to note 
that at this period the Persian Empire had two satrapies within 
the limits of modern India, in one of which, called Candhara, was 
the celebrated University of Taxila,^ near the modern Rawal Pindi. 
As this seat of learning was frequented by Indian students, they must 
have felt even in early times Persian and afterwards Hellenistic 
influence. There are signs of Persian influence in India in the reign 
of Asoka. 

In 327 Alexander the Great, after overthrowing the Persian 
Empire, invaded India, where he remained only nineteen months. 
Immediately after his death in 323, Candragupta, a scion of the 
royal house of Magadha, put an end to Macedonian authority in 

^ This is the Greek form of the name, which is Takshasiila in Sanskrit and Takka- 

64 

BVDBHIEM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cm m 

India and founded the Manrya dynasty, under which Magadha 
became an empire comprising all northern and central India with 
Pataliputra as its capital. Seleucns ISficator, who had inherited 
the Asiatic possessions of Alexander, came into collision with 
Candragiipta bnt was defeated, and about 303 b.g. had to conclude 
a treaty by which he ceded Eiabul, Herat, and Kandahar. The 
grandson of Candragupta was the great Asoka, who was the first 
ruler of practically all India (for his dominions extended from 
Afglianistan almost to Madras) and an ardent Buddhist. But his 
empire broke up shortly after his death and we now enter on one of 
tho.se chaotic periods which occur from time to time in Indian 
history, and there is little certain information about Magadha until 
the fourth century a.d. Andhra, a region comprising large parts 
of the districts now called Hyderabad and the Central Provinces, 
was the first to revolt from the Mauryas, and a dynasty of Andhra 
Kings ruled until a.d. 236 over varying but often extensive 
territories. 

Alexander’s invasion produced httle direct effect and, strange to 
say, no allusion to it has been found in Indian literature. But 
indirectly it had a great influence on the political, artistic, and 
religious development of the Hindus by preparing the way for a 
series of later invasions ffom the north which brought adth them 
a mixed culture containing Hellenistic, Persian, and other elements. \ 
Alexander had settled a considerable number of Greek soldiers in 
Bactria, and it was for some: time ruled by kings with Greek names, 
who were at first vassals of the Seleucids but became independent 
about the same time that the dynasty of the Arsacidee arose in. 
Parthia (260 B.O.). A certain Demetrius seems to have conquered 
Kabul, the Panjab, and Sind, and somewhat later (c. 155 b.g.) 
Menander, celebrated in Buddhist literature as the hero of the 
Questions of Milinda and apparently King of the Ivabul Valley, 
made an incursion to the east, occupied Muttra, and threatened 
Pataliputra itself but was repulsed. Meanwhile another set of 
invaders appeared on the scene, the wandering tribes known as 
Sakas and Yuehchib, smiilar to the modern Turkomans, though they 
probably spoke Iranian languages. After 150 b.g. western India 
was parcelled out among foreign princes called Sakas, Pallavas, or 
Yavanas, whose frontiers ; were constantly changing. For some 
time they admitted the suzerainty of the Parthians, and the most 
important principality, which was known as the great Satrapy and 
included Surashtra (Kathiawar), lasted till about a.d. 395. The 

CH. m] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 66 

Yiiehcliili appear to have started from somewhere near the frontier 
of China about 100 b.c., and, driving the Sakas before them, settled 
in Bactria where they became known as Kushans from the name of 
one of their principal clans. They subsequently conquered the 
whole of North-Western India, and the empire of their great King 
Kanishka, whose capital was Peshawar, included Afghanistan, 
Bactria, Kashmir, parts of Central Asia, and perhaps extended as 
far as Gaya in the east. The date of this monarch, who played 
a part in the later liistory of Buddhism comparable with that of 
Asoka in earlier times, was long a matter of doubt and discussion,^ 
but it is now generally agreed that he reigned at the end of the first 
century and inaugurated the era which began in a.d, 78. His 
successors apparently kept his empire together for some time, but 
early in the third century both the Andhras and Kushans collapsed 
for unknown reasons and the history of India is a blank until the 
rise of the Guptas.^ 

This dynasty, w^hich not only restored some sort of political 
unity but also, rougl.dy speaking, marked the beginning of modern 
Hinduism and of a reaction against Buddhism, was originally 
connected with Pataliputra, though subsequently Ayodhya and 
Kausambi became its royal residences. In 320 Candragupfca I, 
a local Eaja wko bore the same name as the foimder of the Mauryas 
and had increased his hereditary dominions, instituted the Gupta 
era. Samudra Gupta continued this victorious career and by 340 
appears to have received the submission of nearly all the Indian 
peninsula, though he did not attempt to retain or administer all his 
conquests. But his successors, beginning with his son Vikram.a- 
ditya, ruled undisturbed over most of northern lndia, until they were 
overthrown, by new invaders from the north, known as Hunas, 

^ The latest researches show a tendency to put his date 40 or 50 years later. 
See Van Wijk in Acta Orientalia, y, pp. 168-170, and Sten Konow, ib,, y, 28-38, 
and vi, 93-6, %7here he says : “ Kanishka started from Khotan in 128, which became 
the initial year of his reign. The same year or in 129 we find him in Peshawar 
dedicating Buddhist relics in a stupa. Two years later he had established his 
power as far east as Benares, Later he retraced his steps ... and settled down as 
King of Khotan and Suzerain of the whole Kushana Empire . , . He may he 
identical with the King Kien who was killed in a.d. 152.” But Bacbhofer {Ostas. 
Ztsft., 1927, pp. 21-43) maintains the date a.d. 78 for Kanishka’s era. The 
Chinese annals describe the campaigns of Pan Ch'^ao in Central Asia a.d. 72-103, 
hut do not mention Kanishka. This makes it probable that he was not reigning 
at that time. 

^ It is remarkable that the collapse of the Andhras (a.d. 236), the death of the 
last Kushan King, and the rise of the Sassanian dynasty in Persia coincide very 
closely in date. 

66 BVDDSISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cu.m 
TTnl.tlinUtfs or 'White Huns,' fierce barbarians who neither brought 

century They were hostile to Buddhism and are said to have 
worshimed Siva, but their destruction of monasteries and temp es 
w” totably du; to love of pfflage, not to any sectarian animosity 
Up to thisUme Indian princes had shown 

“ *1. « “ “r ?r 

his life emulated for a time the dimensions and prospmty of the 
Guia Empire. Our knowledge of the intellectual and social life 
S^Sis trfod is unusuaUy full, for the works of Sana Bhartahar 
and others who frequented “^Court liave come down to 
as plays attributed to Harsha himself. We have also 

S « Ml.. 

cdtaf Site in® Harsha himself became a devout though 
not exclusive Buddhist. Nevertheless, both Hsuan-Tsang an 
the -t pilgrim I-Ching (. P. 

Buddhism was deca^nng inlndia. Th u p > and thoush 

to Hinduism, though not persecutors S 

the Huns were merely destructive, yet their , h 

hilhamrdan raids in later ages) did more harm to Buddhism 
than other religions, because so much of its stren^h was cone 

trated in monasteries which were easily demolishcc . 

The preceding remarks refer almost exclusively to northern Inia^ 
The history of the south is even more obscure m ohronolo^ a 
lackinv in events, since the Dravidian countries were not disturbed 
by forSgn invasions. But though remote, they were 
Zart from external influences they felt the same mte lectiia,! and 
mligious movements as northern India, for both Buddhism and 
Jaihsm reached them considerably before our era and '^“e pos 7 
stronver than Brahmanism, though we hear of influential Saivite 
1 Apparently . branch of the Hunt who invaded Europe. The original name 
was probably sometliing like Haptal. 

67 

OIL in] BUDBEISM IN INDIA 

and Vishmiite sects at a fairly ancient date. From early times 
the south was divided into three states known as the Pandya, 
Cera, and Cola Kingdoms, and from the sixth to the eighth century 
A.D. a fourth power was important, namely, the Pallavas who had 
their capital at Conjeevaram. 

The Deccan was ruled by the Andhi’as from the fall of the Mauryas 
till A.D. 236, but for the next three centuries nothing is known of its 
history until the rise of the Calukyas in Bijapur. Pulakesin of this 
dynasty (a.d. 608-642), a contemporary ofHarsha, was for some time 
successful in creating a rival empire which extended from Madras 
to Gujarat and exchanged embassies with Persia. But in 642 he 
was defeated and slain by the Pallavas. With the simultaneous 
death of Harsha, the short-lived tendency to political unification 
came to an end and there began what has been called the Rajput 
period (about a.d. 660-1000), characterized by the existence of 
numerous independent kingdoms ruled by dynasties nominally 
Hindu but often really descended from northern invaders. For our 
purposes it is not necessary to sketch their fortunes and contests, 
but the Palas, a line of Buddhist Kings who began to reign about 
A.D. 730, may be mentioned, for under their patronage a decadent 
form of Buddhism, often called Tantrio, flourished in Bengal and 
Bihar until the Mohammedan invasions of the twelfth century. 
The Buddhism of Nepal and Tibet and also of Java apparently 
reflected the phases of religion in Bengal, and there were universities 
at Odontapuri and Vikramafila at which Tibetans studied. We 
hear of Indian translators and teachers in China as late as the 
eleventh century, but the last one of any importance was Amogha- 
vajra’- (a.d. 719-774), who was responsible for the introduction of 
much Tantric literature and practices into the Far East. 

The above sketch will enable the reader to understand the 
difficulty of tracing the evolution of Buddhism in the land of its 
birth. If the historian has to confess that a whole century is a blank 
in which nothing certain can be recorded, it is not surprising if the 
date of a particular doctor or doctrine remains doubtful. But one 
or two features are noticeable. In central and southern India 
Buddhism was not much affected by foreign influences, or, so far 
as we know'-, by state control. It often enjoyed or shared the 
favoiu of local potentates, but there was no institution analogous 
to the Roman or Chinese Empire, and' the social and political ideas 
which spring from such an institution were also absent. The 
^ Translated as Pu-K'ung in Chinese. 

68 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. hi 

wealoiess of Buddhism was tliat its adherents, especially the laity, 
were not sharply distinguished from other bodies, as are for instance 
Moslims and Parsees in modern times. They were inclined to accept 
and adopt prevalent ideas and practices. Not that they were 
merely passive and receptive. Their contribution to the religion, 
philosophy, and art of India was enormous, but still the net result 
was that Hinduism, though it was transformed, remained a. religious 
system supervised by the Brahmans, whereas Buddhism as a 
separate organization ceased to exist. In the north the result was 
much the same, with this difference in the process that many of the 
warlike tribes who invaded India from Central Asia, notably the 
Kushaus and their great King Kanishka, became converted to the 
faith . They gave it valuable material support ; on the other hand, their 
mental texture was very different from that of ancient Magadha 
where the doctrine was first preached, and it is not surprising if they 
welcomed whatever mythology and ritual they found in their new 
faith, and added more of their own. During many centuries the 
political frontier in the north-west was uncertain and India was 
not sharply distinguished from Persia, Afghanistan, Bactria, and 
even Central Asia either politically or in culture. In the Buddhism 
which grew up in this region there is no reason to doubt the presence 
of Hellenistic, Persian, or other foreign influences if the evidence 
suggests it. But we must not exaggerate the inrush of foreign ideas. 
Indian thought and Indian art streamed across Central Asia (and 
also by sea) to China and ultimately to Japan, but the process 
was not reciprocal. Something may have come to India from 
Bactria and Persia, but nothing came from China, and the converted 
invaders made changes not so much by introducing foreign notions 
as by twisting Indian ideas in their own fashion. 

2 , 

But we must return to the earlier stages in the development of 
Buddhism. As already mentioned, there are traditions of a Council 
held a hundred years after the death of the Buddha which, according 
to the Pali Vinaya, decided certain points concerning discipliiie 
rather than doctrine. Later accounts ^ add that those who did 
not accept the decisions of this Couhcil organized themselves as a 
party called Mahdsanghikas, or the people of the C-reat Council, 

^ The Dtpavamsa and Hsiian-Tsang. 

CH. Ill] BUJDDHim IN INDIA 69 

and compiled their own version of the scriptures. Though this 
story is not supported by any external evidence, it is highly probable 
that the rigid and unsentimental doctrine of the Thera vadins 
or orthodox party called forth some kind of popular protest. But 
we really know nothing about the history of Buddhism from the 
death of the Buddha till the reign of Asoka, who ascended the throne 
ill 274 and became a Buddhist in 262 b.c. Later tradition gives 
a list of Elders or Patriarchs who are supposed to have been in some 
vague way heads of the Church, but only live are named for this 
rather long interval and the lists do not ngreel It is probable that 
many of the later works included in the Pali Pitakas were composed 
in this period, though it would be very rash to assume that the Pali 
Abhidhamma was completed before the reign of Asoka. The 
growth and movement of ideas to be found in this literature is not 
great. It consisted chiefly of classification and elaboration and 
even so was concerned with psychological and quasi-metaphysical 
problems rather than with religion. In the absence of evidence it is 
useless to discuss in detail what was the doctrine and practice of 
Buddhism about 300 or 400 b.c., but since there is no record of any 
change or remarkable event we may imagine that it continued 
to exist as an exceptionally powerful and flourishing religious 
corporation of a type common in India in those days, though we have 
had nothing corresponding to it in Europe. It was a body of 
celibates, who may be called monks for want of a better word, 
though their mode of life involved more wandering and intercourse 
with the world than we associate with monkhood, occupied partly 
with study and contemplation, partly with preaching, and supported 
by a body of lay admirers who followed their teaching so far as the 
duties of family life allowed. Gotama’s confraternity had many 
good points which distinguished it from others : from the first 
it claimed to be a message to the whole world, it advocated neither 
excessive mortification of the flesh like the Jains nor paradoxical 
doctrines like the Ajivakas ; it bade men love one another and lead 
good lives. Still, we may imagine that about 300 b.c. it was in 
some danger of becoming a philosophical system like Platonism.^ 
It was Asoka who turned it into what we call a religion and a State 
Church. 

^ The Dipavarasa gives Upali, Dasaka, Sonaka, Siggava, and Tissa Moggaliputta. 
The list of the Sarvastivadins was Mahakasyapa, Ananda, Sanavasa and Madh- 
yantika, Upagupta, and Dhitika. 

® Megasthenes, who was in India about 300 B.C., knew of the Buddha as a 
deified teacher, but does not seem to have considered Buddhism as a separate 
religion. 

BVBDBISM IN INDIA AND CHINA Ipm in 

Asoka was not a. tkeologianj philosoplier, or bigot. He was in tbe 
simplest sense of tlie words good and kind, the friend of man and 
beast. In his youth he was shocked by the horrors of war as he saw 
them during the Kalinga campaign, and Buddhism seems to have 
attracted him because it taught people to live in harmony and respect 
animal life. Numerous inscriptions have come down to us in which 
he lectures his subjects on religion and morality, but though he often 
speaks as a professed Buddliist, in none of them does he formulate 
any creed or deal with such themes as Karma, Samadhi, and Nirvana. 
His Buddhism was popular in the sense of avoiding dogma and 
metaphysics, but he shows no proclivity to mythology and ritual 
which were the popular side of the Mahayana. Also, though his 
didactic edicts recall the inscriptions of Darius and there is probably 
a real historic connection between the two, there are no other signs 
of Iranian influence in his utterances. 

He styles the Buddha Lord and ^akyamuni. He made a 
pilgrimage to his birthplace and erected an inscribed pillar there. 
A similar pillar records how he visited and repaired the stupa of the 
earlier Buddha Kon^gamana, so that he clearly accepted the 
doctrine of a series of Buddhas. Further, he declares that all the 
words of the Lord Buddha are well said : he could point to some 
collection of scriptures regarded as the Lord’s sermons and he says 
that they should be studied “ by monks and nuns, by laymen and 
laywomen”. I have already discussed the tradition that he 
summoned a Council at which the Canon was fixed. The object 
of most of the edicts is to exhort his subjects to follow what he calls 
Dhamma, that is the Law or the good life which a Buddhist layman 
ought to lead. He defines it ^ as obedience to parents : respect for 
living creatures : speaking the truth: reverence to teachers and 
courtesy to relations, and he extols these virtues in language which 
recalls the Dhammapada, His maxims resemble the edicts 
published in later ages by K'ang-Hsi in China and Shotoku Taishi 
in Japan, but his insistence on the sanctity of animal life, to which 
he often recurs, goes beyond ordinary lay legislation and in one 
inscription he remarks that he thinks nothing of much importance 
except what concerns the next world. This shows that, though in 
such of his utterances as have survived he dwells more on the need 
of harmony and humanity than on the truth of any particular 
creed, he was inspired by real religious conviction. 

This conviction filled him with missionary zeal. In the last 
^ In the Second Minor Rock Edict. 

71 

CH. Ill] BUBmim IN INDIA 

Rock Edict Re expresses his horror of war and announces his 
intention of making conquests only by the Dhamma. He then 
states that he has sent missionaries, not only to the outlying parts 
of his own dominions and to Ceylon, but to the Kingdoms of Syria, 
Egypt, Macedonia, Cyrene, and Epirus. Asoka perhaps exaggerates 
. these pious campaigns : indeed, his own language is not quite clear 
as to the results, and we have no confirmation of the presence of 
Buddhist missionaries in Europe or Africa. But he clearly 
enunciates the important principle that it is the duty of a good 
Buddhist to do all he can to spread the faith, and we know that nearer 
home his missionary efforts were crowned with success. Buddhism 
was introduced into Ceylon in his reign, and the statements of the 
Sinhalese chronicles as to dispatch of missionaries to the north 
have been confirmed by the discovery at Sanchi of urns inscribed 
with the names of Majjhima and others who are called teachers 
of the Himalaya region. The same chronicles credit him with 
evangelizing Suvannabhumi or Pegu, but the statement, though 
quite probable, is not confirmed by any inscription. About the 
twenty-first year of his reign, he made a pilgrimage to the sacred 
sites in the district where the Buddha was born. He also visited 
Nepal and he erected five stupas at Lalitpur. It does not appear 
that he visited Kashmir personally, but by his orders Srinagar was 
founded and Buddhism introduced. 

The tradition that he erected many stupas, temples, and monas- 
teries is doubtless correct, though he does not mention these buildings 
himself. He tells us, however, that he appointed commissioners to 
supervise charitable institutions and the affairs of ail sects, not 
merely Buddhists, and he orders the local authorities to hold 
assemblies in which the Dhamma is to be proclaimed and to arrange 
religious processions.^ Later in his reign he speaks almost as Head 
of the Church. As we have seen, he admonishes both monies and 
laymen as to what are the most edifying portions of scripture, and 
in the Sarnath edict he prescribes the steps to be taken against those 
who try to provoke schism and incidentally he orders all his officials 
to attend the Uposatha ceremony,^ 

^ With elephants, cars, and illuminations, he says. They must have been 
very like the Perahera festival still celebrated in Kandy and the processions 
arranged by Harsha as reported Hsuan-Tsang. 

^ Practically equivalent to Sunday, as the ceremony was held at the new moon, 
full moon, and eighth day after each. He doubtless promoted good Buddhists. 
The Divyavadana (xxvii and xxix) mentions Radhagupta and the Arhat Yasas as 
ministers of Asoka. The latter is also mentioned in the Sutralankara of A^vaghosha . 

72 

BVBDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iii 
3 

It would be of great interest to know wbat variations in doctrine 
or discipline amounted to schism in Asoka’s opinion, but be gives no 
explanation. According to tradition there existed in his reign or 
somewhat earlier eighteen schools or sectsd and to these were added 
a little later, but still in the same period, six others. There is nothing 
improbable in this acccount, but unfortunately all the narratives 
which give names and details are late and not quite consistent, for 
naturally rival sects held different views as to the origin of the 
various schisms. The Kathi,vatthu, which tradition associates 
with the Council of Asoka, cites and confutes opinions only : the 
names of the bodies which held the opinions are given in the 
Commentary attributed to Buddhaghosa and more or less agreeing 
with the Sinhalese Chronicles.^ 

It is generally admitted that the most important differences were 
those which separated the Mahasanghikas from all others and that 
these Mahasanghikas were the precursors of the Mahayana. The 
celebrated Chaitya cave at Karli dating from the second century 
A.i). appears to have belonged to them. But we do not know to 
what extent there was hostility between them and the sects which 
called themselves Theravadins, Sthaviras, or Vibhajjavadins. 
They arc not condemned or even mentioned in Asoka’s inscriptions, 
and the probability is that all the sects were schools of thought rather 
than contending religious organizations like Catholics or Protestants. 
Nearly a thousand years later the Chinese pilgrims report that their 
names were still known in India and that it was a creditable thing 
to be versed in the scriptures of all of them. Unfortunately we 
cannot be sure what were the views of the Mahasanghikas, especially 

^ According to Sinhalese authorities, the Mahasanghikas broke away from the 
orthodox Thcravada after the Council of Vesali and split into live sects. Mean- 
while, apart from this schism, the Theravada became divided into the Vajji- 
puttakas and Mahirasasakas. The former had three subdivisions including the 
important Sammitiyas. Most important of all were the Sarvastivadins, with three 
offshoots. They were descended from the Mahirasasakas, as were also the Dham- 
maguttikas. The section of the Chinese Tripitaka which is devoted to the Vinaya 
of the Hinayana contains translations from the literature of the following sects : 
SarvSstivadin, Mulasarvastivadin, Ivasyaplya, Dharmagupta, Mahasanghika, 
Mahimsasaka, Sammitiya. 

® Tibetan sources furnish other accounts given b}'' Vasuraitra (see Wassilieff, 
BovddhLme, p. 227 ff.) and Bha’s^j’-a (sec Rockhill, Life of the Buddha, p. 181). The 
Chinese Tripitaka contains three translations of a treatise on Sects by Vasumitra 
(Nanjio, Nos, 1284-6). 

GH. Ill] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 73 

in early times. It is true that the extant work called Mahavastu 
describes itself as belonging to them,^ but it has certainly received 
many late interpolations (for instance, it alludes to the Hunas and 
the written characters of the Chinese), and we have no safe criterion 
to distinguish what is old and new in matters of doctrine. The text 
as it stands teaches the existence of countless Buddhas and gives an 
account of the ten stages in a Bodhisattva’s upward career. It also 
tells how ^akyamuni in a previous birth took a vow to attain 
Buddhahood. The Kathavatthu ^ condemn.s the view that Buddhas 
are omnipresent and the commentary says that it was held by the 
Maliasanghikas. The name Lokattarav^din refers to the doctrine 
that the Buddha was superhuman and doubtless the Mahasanghikas 
were disposed to welcome all beliefs which fitted in with it.^ But it 
is hard to .say at what date any particular belief was adopted or to 
form any lively picture of the ac tivities of this ancient sect. 

We know more about their opponents, called Thera vadins, 
SthnAuras, or Vibhajjavadins, who claimed to represent orthodox 
tradition, tolerating no innovations. As the old Pali literature 
was produced under their auspices, we have some materials 
for studying their history, at least from their own point 
of Anew. They are the party who triumphed at the Council 
of Vesiili and also at Asoka’s Council, if that meeting bo 
historical. The Pali Abhidhamma is their work, including 
the Kathavatthu, Avhich refutes the views of which they dis- 
approved. The names which they gave themselves mean Elders 
and Particularizers. They claimed to preach the doctrine as 
remembered by the senior disciples of the Buddha and fixed at the 
fir.st Council.^ They respected the niinutiaj of tradition, and their 

^ It states that it belongs to the Lokattaravadin branch of the Aryamaha- 
sanghlka.?. 

I* Kathavat., xxi, 6. 

® It must bo remembered that even in the Pali Canon the Buddha is often 
represented as superhurean in our sense. For instance, in Sam. ISTik., i, ii, 1, 10 
{— vol. i, p. 50), the sun appeals to him and he prevents an eclipse. The really 
important change in doctrine comes when we detect a tendency to regard Buddhas 
as manifestations of the Universal Spirit. 

^ The word theravada actually oecuns in the Maj. Nik., xxvi, and means the 
accepted explanation of a teacher’s doctrine as given by his senior disciples and 
learnt by newcomers. It is used in speaking of the Buddha’s teacher, Alara. 
The title Vibhajjavadin apparently refers to sutra xeix of the Majihima Nikaya, 
where the Buddha, in reply to a question about the respective value of a house- 
holder’s life and a pilgrim’s, declines to generalize and says that all depends on the 
details of conduct. The AbhidharmakojSa explains the name with special reference 
to their views as to the existence of the past, present, and future. 

U BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cii. iii 

pliiiosopliy, wliiGli consisted in carefully cataloguing and analysing 
the moral and especially the psychological pronouncements found 
in the Nikayas, was certainly free from bold generalizations and 
heady speculation. Indeed, it is surprising that so arid and 
scholastic a system can ever have been a cultural force. 

The Theravada exists at the present day in Ceylon, Burma, 
Siam, and Cambodja practically unchanged. This extraordinary 
immutabihty and persistence are no doubt due to the fact that at an 
early date it became the State religion of Ceylon, where the inhabi- 
tants welcomed civilization, art, and seemly ecclesiastical institutions 
but had not got the Indian love of speculation and of new ideas. 
There is no country in the world where an interest in religion and 
philosophy is so general as in India, and for this very reason, although 
piety and reverence may preserve much that is ancient, Indian 
religions are constantly changing. Those who are really interested 
in a subject cannot help welcoming new ideas, and in India when 
one appeared, as for instance Bhakti or personal devotion to a 
particular deity in the centuries preceding the Christian era, or again 
the worship of goddesses several centuries later, we can trace its 
influence in the most divergent sects, both Brahmanic and Buddhist. 
But in Ceylon currents of popular religious sentiment are relatively 
inconspicuous. The monasteries had their disputes and to some 
extent felt the influence of Mahayanism,^ but the attitude of the laity 
was merely a fairly steady piety which supported Church and State, 
and since the monks were ultimately drawn from the laity their 
temperament was not fundamentally different. 

The Theravada, however, lasted some time in India. Doubtless 
its conservatism did not render it very popular in an age of religious 
ferment, but the Questions of Milinda, a Pali work apparently 
written about the time of the Christian era in northern India, ^ 
shows vitality and a certain amplification of doctrine in safe 
directions, such as discussions on space, time, nirvana, and the 
doctrine of anatta. Though little tendency towards Mahayanism 
is apparent, there is an interesting argument about the propriety 
of offering gifts or homage to the Buddha. Since he has attained 

^ The influence of the Mahay ana in Ceylon was doubtless stronger than is 
generally supposed (see the article by S. Paravitane in C&ylon Journal of Scic7ice, 
voL ii, part 1, Dec., 1928, pp. 3o-71), but I doubt if it bad ever any chance of 
becoming the dominant creed. 

“ Like many other works the Milinda panha has been added to and exists in a 
longer and shorter version. The Chinese translation (made under the Eastern 
Tsin dynasty in the fourth century a.b.) omits books iv-vii. 

,,,-1 BUDDHISM IN INDIA 76 

CH. IIIJ 

nirvana, sucli practices seem unavailing and. unmeaning. Never- 
theless they are defended on the ground tlxat “ acts done to the 
Tathagata, though he has passed away and does not accept them, 
are nevertheless of value and bear fruit If buildings are erected 
to contain relics, it cannot be said that th.e Buddha accepts the 
ffift but the builders obtain happiness in this or another life. 
The Blessed One blew over the world with tlie wind of his love and 
allayed the fever of human passion. The wind that has ceased to 
blow cannot be recalled, but just as fans and punkahs can produce 
wind so does reverence shown to the memory of the Buddha allay 
the fever and distemper of the soul. The Earth knows nothing of 
the seeds which are put into it, yet they grow into trees and bear 
fruit even so honour done to the Buddha bears fruit, though he has 
passk away and accepts it not. The Theravada evidently could 
Lt forbid an almost adoring veneration of the Buddha’s memory 
and the cult of his images. The ceremonies approved are merely 
commemorative and are efbcacious so far as they have a good effect 
on the mind of the performer. But for all that, this passage 
sanctions much of the ritual to be seen in modern Buddhist temples. 
Milinda is undoubtedly Menander, the potentate with a Greek name 
who reigned in Kabul about 150 b.g., and it is noticeable that 
tradition, which can hardly be wrong, represents liim as patronizing 

a distinctly Hinayanist type of Buddhism. 

In early Buddhism one of the most prominent Hinayana sects 
was that of the Sarvastivadins,i who were apparently a subdivision 
of 'the Theravada, differing slightly from the Vibhajjavadins. 
Their opinions are alluded to in the Katliavatthu but only three 
questions are directed against them, which probably means that 
they were considered almost entirely orthodox. Their importance 
lies in the fact that they systematized Hinayanist philosophy and 
that their system became the starting point for other sects. 
Mahayanists appear to have accepted it in so far as it did not 
conflict with their special doctrines. Even the followers of 
Nagariuna had no objection to it as an analysis of the world of 
phenomena, though, since they held that world to be an illusion, 
the analysis was for them only relatively true. The Vibhajjavadins, 
on the other hand, had the south for their sphere and had little 
direct influence on the growth of the Mahay^na in the north or on 
the sects which found their way to China and ultimately to Japan. 

1 This is the Sanskrit form : the Pali equivalent is Sabbatthivadin. 

76 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. iii 

Still, translations of tlie Questions of Milinda and of Buddlia- 
ghosha’s Commentary on the Vinaya are included in the Chinese 
Tripitaka. 

The account of the Council of Vesali in the Cullavagga ^ indicates 
that there was an early difference between the schools of the East 
and West, and the latter seems to have been the province of the 
Sarvastivadins. In 184 B.c. what remained of the Maurya Empire 
was seized by Pushyamitra of the Sunga dynasty, who is described ^ 
as a fierce enemy of Buddhism. The persecution was probably 
local and not of long duration, for Buddhist inscriptions are frequent 
until about A.n. 100, but perhaps it accelerated the movement to the 
west and north. Our information is very scanty, but the names of 
Kausambi, Ujjayina, and Mathura (Muttra) are mentioned. The 
last named was a seat of Sanskrit learning and situated on a great 
trade route. It is probable that the Sarvastivadins fl.ourished and 
developed there. At any rate they spread to the north and became 
established in Kashmir.^ Really satisfactory evidence as to their 
position is not to be had until rather later, but when it comes it is 
decisive and interesting. King Kanishka, presumably about the 
end of the first century a.d., built at Peshawar a celebrated stupa to 
contain the relics of the Buddha which he had collected from various 
parts of his dominions. The edifice is described by the Chinese 
pilgrims, and certain remains discovered in 1908 appear to be parts 
of the original structure. In them was found a metal casket 
containing the sacred bones and bearing an inscription which states 
that it was made “ for the acceptance of the teachers of the Sarvasti- 
vadin sect ” and also mentions Kanishka.^ Thus it appears that 
the Sarvastivadins were in charge of the principal religious edifice 
at the capital of Kanishka, who is usually associated with the 
beginnings of Mahayanism. 

But their doctrines show little inclination that way. The one 
from which they took their name (which is approximately equivalent 
to Realists) taught that all things exist, particularly in the sense 
that the past and future are real as well as the present. This sounds 

^ CuUavag., , xii, 2, 7.;, , 

® By Taranatlia (chap, xvi) and the Bivyavadana, 

® The Vinaya of the MulasarTastivadins and the AsokavadMa make the Buddha 
visit both Mathura and Kashmir, which probably means that they considered 
both places sacred and important centres for their own sects. 

^ It mentions “ Agisala, the overseer of works at Kanishka’s Vihara Agisala 
probably represents Agesilaus, so that the building was constructed under the 
supervision of a foreigner with a Greek name. 

77 

OH. Ill] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 

like a proposition more likely to divide professors of pliilosopliy than 
tlie leaders of religious organizations, but tbe account of its origin 
gives it a certain practical significance. Tbe Sarvastivadins traced 
it back to a passage in tbe Samyukta Agama ^ reporting a discussion 
between tbe Buddha and certain Ajivakas, heretics who denied the 
doctrines of Karma and moral responsibility on the ground that the 
past does not exist and that therefore past deeds cannot affect 
our destinies. The Buddha in reply maintained that “ everything 
exists ” (Sabbam atthi) and defined “ everything ” as the senses and 
their objects. Of more importance for the history of dogma was 
the classification of the elements of existence (dharmah), the 
Universe being regarded neither as an illusion nor as the manifesta- 
tion of some one principle (both common views in India), but as 
an assemblage of separate though interdependent fa.ctors of whose 
nature and origin no further explanation was attempted. The five 
Skandhas of the Pali Pitakas represent the beginning of such a 
classification, but the Sarvastivadins greatly elaborated it and made 
a catalogue of seventy-five elements, ^ of which nirvana was one, 
its reality being thus clearly laid down. Naturally this piece of 
complicated dogmatism did not escape criticism. The School of the 
Sautrantikas objected to many items in it and not unreasonably, 
for the list treats as ultimate entities various forces and faculties 
which might easily be further analysed.^ The School called 
Vijiianavadins, on the other hand, increased the hst of items to one 
hundred. Though the whole idea of separate ultimate elements 
seems unnecessary in the Mahayana, which was monistic in its funda- 
mental principles, yet it was not rejected, and even in Japan at 

^ It does not oceur in the Pali text of the coiresponding Nikaya. See the 
discussion in the AhhidharmakoSa, ■ v, 24-6, translated in Stcherbatsky’s Oentml 
Conception of Buddhism, 'p^. 76-91. 

~ See especially ^tcheihoAskj, The Oe^itral Conception of Buddhism, and Rosen- 
berg, Problamp. der Buddhistischen PMlosophie, especially chaps, vii-ix. No satis- 
factory translation of the difficult word dharmah is forthcoming, for the simple 
reason that the dharmah as enumerated do not according to European ideas form 
a natural class or category of any kind. Some are mental, some physical ; some 
are material, some are forces ; some are possibly simple, others are obviously 
compound. The Atomic Theory was accepted by some systems of Buddhist 
philosophy (see xYbhidharmako^a, x, 43, 44, commentary ; ii, 22 ; in, 8.'?-8), 
the unit of matter being the paramanu. But it is not clear when this view was 
first regarded as orthodox. 

3 Eor instance, the forces called prapti and aprapti which control or prevent 
the collection of elements in an individual stream of life. And xvhy should negative 
qualities like alobha and adveaa, the absence of love or of hatred, be treated as 
ultimate elements ? 

78 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ni 

tlie present day its mflnence may be clearly seen, not in popular 
religion, but m the manuals studied by the clergy. 

The Sarvastivadins had a canon of their own. Their Sutra 
Pitaka must have had some peculiarities since it contained passages 
which are not in the Pali version. Their Vinaya was considered 
very complete and is said to be that now used in Tibet. But they 
attached special importance to the Abhidharma Pitaka which, as 
accepted by them, was entirely ditferent from the Pali text but of 
considerable antiquity, going back to at least 100 b.c. It consisted 
of seven books,^ all ascribed to human authors, and still extant in 
Chinese translations. 

King Kanishka apparently was converted to Buddhism late in 
life, for comparatively few of his coins, of which many specimens 
have been preserved, bear Buddhist figures or emblems, whereas 
images not only of Brahmanic but of Greek and Persian deities are 
frequent. The Buddhist Council held under his auspices must 
therefore have taken place towards the end of his reign. Common 
opinion connects this meeting with both the Mahayanists and 
Sarvastivadins, but the accounts which have come down to us 
are far from consistent, though the following conclusions seem 
warranted^: — (1) The Council is known only to Mahayam'st 
writers. Tarandtha calls it the Third Council, thus seeming to give 
it a definite place in the development of what he regarded as the 
true doctrine. But at the present day in China and Japan only 
students have heard of it and it has not the same position as, for 
instance, the Council of Nicasa in the history of Christianity. 
(2) It was apparently a conference of peace and compromise. 
According to all accounts both parties were represented at it and 
Taranatha says that it recognized all the eighteen sects and put an 
end to the dissensions which, had distracted Buddhism for nearly 
a century. (3) But the literary result of the Council seems not 
to have been a compromise or a Mahayanist work, but the compo- 
sition of a huge encyclopsedic treatise which, to some extent, took 
the form of a commentary on the Pitakas and especially on the 

1 The principal is the Jhtoaprasth§.na of Eatyayaniputra, the others being 
called its six feet. It was perhaps originally composed in some kind of Prakrit, 
but Hsuan-Tsang’s translation was made from the Sanskrit. 

2 I have attempted to summarize the traditions about this Council in my 
Hinduism and Buddhism {yol, ii, pp. 77-81), published in 1921, since when no 
new information seems to have been obtained. The three chief sources are Hsiian- 
Tsang’s narrative, Paramartha’s Life of Vasubandhu (JSTanjio, No. 1463), and 
Taranatha’s history, chap. xii. 

79 

CH. iii] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 

Sarvi,stivadm AbMdhamia. It was called Vibiiasliai and hence 
the later Sarvastivadins are often called Vaibhashikas. Taranatha 
adds that all sorts of Mahayanist books appeared about this time 
and that the Hinayanists raised no objection, but he does not say 
that the Council was in any way responsible for them. Thus it 
remains extremely diflB.oult to define the relations of the Sainnisti- 
vadins and Mahayanists. They were evidently more friendly 
than we might expect. The Mahayana was not a sect, but 
apparently something larger — a mode in which the special teaching 
of any sect might be studied. This special teaching was chiefly 
concerned either with discipline or with problems of ontology and 
psychology, whereas Mahayanist theories had quite a different 
range and dealt with such matters as the nature of Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas. The Chinese pilgrim I-Ching ends his work by 
asserting that all his statements are in accordance with the 
Mulasarvastivfidin school, ^ but he was unquestionably a zealous 
Mahayanist. The explanation seems to be that such a one might 
without inconsistency accept the discipline of the Sarvastivadins, 
especially as set forth in literature, and also, to some extent at 
least, their Abhidharma, regarding it as an analysis of the 
phenomenal world to be supplemented by higher knowledge wfiiich 
sees ultimate reality in quite a different light. 

In connection with the rise of the Mahayana the Sautrantikas 
also play some part. Like the Sarvistiyadihs, they assumed 
special prominence bxit in some ways held exactly opposite views. 
Thus they recognized the sutras only and entirely rejected the 
Abhidharma, holding it to be rnerely modern exegesis. As literary 
criticism this was sound, provided that only the ancient sutras 
were accepted, but so many modern works assumed that title that 
the Sarvastivadins could justly claim a certain priority for their 
Abhidharma. The Sautrantikas also demurred to the assertion 
that the past and future can be said to exist in the same sense as the 

^ The full title is apparently Abhidliarma-malia'vibMshll-sastra, of which, there 
are two translations in Chinese (Nanjio, Nos. 1263-4), one by Hsiian-Tsatig in 
two hundred rolumes. 

2 The exact difference between the Sarvastivadins and the Mula (original) 
Sarvastivadins is not plain. A 

® They were apparently the same as the Sankrantikas, one of the Eighteen 
sects, and said to have separated from the Sarvastivadins. Harivarman, the 
author of the SatyasiddhiA&stra, is believed to have belonged to them. His name 
seems to be tmknowm in India, but his works are preserved in Chinese and Tibetan, 
See Yamakami Sogen, Systems of BuddMst Thought, pp- 172-186. 

80 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. hi 

present. They held that sensations and consciousness are merely 
momentary flashes, but they believed in the reality of the external 
world as inferred from our sensations. In more strictly religious 
questions, such as the nature of nirvana and the cosmical body of 
the Buddha, their views approximated to the Mahaydna. 

■' 4 ■ 

Two other philosophical schools must be mentioned, the 
Madhyamikas^ and the Vijn^navadins, sometimes known as the 
Yogacara. Both drew a distinction between relative and absolute 
truth and regarded the ordinary world of experience as illusory. 
Both were strictly Mahayanist ^ and, since their doctrines influenced 
religion as well as philosophy, both were of practical importance, 
especially the Madhyamikas, This school appears to have been 
the earlier of the two and claims Nagarjuna as its founder, though 
perhaps he only systematized speculations which were already 
prevalent, for Madhyamika ideas inspire the whole literature called 
Prajhaparamit^. These treatises of varying but often very 
considerable length are an important part of the Mahayanist 
Canon. The best known is the Diamond Cutter (Vajracchedika). 
The Prajhapfiramita in ten thousand verses is said to have been 
translated into Chinese about a.d. 180.® Nagarjuna probably 
lived in the second century a.d. and several works are attributed 
to him of which at least one, the Mulamadhyamaka Karikas,^ seems 
to be genuine. It consists of verses arranged in twenty-seven 
chapters which express with admirable terseness and lucidity — if 
that word can be used of such a subject — the doctrine that all things 

^ Both Madhyamaka and Madhyamika are in. use. 

2 The Chinese pilgrim I-Ching, who travelled in India betw-een a.d. 671 and 69.5, 
says that “ there are only two kinds of Mahayana, the Madhyainhia and the 
Yoga. Can one say which of the two is right ? Both equaUy conform to truth .and 
lead ns to nirvana ”. This is a remarkable statement from a religious man, who, 
though he was not much of a philosopher, hr some ways followed the vSarvasti- 
vadins.' ■ ■ ■ ■■ 

® Hackman, in his article on the Text of the Sutra in forty-two sections w'hich 
is said to have been translated in a.d. 67, show's that the text exists in at least 
three recensions, one of which (especially in §§ 18-20 and 42) indicates the influence 
of Madhyamika doctrines. But is it certain that this recension is really the 
earliest ? The Saundarananda of Asvaghosha also alludes to Madhyamika 
doctrines. 

* Edited by He la Valleo Poussin, Bibliotheca BuddMca, 1913. 

CH. in] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 81 

are sunya, void, unreal, and non-existent. None of these trans- 
lations of sunya is, however, quite satisfactory and there is much 
to be said for Stcherbatsky’s ^ rendering — relative or contingent. 
Phenomena are sunya or unreal because no phenomenon when taken 
by itself is thinlrable : they are all interdependent and have no 
separate existence of their own. And ideas such as rest and motion, 
cause and effect, continuance and extinction, when analysed prove 
to be unthinkable. The arguments of Nagarjuna have often been 
condeimied by both Indian and European critics as sophistry and 
quibbles, but it must be admitted that recent science is equally 
destructive of our commonest notions. Thus Russell in discussing 
“ the notion of a place ” says : Is London a place ? But the earth 
is rotating. Is the earth a place ? But it is going round the sun. 
Is the sun a place ? But it is moving relatively to the stars. x4t 
best you could talk of a place at a given time : but then it is 
ambiguous what is a given time, unless you confine yourself to 
one place. So the notion of place evaporates.” 

Nagarjuna applies his destructive arguments to the most sacind 
subjects, such as the Buddha and nirvana. If cither is treated as 
part of the world of phenomena, we are landed in difficulties, for 
if the Buddha is a real being, he must come to an end in nirvana. 
But if he is not a real being, neither can he have a real end. In the 
vision obtained by insight or intuition, it is seen that the Buddha, 
nirvana, and sarnsara (the world of transmigration) are not three 
different entities but all the same and all different aspects (if indeed 
that word can be used without error) of the Dharniakaya or cosmical 
body of the Buddha, a conception akin to pantheism. When we 
jnove among such ideas we are not breathing the atmosphere of the 
Pali Canon, yet many passages can be quoted from it which support 
them. The word sunha occurs not infrequently and the Majjhima 
Nikaya describes with approval how there arises in tlie mind “ an 
unchanging, pure and perfect conception of emptiness It is 
stated, too, that even in this world the nature of the Buddha is 
incomprehensible and that it is m-ong to say either that things 

^ The Conception of Nirvana, 1927. He CYcn says of the author of Appearance 
and Reality : “ Bradley can be characterized as a genuine Madhyamilja.” 

® B. Russell, Outlines of Philosophy, 1927, p. 114, 

® Maj. Nik., exsi ad fin. Bee, too, Maj. Nik., cxxii, xliii near end. The 
Sangiti Suttanta of the Dig. Nik, recognizes concentration -which interprets things 
as sumia. 

* Yamaka But. Sarp.. Nik., xxii, 85, 34. 

G 

82 BVBDHISM IN INDIA AND JAPAN [gh. in 

exist or tliat they do iiotd And the refusal of Gotama to reply 
to certain questions — is the world limited in time and space or not, 
does the Buddha exist after death or not, is the soul the same as the 
body or not — can be reasonably explained in the terms of this 
pliilosophy. The questions are unanswerable because they are 
wrongly framed : they assume the real existence of beings and 
things which are merely ranya. 

Both Indian and European critics have observed that, whereas 
the earlier Buddhists concentrated their attention on psychological 
questions and denied the existence of the atta, or self, the Madhya- 
rnilvas applied the same destructive logic to the external world. 
But in the early analysis of human nature into five skandJias, matter 
(nipa) is not distinguished from mind. No contrast is drawn 
between the material and the immaterial ; but matter is one of five 
groups. Kence though the Pitakas do not use idealistic language 
or discuss the problem of reality, they do expressly place matter 
and sensation on the same footing. Rupa is expressly stated to be 
anattii and it is asserted ® that all phenomena are void of anything 
that can be called atta, or self. 

The Madhyamika system continued to be popular for some time 
in India, especially in the south. Aryadeva, the immediate successor 
of Nagarjuna, seems to have been a native of the Dravidian countries, 
as was also the mysterious Bodhidharma, the reputed founder of 
Zen in the Ear East. The two great doctors Buddhapfilita and 
Bhavaviveka both fioiirished in the same region, apparently during 
the sixth century a.d., and represented two important divisions 
of the school. The former favoured purely negative dialectic and 
the method of reductio ad ahsurdmn, which not only argues that 
the visible world has no existence but leads to the almost unthinkable 
conclusion that it is not even phenomenally existent, that is that 
our ideas have no existence. Against this Bhavaviveka held the 
more reasonable view that the world of phenomena was valid 
phenomenally, though not real from the point of view of absolute 
truth. Nevertheless the views of Buddhapalita by no means 

^ Kaccayana Siitra, Sani. Nik., xii, § 16. Sabbam attliiti aj’^am eko anto : 
Sabbam natthiti ayam dutiyo anto. In Sam. Nik., xii, § 67, it is stated that the 
chain of cansation confutes the doctrines that dnkkha, or suflering, is caused by 
self, by another, by both, or by neither. This is precisely the line of argument 
by which the Madhyamikas show that all our ordinary ideas, such as rest and 
motion, production and cessation, are untenable, 

2 Ang. Nik., 3, 134, § 3. Maj. Nik., xxxv, and especially Maj. Nik., xliii. 
Sunham idam attena va attaniyena vati. 

83 

CH. Ill] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 

disappeared, for Candrakirti, the author of a celebrated commentary 
on Mgarjuna ^ who is variously assigned to the sixth or seventh 
century, established the system in its extreme negative form, and 
this doctrine is also accepted by Santideva, the author of the 
Bodhicaryavatara, one of the most beautiful books of devotion 
in the world. Even at the present day the Diamond Gutter^ 
is read in Japan (and I believe also in Tibet) not merely by students 
but by ordinary religious people. It is full of paradoxes : merit is 
no merit and though the Buddha has delivered beings without 
number, yet not one has been delivered. Many members of the Zen 
sect, even laymen, recite every day the short sutra called the Heart 
or Essence of the Prajnaparaniita ^ which deals chiefly with the 
doctrine of Emptiness, and pilgrims may often be seen wearing 
large hats on which are written some such lines as these : “ Through 
ignorance the triple world seems like a castle (i.e. sohd and real) : 
through enlightenment the ten regions become empty. From the 
beginning there is neither Bast nor West. Where can be the 
North or South ? ” ^ 

In fact the objections to these doctrines of non-existence and 
emptiness seem to have come from philosophers rather than from 
popular thought. Many metaphysicians did not deny that the 
external world is an illusion, but they felt that illusion cannot exist 
by itself and that it can be explained only by admitting the existence 
of a mind which suffers from illusion. This School of idealism 
is commonly known as the Yogacara or VijnanavMa. Its history 
is complicated by a difficult question, namely, is the celebrated 
work called the Awakening of Faith ® really the composition of the 
Asvaghosha who flourished at the Court of Eanishlm ? If so, the 
principles of the yijnanavada must have been fully developed at 
least as early as his lifetime, for they are expounded in detail in 
this treatise. Tradition, however, ascribes the foundation of the 

^ It is a work of great ability but it has been plausibly suggested that in giving 
it the title of ■ Clear-worded ”, Prasanuapada, the talented author, was gently 
ironical. See the portions translated in Steherbatsky’s Nirvana, pp. 81-212. 

® Called in Japanese Kongokyo, and translated in S.B.E., vol. xlix. 

® Called in Japanese Hannya Shin-kyo, and also translated in S.B.E., vol. xlix. 

" P! t# Ai 
M ^ M 

7 ^ 4jl£ -f- H 

m M ^ 

db ® ^ M 

‘ Mahayana&addhotpada Ac ^ N. 1249-50. 

84 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. ni 

Vijnanavada to Asaiiga at the earliest, lived from about 
A.D. 280 to 360 and perhaps a century later. It seems reasonable 
to regard the Vijhanavada as originally a protest against the 
supposed extravagance of the MMhyamika teaching, but it would 
certainly be very rash to fix the date of a book by our theories as to 
the chronological development of ideas. Still several circumstances 
make the authorship of the Awakening of Faith doubtful, and I 
think that the evidence indicates that the writer probably lived 
long after Kanishka,^ 

The characteristic phrase of this school is the difficult term 
Alaya-vijnana or receptacle-intelligence.^ I confess that I find it 
hard to explain this idea, because the Alaya-^djnana seems to be 
regarded as both cosmic and individual. India was accustomed 
from the time of the older Upanishads to the conception of an 
Absolute which can only be described by negatives (neti neti). 
To this Absolute Buddhist doctors often give the name of Tathata 
or suohness, a word which does not commit us to any attempt 
at definition. Tathata manifests itself to itself as the cosmic 
l.laya“vi 3 n§,na,® the receptacle of all possible ideas and sensations 
which contains all the dharmas or elements (for the Yijnanavada 
adopted but . modified the Sarvfistividin catalogue of dharmas) 
and among them the important evil element of ignorance (moha or 

^ The chief points are : (d) The admitted works of Asvaghoaha, such as the 
Buddhacarita, show hardly any trace of Mahayanist doctrine, {b) The Buddha- 
earita was rendered into Chinese about A.n. 400, but the Awakening of Faith not 
till 550. But it is a most important and popular treatise and it is hard to say 
why its translation was postponed, since it is shorter than the Buddhacarita and 
not more diffieult. (c); An old Chinese Catalogue does not give the name of the 
author. See Winternitz, (?ea. ih p- 211. (d) The Awakening of Faith: 

appears to quote the Lankavatara-sutra, which is probably not an early work, 
(e) If Asvaghosha really expounded the Yogac&a doctrine some two hundred 
years before Asanga, why does tradition ascribe it to the latter ? It is the habit 
of Indian schools to claim ancient celebrities as their founders and not to ignore 
any plausible connection. It is also noticeable that I-Ching, who mentions 
some of Aivaghosha’s works, does not mention the Awakening of Faith. 
V. P. Demieville, “ Sur Tauthenticite du Ta Tch’eng K’i Sin Louen,” Bulletin 
de Za JfoiiTOJi Fmjico-J'apoaaise, ii, Ho. 2, Tokyo, 1929. 

2^ S. Levi translates “ la sensation du trefonds ”. 

® No explanation of this process is forthcoming, just as in the Vedanta there, 
is no explanation of the association of Brahman with Maya, or illusion. Since 
Indian I’eligion and philosophy have a pas.sion for ultimate problems, this in- 
explicability is made to appear more striking and xmsatisfactory than in most 
European systems. But the same difficulty exists in the West. Bradley says 
in Apfeamnee and Jimlity, “ How there can be .such a thing as appearance we do 
not understand and the familiar language of theology, God created the World, 
really defies further explanation or analysis. 

85 

CH. Ill] BVBBEmM IN mBM 

avidyd). Ignorance affects Sncliness, mncli as in the VeclSnta 
philosophy Maya affects Brahman, the relation being described by 
the technical expression vasana, perfuming or impression. Thus 
arises the whole external world of restless action or duUdia. But the 
impression or vasana is mutual, and the impression of Suchness 
on Ignorance produces the desire for release and, if it is successful, 
the attempt to lead a holy life. 

This is the cosmic aspect of the Alaya-vijnana, but this cosmic 
receptacle-consciousness gives rise to an individual receptacle- 
consciousness in every personality. The Yogacara recognized 
eight vijnanas. The first six of these (recognized also in the 
Sarvastivadin classification) are the five senses and manas, that is 
mind, meaning an independent perceptive faculty which cognizes 
abstract objects. The seventh is the mano-vijnanad which is pure 
consciousness regarded not as isolated but as associated with a 
prcmous moment of consciousness and as acting sub-oonsciously 
and continuously. The eighth is the Alaya-vijnana, which is the 
sum total of consciousness and sub-consciousness, only a small 
portion of which can be present as personal consciousness at a 
particular moment, It is in a way the same as Karma, for it is not 
merely a receptacle in which the seeds of good and evil, eiilighten- 
numt and ignorance, are stored but an ever-running stream which 
carries them on and recreates for each individual in successive lives 
the external world or saipsara. 

The Yogacara School was continued by the great logician 
Dignaga of Orissa. He abandoned the old Abhidharma completely 
and based his idealistic system entirely on logic. A somewhat later 
logician, Dharmakirti of the seventh century, also apparently 
belonged to the same school. He is interesting, as having clearly 
stated and defined the position of insight or intuition in these 
half-religious, half-metaphysical matters which fill so much space 
in Buddhism. Intuition is frequently mentioned from the Pali 
Canon onwards as the source of truth, but without any clear 
definition of its nature. Dharmakirti, however, itates that it is 
one of the four forms of perception ; it is without im.agination and 

^ The difficulty of this exceedingly perplexing and abstruse subject is increased 
by the fact that the sixth and seventh vijnanas are known by the almost identical 
names of mano and mano-vijnana. See for discussions of the whole matter 
Yamakami Sogen, Systems of Buddhist Thought, chap, vi, and Rosenberg, Die 
Probleme der Buddhistischm FMIosopM-e, chap. xiii. 

86 BVDBEim IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iii 

consists of clear insight, produced by intense mental concentration, 
wliicli sees the truth directly or immediately. 

Though the Vijnanavadms are not so open to the charge of parado\ 
and extravagance as the Madhyamikas, yet their doctrine is exceed- 
ingly difficult and it is not surprising if it did not become popular. 
But it inspired the Lankavat4ra ^ and Avatarnsaka ^ sutras, both of 
which are well known in Japan (though to the learned rather than 
to the devout), and also the very important treatise called Yuishiki, 
which is studied by all candidates for the priesthood. These 
philosophical systems lead up to and countenance the ideas of the 
cosmic body of the Buddha and the identity of the Buddha with the 
absolute, but they say little about the more popular beliefs which 
grew up together with these abstruse speculations. 

5 

One obvious difference between the old Buddhism and the 
Mahayana is the multipHcation of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 
The new figures are not mere predecessors or attendants of 
^^kyamuni, Lilre him they are saviours and helpers of manldnd. 
They share his honours and sometimes (as Amitabha) they supersede 
him. Yet it is extremely difficult to trace their antecedents or to 
date their first appearance. Neither the Edicts of Asoka, nor the 
sculptures and inscriptions of Bharhut and Sanchi, nor even 
Gandharan art, which is presumably coeval with Kanishka, nor the 
undoubted works of Asvaghosha, who flourished about the same 
time, indicate a belief in definitely Mahayanist ideas. They depict 
or recount scenes taken from Gotama’s life or from the Jatakas, and 
the story, though embellished, is substantially the same as that in 
the Pitakas. The inference is that at any rate the form of Buddhism 
which received royal patronage had not departed very far from the 
ancient lines, and this accords with the facts that the Sarvastivadin 
sect were apparently the guardians of Eanishka’s stupa and that 
the Gouncil which he summoned gave its authority to a Sarvastivadin 

^ ^ Ryonga. There are three Chinese translations (Nanjio, 173-7), of 
which the earliest, made in a.d. 443, is shorter than the others. 

2 In the Chinese Tripitaka this is reckoned as a separate class of Sutra ^ 

^ Kegon-bn, containing no less than twenty-five items (ISTanfio, 87-112). Three 
of these are relatively late complete translations in 40, 60, and 80 volumes 
respectively. Some of the translations of extracts arc ascribed to the third and 
even second century. 

87 

CH. in] BUDBEmm IN INDIA 

treatise. But we liave seen how this school, though not Mahayaaist 
in its teaching, was compatible with Mahayanism, and there is 
nothing improbable in the statement of Tdranatha (though we do not 
know on what it is based) that Mahayanist books began to appear 
at this period and that the other party raised no objections. The 
doctrines which these books contained were probably not noveltie.s 
but had for some time been slowly growing, especially in the sect 
called Mahasanghika. The belief in celestial Buddhas and merciful, 
helpful Bodhisattvas is doubtless connected with the development 
in Hinduism of the doctrine of Bhakti or faith in a special deity 
and personal devotion to him, and with the rise of sects worshipping 
Krislma or ^iva instead of the old Vedic gods. The new Buddhist 
ideas were probably not actually borrowed. A wdnd of foeliT)" 
stirred the atmosphere and in every denomination religious minds 
vibrated to its influence. The resemblance between the Lotus and 
the Bliagavad Gita is undeniable, and I thinli: that the latter is the 
older There is no direct imitation, but both offer to the believer 
a new revelation and an apocalypse. In both a superhuman 
personage not only instructs the mind but amazes the eye with the 
blaze of his glory. In both this personage is a well-known character 
wbo in earlier documents often appears as little more than a great 
man, and in both (though there may be differences in the 
niceties of doctrine) he proclaims himself as the world spirit. 
Literature and epigraphy !^ indicate that the worship of Krishna 
and the sect called Bhcigavatas were well-knowm in the second 
century b.c., and at the same period the new phase of Buddliism 
was probably in the bud. It is therefore possible that by Kanishlm’s 
time Mahayanist sutras were current and that the world was prepared 
to give them a good reception. The dates of the Chinese trans- 
lations are not inconsistent with this. Accepting those given in 
Nanjio's catalogue,® we find that portions of the PrajnSparamita, 

^ The latest editor and translator of the G!tl. (D. P. Hill, 1918, p. 18) thinks 
that it appeared in its present forni in the second century b.o. 

2 e.g. the inscriptions of Besnagar and Ghasundi. 

® Jilr, Conrad Ostrom of Kobe has devoted special study to the catalogues of 
the Chinese Tripitaka and has read valuable papers on the subject to the Asiatic 
Society at Tokyo, though to the best of my belief he has not yet published anything. 
He informs me that he thinks that the translations of the SukheLvati-vyuha 
ascribed to An-Shih-Kao (see Nanjio, p. 10) and to Bokaraksha (Nanjio, No. 25) 
are both mjdhs, and that the first real translation isNanjio, No. 26, made by Chih- 
Ch'ien a.d. 223-253. Even so, the Sanskrit original must go back at least to the 
second century. Stael Holstein in his edition of the Kasyapaparivarfca seems to 
accept Nanjio’s date for the translation ascribed to Bokaraksha. 

88 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. hi 

the Butras about Amitabha, and a few other works were translated 
in the second century a.d., the Lotus in the third, the Avatamsaka, 
Suvarijaprabha, and Lankavatara in the fourth. But these dates 
merely prove that the works were then known in China and do not 
show how long they had been in existence. We may argue with 
equal plausibility that zealous missionaries were likcl}?- to lose no 
time in importing literary novelties from India and Central Asia 
to China or that only standard works of a respectable age would 
be considered worthy of what was then the great labour of trans- 
lation. Perhaps this second line of thought is more correct, and 
it is also clear that the older translators, who were nearly all natives 
of India or Central Asia with, an imperfect knowledge of Chinese, 
hesitated to tackle lengthy and difficult masterpieces. The Lotus 
may long have been known in Sanskrit before anyone ventured 
to turn it into Chinese. 

Asvaghosha ^ is one of the great landmarks in the history of 
Indian Buddhism and it seems safe to regard him as a contemporary 
of Kanishlia. But it is most unfortunate that there should be 
doubt as to his authorship of the Awakening of Faith. As already 
indicated, I thinlc that on the whole the evidence is against his 
having written this work, and it is noticeable that according to a 
Chinese tradition there were no less than six Asvaghoshas, but, so 
long as any doubt remains, it is hard to feel any certainty as to the 
chronology of Buddhist doctrine. It must be confessed that the 
Awakening of Faith, though knowm only in a Chinese translation, 
is a masterpiece of composition, and the author of the Sanslrrit 
original must have been one of the literary geniuses of India. 
But there was certainly a tendency to ascribe well-known works 
to Asvaghosha. Thus he was identified ^ with Mfftriceta, who 
composed hymns which are highly praised by I-Ching, and with 
Aryasura, the author of the J^takamala, but there is no adequate 
reason for either identification. He seems to have been the most 
distinguished representative of a school to which these two writers 
also belonged and which endeavoured to give expression to Buddhist 
teaching in correct Sanskrit and classical literary form, epic, 
dramatic, and lyric. In tlieh: veneration for the person of the 
Buddha and the emphasis which they lay on the career and growth 
of the Bodhisattva through his long series of previous births, these 
works show the same emotional feeling which inspires the Mahayana, 

^ Ma-ming, iii Japanese Me-myo. 

2 By Taranatha. 

OH. Ill] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 89 

but still they cannot be said to inculcate definitely Mabayanist 
doctrines. Much the same is true of the compositions known as 
Avadanas.i 

Asvaghosha is also recognized as the Eleventh Patriarch, and 
it may be well to say a few words about this term which is frequently 
used in European books. It represents the Chinese Tsu-shih ^ 
rather than any Indian title and, though it is not a very satisfactory 
translation, none better is forthcoming. The Hindus have always 
attached great importance to spiritual lineage, and even in the Upani- 
shads we find lists of the teachers who transmitted some special 
doctrine. Similar lists are given in the Sinhalese Chronicles,® 
but the persons named do not seem to have been heads of a hierarchy 
or to have enjoyed any ecclesiastical authority such as the word 
Patriarch generally implies. According to some Chinese accounts,'^ 
which, though they probably represent the tradition of an Indian 
school, are not confirmed by any known Sanskrit text, there 
were twenty-three or four Patriarchs, the last of whom, Simha 
Bhikshu, was killed by Mihirakula, the King of the Huns. 
But the Zen School continue the list and say that the twenty-eighth 
Patriarch was Bodhidharma, who arrived in China about a.d. 520. 
He there became the first Chinese Patriarch but only in the sense 
of being head of his special sect. Other sects had lists of their own, 
and Shinran’s poem, the Shoshinge, which is daily recited by the 
faithful of the Shin sect in Japan, enumerates at length the doctors, 
beginning with ISTagarjuna, who handed down the true teaching. 
This shows how ingrained was the feeling that correct succession 
and transmission are of the utmost importance, for the Shin sect 
was popular and almost revolutionary in its ideas and by no means 
disposed to follow tradition. 

^ Przyluski thinks that the Asokavadana was vfritten as early as about a century 
before Kanishka by a Sarvasti\’fl(lin of Mathura. The Avadana^ataka was trans- 
lated into Chinese between a.d. 223 and 2.53. The Divyavadana is apparently 
later in its present form, but contaiixs material of very different ages. It opens 
with an invocation to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 

® jffl This title is to be distinguished from ^ $|[j Kiio-shih, Instructor 
of the Nation, a purely official designation conferred from time to time by Emperors 
of China on eminent Buddhists. 

® Mahavamsa, v, 9.5 ff. ; Dipavarpsa, iv, 27 ff., and v, 69. 

* The most important is Nanjio, 1340, called Fu-fa-tsang-yin-yuan Ching, which 
professes to be a translation from an Indian work. The Zen views as to the 
succession are set forth in Tao-yiian’s work, The Transmission of the Lamp (Nanjio, 
1524), but they offer great chronological difficulties. For more on this subject 
see Chapter V. 

90 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. hi 

After Asvaglioslia, the next great name in the history of the 
MahayS.na is Nagarjnna/ who in the lists of Patriarchs is generally 
reckoned as the second in succession from him and probably lived 
in the second centmy of our era. Though biographies of Nagarjuna 
are extant, they are almost entirely fabulous and represent him as 
not only a theologian and philosopher but as a great magician and 
even as living for several centuries. Nevertheless he seems to have 
been an historical person, ^ and we have perhaps a fragment of truth 
in the tradition which says that he was a Brahman of Berar but 
had as teacher a sudra called Saraha (which sounds like a foreign 
name) or Eahulabhadra. The aphorisms of the Madhyamika 
philosophy already mentioned are unanimously ascribed to him and 
also the commentary on the Prajnap^ramita, an abstract of which 
was translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva as early as a.d. 402-6, 
It quotes the Lotus and many other sutras, so that the autlior must 
have had a considerable tradition behind him and, however 
prominent he may be in the history of the Mahayana, he cannot 
be regarded as its founder or even as a very early exponent. To 
Nlg^rjuna is also ascribed an interesting work called the Suhrillekha 
or friendly epistle,® a short homily addressed to a king whose name 
is uncertain but who probably belonged to the Andhra dynasty. 
It was translated into Chinese in a.d. 434 and I-Ohing devotes to 
it a long eulogy. It may well 3‘epresent a type of Buddhism 
considered suitable for the laity in India in the second century. 
It says nothing about the Madhyamika philosophy but speaks of 
the four truths, the eightfold path, and the chain of causation almost 
in the language of the Pitakas. On the other hand, it mentions 
Amitabha and Avalokitesvara and commends the use of incense 
and images in worship. 

^ I®! Xiung-Shu ; Byu“ju- See WallesePs " Life of NagS-rjiana from Tibetan 

and Gbinese Sources ” in th.Q Hirth Anniversary Volume, 192S, wliere it is admitted 
that we know hardly any historical facts about his life. The Sarvastivadins, who 
were strongly opposed to his doctrines, did not count him 

® Possibly the site of NagarjunUronda on the lower Kistna, where there are 
inscriptions of the second and third centuries, has a real conneotion with Nagarjuna. 
The Animal Bibliography of the Kern Institute for 1 929 says : “ Another point of 
interest is the mention of Siripavvata corresponding to the Sanskrit Sriparvata. 
There is a tradition in Tibet that Naghrjuna speiit the end of his life in a monastery 
of that name in Southern India. If this convent is the same as the ‘ Viliara on 
the Siripavata to the Bast of Vijayapuri ■ of our insbription, it follows that his 
association with this locality has been preserved up to the present day in the 
name hrdgfi,r|unikonda ” (p, 1.3). 

® Nanjio, 1440. See, too. Jour, of Pali Text Soc,, 1886, and Takakusu’s transla- 
tion of I-Ohing, p. 158 fF, 

ciL in] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 91 

Most lists make Axyadeva ^ succeed' Nlgarjtma as Patriarcli, and 
lie may reasonably be supposed to liave flourisbed about a.d. 200. 
The accounts of Iiis life are fragmentary. We know that he lived 
in South India and that he had some knowledge of Greek astronomy, 
which was not impossible at the date mentioned. 

His works ^ indicate a tendency towards the Vijhanavada teaching 
and he also wrote refutations both of the Hinayana and of various 
Brahmanic schools. The titles of these polemics in the Chinese 
translations seem to connect him with the Lankavatara-sutra, for 
they say that he condemns the same heresies. 

The next, and indeed the last, great names in the history of Indian 
Mahayanism are the brothers Asanga and Vasubandhu,^ who arc 
known in Japan by statues ^ as well as by their literary works. 
The life of Vasiibandhu was written by Paramartha,“ and we learn 
from it that they were natives of Peshawar but also lived at Ayodhya 
at the Court of Vderamaditya. This title may have been borne 
by any king of the Gupta dynasty and it is most unfortunate that 
it should not be sufficiently precise to put the date of those important 
writers beyond doubt. Peri,® after an elaborate discussion of the 
question, suggested a.d. 280-360 as probable limits for tlie life of 
Vasubandliu and his conclusion has been very generally accepted, 
but Stoherbafsky, Takakiisii, and other Japanese authorities favour 
a later date and assign him and his brother to the fifth century. 
Fa-Hsien, writing early in that century^ does not mention him, but 
since he also fails to mention Asvaghosha, N§,gS,rjuna, and ilryadeva, 
his silence is not conclusive. I-Ching, writing about a.d. 700, 
divides the Buddhist doctors of India into throe classes; early, 
Asvaghosha, hTagarjuna, and Deva ; middle, Vasubandliu, Asanga, 
Sanghabhadra, and Bha.vaviveka ; late, Dharmapala, Dharmakirti, 
and Sthiramati. This is valuable as showing the accepted order 

1 H ^ TI-P'o : Daiba or H SKeng-T'ien; 

® The best known is the Catuhsataka. For the controversial works see aSTanjio, 
Nos. 1250 and 1260. 

® Asanga ^ Wu-Chao or Mujakn. Vasubandhu ^ ^ T'ien-Hsin, 
Tenjin or 'jfi: ^ Shi-Hsin, Seshin. There was also a third brother called Virinci- 
vatsa who never became a Mahayanist. 

4 Two remarkable wooden statues of them belong to the Kofukuji of Nara. 
See the excellent reproductions in ThJima’s 5eleri\iKei!ica, 11, x. 

^ Nanjio, No. 1463. Translated by TakakuSu in jPoo, 1904. Paramartha 

is said to have made translations in China from 557 to 569. 

® See Pori, “ A Propos do la date de Vasubandhu,” in B.E.F.E^O., 1911. 

92 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. ni 

of sequence but it is not decisive as to date. The question is too 
intricate for full discussion here.^ 

The best known works of Asanga are the Mah§,yanasutralankara 
and the Bodhisattvabhumi, both extant in Sanskrit and l^oth 
describing the career of a Bodhisattva, that is to say, of a pious 
person who deliberately sets before himself the ideal of winning this 
high position by efforts maintained through a series of existences. 
His progress is traced through ten stages, in each of winch lie acquires 
new virtue and knowledge. The idea is not new : the stages are 
described in the Mahavastu, though this proves little since, as already 
pointed out, that work contains both old and late material, and the 
Avatamsaka-sutra contains a similar account. The detail and 
dogmatic precision of the programme as defined by Asanga suggest 
mature development and perhaps a late rather than an early date. 
Asanga is also very definite in insisting on the excellence of the 
Mahayina and enumerates seven respects in which it is superior- 
to the Hinayana — its comprehensiveness, its universal charity, 
its intellectual thoroughness, its spiritual energy, its adaptability, 
its higher ideals, and its greater activity as manifested in Bodlii- 
sattvas. Tradition states that many of the works ascribed to him 
were really revelations made by Maitreya, the future Buddha, and 
some Oriental scholars ® think that this story conceals the historical 
fact that a teacher called Maitreyanttha was his predecessor and the 
founder of the Yogacfira. 

Though there are many translations from Asanga in the Chinese 
Tripitaka, he is not a great figure in Bar Eastern Buddhism and his 
younger brother Vasuhandhu is a much more famous name. It is 
agreed that he followed the Saryastivadin school during the greater 
part of his life but in a li|)eral spirit and not without criticism. 
It was only in old age that his brother succeeded in converting him 

^ Attentioa may be called to the following points : P^ri holds that Kumarajiva, 
whose literary activity extended from aboixt402 to 412, wrote a life of Vasnbandhu 
and that tho Sata adstra of Vasu which he translated was a work of Vasubandhu. 
Tf this can be proved, Vasubandhu was certainly anterior to the fifth century. 
Nanjio, 1188, ascribes this work to Deva and yasubandhn, the latter having com- 
mented on the former, but it appears that the name of the author is given as 
simply Vasu K'ai-Bhih, the last two characters being a title. There W'as an earlier 
Vasubandhu. See Abhidharmakofe, i, 13, and Poussin’s note. On the other 
hand, one of the senior opponents of Vasubandhu was Sanghavarman, and if it 
can be proved that he was identical with the Sanghavarman who translated the 
Samanta-Pasidika and was at Canton in 489, Vasnbandhu, who lived to be an 
old man, must have been alive at that time. 

2 H. P, Sastri and in Japan, Kimura and Ui. 

93 

CH. ni] BUDDHISM IN INDIA 

to Mahayanism,. In his earlier phase he wrote the Abhidharma- 
kosa, consisting of 600 verses with a commentary of his own. 
It is a most important encyclopsedic treatise which is still studied 
by most, if not all, sects in Japan. He was favourably disposed 
towards the views of the Sautrantikas, but his many-sided intellectual 
sympathies enabled him to vTite an impartial summary of doctrine 
which is still generally acceptable. It is not concerned with the 
questions which divide existing sects such as the Shinshu, Zen, and 
Nichiren, but wdth the ultimate problems of ontology, mind and 
matter, and the nature of the wmrld process. Thus it deals wdth the 
theory of dharmas and dhatus, the nature of the senses and of 
atoms : it describes the constitution of the Universe according to 
the ideas of the author’s time, including heavens and bells and 
immaterial spheres : it explains the mysteries of Karma and 
the anusayas : it treats of the Path and the saints who walk in it : 
it discusses the nature of knowledge, meditation, and rapture. 
A supplementary chapter refutes the doctrine of the existence of the 
pudgala, the Self or Soul, as affirmed by some schools. Late in life 
Vasubandhu is said to have written many Mahayanist works and 
especially a short treatise on the Sukhavati-vyhha, knowm in 
Japanese as the Ojoron,^ in virtue of which he is considered as the 
second Patriarch of the Amidist sects, Nagarjuna being the first. 
If he was really the author of this little book, his religious horizon 
must have been very similar to that of Japanese priests of the Jodo 
sect who study the Abhidharmakofe and worship Amida, After 
accepting the idealist philosophy known as Vijnanavada, he composed 
two compcndiums of it in twenty and thirty verses respectively 
called Vimhatika and Trimsika.^ The latter is the basis of the 
Joyuishikiron or Ymshiki,^ which is still one of the principal text- 
books studied by the clergy in Japan. It is a collection of extracts 
from Dharmapala and nine other eonmientaries on the Trunsika, 
together with numerous quotations from other works, arranged by 
the celebrated Chinese pilgrim Hslian-Tsang and furnished with 
a commentary by his disciple, Kbei-Ki. 

From the first century of bur era until the eleventh and even 
later, many foreigners went to China as teachers and translators. 

^ Nanjio, 1204, rendered as Amitayus-sutropade^a or Apariiaitayns-sutra- 
i^astra. Only nine leaves. Translated by Bodluruchi A.n. 529. 

^ Both edited in Sanskrit by S. Lovi in. 1925. 

* ^ Pi ^ Ht. See Vijnaptimatratasiddhi, La Siddhi de Hsiian-Tsatig. 
Traduite et airnotee par L. de La Vallee Poussin. In the series Buddhica — 1928. 

94 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND OHINA [ch. m 

Of several, even in the earliest times, it is distinctly stated that they 
were natives of Central India, but many came from Afghanistan 
and Central Asia and, though they had studied Sanskrit, it is 
hard to say what their race may have been. Still, it is correct to 
describe the whole process as the conversion of Central Asia and 
China to Buddhism effected by Indian propaganda. Later there 
was also intercourse by sea with Southern India and Ceylon. 
Tradition says that the first Indian missionaries were invited by the 
Chinese, and though the desire to proselytize was not wanting, 
it is clear that Chinese eagerness to learn had as much to do with the 
spread of Buddhism in the Far Bast as missionary zeal. 

Early in the fifth century Chinese pilgrims began to visit India 
and several of them have left interesting narratives of what they 
saw. Fa-Hsien resided in India from 405 to 411, his chief object 
being to collect manuscripts of the Vinaya. He speaks of the 
Hinayana as prevalent in some localities, the Mahayana in others, 
but does not indicate that there was any acute rivahy between them. 
He mentions Maitreya but not Amitabha, and says that offerings 
were made to the book Prajnaparamita, to Manjusri, and to 
A.valokiteBvara, 

The two pilgrims, Sung-Yiin and Hui-Sheng, visited Gandhara 
and Udyana in a.d. 518-521, that is during the domination of the 
Huns. Their evidence is important, for it shows that, whatever 
the barbarities of the Huns may have been, they had not destroyed 
Buddhism in North-Western India. The pilgrims found the local 
potentates devout and pious and they collected 170 volumes, all 
Mahayanist works. 

The greatest of the Chinese pilgrims, Hsiian-Tsang,! spent 
sixteen years in India 629-646) and left a copious narrative 
which has fortunately come down to Us. He witnessed the religious 
festivities which the Emperor Harsha celebrated at Kanauj. 
The Buddha, &va, and the Sun were honoured on successive days, 
and though the image of the Buddha was treated with more respect 
than the others, the worship was evidently mixed. This was the 
part of India where Buddhism was most flourishing, but the pilgrim 
does not hide the fact that bn the whole it was decaying, especially 
in the north-west where there were more than a thousand deserted 
monasteries, and in the south where Jainism was advancing at its 
expense. He speaks of the hostility of the Brahmans, but he does 

not indicate tliat there was any serious animosity between the 
Maha- and Hinayana, and it is remarkable that according to his 
statistics many more monies belonged to the latterd Perhaps the 
strength of the Mahayana lay rather in its hold on the laity. 
He mentions statues of Tara and AvaJokitesvara. 

I-Ching,^ who travelled in India and the Malay Arcliipelago from 
A.D. 671 to 696, gives a very .similar account. He deplores the decay 
of the Faith even more explicitly and shows how it was possible to 
combine views which might be considered antagonistic, for he was 
a follower of the Mulasarvastivadin school and yet praises both the 
Madhyamika and Yogacara systems. He gives an interesting 
description of the musical services performed in monasteries and 
speaks of the worship of Amitabha with apparent approval. 
He specially praises the Suhrillekha of Nagarjuna, Matriceta's 
h}Tnns (which he tells us w’^ere learnt by all monks, both Maha- 
and Hinayanist), the Jdtakamala, and Asvaghosha’s Sutralanlcara 
and Buddhacarita. He adds that young priests read the sutra 
about Avalokitesvara ® and the Mahaparinibbana-sutra, just as 
young laymen in Chinese study the Chinese classics. 

The works of ^antideva,^ who probably flourished about a.d. 
600-650, are not deliberately descriptive but they contain much 
which confirms and illustrates the Chinese accounts. The wmi’ship 
of numerous Buddhas and Bodhisattvas is mentioned but not mucli 
emphasis is laid on Amitabha. Though the Mahayana is clearly 
regarded as the highest form of religion and as absolute truth, the 
Hinayana is treated in a very charitable spirit. Thus in a quotation 
from a work called the Akasagarbha-sutra, the following are counted 
among the “ root sins ” of anaspirantto the career of a Bodhisattva : 
preaching ideas that lead to the Hinayana ; preaching the 
Mahlyana as a substitute for rules and discipline ; undue dis- 
paragement of the Hinayana. Very similar are the directions given 
to a teacher in the Bodhicaryavatara, v. 89-90. He should show 
the. same respect to the Hinayana and Mahayana. He should not 
teach the former to one who is worthy of the latter, but he should 

^ tie gives the total number of monks as 183,000, of whom more than 96,000 
belonged to the HtnayEna, 64,000 studied both systems, and only 32,000 were 
definitely Mahayanist. 

^ m 'm. 

® That is, chap, xxiv of the Lotus. 

* The Bodhicaryavatara and the Sikshasamuccaya, which is a collection of 
extracts from various sutras arranged according to topics. 

r 

96 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. hi 

never delude a pupil by the liope that he can succeed if ho simply 
studies sutras and mantras and neglects the rules of good conduct. 
Though the Sikshasamuccaya quotes copious extracts recommending 
the life of a recluse in the forest, it also has chapters on being careful 
as to one’s pleasures and on purity of eiijopnents, and it cites the 
Ugraparipriccha as saying that a householder who is a Bodhisattva 
seeks his enjoyments rightly and not wrongly.^ Thus no blame 
attaches to a life which includes innocent pleasures. Popular and 
attractive forms of worship are commended, such as offering flowers, 
incense, perfumes and banners, bathing images of the Buddhas, 
making, venerating, and even looking at their pictures. Such 
precepts and ceremonies explain the success of Buddhism among 
the masses in the Far East and modify the impression which its 
philosophical treatises are apt to produce that it is a difficult and 
detached system which hardly appeals to the ordinary citizens of 
the world, 

6 

In the sixth century and perhaps considerably earlier, for it is 
difficult to trace the beginnings of these wide movements, Indian 
religion became infected by tendencies often called Sakti.sm and 
Tantrism, It is well to distinguish the two, for though they are 
commonly found together, Tantrism may exist wnthout Saktism. 
It means a system of religious magic which employs such methods as 
spells and formulas without meaning in ordinary language, diagrams, 
combinations of letters, gestures, and every kind of mystic spnbolism 
ill words and actions. The theory underlying ail these practices 
is that there is a force pervading the Universe which can be controlled 
by rites, especially by sound, just as electricity can be controlled by 
certain processes and apparatus. A Tantrio formula or dharaui 
may be called a prayer, but it is supposed to act not as an appeal 
which may move a deity nor by bringing peace and comfort to the 
mind of him who prays but simply in virtue of the magic potency 
of the syllables which compose it. Saktism means the worship 
of a goddess, especially of a goddess conceived as energy and as the 
active and creative part of a divine couple, the male deity being 
regarded as relatively passive and as thought rather than as action. 
Most Saktist sects advocate and practise immortal rites. Tlie 

1 Chap, vii, Bhogapunyarakaha, and chap, xv, Bhogapunyasiddhi. See 
Bendall, p. 267, for the quotation.- ' 

97 

CH. in] BVBBHIBM IN INDIA 

worst enemy of BuddMsm could hardly maintain that even the 
germs of such doctrines can be found in the Pitakas. Nevertheless 
they invaded late Buddhism, especially in Bengal, and passed thence 
to Nepal and Tibet. The various Buddhas were provided with 
female counterparts and such double statues may be seen in Lamaist 
temples in North China. But to the credit of the Far East let it be 
said that except in these temples Buddhism hardly shows a trace 
of Saktism or phallicism in ritual or iconography.^ Neither was 
there much disposition to adopt the ritual called Sadhana, in which 
a devotee meditates so long and earnestly on the attributes of a 
Bodbisattva or Sakti that at last the worshipper and the object 
worshipped become one.^ But of tantrio practices such as charms, 
gestures, and magic syllables, used either as aids to meditation or for 
their own sake, there is only too much. 

The spirit which tolerated such practices is nothing new in the 
history of Buddhism. Our earliest records represent the Buddha 
as very indulgent to popular religion. The worship of Hindu 
deities is not condemned nor is its efficacy in a certain sphere denied, 
though it has nothing to do with the road to nirvana and the really 
religious life. In the Digha NikS,ya ^ friendly spirits teach the 
Buddha’s disciples a spell by which they can protect themselves 
against evil spirits and the Buddha approves, although it must be 
remembered that the same Nikaya contains a long list of super- 
stitious practices of which he disapproves.^ But charms consisting 
of meaningllfes words are found in the Lotus, though only in the 
later supplements to it, and form a large proportion of the later 
sacred literature translated into Chinese by such authors as 
Vajrabodhi (A.D. 719-732), Amoghavajra (A.D. 719-774), and their 
successors. I confess that I find all this phase of decadent 
Buddhism, which is sometimes called Mantraylna or Vajrayana, 
most distasteful and uninteresting. StiU, it is necessary to recognize 
its existence, for anaong other reasons it enables us to understand 

1 In the Shingon sect of Japan five female personages are mentioned correspond- 
ing to the five Buddhas, and are equivalent to the five ^aktis of Nepalese Buddhism. 
But they are not represented by statues, though their figures are found in the 
Taizokai Mandara, and it is expressly denied that they are the spouses of the 
Buddhas. This is the only mention of the Saktis that I have found in Japan. 

® See for an example Benoytosh Bhattacaryya, pp. 

169-175. 

® Dig. Nik., xxxii. See Rhys Davids’s Introduction where parallel passages 
are quoted. 

* The paragraphs called silas which are found in Dig. Nik., i, especially 21-7, 
and are repeated in each one of the twelve following autras. 

98 

BUDDBI8M IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. m 

tlie rise in medieval Japan of vigorous and popular sects wliich 
protested against tlie dead formalism of the older ritual. 

The word Vajra, which forms the first part of Vajrayana and is 
rendered in Japanese by Kongo, means both thunderbolt and 
diamond, but is used to signify the real and absolute as opposed 
to the phenomenal world. It is often declared to be the equivalent 
of Sunyata, but the Vajrayana seems to have a closer connection 
with the Vijnanavada than with the Madhyamikas, for the strict 
doctrine of sunya was not altogether congenial to a school which 
dealt so freely in supernatural Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 
Tradition connects Asanga with the introduction of Tantrism 
into Buddhism, but the allusions to it in his undoubted works, so far 
as they are known, are not numerous.^ 

1 In the Mahayana-sutralankara he mentions dharaijis (xviii, 71-3) and maithuna 
(ix, 46) without disapproval. 

CHAPTER IV 
THE PANTHEON 
• 1 

As already mentioned, one of the obvious differences between the 
older and newer forms of Buddhism is the tendency to multiply 
Buddhas. It is not a new idea : it is merely the growth and develop- 
ment of a very old one. From the very first a Buddha is one of a 
series, like the Avataras of the Brahmans and the Jinas of the Jains, 
benevolent powers who manifest themselves from time to time in 
order to help and teach suffering humanity. The activity of each 
marks an epoch but it is not final. In the oldest scriptures we 
already have a procession, more or less extended, of past Buddhas, 
a prophecy of at least one Buddha in the future and a hint that there 
may be other Buddhas in other worlds. This last is the idea which 
grows and expands with what seems to us riotous exuberance. 
Unlike Europeans and Semites, Indians do not thinlr of man and 
his world as constituting the universe or even as being its centre : 
they conceive of life as distributed throughout immeasurable time 
and space and it is only natural to believe that the highest forms 
of Mfe— Buddhas and deities— should appear in correspondmg 
profusion. The Lalita-vistara and Mahavastu speak of them as 
innumerable, and tbe Lotus, which is not one of the latest Mahay^na 
sutras, makes a passing allusion to a group of thirty hundred 
thousand myriads of Kotis of Buddhas,, a Koti being ten million. 
Yet, with a few noteworthy exceptions, these Buddhas have little 
personality, less perhaps than the Bodhisattvas : they are not a 
pantheon but a countless heavenly host. In the Lotus ^akyamuni 
is not really one among many: Bodhisattvas wait on him and 
Prabhutaratna, an ancient Buddha of the remote past, is called 
up to show the continuity of the true doctrine. But ^akyamuni 
remains the central figure: the bewildering millions of other 
Buddhas and paradises are merely a background which, though 
gorgeous, does not impair his dignity, and their chief doctrinal 
importance is to prove to the faithful that the disciple can win the 
same position as his master and become a Buddha, ^Mryamuni 
is duly honoured by many Japanese sects, particularly by the 
' 99 

100 

BUDBEim IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

Nicliiren, but in tbe Jodo and Sbinsbu be is entirely eclipsed by 
Amida. In the later Mah^yana, though it is hard to say whend 
a group of five Buddhas was formed and is known in Japan, though 
specially worshipped in Tibet, Nepal, and ancient Java.^ The 
names are usually given as Vairocana, Akshobhya, Amitabha, 
Anioghasiddhi, and Eatnasambhava. Here Sakyamuni seems 
to have disappeared, but in the fully developed form of the doctrine, 
accepted apparently in Tibet, he is regarded as the human reflex 
of Amitabha. Vairocana seems to be regarded as the central and 
highest personage in the group, the other four each presiding over 
a point of the compass. The whole arrangement finds a pared el in 
Hinduism, for both Vishriu and Siva are worshipped in five forms, ^ 
and the Manichaeans * also had groups of five deities. But they 
may have borrowed the arrangement from the Buddhists, 

In Japan the five Buddhas are known to the Shingon sect as the 
Go-chi-nyorai, but do not form part of popular theology. Some 
lists give the Indian names as above, the last two being translated 
as Fukujoju and Hosho.^ But in this land of elastic theology they 
are also enumerated as Yakushi, Taho (the Prabhutaratna of the 
Lotus), Dainichi, Ashuku, and Shaka. 

The germ of the idea is perhaps to be found in an exceedingly 
curious passage of the Lotus,® where ^flkyamuni states that five 
of his disciples (K§.syapa, Subhuti, and others) are destined to obtain 
supreme enlightenment and to become “self-born Jinas Jina 
is the usual title applied to Vairocana and the other members of the 
pentad, though they are sometimes known as Dhyani Buddhas. 
The most important of the later group of five are Amitabha and 
Vairocana, to whom we must now turn. Alrshobhya, the Buddha 
of the East, must be ancient, for his paradise is described in a sutra 

^ They are mentioned, iu the Dharma-sangraha, § Immediately after- 
wards in § 4 four goddesses (catasro devyah) are mentioned— •Eocan^. Mamaki, 
Pandurd, Tara. The silence of Santideva is remarkable. He does not make 
any mention of the group of five, though it would have been natural for him to 
do so had he known, or at least approved, of the classification. 

® This distribution probably implies that the idea spread from Bengal to these 
various countries, 

® The Pancarfi,tra recognizes the highest form or Para and four Vyubas, presiding 
over the points of the compass, and the worshippers of Siva say tliat he has five 
faces, I^ana or Sadaiiva, the highest, and four others for the four points. 

^ See Chavannes and Pclliot, in J.A., 1913, i, pp. 333-8. 

® ^ ^ Gochi-nyorai : ^ ^ Fukujoju: ^ ^ Hosho, 

® Lotus, chap, vi, especially verse 39, which is curious Sanskrit and perhaps 
corrupt, Patica mi ^ravaka ye nirdishta ye te maya agrabodhaye, apparently 
meaning “ my five disciples whom I have destined to supreme Enlightenment ”, 

THE PANTHEON 

101 

CH. IV] 

wIiicL., according to the traditional date, was one of the earliest to be 
translated into Chinese^ but it does not appear that his worship 
was ever popular. The Buddhas of the north and south appear 
to be little known except in Nepal and Java.® But Amitabha, the 
Buddha of the West, the Lord of Measureless Light, has had a 
surprising destiny. Belief in him as Saviour and the Lord of 
Paradise has transformed Buddhism in many parts of the Far East 
and he is still adored by two most important sects in Japan, the 
j5do-shu and Shin-shu. 

It is most difficult to explain the history and origin of this 
attractive and imposing figure. The legend relates that in a remote 
former birth he was once a man, but he does not seem to have the 
smallest connection with any historical personage or fact. His 
name is unlmown in Pali literature, in the Lalita-vistara, and 
apparently in the Agamas translated into Chinese. He is just 
mentioned in the older part of the Lotus, but without any emphasis, 
as one of the Buddhas of the West, and he and his paradise are 
spoken of more explicitly in the supplementary chapters xxii and 
xxiv. But in several important and fairly ancient works his 
worship appears fully developed. He is not merely one of the 
Buddhas ; he is the great saviour of all mankind, and Sfikyamuni 
is little more than a forerunner whose mission is to preach his mercy 
and his merits. Of the three chief scriptures ® which treat of him, 
two — ^the Greater and Lesser Sukhavati-vyuha — are extant in 
Sanslmt, The former is said to have been translated by 
An Shih-Kao (a.d. 147-170), but the translation is lost, though 
another of about the same date ascribed to Chih Lou Chia Ch''an 
is extant. Even if with some critics we reject these works as 

^ Nanjio, No. 28, ascribed to the period 147-186. Nanjio, No. 23 (6). is a later 
translation of the same by Bodhiruchi. It is an apocalypse very similar to the 
Sukhavati-vyuha. Sakyamuni on the Vulture’s Peak explains to Sariputra 
the vow made by Akshobhya and the glories of his paradise, which is called Abliirati. 
Akshobhya is also mentioned in the Lotus in a list of sixteen Buddhas who preside 
over different directions (chap, vii) and in a similar but longer enumeration in 
the Lesser Sukhavati-vj'uha. His vow is also mentioned in the Sikshasamuceaya. 
The work which speaks of him most frequently appears to be the Prajiiaparamita. 

® But it is remarkable that in the pa-ssage quoted above (chap, vi, prose portion 
soon after verse 16) Subhuti’s paradise is called Eatnasambhava. 

® The names of the three are ; (1) The Greater Sukbavati'Vjmba ^ ^ 

Muryoju-kyo. See Nanjio, 23 (5) and note. (2) The Lesser Sukhavati-vyuha, 
generally called ^ ^ Amida-kyo. Nanjio, Nos. 199 and 200. (3) The 

Amitayurdhyana-sutra ^ ^ ^ Kanmiiryoju-kyo or Kangyo. Nanjio, 

102 

BUBBEmm IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

imaginary or spurious, a tMrd by Cb'ib Cliien (a.d. 223-253) lies 
under no suspicion, so that the Sanskrit original must go back to tbe 
second, and probably to tbe first century of our erad Nine other 
translations attest tbe popularity of tbe work. The Lesser 
Siikbavati-vyuba was translated by Kumarajiva (402) and by 
Hsuan-Tsang. , Tbe third scripture is generally known as tbe 
Amita}T.irdby^na-sutra or Meditation on Amitayus and appears 
to be an undoubted translation from Sanskrit made in 424, though 
the original is lost, as is abo the original of the little text called 
Ojoron m Japanese, translated in 529 and ascribed to Vasubandhu 
in his old age.^ 

These texts explain clearly the personality and worship of 
Amitabha which are made the centre — or rather the whole— of 
dogma and practice. On the other hand, it is remarkable that many 
other Mahayanist writings, such as the works of Nagarjuna, Asanga, 
and the Awakening of Faith, treat devotion to him as something 
laudable but not essential. In the same spirit Hsiian-Tsang 
turned the Lesser Sukhivati-vyuha into Chinese, though his almost 
superhuman activity as a translator was mainly devoted to works 
advocating entirely different principles. One would have expected 
that a belief which transforms Buddhism and practically dethrones 
^akyamuni would have aroused polemics as well as enthusiasm, 
as in fact it did later in Japan in the days of Nichiren, but India and 
China were so tolerant that the new road to salvation was regarded 
as permissible even by authors who devoted their main attention 
to quite other methods, I have already pointed out ® one reason 
for this. Even in the Pali Nik^yas the desire to be reborn in the 
heaven of Brahm§, or some other deity is admitted to be natural 
and proper for laymen, though it is not the quest for true happiness 
which is nirvana, and this new teaching was not essentially different 
except that it exalted Amitibha to a position very unlike any which 
the Pitakas accord to Brahm^. It may be, too, that another reason 
for the somewhat sporadic and irregular appearance of Amit§,bha 
in Indian Buddhist literature is that his worship originally grew 
up somewhere in Afghanistan or the neighbouring regions under 
Iranian influences and only gradually spread in India proper 
among those to whom it was congenial. Images of him are not 

^ See above, Chap. Ill, p. 87. 

® See above, Chap. Ill, p, 93. 

Chap. II, p. 47, 

CH. IV] TEE PANTHEON 103 

particularly frequent ^ and the Chinese pilgrims mention liiin only 
occasionally.^ 

Tlie Sam}uitta Nikaya contains an exceedingly curious dialogue ^ 
entitled the Westerner, in which a village headman called Asi- 
bandhakaputta, or the snake charmer’s son, informs the Buddha that 
the Brahmans of the West, who are fire-worshippers, carry out the 
dead, call on them by name, and send them on their way to 
heaven. ” But the Lord,” he continues, “who is an Arhat and All- 
Enlightened, can bring it about that the whole on the 

dissolution of the body, can be born in a happy state, in the heavenly 
world.” Gotama condemns this view, which was evidently not 
approved by the Thoravada, He does not discuss 'wliat the 
powers of a Buddha may be in such matters, hut simply says that tlie 
dead go to paradise or purgatory according as their deeds are good 
or bad. The praise of a great multitude with uplifted hands will 
not send a bad man to paradise nor can they prevent a good man 
from going there, just as they cannot make a rock float or oil sink. 
Though the doctrine is expressly condemned, the. story clearly 
implies that there was an idea that a Buddha can enable the dead 
to reach heaven, and this idea is connected with the funeral customs 
of the West. This certainly suggests that in those regions a belief 
was already growing up that prayer to the Buddha is a moans of 
obtfiiuing heaven for oneself or others. 

The main ideas of Amidism,^ as the worship of Araitablia is 
conveniently termed, are all found in the Zoroastrian scriptiu-es, 

^ Sec Fotichcr, IcotingrnpJdc Boitddhiqve dans Vlndo.^ and Benoytosh Bhatta- 
car.>W‘a. Indian Buddhist Imnography. 

® Fa-Lfsicn doo.s not mention him at all nor does Hsiian-Tsang in his narrative, 
though be translated the Lesser Sukhavati-vyuha. I should hesitate to make 
such a_sweeping negative statement vere it not confirmed by the professors 
of the Otani Uiaiversity, Kyoto. I-Ching twice speaks of him with devout apprecia- 
tion. Tzii-Ming. hWever, is reported to have found his worship very prevalent 
(see Kimura, IHnaydna and Mahciydna, p. 42), but he did not arrive in India 
till A.n. 705. 

® Sam. Nik., xlii, 6. Paccabhumako. The western Brahmans are described 
as Kamandaluka sevdlamalika udakorohaka aggiparicarika" “ carriers of water- 
pots, wearing garlands of sovala, bathers, tenders of the fire ’h The last %vord 
must not be unduly pressed to mean anything un-Brahmanie, for it might bo 
used of priests who keep up the sacrificial fires, and udakorohaka is used in Maj. Nik, 
of those who believe in ceremonial bathing. 

Safinapenti seems to mean “ call by name ”, but it is an unusual use of the word, 
which more commonly signifies to convince. The words about the Buddha’s 
power arc — Bhagava pana arahani saminasambuddho pahoti tatha katum yatha 
sabho loko kdyassa bhecla param marana sugatim saggam lokam \ipapa,ijeyati. 

Amida is the shortened form of Amitabha in use in Japan. 

104 

BUBDEISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [on. xv 

The highest heaven is called Endless, or Boundless, Light, ^ a striking 
verbal resemblance and, like Amitlbha’s paradise, it is a land of 
song and pleasant sounds. Prayer can win this paradise, and if 
anyone recites the Ahuna-vahya formula, Ahuramazda “ will bring 
his sou] to the lights of heaven Further, it is expressly stated 
that Ahuramazda and his archangels will guide the dying beHever 
on his way thither.^ Precisely the same promise is made in the 
SukhS,vati-vyuha and still consoles countless deathbeds in the 
Far Bast. 

But though I think that the worship of Amitabha first grew up in 
the regions to the north-west of India proper, its Iranian affinities 
must not be exaggerated. As presented in its earliest scriptures, 
it is already thoroughly Indian in its details. In strict language 
Amitabha is not a benevolent deity : he is a Buddha who has 
followed the arduous road to Enlightenment like other Buddhas : 
his paradise is the result of his merits and the right to enter it is 
regulated by Karma, somewhat liberally iuterpreted, it is true. 
The efficacy of the deathbed prayer — ^that a man goes to the deity 
whom he remembers in his last hour — ^if not exactly a Buddhist 
doctrine, is clearly affirmed by the Bhagavad Gita,^ There is 
indeed a close parallel between the development of Amidism and 
Vishnuism. In a recent Indian work, Mallik’s Philosophy of the 
Vaishnava Religion, it is stated that in this Kali age Hfe is short 
and the intellect weak. Men cannot follow the Vedas. Similarly, 
in Japan, Honen and Shinran declared that modern man could not 
follow the ShodSmon, or path of good works, which is practically 
admitted to be the original teaching of the Buddha. Secondly, 
Mallik states that the Puranas are a supplement to the Vedas ; 
they are of the same quality, but can be read and understood by 
anyone. Thus relatively modern books are exalted above the 
ancient sacred texts, j list as in Japan the average member of the 
Shin sect has never even heard of the Agamas. 

^ x%xiii, pp. 317 and 344, and iv, p. 293. The expression in the last 

passage “ houndlesB light and undeserved felicity ” is noticeable. In the Lesser 
Sukhavati-vyfiha we are told that paradise is not the revFard of merit. 

^ xxxiii, pp. 335-7 ; xxxi, p. 261. The Grmazd Yasht xxxiii, 

20-31) clearly affirms the; efficacy of Ahuramazda’s name &s an invocation. 

® Bhag. Gita, viii, 6. A somewhat similar idea is not wholly absent in early 
Buddhism. In Saip. Nik., xli, 10, when Oitta is dying the deities of the forest 
exhort him to aspire to be a king in his next birth. He rejects the suggestion, 
but it is not denied that dying aspirations can influence the next existence. See, 
too, Maj. Nik., xli, where it is said that a good man can be reborn a noble or a 
Brahman, or a god if he forms the desire. 

105 

CH.1%1 THE PANTHEON 

The tliree Amidist scriptures all have the form of sutras and 
represent ^akyamnni as preaching the new doctrine in scenery and 
company familiar to the student of the Pali Pitakas. The longer 
and doubtless older version of the Sukhc^vati-vyuha is a discourse 
delivered on the Vultures’ Peak in answer to Ananda’s questions, 
Sakyamuni begins by enumerating no less than eighty previous 
Buddhas of the remote past. After them came one called Lokesvara- 
raja, in whose presence a monk called Dharinakara, the future 
Amitabha, made a series of vows. The idea that the aspirant to 
Buddhahood formally commences his career in this way is found 
even in the introduction to the Pali Jataka and in the Mahavastu. 
In the later literatm’e the accounts of the great Bodhisattvas, 
especially Avalokitesvara ^ and Kshitigarbha, sometimes mention 
that they made such vows and the scene is often depicted in the 
frescoes found in Central Asia. Dharmakara vowed that he would 
become a Buddha, but on conditions, namely, that he should be 
able to help others and share with them his vast store of accumulated 
merit. If I cannot do this, he said, then may I not obtain supreme 
Enlightenment. When after countless ages he obtained that 
Enlightemnent, the conditions held good and became a law of 
Karma. According to the terms of the vow he is lord of a paradise 
called Sukhavati, or the Happy Land, to which those who have 
thought of him ten times are admitted. 

The belief in the transfer of merit from one person to another 
(pattid&na or parinamana) is hardly agreeable to the older Buddhism, 
which uncompromisingly asserts that we make our future by our 
own deeds. But it is an admitted principle in Mahayanist writings 
and is obviously a charitable and comforting doctrine. In practice 
it may be found even in Ceylon, ^ and the Amidist sects have no 
hesitation in saying that man is too weak and foolish to be able 
to save himself. Nevertheless the earliest pronouncement as found 
in the treatise which we are considering does not wholly reject 
good works : it promises paradise to those who make it the object 
of their thoughts and acquire merit for that purpose. It also 
excludes those who have committed deadly ^ sin. But the Lesser 

^ The vows made by Avalokitesvara under innumerable Buddhas are mentioned 
in the Lotus, chap, xxiv, verse 3. The vows of Akshohhya, Bhaishajyaguru, and 
others are also described in special sutras. 

® For instance, prayers are still used In which the hope is expressed that merit 
may be transferred to departed relatives and to good spirits w'ho protect religion. 

® Sins which bring immediato punishment on the sinner, such as killing one’s 
parents or provoking schism. 

106 BUDJDHim IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

Sukhavati-vyiilia, wHeli purports to be an address delivered by 
^ akyamimi to Ananda at ^ravasti, categorically preaches salva- 
tion by faith only. “Beings are not born in that Buddha country 
as a reward and result of good works done in this life. No, all men 
and women who hear and bear in mind for seven nights, or even 
only one, the name of Amitayus,^ when they come to die Amitayus 
will stand before them in the houi’ of death, they will depart this 
life with quiet minds and will be reborn in Paradise.” Both sutras 
are mainly occupied with a description of the joys of this Happy 
Land, its gardens, flowers, rivers, music, and jewels, and much of 
the description recalls the account given in the Digha Nil^aya ^ 
of the pleasances constructed by the Great King of Glory where 
there were also lotus ponds with four flights of steps surrounded 
by golden and jewelled trees which made music in the wind. It 
is noticeable that these delights, though they do not include 
eating, drinking, and things sexual, are mainly agreeable sights 
and sounds which Gotama would have pronounced vain and imper- 
manent, But, strictly speaking, Paradise is not final bliss : it is 
a happy state in which believers remain “ constant in absolute 
truth until they reach nirvana 

The third sutra, called the Meditation on Amitayus, presents the 
whole doctrine in a more advanced and developed form. It is 
prefaced by a historical introduction which tells how the wicked 
Aj§,tasatru imprisoned and wished to kill his father and mother. 
The latter, Queen Vaidehi, prays to Sakyamuni, who appears 
miraculously in her prison, and in answer to her desire to be told of 
a country where there is no sorrow or trouble, gives her a vision of 
many radiant heavens, among which she chooses Sukhavati and asks 
how she may be born there. The scheme of salvation which 
Sakyamuni unfolds is comprehensive, for a moral life, unselfishness, 
ceremonial observances, and meditation are all declared to be 
efficacious, but the method specially recommended is a series of 
sixteen meditations which are described in detail. Manldnd are 
divided into many classes according to their mental and moral 

^ The names Amitabha (Measureless Light) and Amitdyus (Mcasiireless Life) 
seem to be used indifferently. The Greater Siikh.-vyuha usually employs the. former, 
but explains Amitayus in § 14. The two other sutras use Amitayus, but the 
Lesser Snkh.-vyuha explains Amitabha in § 9. 

® .Dig. Nik.,, xyii. , ■ 

® Greater Sukh.'vyuha-, § 24. Sarve te niyatah samyaktve yavan Nirvanam,. 
Cf. AmMyAr-Dhyana S,, § 26, But the Sukli.-vyuha also says (§ 21) that the 
inhabitants of paradise are as happy as a Bhikshu who has attained nirvana. 

THE PANTHEON 

107 

OH. IV] 

qualities, but even the most ignorant sinner may on his deathbed 
meet a friend who will teach him to invoke the name of Amitayus. 
Then the flames of hell will turn to heavenly flowers and he will be 
born in a lotus blossom which will at last unclose and leave him 
among the joys of Sukhavati. The description of the Happy Land 
is much the same as in the other siitras, but the rulers of it are not 
one but three, the great Bodhisavattvas Avalokitesvara and 
Mahasthama ^ being described in detail and repeatedly mentioned 
as aiding in the work of salvation. At the end it is even said 
that the sutra should be called the Meditation on Amitayus, 
Avalokitesvara, and Mahasthama. 

The author was evidently familiar with an extensive Mahayanist 
literature, for he repeatedly recoimnends the study of the scriptures 
and specially of the Vaipulya sutras. He also knew of the doctrine 
of the DharmakS,ya, and puts the following remarkable passage 
into the mouth of Sakyamuni, who, after describing the seventh 
meditation and the flowery throne of Amit^bha, continues : — 
“ When you have perceived this you should think of Buddha. 
Why so ? All Buddhas Tathagatas are the Fa-chieh-sheng 
(Dharmadhatu) which enters into the mind and thought of all 
sentient beings whatsoever. Therefore, when you think of the 
Buddha in your mind, that very mind is the thirty-two marks and 
eighty beautiful signs. TJiat mind maJces Buddha : that mind is 
BuddhaP This seems to be a statement that the mind makes 
heaven ; we obtain what %oe believe in. This idea has borne fruit 

in the Japanese Amidist sects. 

Vairocana ® is an important figure in the Buddhism of the Far 
East and also of Tibet, Nepal, and Java.^ There is even a tendency 
to make him the Adi-Buddha or primal spiritual essence which is 
postulated by some varieties of the Mantrayana. In Japan he is 
the principal object of reverence in the Shingon sect and was also 

^ I'hey are just mentioned in the Greater Sukh.-vyuha, § 34. Avalokite.svara is 
mentioned again in § 31> when he is called a son of the Buddha. 

> Amit. DhyJna-S,, 17. E Jb 9- E ^ S' ® ft W « # W ® 

ft iD * * m M A — H # ^ -c « 4' & m m m * 
« ft It s iiJ a = + - iff. A mm » a * # « 

a *a«- 

* He is spoken of in some detail in the Javanese books Kamahayanikan and the 
story of Kunjarakarna. Sec my Hinduism and Buddhism, iii, 172 ff., for a further 
account. 

108 BVDDHI8M IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. iv 

at an early period identified witl. the Smx goddess in tlie conciliatory 
system wMcli united Shinto and Buddhism, But though he is 
well-known, especially as represented by the gigantic statue in the 
temple at Nara,^ he is less popular than Amitabha. He is a 
pantheistic and philosophic conception rather than a saviour, and 
the doctrines which concern him are exceedingly abstruse. The 
name is a derivative of Vhocana, a recognized title of the sun in 
Sanskrit and rendered as Tai-jih in Chinese, which in Japanese 
becomes Dainichi. His origin is very lilcely to be found outside 
India in Iranian countries, though it must be remembered that 
from Vedic times onwards there are numerous solar deities who are 
purely Indian. Nevertheless it is exceedingly difficult to trace 
his history in Sanskrit Hterature and his images are not numerous 
or early. Vairocana occurs in the Mah&vastu as the name of an 
otherwise unknown Buddha, and in the supplementary chapters 
of the Lotus (xxiii and xxv) a luminous Buddha-world called 
Vairocana-rasmi-pratimandita is frequently mentioned. But the 
chief scripture which treats of him is the important Kegon or 
Avatamsaka-sutra,® which appears to be identical with the 
Ganda-vyuha or perhaps that work is merely a portion of it. 
But the reports published of the Sanskrit text are not so full as could 
be wished. Since it was translated into Chinese in a.d. 398-421, 
it must be at least of moderate antiquity, and several of the partial 
translations are ascribed to the end of the third and even to 
the second century. A commentary on part of it attributed to 
N^garjuna was translated by Kumarajiva (Nan. 1180). 

Locana ^ seems hardly distinguishable from Vairocana but is 
regarded as the special personification of Dharma in all its aspects, 

1 Strictly speaking, the temple and image are dedicated to Locana or Roshana 
as stated in the Shokn-Nihongi. 

^ ^ ^ Chinese Hna-yen, Japanese Kegon. The Ganda-vyhha seems to 
be known only by Ra|. Mitra’s abstract in Nepalese Buddhist Lit., pp. 90 If. Ror 
its identity with the Avatarnsaka-shtra see Watanabe, J.B.A.S,, 1911, p. 663, 
and Pelliot, J.A., 1914, ii, pp. 118-121. The translations of this sutra, entire 
and partial, form a whole section of the Chinese Tripitaka, Nanjio, Nos. 87-111. 
The principal are (a) the version in sixty volumes, a.d. 317-421, (b) that in eighty, 
A.i). 695-9, (c) and that in forty, a-D. 796-8. 

^ ^ M Japanese Roshana or Dainichi. According to the Tendai 

system, Vairocana is the Dharraakaya and LocanS, the Sambhogakiya. Though 
some authorities hold that the two forms should be distinguished, the priests 
of the Todaiji temple at Nara call the great image Rirushana, although historical 
records call it Roshana and this Is the form used in the text of the Kegon-sutra 
{the edition in sixty volumes), which is specially studied in the temple. 

109 

OH. iv] THE PANTHEON 

tlie cosmic as well as the moral Law. In the well-known manual 
called Fan-Wang-Chingd which in China has practically taken 
the place of the Vinaya as a statement of the aspirations 
and rules of conduct by which monies should be guided, he 
is presented ia the introduction with peculiar emphasis as 
proclaiming the Law which he incarnates, ^alcyamuni, who 
approaches him reverently with a crowd of Bodhisattvas 
to receive his instructions, is but a minute portion of his 
essence. The throne on which he sits is surrounded by a 
thousand lotus petals and each petal is a universe with a Sakya 
of its own. But every one of these universes contains a hundred 
million worlds in the human sense, all with their suns, moons, and 
!§akyas. “ The Buddhas of the thousand petals are transformations 
of myself, and the hundred million Sakyas a thousand times 
repeated are transformations of them. I am the source and origin 
of all and my name is Locanl.” ^ In this speech we have almost a 
statement of the doctrine of the Adi Buddha, or original Buddha, 
that is the original self-existent creative Buddha-spirit, which 
evolves from itself the whole world. This doctrine,® which is practi- 
cally theism, is found among Tibetans in the Kalacakra system and 
in Nepal, and apparently was prevalent in medieval Java, but it has 
not had much success in the Far East in spite of the passage quoted 
above. 

The Avatamsaka-sutra emphasizes not so much the idea that any 
particular Buddha is to be regarded as the source and origin of the 
world as a variety of the doctrine of relativity already explained 
in speaking of Nagarjuna. In the heaven of Indra there is said to 
be a net-work or pearls so arranged that if you look at one you see 
all the others reflected in it. In the same way each object in the 
world is not merely itself but involves every other object and in fact 
is everything else. " In every particle of dust there are present 

^ Nanjio, 1087, ^ ^ Bommokyo in Japanese pronunciation. Edited 
and translated by Be Broot under the title ie Code, du Mahayana m OMne. The 
Sanskrit original is unknown but the translation professes to have been made 
by Kumarajiva, e. A.n, 400. It seems to have been interpolated in much later 
times, but there is no particular reason to suspect the introduction in which Locana 
explains his position. 

2 Very similar language is used in the Kegon-sutra (BuddHabhadra’s transla- 
tion), chap. 3 and chap, 34 (faso. 45^1 pp. 22-3 of the Kokyo Shoin edition), where it 
is said that he emits from his body “clouds of Nirmapakayas ” (Keshin-un). 
Compare the language of the Lotus about the Buddhas “ created ” by Sskyamuni. 

® It is also found in the metrical version of the Karapda-vyhha, which appears 
to be later than the prose version, of which it is a paraphrase. 

110 

BUmEim IN INDIA AND CHINA [gk. w 

Buddhas without number ” and ‘‘ on the point of a single hair 
a whole Buddha land may be seen”d It is also noticeable that 
this sdtra, when describing Locana as a being manifested to mankind, 
speaks of him as having made vows (like Amitabha) and as having 
created by their efliciency and by the good deeds which he practised 
through untold ages the Lotus universe of which our world is 
apparently a part. In Japan at the present day the Kegon-sutra 
is chiefly studied by the small sect of the same name who own the 
great Todaiji temple at Nara. The far larger Shingon sect have as 
their principal scriptures a work commonly known as Dainichi-kyo,^ 
and two other sutras, all translated about a.d. 724. As the date 
indicates, this literature belongs to the Mantrayana school made 
popular in China by Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra. 

The Healing Buddha ^ enjoys considerable prestige in the Bar 
East, for like AmMbha he makes a simple and direct appeal to 
humanity, but, as in the case of the Buddhas already mentioned, 
it is exceedingly difficult to trace his history in literature and art 
on Indian soil. By a natural metaphor a religious teacher is called 
a physician of the soul, and even in the Pali Pitakas ^ Gotama is 
styled the best of healers. But the stories of his life rarely represent 
him as curing disease, and the powers of healing do not seem to be 
specially personified in any of the earlier supernatural Buddhas, 
or in Indian iconography.® Bhaishajya-r4ja, however, whose name 
must mean something like the King of Healing, is a character 
of importance in the Lotus.® He is not a Tathagata but a 
Bodhisattva, and ^akyamuni addresses him as the representative 

1 Kegon (Avataijisaka) sutra, chap, v. 

® Nanjio, 530. In Oliinese PJt ^ ^ ® ^ ^ 

Ta-p'i-lu-che-na-clieng-fo-shen-pien-chia-ch'ih.-chmg. Apparently representing 
MaMvairocanabhisambodhi in Sanskrit. Tbe other two works are Nanjio, 
^ ^ being an abridged translation of the Vajrasekbarayoga. 

tantra commonly called Kongocho-kyo in Japanese, and Nanjio, 533, ^ fife 

^ IS ^ Susiddhikara-sOtra, commonly called Soshitsuji-kyo. 

® iiji ilU ^ Yao-Shih-Ju-Lai: Yakushi Nyorai. The Sanskrit 
title is Bhaishajyaguru. ; 

* Sallakattoanuttaro, Maj. Nik., xcii, and Sntta Nip-, 582. Of. Mil. Pan., iv, 5, 8, 
and Lotns, chap. XV, 21. Evam evfi,ham eikitsakah sairva prajnananathah. In 
the Mahavag., vi, 23, the Buddha cures Suppiya miraculonsly, but this was a very 
special case. As a rule sickness is regarded as the result of Earma. 

° There seems to be no representation of a healing Buddha in the Buddhist 
Iconography by Benoytosh Bhattacarya. 

® Lotus, chaps, x, xii beginning, xxi, xxii, and xxv. The name also occurs 

THE PANTHEON 

111 

CH. IV] 

of that class of beings. He promises to spread the true doctrine 
among maiddnd and teaches a charm for the protection of believers. 
His good deeds in previous births are described at great length, 
and especially how he once burnt himself in honour of an ancient 
Buddha. This narrative, we are told, will be like medicine to those 
who hear it and prevent sickness, old age, and untimely death. 
But except in this passage Bhaishajya-raja’s healing powers are not 
emphasized. 

The Sikshiisamuccaya ^ prescribes rites for curing diseases. 
Borest flowers should be offered at a Caitya or to an image or to the 
Book of the Good Law (Sad-dharma-pustaka). A Tathagata bearing 
the name of Bhaishajya-guru or some longer title is several times 
mentioned ; we should pray that beings may be free from disease 
even as he is : those -who invoke his name shall not fall into misery 
and a virtuous man is bidden to pursue the good of all creatures 

like an image of Bhaishajyaguru ”. These passages evidently 
allude, though in somewhat vague language, to a popular healing 
Buddha. Two works in the Triphuka ^ translated in the seventh 
centmy relate that like Amitabha he made vows and asked for 
enlightenment on condition of being able to cure disease and drive 
away famine. 

S^akyamuni, Amitabha, Vairocana, and Bhaishajyaguru are the 
principal and for practical purposes the only Buddhas (as distin- 
guished from Bodhisattvas) now venerated in the Far East. Not 
that there is anything in the least unorthodox in showing devotion 
to others. As mentioned above, the Chinese Tripitaka contains 
a sutra which extols the vo-ws and the paradise of the Buddha 
Alvshobliya, and statues of him may be seen occasionally in Japanese 
temples. It also contains a translation of a work which gives an 
account of the land of Padmadhatu and its ruler, the Buddha 
Padmottara.2 But such figures play no part in religious life and 
hardly any m art. 

^ Siksliasamuccaya, Benclall’s edition, pp. 1.30, 32, 174-5, 362. A work 
called the Ehaishajyaguru-Vaidurya-prabha-sutra is also quoted pp. 13 and 174. 

® Nanjio, 170 and 171, called in Japanese Yakushi-hongwan-kyo. The latter 
was translated by Hsuan-Tsang in a.d. 650. 

® Nanjio. 2^0. 142, ^ ^ Pei-hua-ching, a translation (a.d. 414-421) of the 

Karunapundarika, still extant in Sanskrit. 

m BmmisM IN india and china [ch. iv 

2 

TKougli in tte Pali Pitakas Gotama is more tlian an ordinary man, 
he has the outward semblance of one, but these later Buddhas, 
practically immortal Lords of radiant paradises, are clearly beings 
of quite another kind, and it is not surprising if the imagination 
which drew such pictures had also its philosophical side and 
developed new ideas of the Buddha-nature described by the formula 
Tri-K4ya or the three bodies^ I have already mentioned that this 
doctrine is adumbrated, though only faintly, in the Nikayas, 
Still, Gotama is made to state ^ that when he frequents the 
assemblies of men and gods he can appear and vanish in any form 
be pleases without being recognized. At a comparatively early 
period the Mahasanghikas held that Buddhas are supermundane 
(lokottara), that their rupakaya (which appears to be a synonym 
of sambhogakaya) is limitless, as are also their divine power and 
length of life.® All Mahayanist sutras, whether they make dogmatic 
statements or not, accept these views. The clearest and most 
accessible definitions are those to be found in the Awakening of 
Faith and in Asanga.^ A Buddha has three bodies,® which are : — 

(1) The Nirmanakaya, Hterally the body of transformation, that 
is to say, the human form which a Buddha assumes in his intercourse 
with mankind. Far from being the real Buddha, it is a mere 
magical contrivance. This recalls the ancient heresy attributed 
to the Vetulyakas who held that the Buddha remained in the Tusita 
heaven and sent a phantom to preach in the world.® On the other 
hand, the Nirm^pakaya considered philosophically is the counter- 
part of the belief in the existence of the Self. The fancies of ignorant 
people create their own selves, their pleasures and, pains, their gods 
and Buddhas. In reality these are all Nirmlnakayas. 

(2) The Sambhogakaya^ the body of bliss or enjoyment, is the 
presence of a Buddha as manifest in paradise. It is personal but 

^ Sanjm.'' 

2 Mahaparinib.-sutta, iii, 22. 

® See Vasumitra’s treatise translated by Masuda in ii, p. 19. 

* Suzuki, pp. 100-1. Mahaytoasiitralankiira, ed. Sylvain Levi, is, 60 ff. 

® The three bodies aro called in Japanese Ojin or Nirmanakaya ; 

^ ^ Hoshin or Sambhogakaya, and ^ Hoashin or Dharmaksiya. 

® This belief is mentioned in Kathayatthu, xviii, 1, and the commentary says 
that it ■was held by the Vetulyakas. 

THE PANTHEON 

CH. IV] 

113 

above liiiman. limitations. Splendour and radiance are prominent 
among tlie qualities ascribed to it. 

(3) The Dharmaka 3 ^a or body of the law. This is the true 
Buddha. It is above personality and cannot be described as 
either existence or non-existence.^ It is practically equivalent 
to Bhutatathata, Tathagatagarbha, Dharmadhatu, Bodhi, and 
Nirvana. It has thus obvious analogies to the Brahman or 
Aljsolute of the Upanishadsj bub it is only just to say that the 
Lankavatara-sutra warns us that the two conceptions are not to be 
confounded. 

The Suvarnaprabhasa-sutra ^ shows us the doctrine in a somewhat 
different stage of development. It uses technical terminology in 
speaking of the three bodies, but still it regards them from the point 
of view of religion, not metaphysics, as agencies co-operating in 
the work of salvation, not as explanations of the mysteries of 
existence. The Buddha by his good deeds done in human form has 
acquired a spiritual power which enables him to appeal to mankind 
as the perfect man and to teach the first steps towards Enlighten- 
ment to those wrho will follow his example. This is the Nirmana- 
kaya. But he can also appeal to Bodhisattvas, those beings 
who are treading the higher stages of the path ; he shows them that 
sarnsara and nirvana are really the same, he destroys egoism and 
individuality and lays the foundation of the true Buddha nature. 
This is the Sambhogakaya. But both these bodies are provisional 
forms of his existence, assumed for special purposes. The 
Dharmakaya, on the other hand, is the reality : pure suchness 
(Tathata) w^ithout taint, imperfection, or emotion. Just as the 
light of the sun or moon reflects itself in water, without making 
a conscious distinction between the water and other places and 
without itself suffering any change, so does the Dharmakaya reflect 
itself in the form of the other two bodies according to the spiritual 
needs of believers. Some scriptures which are esteemed in Japan 
formulate respecting the bodies of the Buddha even more elaborate 
doctrines, which, however, have not become popular and are knowm 
only to the learned. Thus the Kegon or Avatanisaka-sutra 
enumerates no less than ten bodies, the theory being that the 
Buddha nature is present in all things animate and inanimate, 

^ Of. the words of the Pali canon in describing the state of the Tathagata after 
death. See above, pp. 43-5. 

2 I-Ching’s translation, voL ii, chap, iii, p. 6. The passage does not seem to 
be extent in Sanskrit. 

114 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. iv 

whatever their grade of spiritual development. By a further 
refinement the seventh of these bodies, Nyorai-shin or Tath<^gata- 
kaya, is again subdivided into ten Buddhas, apparently an attempt 
to define the various manners in which the Buddha nature may be 
present.^ 

The Shingon sect hold that there are four or five bodies and, more- 
over, give them all a title corresponding to Dharmakaya. They 
are : (1) Jisho-hosshin, (2) Juyo-hosshin, (3) Henge-hosshin, and 
(4) Toryu-hosshin.2 Of these the first three correspond to the 
three bodies of the ordinary classification. The Toryu-hosshin 
is an attempt, as in the Kcgon-sutra, to explain the presence of 
the Buddha nature in all things. In very truth the Dharmakaya 
is not only in all but is all. But in virtue of the Toryu-hosshin 
it may appear in the form of an animal or even of a demon. This 
series of four is increased to five by dividing the second body — the 
body of enjoyment — into two,^ the Ji-juyo-hosshin, or body of 
personal enjo 3 nnent, in which a Buddha feels the bliss of enlighten- 
ment, and the Ta- juyo-hosshin in which he communicates this bliss 
to others who are capable of feeling it. These doctrines may be 
found both in translations from the Sanskrit ^ and in the works of 
K5b6 Daishi,® But the importance of such ideas does not lie in the 
number of bodies, not even in the relatively ancient and orthodox 
three, but in the Dbarmakaya. Difl&cult as this conception, is to 
formulate in Eurox^ean or even in Eastern languages and apt as it is 
to lead to abstruse speculations which are obviously only for the 
select few, yet inasmuch as it teaches that the Buddha is not to be 

^ Por the Jisshin or ten bodies see the edition in 60 fasciciili Nan. No. 26. They 
are: (1) Bhwjo siihi, (2) ^ Kokudo s., (3) H ^ 

G5h6 s., (i) ^ ^ Shomon s., (5) ^ ^ Byakushibntsn s., (6) 

M ^ Bosatsu s., (7) ^ Nyorai s., (8) ^ ^ Chi s., (9) ^ ^ 

Hosshin, (10) & ^ ^ Koku s. The ten Buddhas who are subdivisions of 
No. 7 in the above are enumerated in Nan. 42 of tiie same work. They are ; (1) 
fljj Mujaku Butsu, (2) ^ ^ Gan Butsu, (3) ^ ^ Goho Eutsu, 
(4) ^ Ji Butsu, (5) ^ “0^ Nehan Butsu, (6) ^ Hokai Butsu, (7) 

Shin Butsu, (8) ^ Sanmai Butsu, (9) Sho or Sci Butsu, (10) 

^0 Nyo-i Butsu. 

“ The Japanese characters are § ^ ^ ^ ^ 'ffc .JI'j 

^ ^ 

^ ^ M ^ M 

* e.g. Nanjio, No, 1039 and No. 1433. 

^ Such as the Kenmitsunikyoron and Sokushin jobutsugi. 

116 

cH. IV] THE PANTHEON 

tlioiiglit of as merely a person, limnan or superhuman, but as a 
spirit present in all nature and in the human heart, it has been 
ill the Far East a great force in religion and in art. ^ 

Though triads are common enough in Hinduism, notably the 
three guuas, or constituents of being, the formula of the three 
bodies is mainly Buddhist.^ But the underlying idea, as so often 
happens in India, is characteristic of an epoch, not of any particular 
sect. In the Bhagavad Gita Krishna is sometimes merely the 
charioteer of Arjuna. But he reveals himself in his divine form,® 
radiant and glorious, and besides this he is extolled as the Absolute,^ 
as Being and not-Being, as the Supreme Self (paramatma), and the 
Self dwelling in the heart of every creature. The resemblance here 
to the doctrine of the three bodies is very close, but there is a 
difference in tone between Buddhist and Brahmanic sentiment. 
Krishna, as revealed in his divine form, is splendid, but above all, 
terrible. But though epithets descriptive of light and glory, 
overwlielming and infinite, are heaped upon the Sambhogakaya 
of the Buddhas, there is no terror. One feels not their power and 
majesty, liut their infinite kindness and desire to help. 

The conception of the Buddha in the Lotus offers many resem- 
blances to the Bhagavad Gita. No technical dogmatic language 
about the three bodies is used and the description of Sakyamuni’s 
presence and movements, the immeasurable rays of light which 
issue from his countenance and so on, are so hyperbolical that there 
seems to be no c[UGstion of a human frame. Nevertheless, this 
personality was born at Kapilavastii and reached enlightenment 
at Gaya ® but a short time ago ” and is in that sense a nirmanakaya, 
a mere illusion. The birth and nii’vana of a Buddha are illusion : 
kindly devices designed to arrest attention and make men listen 
to the law. But He himself is beyond birth and death. He is not 
God in the Eiuopcan sense of the word, for he is not the Creator ® 

^ Its influence on art is eloquently explained by Anesaki in his book, Buddhif>t 
Art in its relation, to Buddhist Ideals, 1915. 

* I3ut Hinduism also ascribes tlu-ee bodies to all living creatures : the Karana- 
sarira, linga^., and sthula^. 

® In book xi. Dari^ayam asa paramam rupam aisvaram. He showed his 
supreme form as Lord. Cf. Vi^vamiirti, viSvarupa, anantarupa, 

^ Bhag. Gita, x, 27 ; ix, 19 j xv, 17 ; x, 20. 

® Lotus, xiv,’ verse 44. 

* The world is not real as ordinary men suppose. Lotus, chap, xv, Hrishtam 
hi Tathagatona traidhatukam yathabhutam. Ha jSyate na mriyate, etc. The 
doctrine of the Void, or Sunyatd, is frequently commended. See chap, v, verses 
41, 52, 7.5, 80, and chaps, viii, xi, and xiii. The Lotus several times calls the 

116 

BVJDmiSM m INDIA AND CHINA [ch. it 

nor, it would seem, in most respects tlie Ruler of tlie world. But 
his constant purpose is to help and save mankind by bringing them 
to Enlightenment : like Krishpa, from time to time he manifests 
himself when ignorance and vice prevail,^ and he causes all beings 
to reach nh'vana by means of his own complete nirvana : all his 
disciples, even Devadatta, will become Buddhas.^ Though the 
language of the Lotus is most authoritative and dogmatic, it is not 
always precise. In particular, the relations of ^&kyamuni to other 
Buddhas are not entirely clear. Often (for instance, in the second 
chapter) the Buddhas who have won Enlightenment and who save 
the world are spoken of as many. But other passages seem to make 
Sakyamuni something above ordinary Buddhas and speak as if he 
were the universal essence and spirit from which they all derive their 
being. They are said to be his emanations and to be made 
(nirmita) by him ® ; from the very beginning (adita eva) he has 
developed them and by him alone have they all been brought to 
maturity. A somewhat similar obscurity occurs in later forms of 
Buddhism. Philosophy seems to require the Dharmakaya to be 
above pluraUty and personality. Yet sometimes a particular 
Buddha is said to have a Dharmakaya. 

The more purely philosophical views about the Dharmakaya, 
such as are found for instance in the Madhyamika Karikas of 
Kagarjuna, are a not illogical amplification of the statements found 
in the Nikayas about the impossibility of making any assertion 
about a Buddha after Ms death and even (as the dialogue with 
Yamaka shows) during his life.^ This is expanded to mean that the 
true Buddha nature is the absolute. Since it is in no sense relative, 
no ordinary words apply to it. It is beyond definition and 
characterization : it can be understood only by intuition. But 
still it is the one without a second, it is truly real, whereas nothing 

Budda Bather, or Bather of the world, and his disciples are his sons. See hi, 
verse 97 ,* iv, verse 36, and specially xv, verse 21. Lokajhta syayambhhh. But 
apparently the word Bather is always used in the sense of one who cherishes and 
protects, not one who begets or creates. Bor the sentiment cf. Asokavadana, 
chap, iv, trans. Prayluski, p; 291, “ Mon pfere est le roi Asoka . . . et j’ai aussi un 
autre pCre, lo grand roi de la Loi qu’on appelle le Bouddha.” 

^ Lotus, XV, 22. Cf. Bhag. GM, iv, 7. 

^ Lotus, iii {S.B.11,, xxi, p, 81) and v, verso 44, and xi, after verse 46. 

® Lotus, xi {S.B.JS,, xxi, 231 and 235) ; xiv (ib., p. 295) and xiv, verses 38 and 
43. The language is often perplexing. Thus, in chap, viii, verse 1 4, it is stated 
that Puraija shall become a self-existent (svayambhh) Buddha in the world. But 
bow can one become self-existent ? The quality seems to be original and essential, 

^ See above, Chaps. 11, p, 50, and III, p. 81. 

CH. IV] TEE PANTHEON 117 

which is manifold and relative can be real in the same sense. The 
obvious criticism on such doctrines is that they are metaphysics 
and not religion. In making it we must remember that even in the 
Far East, which is not metaphysical in temperament, portions of 
the Prajhaparamita,^ if not exactly popular, are constantly read by 
the devout. 

Though only about four of all the millions of Buddhas extolled 
in the Mahayanist scriptures are known to popular Buddhism, the 
images seen in Chinese and Japanese temples suggest a much larger 
pantheon and recall the passages in the Nik§,yas ^ which tell how'' 
throngs of Devas and spirits came to do homage to the Blessed One. 
Triads of large figures surrounded by smaller attendants are 
common and other supernatural personages guard the vestibules or 
receive homage in separate shrines. The more important of them 
are Bodhisattvas, but many can only be described as deities, 
generally Indian in origin, whose Worship is sanctioned by Buddhism, 
at least by the older sects, though it is really not Buddhist. The 
inquirer is warned that whatever title, Bodhisattva or other, may 
be given to these personages, it is often difficult to ascertain what 
are their real names and attributes. Not only the laity bnt even 
the clergy are generally hazy about such matters unless they have 
some special interest. In the same way in Europe many excellent 
Cliristians might be perplexed if they were asked to give the names 
of the three Magi or of the Archangels. 

The distinction between a Buddha and a Bodhisattva ® is easy 
to defi]ie in technical language. A. Buddha is one who has obtained 
enlightenment and has entered mto^ n^ a Bodhisattva, on 
the other hand, is in the older sense an aspirant to Buddhahopd, 
like Gotama before his enlightenment : in the later sense he is such 
an aspirant who deliberately renounces nirvana in order that he 
may help and instruct mankind. But it will be noticed that 
Sakyamuni in the Lotus and Amitabha in the Sutras which treat 
of his paradise are indubitably Buddhas, yet their very essence is 
benevolent activity and they seem to belong to the same class as 
Avalokitesvara, who indeed is Amitabha’s assistant. One dogmatic 

^ Especially the Prajnap^ramita-hridaya-siitra. See above, p. 83. 

" e.g. Dig. Nili., xx and xxxii. 

^ Butsu ; ^ ^ Boaataii. 

118 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

explanation is tliat, tliougli a Buddha may have passed beyond aU 
things mundane and human so far as his Dharmakaya is concerned, 
■yet his Sambhogakiya remains as an immaterial but still radiant 
and beneficent presence for the help and instruction of mankind. 
The reader must remember that there is in the Mahayana no 
one authoritative statement of these mysteries analogous to the 
Athanasian Creed. Every important sutra uses formula of its own. 
Thus it is asserted that for those who have true intuition there is no 
difference between sarnsara and nirvana, which is equivalent to 
saying none between Bodhisattvas and Buddhas. But though in 
many Ear Eastern sects the great Bodhisattvas are for devotional 
purposes as important as the Buddhas, yet the distinction of nomen- 
clature is, so far as I know, always observed. Some late Tantric 
works seem to neglect it and to speak, for instance, of Manjusri 
as a Buddha.^ 

The scriptures of the Mahayana constantly describe the Bodhi- 
sattvas, like the Buddhas, as hosts of incalculable millions in this 
and other worlds, but the numbers of those who have any sort of 
personality are far more modest. The Dharma-sangraha gives a 
group of eight, obviously those who have been selected for devotional 
purposes.^ The Sikshasamuccaya mentions about twenty, some 
well known, others merely ancient names though generally connected 
with some edifying anecdote. In the Ear East of the present day 
the most important figures are (to call them by their Indian names) 
Maitreya, Avalokitesvara, ManjuM, and Kshitigarbha. Less 
popular but still often represented by imposing images are 
Samantabhadra and Mahasthamapr^pta. A group of twenty-five 
Bodhisattvas (M-ju-go Bosatsu) is sometimes depicted in Japanese 
art, but many of the members have little individuality. 

Maitreya ® is of special importance for the history of doctrine, 
for he connects the older and newer conceptions of the nature of a 
Bodhisattva. He is mentioned in the Bali Canon but with few 
details, All that is shid, however, suggests that his career was 

^ A work is quoted called the Jn&na-sattva-manjusri Adi-Euddha-sadhana. 
What is the meaning of the Tathagata-guhya siitra quoted in Sikshasamuccaya, 
p. 159, which says that when a Bodhisattva has the Dharmakaya, all beings who 
touch him are cured of their passions and distress (Tasya dharmakaya-prabha- 
vitasya Bodhisattvasya) ? . . 

2 Dliarmasan., § 12. Maitreya, Gaganagafija,-, Sammatabhadra, Vajrapani, 
Maujx:sri, iSarvanivaranavishkambhi, Kshitigarbha, Khagarbha. 

3 Sanskrit Maitreya, Pali Metteyya. ^ ^ pronounced Mi-Li in Chinese, 
Miroku in Japanese. He is also called AJita, the unconquered one. 

119 

CH. IV] TEE PANTHEON 

supposed to be closely parallel to ^alcyamum’s own, and to consist 
of a long series of birtbs in wMcb lie followed tlie arduous ideals 
of Buddbabood. Ail branches of Buddhism recognize him, and 
he is mentioned frequently in the later Pali literature and in such 
Sanskrit Buddhist texts as the Lalita-vistara and Mahavastu. 
Nor is he neglected in the Lotus. He is prominent there as a future 
Buddha, but receives instruction as befits his position and appeals 
to Manjusri as one of greater experience.^ He appears to be 
represented in the oldest Gandharan sculptures, and about a.d. 400 
Fa-lisien saw a celebrated statue of him in Udyana which was 
considered to be very ancient. There are still temples dedicated to 
him in Ceylon, but probably his worship was favoured by the 
Sarvastivadins more than by the Thera vadins. It appears to have 
been prevalent in northern India in the centmaes following and 
probably in tliose preceding our era and perhaps owed something 
to Iranian influence, for h is distinctly the Messiah, the Buddha of 
the future who will restore true religion and virtue. This idea, 
though not absent in India, never had much life there, whether the 
destined saviour was regarded as a Buddha or a coming incarnation 
of VishiiUj but among Iranians, as among the Jews, an expected 
li])erator and regenerator does seem to have fired the popular 
imagination. The Chinese pilgrims not only mention statues and 
sites connected with Maitreya but seem to feel a personal devotion 
for him and to think of him as occupied in protecting the faith while 
waiting his own time to appear on earth. He makes revelations, 
and saints like Kasyapa, hidden in mountains and absorbed in 
trance, await his advent.^ I-Ching speaks and even sings of the 
joy of meeting him, much as devout Christians look forward to the 
second coming of Christ, and a temple dedicated to him. as an active 
and benevolent spirit manifesting himself in many forms has been 
found at Turfan. The prince to whose memory the temple was 
erected seems to be regarded as one of the manifestations. The 
Chinese Tripitaka contains several works dealing specially with 
Maitreya,® most of which deal with his advent on earth and exhort 
believers to make themselves worthy of joining the glorious band 
who wall surround him. But one (Nan. 204) treats of him as at present 
lord of the Tusita heaven where the faithful will be welcomed and 

^ Lotus, chap. i. 

® Watters’s Yuari Chvang, i, p. So.’i ff. ; ii, p. 144. 

® See Nanjio’s Catalogue, Xos. 204 to 208. The earliest translator is 
Dharmaraksha, a.d. 265-316 ; the latest I-Ching, A. 0 . 701. 

m BUDDHISM m INDIA AND CHINA [oh. iv 

attended by beautiful nympbs. In Japanese records of the seventh 
and eighth centuries his images are mentioned and we also hear 
of the Mirolm~ye, a festival celebrated in his honour. But in more 
recent times his influence seems to have waned. His statues in the 
Bar East are numerous and sometimes gigantic, though less 
conspicuous in Japan than in neighbouring countries. His position 
as the Buddha to come is not challenged and some secret societies 
in China are said to regard him as their patron. Also, as mentioned 
below, he has undergone a strange transformation as Hotei, one of 
the gods of luck. But Avalokite^vara, Manjusri, and Kshitigarbha 
— or, to call them by their Japanese names, Kwannon, Monju, and 
Jizo — play a far larger part in popular religion. All three have 
certain characteristics which they share to some extent with 
Amitabha. The Pali scriptures contain no hint of their existence, 
and, though they are frequently spoken of in Sanskrit Buddhist 
literature, they appear irregularly and are not always mentioned 
when we should expect it. Their origin is most obscure : even the 
meaning of their names is not clear. It is plausible to suppose that 
they come from Persia or Central Asia, but positive proof is lacking. 
They are not connected with history or mythology and most of the 
anecdotes which have gathered about them are obviously later 
accretions. Though they are represented with the dress and 
attributes of Indian deities, they are more like the Amesha Spentas 
of Zoroastrianism or the Angels of Jewish tradition ; they are not 
personifications of natural forces but pure and benevolent spirits, 
devoid of passion and ambition and desirous only of doing good. 

Avalokitesvara ^ is undoubtedly the personification of divine 
mercy and as such is called Mahakaruna, the Great Compassionate 
One. He is also known as Lokanatha or Lokesvara, Lord of the 
World, and Padmapapi, or Lotus-handed. The earlier images 
represent him as a young prince wearing a JeweUed head-dress, 
usually surmounted by a small image of Amitabha,^ and carrying 
in his left hand a red lotus, while his right is extended in the gesture 
known as charity (varamudra). The name Avalokitesvara is not 
easy to explain. One traditional rendering is the Lord who looks 
down ^(from heaven), but in form avalokita is c^^ 
participle meaning “looked at or observed”. Hence the title has 

^ ^ W Chinese Kuan-Yin. Japanese Kwannon or Kannon. 

® The Ainitayurdhyana S., 19, says that he bears on his head a crown in which 
there is a transformed Buddha standing 25 yojanas high, hut the name is not 
mentioned. 

OH. IV] THE PANTHEON 121 

been explained as referring to the small image in the diadem, which 
looks down on the figure wearing it. But the image is not specially 
characteristic of Avalokitesvara and no particular importance 
seems to attach to it.^ The common Chinese translations Kuan- 
Shih-Yin or Kuan-Yin, the deity who looks upon the region of voices, 
or simply voices, make one suspect that the translator found in the 
latter part of Avalokitesvara not the word Uvara, Lord, but svara, 
sound, ^ and it has been suggested ® that the original title, invented 
not in India but in Central Asia, was Avalokita-svara— supposed 
to mean one aware of imploring voices. This , does not seem to be 
a very classical form, but they may have used queer Sanskrit in 
Central Asia. It is noticeable that the Lotus ^ sometimes uses the 
form Man|usvara instead of Manjusri and consecrates a whole 
chapter to a Bodhisattva called Gadgadasvara. But if the name 
is to be regarded as a genuine Indian word, I would suggest that it 
means Lord of the World and is parallel to the titles Lokesvara and 
Lokanatha, avaloldta meaning that which is looked at, hence the 
visible universe,® If this is so, the well-known names Kwan-Yin 
and Kwannon will be simply mistranslations and the scholarly 
Hsiiaii-Tsang may have purposely tised another rendering. The 
Lotus in cluip. xxiv actually raises the question why Avalokitesvara 
is so called, but unfortunately the explanation is not very lucid, 
being to the effect that it is because he saves from danger all who think 
of him. Possibly the author interpreted Avalokita as meaning 
he who is beheld or looked to by those in trouble, but as emphasis 
is laid on his wonderfulpower to save everywhere. Lord of the whole 
world would be equally appropriate. 

The vTjrship of Avalokitesvara is mentioned by the three Chinese 
pilgrims, but his name seems not to occur in the Lalita-vistara, 
Divj'-avadana, JatakamMa, or in any of the works attributed to 
Asvaghosha. He is mentioned once in the ^ikshasamuccaya, which 
also quotes a work called Avalokiteivara-Vimoksha, but he has not 
the prominence which we might expect. In the larger Sukhlvati- 

^ Also Sanskrit Dictionaries indicate that the base of avalokita and similar 
words means to look at or observe, ratHer than to look down. 

® But Hsiian-Tsang’s rendering is Kwan-TzQ-Tsai, meaning apparently the 
Seeing and Self-existent One, but cdntaimng no reference tp sound. The Tibetan 
rendering is Spyan-ras-gzigs, meaning he who sees with bright eves. 

3 Mironov, in J.R.aA., 1927, p. 241 ff. 

^ Chap, i, versos 50 arid 56. Chap., xxiii. 

® It is noticeable that the shorter form, Avalokita, though used by Europeans, 
is rare in Sanskrit. The Bodhicaryayatara, ii, SI, has Avalokitan natham. 

122 

BVDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

vyuha ^ tie is called son of tlie Buddha and is mentioned in 
connection with MahlsthamaprS,pta. It is the light of these two 
beings which causes Paradise to shine with glory. In the Amitayur- 
dhyana-sutra, as mentioned above, this idea is greatly developed and 
Paradise is represented as ruled by a Triad, the Buddha Amit§,yus 
and the two Bodhisattvas. 

In the first chapter of the Lotus Avalokitesvara is mentioned 
after Mahjusii as second in the list of Bodhisattvas, but chapter 
xxiv, which is probably a later addition, is specially devoted to his 
praises under the name of Samantamukha, he who looks every way 
or is omnipresent. This chapter is often printed separately and 
is one of the most popular books of devotion in China and Japan. 
Three features may be specially noted in this remarkable eulogy. 
First, Avalokitesvara is the great saviour of the world. S^kyamuni 
solemnly declares that one invocation of his name is as efficacious 
as invoking a number of Buddhas equal in number to sixty- two 
thousand times the sands of the river Ganges. He saves those 
who call upon him from physical danger, from shipwreck, execution, 
robbers and violence, and also from moral evils such as passion, 
hatred, and folly. Secondly, he can assume any form^ for his 
benevolent purposes, and in order to appeal to different classes of 
hearers he will preach the law in the guise of a Buddha, a disciple, 
a Brahman, or any shape human or divine. Thirdly, he grants 
children to women who worship him. This boon is generally granted 
by female deities and is interesting as being the first hint of his 
becommg a goddess. In the long list of his transformations a 
female shape is not mentioned, though perhaps the invocation^ 
to his beautiful eyes, full of pity and kindness, has a somewhat 
feminine ring about it. Also the ^ikshasamnccaya ^ states that 
another Bodhisattva, lhasagarbha, appears in the form of a maiden. 
But against such hmts dne must set 'the dogmatic statements that 

1 Siikhav.-vyuha, § 31 and § 34 The latter passage is not very plain, but the 
meaning apparently is that they were both, inhabitants of this world and then 
were reborn in SufchS^vatl, . ^ 

® Even in Indian iconography and without Counting Far Eastern forms Avalo- 
kitesvara is extremely polymorphic. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya {Indian Buddhist 
Iconography) gives fifteen main types of his images and illustrates 108 more from 
a Vihara in Nepal. 

® Lotus, xxiv, verse 20. 

^ Sikshasam., chaf). iv, page 64 of text, quoting the Akasagarbha-sutra. The 
Karanda- vyuha says that in order to impart true knowledge he assumes aU forms, 
including those of father and mother. Matapitrivaineyanam sattvanam m^tp- 
pitrirfipena dharmam de.4ayati. 

123 

CH. IV] pantheon 

there are no women in paradise/ and no clear proof has been 
adduced that Avalokite^vara was regarded as feminine in either 
India or Tibet/ It is -fclierefore remarkable to find that in China, 
Japan, Korea, and Annam the female nature is unquestioned, 
and that it is only in ancient images and pictures that the 
Bodhisattva is represented as a young man. Still, in whatever 
shape he is represented, Avalokitesvara or Kwannon is not a 
sexual deity like KriskjjLa or Durga : there is nothing erotic about 
the figure, be it male or female : the gracious face is inspired solely 
by compassion and benevolence : it is not even interested in 
human love. 

The precise time and circumstances in which Avalokitesvara 
became a goddess are unknown/ The artists of the early T'ang 
dynasty seem to have generally represented him as a young man, 
and female figures of h.im are not common until the Sung period. 
It was under this dynasty that a monk called Pu-Ming published 
in 1102 the story of Kuan-Yin’s earthly life, which did much to 
popularize her worship. It is a religious romance and a product of 
Chinese fancy which o^ves nothing to Indian tradition. There was 
a tendency in both China and Annam to identify Kuan-Yin with 
ancient native heroines, for Faery Queens and magic maidens had 
always appealed to the popular taste. There was also probably 
some confusion between ICuan-Yin and Hariti and also Tara. 
The latter is an Indian goddess with obvious analogies to the 
Baktis of ^iva. Tantric Buddhism, which assigned female 
counterparts to the various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, associated 
her with Avalokitesvara and, like him, she assumes many forms. 
She is mentioned by Hsuan-Tsang,^ but except in Lamaist temples 
is not an object of popular worship in China. It is possible, however, 
that the association of Avalokitesvara with a goddess in Tantric 
literature may have facilitated Ms own change of sex. But Kuan- 
Yin is not an adaptation of Tara. She is undoubtedly the 
Bodhisattva who has a share in Amitabha’s paradise and who is 

^ It was one of Amitabha’s vows that women calling upon him should be born 
in his Paradise, but as men. See Sukhav.-vyuha, § 8, 34. Even the Lotus in the 
chapter quoted {xxiv, verse 31) says : “ There (i.e. in the Paradise ruled by 
Amitabha and Avalokitesvara) no women are to be foimd.” See, too, Lotus, xxii, 
towards the end, for women being reborn in Paradise as men. 

® I confess that the explanation which regards the words raani-padme in the 
celebrated formula as a feminine vocative seems to me very plausible. 

® See for some further observations my Hinduism and Buddhism, vol. ii, p. 17, 

^ See Watters, Yua,^ Choang, vol. ii, pp. 105, 107, 171. 

im BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

extolled in cliapter xxiv of the Lotus — that is, Avalokitesvara 
himselfd 

Everything connected with this great being is multiform and 
protean. Even while listening to a prayer he seems to turn into 
something else. Kuan-Yin, or in the Japanese form of the name, 
Kwannon, is like his other aspects, polymorphic, and gives rise to 
a whole gallery of wonderful shapes which naturally become for 
the ignorant different personalities, like the many Madonnas 
worshipped by the peasantry in Russia. I shall deal with them 
later, for in the main they are products of Japanese imagination 
rather than of Indian tradition. 

Mention should perhaps be made of Potala or Potalaka,^ a sacred 
mountain where Avalokitesvara is supposed to dwell. The name 
occurs in the most various localities : it was borne by two mountains 
in India, one in the south and one near the mouth of the Indus ; 
in later times it was given to the palace of the Grand Lama in Lhasa 
and to another Lamaist building at Jehol in North China, and it 
reappears in the sacred island of P'u-t'o near Ningpo. But it is sad 
to have to confess that, like so many things connected with this 
subject, its origin is most obscure.® The Japanese have legends 
which relate how images of Kwannon were miraculously wafted to 
their shores from Potala in the southern seas and the temple at 
Nachi in Kishu, which is the first of the thirty-three places sacred 
to Kwannon, is called Fudaraku-ji. 

Manjusri,^ the second great Bodhisattva, offers many resemblances 
to Avalokitesvara, but benevolent as he is (and benevolence is the 
essential nature of a Bodhisattva) he is the personification of 
wisdom and intellect rather than of compassion. It is for this that 
he has in his hands the sword of knowledge and a book, and a figure 
from Java (now in the British Museum) which represents him as 
bearing these emblems is one of the most beautiful products of 
Eastern art. Even Tantric Buddhism is chary of associating him 

1 The Japanese show a certain iacliaation. to think of the Pivine Nature as 
feminine. Shinto recognizes the Sun-goddess and many others. In a very 
diflhrent order of ideas Honen says that Amida has “ all the deep sympathy of a 
compassionate mother ” (Coates and lBhizuka, p. 437). 

Potalaka. Japanese, Pudaraku. 

“ Hsuan-Tsang locates it in Malakuta but apparently did hot visit it. See 
Watters, Yuan Chwang, voL ii, pp. 228-232. It is mentioned in one version of 
the Kegon-.sutra (NanjiD, No. 88, chap. 68), but the earlier version (Nanpo, No. 87) 
calls it Koniei (Kuang-Ming). 

• it 

125 

CH. lY] TBE PANTHEON 

witt female companions, but tbe representations of Prajna- 
paramita, tbat is, tbe scripture of tbat name personified as a 
goddess, are practically replicas of bis images. 

He bas mucb tbe same bistory in bterature as Avalokitesvara, 
being unknown to the Pali scriptures and such Sanskrit works as tbe 
Lalita-vistara. But even in tbe earlier Mabayanist siitras be 
assumes great prominence, and tbe Chinese pilgrims mention bis 
worship. Ill the Lotus be is introduced at the bead of the Bodbi- 
sattvas and is styled tbe Prince Eoyal (Kumarabbuta), a title wbicli 
be also receives in tbe Lesser Sukbavati-vyuba, apparently because 
it is bis duty to see to tbe preservation of tbe true Faith in tbe 
interval between two Buddhas. Tbe Lotus also recounts bow be 
gives instruction to Maitreya and bow be once visited the depths 
of tbe sea and converted tbe daughter of the Icing of tbe Nfigas. 
He is the principal interlocutor in many important sutras, for 
instance, tbe Yuima-kyo or Instruction to Viinalakirti,^ wbicb is 
very popular in Japan, and the Chinese Tripitaka contains several 
works composed in bis honour, some of which must be of respectable 
antiquity. 2 He is mentioned more frequently than any other 
Bodbisattva in tbe ^iksblsamuccaya, wbicb concludes with a 
remarkable prayer to him as “ sorrow’s physician, the giver of the 
feast of happiness, by whom in every way we live 

The name Manjusri is somewhat strange, but even in Vedic 
Sanskrit there are forms like Agnisri and Esbatra&t. Tbe variants 
Manjiinatlia, Manjnsvara, and Manjugbosha are also found. But tbe 
use of tbe word Manju, sw^eet or charming, as applied to tbe spirit 
of transcendental wisdom, does not seem very appropriate and one 
is tempted to seek for some other derivation of tbe name in tbe 
languages of Central Asia. Tbe Huidus themselves were disposed 
to connect him with China, but traditions to this effect must 
be used with caution, for they arc all late. I-Cbing^ is tbe 
first to tell us tbat tbe Indians believed tbat Manjuh'i came from 
China, but the earlier pilgrims HsuamTsang and Fa-Hsien, though 
they speak of his worship, do not mention any such belief, and since 
it is a point wbicb would have interested Chinese authors and readers, 

^ Vimalcakirttinirde^a. Nanjio, Nos. 144-7, 149, ISl. 

* e.g. the Ratnakaranda-vyuha (N., 168, 169) translated in a.d, 270 and the 
Mafiiusri-vikridita sutra in a.d. 313. 

® He is also mentioned several times in the Bodhicarvavatara, especially in 
Book X. 

^ See Takakusu’s translation, p. 136. 

126 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

their silence is remarkable. Clearly when I-Ching made his 
pilgrimage (671-695) the idea that Mahjusri came from China had 
become famihard but by that time China had become celebrated 
as a Buddhist centre and the visits of distinguished Chinese 
Buddhists may have created the impression that it was a haunt of 
Bodhisattvas and Tantric adepts. One form of the goddess T§.r§, 
is called Mahacmatara,^ but it has no Chinese characteristics and the 
name seems to have been used simply to give a spice of exotic 
romance. But though the traditions about the connection of 
ManjuM with China seem to be late and imaginative, they may 
possibly be based on the forgotten knowledge that he was originally 
introduced into India by the Kushans or some other invading tribe. 
On the one hand, when he first appears, for instance in the Lotus, 
his position is assured and there is no hint that he is a newcomer 
whose presence needs any explanation : on the other he has, hke 
most Bodhisattvas, a certain pure and abstract quality, an aloofness 
from sex and mythology, which seem to dissociate him from native 
Indian deities lilce Krishna and recall the Amesha-Spentas of 
Persia. 

The later stories ^ connect him definitely with the moimtain of 
Wu-T'ai-Shan in the province of Shansi, rendered in Sanskrit as 
Panca&sha, or Panca^ikha, and still covered with temples erected 
in his honour, the oldest of which dates from the end of the fifth 
century. The Svayambhu Purana relates that when residing there 
he became aware that the Adi-Buddha, the original essence of all 
Buddhas, had manifested itself in the form of a flame rising from a 
lotus on the waters of a lake which then filled the valley of Nepal. 
Accompanied by his disciples and by the King of China who was 
called Dharmakara, he set out to adore the miraculous flame and, 
finding that the water rendered approach difficult, cleft the mountain 
barrier to the south with his sword and drained the valley. He then 
erected several buildings, made Dharmakara King of Nepal and 
returned home, where he obtained the divine form of a Bodhisattva. 
Some have treated this legend as a reminiscence of the introduction 
of Chinese culture into Nepal, but the story is late, for the Sva- 
yambhu Purapa in its present form is not earlier than the sixteenth 

^ Japanese tradition says that the Indian Bodhisena who arrived at Nara in 
735 began his pilgrimage by going to China to find Manju^rl. 

2 Benoytosh Bhattacaryya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, p. 77. 

® Found in the Svayambhu Parana and supported by the text appended to 
various miniatures. 

CH. IV] THE ^ ^ 127 

century. Earlier accounts do not suggest ttat tEere is any con- 
nection between Manju&i and Nepal or that be is a recently deified 
hero, for in tbe Lotus be is accepted as tbe chief of the Bodbisattvas 
and is appealed to as one who has long experience of tbe teaching 
of many Buddhas in tbe past. Still, it cannot be denied that in 
later times there was a widespread impression that he had been 
active in China and the lands to the west of it. He was said to have 
been incarnate in the monk Vairocana who introduced Buddhism 
into Khotan^ and in the Tibetan reformer Atisa. In a.d. 824 
a Tibetan envoy -was sent to ask the Chinese Court for an image of 
Manjusri and the Grand Lamas recognized that he was incarnate 
in the Emperor, being influenced perhaps in later times by the 
name Manohu. 

Kshitigarbha ^ makes his appearance in Sanskrit literature later 
than the other great Bodbisattvas and does not seem to have 
attained much importance on Indian soil at any period. In China 
and Japan, however, under the names of Ti-Tsang and Jizo ^ he 
became a most popular deity. He is not mentioned in the Lotus 
nor, so far as I Imow, in any of the great Mahayanist siitras. But 
the Dharma-sangraha includes him among the eight great 
Bodbisattvas, he is invoked in the Bodhicaryavatara, and a work 
called the Kshitigarbha-sutra is several times quoted in the 
Sflrshasamucca}^. The Chinese Tripitaka ^ contains books 
composed in his honour, but the earliest translation of them w^as 
made between a.d. 397 and 439. 

The name seems to mean Earth-womb or Earth-storehouse and 
he is often coupled with a more shadowy double called Akasagarbha 
or Kha-garbha.® The original meaning of the title is not very 
plain, but it was interpreted to mean that he is Lord of the nether 
world. In China especially he plays a great part in ceremonies for 

A See Watters, Y&an Gliwarig, \2, 296, 300. 

® In Ost-Asiat, ZUft., 1913-15, Visser has published a most interesting mono- 
graph on this Bodhisattva and on the strange transformations which he has 
undergone in various countries. 

® Ti-Tsang ^ is a literal Chinese translation of Kshitigarbha. The same 
characters are read in Japanese pronunciation as Jizo. 

* Kanjio, Nos. 64, 65, and 1003. 

Though Akasagarbha, or Kokuzo ^ ^ has not become a popular 
deity like his counterpart, several works in the Tripitaka are written in his honour 
{Nanjio, 67-70) and his statue may be sometimes seen in Japan at the right hand 
of Sakyamuni or Vairocana. Kobo Daishi is said to have regarded him as his 
personal protector. In some forms of Ryobu-Shinto he is identified with the 
deity of Mt. Asama. See Anesaki, History of Japanese Eeligion, plate ix, fig. C. 

128 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

the welfare of the dead, and large temples often contain special 
halls dedicated to him. He has vowed to deliver all creatures from 
hell : he visits them in their places of suffering and endeavours to 
procure their release. He is even said to suffer in their stead. 
In Japan he is the special protector of dead children. But his 
benevolent activities have many sides . The earth was often thought 
of as a goddess and Kshitigarbha has some feminine traits. In 
previous births he is said to have been twice a woman : in Japan 
he was identified with a mountain goddess and he helps women in 
labour. He is also a guardian of roads and is sometimes represented 
as a militant priest on horseback. But the commonest images are 
those which show him as a monk, with staff in hand and shaven 
head. Frequently he is represented by six images signifying that 
he multiplies his benevolent personality and helps beings in all the 
six states of existence. 

Samantabhadra, or Fugen,i is mentioned in the Dharma-sangraha 
and is the hero of chapter xxvi of the Lotus, where he vows to 
undertake the special duty of protecting those who follow the 
doctrine there expounded. He describes himself as riding on a 
white elephant with six tusks and he imparts a talismanic formula 
which averts all danger. He is the patron saint of Mount Qmei 
in China, ^ with which he is associated much as Manju^r! is with 
Wu-t'ai-shan. In Japan his image is not unfrequently to be seen 
on the right hand of ^akyamurd’s and he has an honourable place 
in Buddhist tradition, though at present he may not have many 
worshippers. For instance, he appeared to Honen at the beginning 
of his career. A Japanese priest told me that Fugen and Jizo are 
considered to be the same, but I have found no evidence of such an 
identity in India. 

As mentioned above, Mahasthamaprapta ^ is described in both the 
Larger Sukhavati-vyuha and the Amitajuirdhyana-sutra as one 
of the spirits who administer Amitabha’s paradise. The latter 
work instructs its readers to meditate on him and asserts that in 
appearance he is as glorious as Avalokitesvara. The two, no doubt, 

^ ^ ^ Chinese P'u-Hsion, Japanese Pugen. 

2 For an interesting account of this sacred mountain, see Johnston, From 
Peking to Mandalay. 

3 ^ ^ Chinese Ta-Shi-Chih, Japanese Dai-sei-shi. He is said to 
be the Arhat Maudgalyayana deified, For mention of him in the Amida-sutras 
see SukhS-v.-vyuha, § 34, and Amit.-Dhyana S., § 19. The Lotus mentions him 
and Avalokitesvara together in chap, i, but says nothing about Sukhavati. 

129 

CH. IV] THE PANTHEON 

are not equal in popular esteem, but SeisM, as be is conmionlf called 
in Japan, is constantly represented in art as attending on Aniitabha 
with. Kwannon, one on either band, and with them be visits tbe 
deathbeds of tbe faithful and welcomes the dying to paradise. 
The great temple of Zenkoji at Nagano is dedicated to Amida, 
Kwannon, and Daiseishi. His name alludes to strength and he 
gives strength, but Ms special attributes are not very clear, and 
though a chapter of the Lotus (xix) is addressed to him, it does not 
tell us much about his personality. According to J apanese tradition 
he was incarnate in Honeii. 

The great beings of whom we have been treating are often spoken 
of as celestial or superhuman Bodhisattvas, and rightly, for, as they 
appear in most Mahayanist sutras, they seem to be inhabitants of 
another world, or in the language of Christian theology, angels. 
If their Iranian origin can be proved, this conception of their nature 
may be the oldest. But it must be remembered that, according to 
Buddhist theory, whether ancient or modern, Hina- or Mahayanist, 
Bodhisattvas and Buddhas are merely the perfection and full 
development of humanity. Even Sakyamuni and Amitabha, if 
considered not as the Dhaimakaya but as individual existences 
having relations with this world, attained their present position 
by the good resolutions which they formed as human beings and 
maintahied through a long series of births. In the principal 
Sanskrit sutras there is little disposition to dwell on the previous 
existences of Avalokite^vara, Mafijusri, and the other great Bodlii- 
sattvas, but occasional references show that they were believed to 
have taken vows and dedicated themselves through incalculable 
ages to the salvation of the human race. The Far East was 
naturally inclined to euhemerism, to turn great men into deities, 
and if there was no ancient legend about the human origin of a god, 
to invent some edifying romance. In this way arose many stories 
which have no precise prototypes in India about the kindness and 
unselfishness shown by Kwannon and Jizo in other existences. 
But neither Chinese nor Japanese seem to have had much taste for 
a class of literature which was very popular in India and Ceylon, 
the Jataka stories which tell of the Buddha’s previous births as an 
animal. 

130 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. iv 

4 

As already mentioned, tlie Mahayana bronglit together the 
human and divine.^ It dilates on the numbers, power, and 
splendour of the heavenly host in language which goes far beyond 
anything ^vhich can be found in the Pali Nikayas, but at the 
same time it not only assures the faithful that they can become 
Bodhisattvas and Buddhas but bids them try to do so and to begin 
here and now.^ 

The ideal of the Bodhisattva takes the place of the older ideal of 
the Arhat and the moral point of view undergoes a corresponding 
change : the goal is not personal and individual salvation, but the 
salvation and happiness of all Hving beings. Nor does this career, 
though strenuous, involve a monastic life. The Ratnakaranda- 
sutra ® says expressly that even a man of the world may become a 
Bodhisattva, that is, a devout person who tries to perform to the 
full the duties which religion prescribes. The manual of Santideva 
describes the rules of life and faith which he who desires to become 
a Bodhisattva should follow. The neophyte, when first conceiving 
the thought of obtaining Bodhi or supreme enlightenment, offers 
adoration to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, surrenders himself to 
them unreservedly and takes refuge in them.^ He confesses his sins 
and feels a sympathetic joy in the good actions of all living beings : 
he makes over to others whatever merits he may possess, he gives 
himself and all his possessions as an offering for the salvation of the 

1 Eckhart is quoted as jhaving said, “Our Lord says to every living 
aoul; I became man for you. If you do not become God for me you do 
mo wrong.” 

® The idea of bocoming a Buddha is not entirely unknown in Ceylon, where the 
following prayer is in use : Sfla-nekhamma-pahnadin puretva sabbaparamin 
Parami-sikharam-patva, Buddho hessam anuttaro. 

A devout Siabalcse Buddhist told me that it is usual to close all prayers with 
a mental aspiration to become (1) an Arhat, (2) a Pratyeka Buddha, (3) or a Buddha, 
but that the first aspiration is the commonest. It will be noticed that the word 
Bodhisattva docs not oceur, 

3 Qiioted in the Sikshasaxnuccaya, p. 6. Ratnakararidasutracea prithagjano'pi 
Bodhisattva iti jnayate. Of., too, the same work’s quotation from the 
Ugraparipricchd given aboye, p. 96. 

* The old formula of the Hfaayana is preserved. Bodhicaryavatara, ii, 48. 
Adyaiva saranam yami jagannatham The forniula of self-surrender is found, 
ibid., ii, 8. Darlami catmanam jihebhyah, sarvena sarvam ca tadatmajebhyah : 
Parigraham me kunitagrasattv&h • yushmasu dasatvam upaimi bhaktya. “ I give 
myself to the Jinas and their sons entirely and without reserve. Take possession 
of me. Great Beings. In devotion I make myself your slave.” 

yet ill many respects it is clear tliat tliis new tlieoiy lias grown out 
of tlie old rules and promises dealing witli tlie religious life and its 
liappy culnimation. The real change is the emphatic substitution 
of an unselfish and altruistic ideal— the salYation of the world — for 
the old aim of personal peace and happiness.^ But the P4ramitas, 
or virtues, appear already in the later Pali literature. The 
Cariyapitaka, which is practically a small collection of Jatakas, 
is divided into three sections illustrating three of them, and the 
Nid4iiakatha makes the future Buddha declare, when making 
his vow, that he will practise no less than, teii.^ Surrender of oneself 
to the Buddha is mentioned in the Pali commentaries,® and even 
the division of the Bodhisattva’s career into numbered stages has 

of the fetters broken. The aspirant who has broken three is called 

1 Bodhicaryavatara, iii, 10. Atmabhavains tatiiil bhogan sarva-try-adYa- 
gatam subbam Hirapekshas tyajamy esha sarva sattYartba-siddbaye. 

2 ^}]a, ksbanti, yirya, dbyana, and prajila. Dana, tboiigb meaning 
liberality, is used lilce caga in the sense, of readiness to give life and everything 
else for others, and hence is ecpiivalont to eelf-sacrifice. Special chapters are 
devoted to the other five parainitas but not to dana, apparently because it is 
assumed from the beginning and is the impulse which promiits the original vow. 

® Even in the Pali Pilakas the altruistic ideal seems to be implied thougb it is 
not clearly enunciated, feu* a Sammasambuddiia like Gotama is invariably repre- 
sented as superior to a Paccekabuddha who has the same knowledge but keep.s 
it to himself and docs not preach. 

^ Dana, sila, nekkhamma, viriya, khanti, pailila, adhitthana, saeca, metta, 
■upekkha. „„ 

® For Atmabhavaniyatana, surrender of oneself to the Buddha, compare 
'Sumangalavilasini, i, 231 (on the Samahuaphala S.). Ajjadim katva aham attana-m 
Buddhassa uiyatemi, Dhammassa, sanghassati evam Buddhadinam attaparicca- 
janam, etc. 

132 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

Sota-apanna, tie who has entered the current, that is the stream 
of salvation which will bear him to nirvana in not more than seven 
births. The Sakadagamin will be born only once more in this world 
and the Anagamin, or he who does not return, also once only but 
in a Brahma world, while the Arhat, or he who has broken all the 
bonds, attains nirv&na here and is not subject to rebirth.^ 

It is not clear to what extent the stages in a Bodhisattva’s career 
were regarded as practical realities. Though ^S,ntideva sets up 
a high ideal, he distinctly writes for ordinary human beings, but 
in Asanga we seem to leave this world and to soar among Buddhas 
in other spheres. Was it usual or possible to say that a living 
person had reached a particular stage ? There seems to be no 
evidence on which we can decide, but at any rate in Japan the ten 
stages are not a part of practical rehgion, though in the Zen sect 
the Ko-an, or problems which students have to solve, are divided into 
classes according to their proficiency. The title of Bodhisattva 
(Bosatsu) is freely bestowed on eminent churchmen of the past and 
may be used colloquially of a generous person, just as we say he is 
a perfect saint or an angel. But the aspiration to become a Buddha 
has lost most of its meaning owing to the politeness of the Japanese 
language. The dead are habitually spoken of as Buddhas (hotoke) ^ 
and to become a Buddha (jobutsu) is merely a pious expression 
for dying, much like the inscription " entered into his rest ” on a 
tombstone, and has no dogmatic significance. 

But the aspiration to become a Bodhisattva implies aims and 
ideals which are still living and influence religion. One is the duty 
of treating others as we would wish to be treated ourselves, which 
is common as a theory (though not as a practice) in many creeds. 
To make no difference between oneself and others is a well-known 
Indian precept among both Brahmans and Buddhists.® ^antideva 
says ^ with beautiful simplicity : " I ought to alleviate others’ 
suffering, because it is suffering like my own. j ought to show 
kindness to others because they are beings like myself.” This 

^ Compare, too, the list of six happy destinies enumerated at the end of Maj. 
Nile., xxii. 

® The expression is probably due to the analogy of Shinto in which the dead 
arc said to become Kami, an extremely vague word. 

® See e.g. Mahabharata, iiii, -557l, where the proper rule of action, is said 
to be to look on one’s neighbour as oneself (3,tmaupamyena). Cf, the Sigalovada- 
autta, 31— a man should minister to his friends (samanattat%a) by treating them 
as he treats hirnself. 

* Bodhicary., viii, 94. 

CH. IV] TEE PANTHEON 133 

motive, tlie pursuit of otliers’ happiness at the risk of sacrificing 
one’s own, is the moral side of the doctrine of anatta and is insisted 
on throughout the ethical literature of the Mahayana, But side 
by side with it we find held up another motive which is new and not 
common in Indian theology. Since Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
are animated by love for all and by the desire to help all, they rejoice 
when living creatures are happy and grieve when they suffer. 
Hence uiildndness and want of consideration for others is an offence 
against these merciful beings, nay, it causes them actual pain. 
On the other hand, unselfishness and paiticniarly the transfer 
of one’s own merits to others gives them pleasure. Saiitideva 
discourses eloqiientty on the duty of pleasing our Masters (svamiiiah) 
and the sin of making them feel distress.^ 

Beautiful as the moral ideals of the Mahayana often are, they 
are sometimes threatened by a danger which is common in Indian 
religious systems and which seems to us to arise from a certain 
want of common sense and proportion, a tendency to exaggeration 
and extravagance which does not shrink from immorality, extreme 
asceticism, and even suicide, if such consequences seem to follow 
from exclusive attention to any one principle. Though tlie Buddha 
himself protested against this fault, ^ his followers have not always 
escaped it. The doctrine that a Bodhisattva will go to hell and 
suffer there instead of the unhappy inhabitants is perhaps justified 
by the theory of the transfer of merit. If we can make over our 
good deeds to others, parity of reasoning suggests that we can accept 
the responsibility for their sins. But there is something shocking 
in the idea of powerful and benevolent beings suffering the torments 
of the damned, and we read with pleasure other passages which 
state that they descend even into Avici as gaily as wild geese into 
a lotus pond.® But what is to be said of the proposition that a 
Bodhisattva may commit sins if he thereby increases the happiness 
of others 1 This astounding doctrine is clearly enunciated in the 
Bodhicaryavatara and illustrated in the ^ikshasamuccaya.* 
The latter work quotes a story from the TJpaya-Kaiisalya-sutra 

See especially BodMeary., -pi, 119-124. 

2 In formulating the Path he recommended the middle way and tlie avoitiance 
of extremes. Both self-indulgence and self-torture are ignoble. Cf. Slaj. Xik., 
h'ii, about the fakirs who imitated the ways of dogs and oxen. 

® Bodhicaiy., viii, 107, and Sikshasam., p. 360. 

* Bodhicary., v, 84. Evam buddhva parartheshu bhavet satafcam utthitah : 
Xi.«liiddhaxn apy anujiiatam kripalor ai'thadar.4inah. The explanations and 
quotations will be found in pages 1G7-8 of the Sikshasam. (Bendall’s edition). 

134 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

wliicli relates how a young man who' had kept a vow of chastity 
through many births broke it to make a certain lady kappy, and 
it emphatically asserts that if a Bodhisattva sees that he can cause 
a single being to acquire merit at the cost of himself committing 
a sin which will make him burn in hell for long ages, it is his duty to 
commit that sin. The Eatnamegha is cited as sajdng that it is 
permissible to kill a man who is intending to commit a deadly sin 
and thus to prevent him. '‘And so,” is the conclusion, “when 
there is an opportunity of doing good to others, a sin arising from 
passion is declared to be no sin.” 

Somewhat dangerous, too, is the efficacy ascribed to confession, 
that is, not a public avowal made before a congregation as contem- 
plated by the older discipline, but merely an acknowledgment of 
one’s sins made in the course of private devotions before the 
Buddhas. These merciful saviours desire nothing better than to 
forgive and grant peace of mind. Confession made before them 
secures pardon of even deadly sins, including parricide.^ 

It is sad to find that one of the supplementary chapters of the 
Lotus 2 countenances religious suicide and self-inflicted tortures 
which, though condemned by Gotama, are only too common in 
Hinduism. It relates how in ancient times the Bodhisattva 
BhaisBajya-raja burnt his own body in honour of the Buddha. 
Such self-immolation is commended as the highest form of worship, 
and we are told that to burn a toe, or finger, or a limb at the shrine 
of the Tathagata is more meritorious than to give up a kingdom. 
Subsequently cauterizing the head became part of the ordination 
ceremony and still is so in China.® I-Ching discusses at considerable 
length and reprobates the practice of burning the body and limbs. 
He comments on such Hindu customs as drowning oneself in the 
Ganges, but justly observes that the Buddha condemned them and 
that we are “disregarding his noble teaching ” if we burn our 
bodies,^ The good sense of the Japanese seems to have made them 
incline to the same opinion, but it is said that attractive nuns 
sometimes brand their faces in order to spoil their beauty. 

^ See tSikshasam., p- 169, where the formula of confession (desana) is given and 
the names of thirty-five Buddhas, beginning with Sakyamuni, who are sometimes 
called the Buddhas of confession. 

** Lotus, chap. xxii. 

* See, too, De Gmot, Code du MaJiayma en Chine, p. 228, and the article of 
MacGowau (Glimeae iJecorder, 1888) there cited for cases of self-cremation, in China. 

I-Ching, A Record of JSuddkist Praetioes^ irms. Tskkakuan, oh&ys. xxxvUi~xh 

CH. IV] THE PANTHEON 136 

5 

In addition to Buddhas and Bodhisattvas a multitude of images 
may be found in the temples of the older Japanese sects, especially 
in the neighbourhood of Kyoto and Kara. Many of them have 
a definite connection with Buddhist tradition. They are guardians 
of the faith or attendants on higher powers, or disciples, or spiritual 
beings with which the Mantrayana, or Shingon sect, peopled the 
spheres. But some are simply Indian deities unknown to the 
Pitakas, whose worship is conducted under Buddhist auspices, 
though in the strict sense it can hardly be said to be Buddhist.^ 
With very few exceptions all these deities and personages are of 
Indian origin, though Japanese attributes and legends have collected 
round some of them. For a long period Buddhist priests w^ere in 
charge of Shinto temples, but the reformers of 1868 put an end 
to this arrangement, and while it lasted it meant that Buddhist 
emblems were introduced into Shinto shrines rather than vice versa. 
ShintS used no images : its deities were identified with Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas but did not as a rule take their places beside them 
in the same company. 

Of guardian deities the principal are the Two Kings and the 
Foui“ Deva Kings.^ The former are represented by two gigantic 
figures of ferocious aspect which are to be found at the outer gate 
of most Japanese temples. They are sometimes described as 
Brahma and Indra, but their more correct designations are Kongo- 
Kikishi and Misshalcu-Kikishi.® Perhaps they were originally two 
figures of Vajrapliii. The Four Kings are generally placed in an 
inner court and are somewhat similar figures who hold weapons 
in their hands and trample demons underfoot. They are the regents 
of the four quarters and in the Nikayas are represented as paying 
homage to the Buddha,'^ It is said that Amoghavajra, who was 

’ It is not, liowever, contrary to Buddhism to honour such deities. See above, 
Chap. II, pp. 57-8. 

t: ^ Ni-6 : IS i Shi-tenno. The names of the two Kings 
are ^ m ± Kongo-Rikishi and ^ ^ ^ ~P MishakU'Rikishi. 
The four Kings presiding over the points of the compass are ^ ^ Jikoku or 
Dhritarashtra, the East : ^ @ Komoku or Virupaksha, the South : i| l± 
Z6 j o or Viriidhaka, the West : ^ Tamon ; or VaMravana, the North. 

® See Nanjio, 23, Ratnakuta. seetion. No, 3,wMch is called in Japanese pro- 
nunciation ^ ^ Pil] Misshaku-Kongo-llikishi-E. 

* Dig. Nik., XX and xxxii, where they are styled Cattaro Maharaja. 

136 BUnmiSM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cii. iv 

in Ciiina between 719 and 774, first introduced tbe practice of 
placing tlieir images in temples. But tlie Mliongi mentions tliem 
(tbougli without special reference to tlieir being guardians of temples) 
in its entries for the year 642 and also records the erection of the 
temple of Shitennoji in 593. Vaisravana or Bishamon, the regent 
of the North, who is often identified with Kuvera, the god of wealth 
and is lilmwise regarded as the god of war, is also worshipped 
independently and has temples of his own. The Hachi-bu-shu/ 
or genii of eight classes, are the Nagas, Yakshas, Kinnaras, Asuras, 
etc., who are also represented in the Nikayas as doing homage to the 
Buddha, either independently or as forming the retinue of the Four 
Kings. A more special group are the so-called Twelve Generals ® 
who are the retainers of the Healing Buddha and correspond to the 
twelve vows which he made.® 

More difficult to define are the Myo-o, a class of deities which 
originated in the mysteries of the Tantric school, though some of 
them have a much wider popularity. The name appears to corre- 
spond to the Sanskrit Vidyaraja ^ and, like the Two Kings, they are 
terrible in appearance, but this awful aspect is assumed merely 
to frighten evildoers and guard the Buddhas and their servants. 
The best known of the My6-6 is Fudo,® whose name is a translation 
of Acala, the immovable, a form of Siva. The great temple of 
Narita is dedicated to him and burnt offerings form part of his 
worship.® Another is Aizen,’ also a deity of terrible appearance, 
though popularly regarded as the god of Love, He appears to be 
a personification of the Divine Love which embraces the whole 
Universe and destroys all vulgar passions. 

These beings are the product of a special type of religious fancy 
prevalent in India in the period when late Tantric Buddhism 

/V ^ Hachi-bu-shu. 

v-h z: # M- The story of the twelve vows is related in the ligfPiD 
^ M Yao-shih-ju-lai-pen-yuan-ehing, Nanjio, 170. See also Nanjio, 

■,171-3.' V _ ■' ■ ■ ■ , 

® Near the entrance of Chinese temples there is generally an image of the guardian 
deity Wei-To, Whose name has passed into Japanese as Ita-ten and has become a 
proverbial expression for a swift runner. But statues of him are not common. 

^ See Przylixski, “ Les Vidyaraja : Contribution h Thistoire de la Magic dans 
les Sectes Mahayanistes,” 1923, pp. 301-318. He pointe out that 

in its oldest use Vidvara|a means the personification of a magic formula. 

® They are called Goma, which is the Sanskrit word homa. 

’ ^ ^ P 3E Aizen Myo-o. 

CH.IV] ms PANTimON 137 

became amalgamated witli the worship of Siva and Ms consort. 
Siva is not said to become incarnate like Vishim, but from time to 
time he shows himself in forms which are generally terrible and is 
surrounded by fierce attendants with many heads and limbs. 
In Tibet an excessive love for these strange and horrible shapes 
often makes a Buddhist temple look like a pandemonium, but the 
good sense and artistic feeling of the Japanese kept this tendency 
within bounds and, as a rule when they represent tlie sterner side 
of the divine nature, the figures are awe-inspiring rather than 
monstrous. 

As a counterpoise to these well-meaning but alarniiiig guardians 
of the faith, Japanese temples often contain images of human saints 
orEakan (arhats). A group of Sakyamuni’s ten principal disciples 
may often be seen. It includes, besides the vreli-known Apostles 
such as Sariputta, others such as Euriina (Pupna), Eakora, that is 
Eahula, the Buddha’s son, and Subhuti, 'who figures in the Biamonti 
Cutter and other Mahayanist siitras. Statues of the pious layman 
Yiiima, or Vimalakirti, are also frequent. Groups of sixteen or 
eighteen may also be fonnd, though not so often as in China. 
In a few temples, such as the Dairyuji at Hagoya, are images of no 
less than five hundred Eakan.^ 

The respect paid to Binzuru,®' or Pm<Jola, seems peculiar to 
J apan, though the practice of making offerings to him and inviting 
Mm to visit a particular temple was known in China and even in 
India. His image is usually foimd seated outside temples, for 
legends tell how he somehow offended against the rules of the order 
and was banished from the sacred precincts,. But according to 
another story his entry into nirvana was indefinitely delayed and 
meanwhile he W'as charged with the protection of the Church, 
In Japan he -underwent another transformation and somehow 
came to be regarded as the God of MedicinA and even to be styled 
a Buddha, Suppliants afflicted with disease rub the corresponding 
part of Ms image so that the limbs and features of Ms statues are 
often worn away. 

In Binzuru, as in Jizo, we seem to find a mixture of an Indian 
original with native legends, and a similar comhinatlon is still more 
striking in the mysterious deity Kompira,® though it is by no means 
clear that the Indian part of his composite character is the oldest. 

1 This number is also not uncommon in large Chinese temples, 

■« « a. 

138 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cii.vi 

A great temple dedicated to Mm stands above tbe town, of tbe same 
name in SMkokn and is said to have been built by Kobo DaisM. 
It was formerly served by BuddMst priests but has now been trans' 
ferred to SMnto control. Possibly Kompira, wbo is specially 
worsMpped by sailors, was an ancient local deity of tbe sea, but 
in Buddhist times he was identified with Kumbhira, who in the 
Digha Mkaya ^ is the presiding deity of Rfijagaha and comes to do 
homage to the Buddha. Later Buddhism made him a spirit in the 
retinue of Bhaishajyaguru and Shintoists identified him with 
Susano-6 and other Shinto gods. 

Kishi-Mojin ^ is another Indian figure with a curious history. 
She is the Indian Hariti, an ogress whom the Buddha converted 
and cured of her wicked habit of eating children, as is related in the 
Sarvfistivadin version of the Vmaya. In one of the later chapters 
of the Lotus ^ she is represented as appearing before him with other 
female monsters (Rakshasi), and offering to teach a charm which 
will protect Ms disciples against devils, goblins, sorcerers, and other- 
plagues. I-Ching describes how offerings were made to her in 
Indian monasteries,^ and Nichtcen established the same usage in the 
institutions of Ms sect, doubtless on account of the passage in the 
Lotus. In Japan she has come to be regarded as the special guardian 
and protectress of cMldren and has perhaps been to some .extent 
confounded with Kwannon. • 

It is remarkable that Japanese Buddhism has preserved so many 
Indian figures which are lost or unknown in China. This is illus- 
trated by Kishi-Mojin and also by several Indian deities of whom 
we hear nothing or very little in Pali literature but who are still 
worsMpped in Japan. Foremost among them is Ganesa, called 
Shoten Sama or Kangi-ten,® to whom several temples are dedicated, 
notably one at Ikoma, between Kara and Osaka. His images 
generally consist of two human figures with elephant’s heads, 
wearing long robes and standing face to face with their trunks 

^ Dig. Nik., XX, 8. Kumbhiro Bajagahiko Vepiiilas.ga nivesanam Bhiyyo nam 
sata-sahassam Takkhanam payirupasati Kumbhiro Rajagahilio so p'aga sauiitim 
■vanam. The word seems to mean a crocodile. 

® ^ *5^ jji^. Sometimes called Kishi-Bojiti. See Peri’s monograph 
on her m B.E.F.E.O., 1917, pp, 1-101, where the literature about her is collected 
and translated. The most important works are the Sarvnistivadin Vinaya, N. 1121, 
and the Mahamayd-sutra, N. 380. 

^ ® Lotus, xxj, near the end. 

^ I-Ching (trans. Takakusu), Records of Buddhist Practices, p. 37. 

^ M Ji or IP: W- 

CH. IV] THE PANTHEON 139 

on eacli other's shoulders. They are kept in brass cases, remarkably 
like the lingakosas which are occasionally found in India and were 
extensively used in medieval Cambodja. Offerings of food, 
including sake or alcohol, are spread out before the case and an image 
of Kwannon is generally worshipped in the same shrine. Ganesa 
seems to be unknown in China at the present day except in Lamaist 
temples, but the Chinese Tripitaka contains several sutras ^ which 
describe the ritual of his worship. The translations are ascribed 
to Bodhiruohi, Amoghavaira, and others of about the same period, 
so that this deity must have been himihar to the Chinese of the 
eighth century. But it is stated - that m a.d. 1017 the Emperor 
Clien-Tsung issued an edict prohibiting the inclusion in the Tripitaka 
of the sutra about him in four volumes and the translation of similar 
works, so that probably his cult was suppressed after this time. 

Ganesa is sometimes called a Bodhisattva,^* but sometimes under 
the name of Binayaka seens to be regarded as a power to be dreaded 
and propitiated. The word (Vinayaka in Sanslcrit) really means 
the remover of obstacles, but in some Buddhist works was understood 
as meaning a spirit who creates them, though he can also remove 
them if appeased.*^ 

Another Indian deity who has several temples in Japan is Benten 
or Benzaiten,® that is vSarasvati, the goddess of eloquence and 
riches, who is also coimected with islands as is testified liy her 
shrines at the Shinobazu Bond at Ueno and at Bnoshima. A 
chapter of the Suvarnaprabhasottamaraja-sutra ® is consecrated 
to her. Kichijo-ten or Lakshmi, Katen or Agini, that is Agni the 
God of fire, regarded as a purifier, Suiten or Varuna now become 
the god of luck, and Kojin or Rudra ^ ail still have worshippers ; 

^ The new edition of the Chinese Tripitaka published by Takakusu {“ Taisho 
Issaikyo ”) contains ten of them, No.s. 1260-1275, in vol. xxi, pp. 286-293. Most 
of them are quite short, but No, 1272 is in four books. 

“ In the Fo-tsu-t%ng-ehi of Chih-Pan (Nanjio, No. 1661), pp. 405-6. The 
sutra in four Tolume-s, Takakusu, vol. 21, serial No. 1271, authorizes the use of 
all kinds of flesh (including human flesh) for ritual purposes. 

® e.g. in Takakuau’s Trip., vol. 21, No. 1271. 

^ A work called the Vinayaka-sutra (Takakusu, vol. 21, No. 1270) says that 
Mahesvara had 3,000 children, of whom 1,500 on the right hand were benevolent 
and under the command of Senayaka, an incarnation of Kwannon, whereas 1,500 
on the left under Vinayaka were the reverse. But these are late Tantrie fancies* 

® Nanjio,:,' No. V 126. , 

^ So according to Takakusu in TAe Yontig I^ast, 1Q25, p, 147. But others 
say that he is Seimen-Kongo, described as a messenger of Indra. He is popularly 
regarded as the God of the Kitchen. 

140 BVDBEim IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. iv 

and in the older temples statues such as Marishi (Marici), Light ; 
Nikko and Gakko, the Sun and Moon, may sometimes be seen. 

India, or Taishaku,i and Brahma, or Bonten,^ who are constantly 
mentioned in the Pit;akas as the protectors and respectful assistants 
of the Buddha and his disciples, are represented by statues, but, 
so far as I Imow, temples are not dedicated to them. This honour 
is, however, accorded to Emma-6 ® or Yama-raja, the ruler of the 
Underworld and Judge of the dead. By him stand two attendants 
who write down and read out the sins of mankind. He, too, is fully 
recognized in the Nilrayas, for instance, in the celebrated sutra 
called the Messengers of the Gods,^ in which before punishing the 
sinner who is led before him he asks why he did not attend to the 
warnings sent to him by Heaven. 

The Seven Gods of Luck are a most miscellaneous group of 
ambiguous position, for though everyone would wish to conciliate 
them, they hardly belong to serious religion. Daikoku ® is ap- 
parently Mahakala, Benten and Bishamon ® are the deities already 
mentioned, all three being Indian. Jur6jin and Eukurokuju ’ seem 
to be of Chinese origin, both genii of Long Life. Ebisu ® is 
native Japanese. He carries a fishing rod and a tai fish, 
and his festival is widely celebrated on the tenth of January. 
Hotel ^ is a strange transformation of the Bodhisattva Maitreya. 
He is represented as an enormously fat and hilarious cleric, the 
tradition being that in China under the Liang Dynasty there was 
a monk called Pu-Tai whose benevolence caused him to be regarded 
as an incarnation of the Bodhisattva, though his prosperous 
appearance made him a subject of popular caricature.^® 

Sometimes a Buddhist and a Hindu deity seem to be combined. 
Thus we have Batokwannon,^’- an image of Kwannon with a horse’s 
head set above or even replacing the human head and revered in 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ m M 2. 

^ Devaduta-sxjtta, Maj. Nik., exxx. For a medieval account of a visit to 
Emma-o’s Court see the adventures of the priest Jishin Bo Sonei as related in 
the Heike Monogatari (Sadler’s translation, p. 110 ff.). 

- ■ ■ 

0 ^ ^ and 

^ ^ A and )IiS fife 

He is the “ Laughing Buddha” commonly seen in Chinese temples. Finot 
says that in Cambodja a similar figure is called Kaecayana, for unknown reasons. 

“ « « « 

CH. IV] the pantheon 141 

Japan as the protectress of horses. Hayagriva is a similar figure 
of Vishnu in Brahmanic mythology. But it must be remembered 
that in India the same myth sometimes reappears in both Buddhist 
and Brahmanic forms. In the Jataka book we read how ship- 
wrecked traders in Ceylon were saved from the attacks of goblins 
by the Bodhisattva in the form of a flying horse uttering “ huinari. 
speech full of mercy 

The object of the above remarks is merely to show how numerous 
Indian deities have been introduced into Japan, and I^ have not 
attempted to give a guide to the iconography of Japanese Buddhism, 
a vast’and intricate domain, or to describe the various sbnpes which 
fancy, learned or popular, has invented for these personages. 
Bomething more will be said on this subject in subsecpient chapters 
as occasion offers. 

1 Jataka, No. 196. Karunaya paribliavitam mamisibharfain bbasati. 

CHAPTEK V 

BUDDHISM IN CHINA 
1 

Buddhism came to Japan from Cliina, at first tlirougli Korea and 
afterwards by direct intercourse. But even in tbe earliest period 
Korea was simply a transmitter. Buddhism there has some slight 
individuality in art and architectme : in literature and doctrine 
it has none at all. The Koreans seem to have taken no interest 
in such matters. What had come from China passed on to Japan 
practically unchanged. But the temperament of the Chinese was 
different. Their Buddhism represents a sincere attempt to under- 
stand the true doctrine' and practice as prevalent in India, but 
so numerous, intelligent, and artistic a people with ancient ideals 
and customs of their own were not Hkely to accept unchanged and 
without modification a new philosophy and moral system, especially 
when the country from which the novelties came was distant and 
not easily accessible. There was continual contact, but it was 
contact of individuals, not of the masses. The imported religion 
underwent little change in essentials, but it somehow acquired a 
foreign dress and manners and, so far as we can distinguish between 
Indian and Chinese Buddhism, it is definitely the latter which 
reached Japan. The scriptures carried there had been selected 
and translated in China ; Chinese became the ecclesiastical language, 
like Latin in Catholic Europe, and sects like the Zen and Teiidai 
which have no exact equivalents in India made themselves at home 
and flourished. It will therefore be well to notice briefly the chief 
phases of religious history in China in order to iinderstand clearly 
what the Japaheso imported at different epochs. 

According to the common story, Buddhism was introduced 
into China in A.D. 67 m consequence of the dream of the Emperor 
Ming-Ti.^ It is not necessary for our purpose to discuss the details 
of this and other legends, but the statements that even before this 
date there were Buddhist communities in Western China are not 

^ See Maspei'o, “ Le Songe et I’Ambassade de FEmpereurMiiig-ti,” 

1910, and also Pelliot in B.E.F.E.O., 1906, p. 393 if. 

14-2 

cH. v] BUDDHISM IN CHINA 143 

improbable, for before tlie Christian era Btiddhisni liad spread 
among the tribes living to the north of India and about 138 b.c. the 
Han Emperor Wu-Ti sent to Central Asia the first of several expcali- 
tions which made the Chinese familiar with those regions. But even 
in the first century of our era Buddhism in China can have been 
represented only by a few scattered settlements. Our evidenc^e 
for its existence and progress during the second century is cMeily 
Hterary. About ten persons are mentioned as ha\dng translated 
various siitras, and other translations are ascribed to unknown 
authors. The most sceptical criticism must admit tliat this lisl- 
implies considerable missionary activity.^ The translators wer?' 
all foreigners and most of them came from Central Asia, including 
the celebrated An Sliih-Ivao, a prince of An-hsi orPartliia. Only 
a few were Indians. But about the same time a native Cliinese, 
MoU“TzUj‘^ wrote a work of questions and answers about Buddhism 
which resembles the Questions of Milinda, though full of Taoist 
ideas. Still, it is not until the third century that Buddhism becomes 
prominent as a force among the masses of the people ami also at 
Court. Its progress was no doubt connected with the divisions 
which tiireateiicd to break up the Empire and with the rise of Tartar 
states within the Hniits of what was supposed to be China. 

Coniiiciaiiism, which ■was dominant at the Iniperml Coint, had 
ahvays been somewhat contemptuous of Buddhism and Taoism 
as popular superstitions, and np to the present day the Buddliist 
priesthood have never been able to establish themselves in popular 
esteem as the guardians of learning and the proper supervisors 
of education, that position being successMly monopolized by the 
Confucian literati. But the Tartar states, among which the most 
important was Wei, had no such prejudices. They were not 
pro-Buddhist and anti-Confucian, for they Were anxious to acquire 
Chinese civilization of every kind, but the zealous Buddhist 
missionaries, many of whom v?ere themselves of Tartar extraction, 
made converts among them more readily than did the somewhat 
supercilious Confucian philosophers. In the fourth century the 
spread of the new faith----for it was only beginning to be 
accepted as a natural part of Gbmese lifewwas even more remark- 
able. In 335 the Prince of Chao, a Tartar state which included 

^ According to the varioua catalognca cited by Nanjio there flourished under 
the Latter Han Dynasty (a. d. 25-220) twelve translators "svlio produced 292 or 
359 works of which 96 are reputed to be among those extant. 

® See Pclliot in T'otmg Pao, xix, 1920. 

144 BVDBEim IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. v 

Shansi, issued a decree allowing the population to become monks 
freely, a permission which is interesting as already indicating 
a theory often put into practice in later times that a subject had no 
right to abandon family life without his master’s leave. In 372 
Buddhism was introduced into Korea and apparently accepted 
as the flower of Chinese civilization. In 381 we are told that in 
north-western China nine-tenths of the inhabitants were Buddhists. 
Nor was the movement confined to the Tartar states. The Eastern 
Tsin dynasty (317-420), which ruled at Nanldng and, according 
to Chinese ideas, represented the legitimate Empire, was also 
favourable to it and Hsiao Wu-ti of this line was the first Emperor 
of China to embrace the faith. 

Meanwhile the output of Buddhist literature was considerable. 
Up to A.D. 400, if we can trust the old Chinese catalogues, something 
like thirteen hundred works had been translated, of which about 
four hundred are still extant. About that time there arrived the 
celebrated Kumarajiva.^ He was the child of Indian parents but 
born at Kucha in Central Asia. Like Vasubandhu, who, though 
of uncertain date, perhaps lived about the same period, he originally 
followed the Hinayana but subsequently became an enthusiastic 
Mahayanist. In 383 Kucha was captured by the troops of the 
Former Ts'in Djmasty,: a line of Tartar Princes who reigned at 
Ch'ang-An, Kumar^jiva was carried off and after some adventures 
settled at their capital. He was appointed Kuo-shih, or Director 
of Eeligion and Public Instruction, and is said to have had three 
thousand students to whom he lectured in a hall specially built 
for him. From about 402-412 he made numerous translations 
from the Sanskrit, of which fifty are still extant, and was one of the 
most important foreign scholars who influenced Chinese Buddhism 
in its early days. About the same time (a.b. 399) Fa-Hsien, the 
first Chinese pilgrim, started on his journey to India and began the 
long procession of travellers and inquirers who visited the sacred 
places of Buddhism and its centres of learning with the object of 
■collecting books and ascertaining by their own researches what 
was the true doctrine and correct monastic discipline. 

In the fifth century Buddhism was on the whole in a flourishing 
•condition both under the legitimate dynasty of Liu-Sung which 
reigned at Nanldng and under the Tartar Princes of Wei. But it is 
not surprising if this progress caused a certain opposition and 

BUDDHISM IN CHINA 

145 

Oil. v] 

reaction. In botli states we liear of protests against the multipli- 
cation of monasteries and the expenditure of public, money on 
costly ceremonies, of accusations of conspiracy brought agaiiisfc 
the monies, and finally of restrictiv(>, edicts and perseculitm. But in 
both the time of trial was short and the current of jiopular (>]>inion 
set definitely in hivoiir of toleration. The "Princes of ^^'ei became 
again defenders of the Faith : the sculptured grottoes of Yiin-Kang; 
in Shansi were executed in the latt^a- half of the century and there 
are said to have been thirteen thousand feiuples in. Vuu. Hu. tie* 
Dowager Empress, was a fervent devotee (though like many such 
an iiiflifferent example in matters of secular morality), and in .578 
sent Sung-Yiin and Hui-8heng to No-rtlrern India in search, of 
sfitras. At Nanlving, Wii-Ti, the first Emperor of the Liang 
dpiasty, rivalled Asoka in piedy but not in priidcnce or prospc'rity, 
for though he had a long reign (502-549) lie ultimately lost Ins 
kingdom and his Ide owing to his intrigues with disaffected factions 
in Wei, which appear to have been neither skilful nor scrupulous. 
He was originally a Confucianist, but about 510 he became a most 
zealous Buddhist. He forbade the slaughter of animals, w'as 
reluctant to inflict capital punishment, expounded the scriptures 
in public, and three times became a monk for short periods, Under 
his auspices was produced the first edition of the Chinese Txipitaka, 
which is said to have contained 2,213 works, including the travels 
of Fa-Hsien.^ It was in Ms reign, too, that Bodhidharma, of whom 
more anon, came to China from India ; but according to the 
common though perhaps apocryphal story his views did not agree 
with those of the pious Emperor and he left Nanking for the iiorth. 
Wu-Ti also sent a mission to Magadha to obtain Sanskrit texts, 
and it brought back not only many valuable manuscripts but also 
the learned scholar and translator Paramartha. 

It was about tMs time (a.d. 552) that Buddhism was first intro- 
duced into Japan from Korea. Wu-Ti’s death was followed by 
a slight reaction. A Prince of Northern Chou, who bore the same 
name, defined the precedence of the three religions as ConfucianivSm, 
Taoism, and Buddhism, and in 575 ordered temples to be destroyed 
and monastic bodies to be dissolved. But the persecution as usual 
was short, his son revoked the edict, and a few years afterwards 
the founder of the Sui dynasty gave permission to all who desired 
it to take monastic vows. He seems indeed to have used Buddhism 

^ See Nanjio’s Catalogue, Introduction, pp. xvii and xxvii. 

146 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

as a means for unifying the Empire, and during the period 594-616 
no less than three new collections ^ of the Tripitaka were made.^ 

With the seventh century began the great T'ang dynasty under 
which intercourse with India continued. Shortly after its advent 
Hsiian-Tsang made his celebrated journey (629-645) and on his 
return was received by the Emperor with great honour. A little 
later I-Ching won almost equal fame by his travels (671-697). 
In 751 Wu-K'ung accompanied a political mission to the King 
of Kipin. He remained some time in India, became a monk, and 
returned to China with numerous books and relics. The first half 
of this dynasty and the period immediately preceding it, that is, the 
two centuries from a.d. 550 to 760, was clearly the age when the 
creative force of Chinese Buddhism was most vigorous, when the 
greatest teachers flourished, and the most important sects took 
shape, even though their origin may be referred to earlier saints. 
Only slightly later, say 615-815, is the period when most Chinese 
sects were introduced into Japan.^ 

Remarkable as was the progress of Buddhism it could never 
pretend to be the only rehgiou of China and only occasionally and 
locally could it be called paramount. Though there were long 
spells of truce, the triangular conflict between Confucianism, 
Buddhism, and Taoism was only dormant, not ended, and any one 
of the three which could bring influence to bear on the Court often 
secured a striking though transitory triumph, at least in the 
neighbourhood of the capital. In many ways it is wonderful that 
Buddhism should have met with so large a measure of success. . 
Its ideals of asceticism and cehbacy were repugnant to popular 
Chinese views, which regarded the perpetuation of the family 
as a sacred duty. It set no store on loyalty and the political virtues 

1 The word collection is perhaps more accurate than edition, for they were 
not mere editions in the sense in which we speak of a new edition of the Bible 
or of the works of Virgil, hut the actual material published on each occasion varied 
considerably. Thus we are told (Nanjio, p. xvii) that the oldest catalogue mentions 
2,218 works of which only 276 can be identified with those now existing. Many 
of the collections were published in more than one edition. 

® About this time (540-594) lived Hsin-Hsing, the founder of the Sau-Chieh sect 
which lasted till about 846, though often denounced as heretical. , The writings of 
this sect have been preserved in Tun-huang and some in Japan, but I cannot dis- 
cover that it ever had any practical importance there. See for an extensive 
monograph Yabuki Keiki’s work entitled Sanhai-hyd no Kenkyu, published at 
Tokyo, 1927. 

® One might indeed say all sects for, though Zen propaganda was not successful 
till the thirteenth century, the sect was first introduced in 736, or according to 
some traditions even in 654, but died out. 

of fairyland ratlier tliaii lieavon, wlio do not appeal to tlie lieart 
like Amitabha oi tlie merciful Kwan-Yin. 

Not only were the periods of restrictive legislation short, but it is 
clear that the return to religious liberty was a national relief. 
The policy of most Emperors was statesmanlike rather than 
consistent. Not a few of them after issuing repressive edicts 
performed some devout and complimentary act which seemed 
to indicate that they merely desired to curb extravagance and not 
to interfere with religion and learning. Thus Hsiian-Tsung 
(a.T). 713 -756) forbade the building of monasteries and the copying 
of sutras, but subsequently the seventh collection of the Tripitaka 
was made and published by his orders. So, too, nearly a thoiisand 
years later K'ang-Hsi issued the well-known Sacred Edict forbidding 

148 BVBDHmm IN INDIA AND CHINA [oh. v 

heterodoxy (i tuan), in whicli the official explanation clearly includes 
Buddhism, but later he issued a gracious rescript to the monks 
of Pffi-Tffi in which (though admitting that he had not had time to 
study Buddhism properly) he used most polite and devout language 
about their deities. 

But the T'ang dynasty was a period of genius and extravagance 
and many of its sovereigns expressed their religious convictions with 
vehemence and publicity. The Empress Wu, who dominated the 
second half of the seventh century, was an example of lavish but 
not humble piety, for she assumed divine honours and caused 
herself to be styled Maitreya or Kuan-Yin. The Emperor Su-Tsung 
(756-762) was conspicuous for his devotion, as was also his successor 
Tai-Tsung, who expounded the scriptures himself and attracted 
even more attention by the magnificent ceremonies which he caused 
to be performed for the repose of his mother’s soul. In 819 the 
Emperor Hsien-Tsung provoked a celebrated incident by installing 
in the palace a bone alleged to be a relic of the Buddha and to 
possess miraculous powers. Han Yu, one of the best known 
scholars and statesmen of the time, presented to His Majesty a 
written protest, celebrated in China as a Hterary masterpiece, but 
achieved no result except exile for himself. On the other hand, the 
Emperor Wu-Tsrmg was a zealous Taoist and in 845 issued a most 
trenchant edict ordering Buddhist temples to be destroyed, 
ecclesiastical property to be confiscated, and monks and nuns 
to return to the world. Indeed, he would either have crippled 
Buddhism or have provoked a rebellion but for his sudden end, 
which is a warning to make sure that your own superstitions are 
beneficent before you persecute other people. On the recom- 
mendation of his Taoist advisers he began to take the Elixir of 
Immortality and soon died of the treatment. His successor 
revoked the edict, executed the Taoist priests who had instigated 
it, and things went on much as before. 

Both Manichseism and Nestorian Christianity were known in 
China under the T'ang. The former, called Ming-chiao, or the 
religion of light, was at first discouraged, but when the Uigur 
princes, who were formidable neighbours of China, adopted it in 763 
as the state religion, it was thought prudent to tolerate it (though 
reluctantly) and Manichoean places of worship were opened at 
Lo-Yang and Ch'ang-An. But as soon as the power of the Uigurs 
was broken by the Kirghiz in 840, Manichseism in China was promptly 
suppressed (843), 

149 

OH. vj BUDDHISM IN CHINA 

Nestorianism, known as Cliing-cliiao or tlie radiant religion, 
appeared in 635 and received favourable treatment under the early 
T'ang Emperors, though that zealous Buddhist the Empress Wu 
persecuted it. Her successors, however, even when they shared 
Buddhist convictions as did Su-Tsung and Tai-Tsung, gave it 
toleration and even patronage. The celebrated inscription in 
Chinese and Syriac discovered at Si-Hgan-fu ^ and commonly 
known as the Nestorian Stone, %vhich dates from 781, gives a long 
account of the doctrines and history of the E'estorian Church. 
It has led several authors to ma,intain that the development of 
Buddhism in China was materially influenced by Nestoriaii 
Cliristianity, but without sufficient w^arrant in my opinion. It is 
clear that Cluistians and Buddhists consorted together amicably 
and also that their doctrines and ceremonies had certain obvious 
though often superficial resemblances. But there is no proof, 
for mstance, that Buddhist services for the dead were in any ’ivay 
imitations of Cliristian funeral masses as has been contended, 
Tlie details of the two rites and the methods by which they propose 
to help the departed are entirely different, and Indian and Chinese 
usages fully explain the origin of the Buddhist ceremonial. So, too, 
though the image of Kuan-Yin with a child may look like the 
Madoima and the inflint Christ, it does not represent divine mother- 
hood but a benevolent powder ready to hear the prayers of Avomen 
who wish for children. It is not clear that the Maniehtnans 
exercised much iiifluence on Buddhism, but they certainly felt its 
influence, for they borrowed its phraseology, symbols, and doctrines." 
And it looks as if Nestorian Christianity to some extent did the same. 
The Nestorian Stone uses many Buddhist terms (such as Seng and 
Ssu for Christian priests and monasteries), and, Avhat is far more 
remarkable, though it describes at some length the life of Christ 
and its results, it omits all mention of the crucifixion and merely 
says in speaking of the creation that God arranged the cardinal 
points in the shape of a cross. The reason must be that the doctrine 
of the atonement was felt to be unacceptable and was suppressed 
under Buddhist influence.® And when we hear that the Emperor 
Hslian-Tsung presented to Nestorian churches portraits of his 

^ Hsi-an-fii. 

- See the three articles by Cliavannes and Pelliot in J.A., 1911, 1913, entitled 
“ Un traite Manicheen retronve en Chine A Chinese edict of 739 accuses the 
Manichaians of falsely taking the name of Buddhists and deceiving the people. 

® See Havret, “ La Stele Chretienne de Si-ngan-fu ” in Varietia Shiologms, p. 54. 

150 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

ancestors and inscriptions written in Ms own handwriting, we 
cannot help suspecting that the buildings thus honoured did not 
look much like Christian places of worship. 

Like the Emperors of the T'ang dynasty, its authors and artists 
had various convictions of their own, but such great names as the 
painter Wu Tao-Tzu and the poet Liu Tsung-Yuan are instances 
of Buddhist inspiration. And in the Sung dynasty, justly famous 
for culture, learning, and art, especially landscape painting, the 
same inspiration is often obvious. The school of Buddhism which 
had the greatest influence on art and literature was the Ch'an 
(better kno-wn in its Japanese form Zen),^ which, though said to have 
been founded by Bodhidharma, had at first a somewhat variable 
and uncertain position and did not definitely win the sympathy and 
esteem of the cultured classes until long after his death. The earlier 
Emperors of the Northern Sung dynasty on the whole encouraged 
Buddhism. Though T'ai-Tsu, the founder, published some re- 
strictive edicts, yet a new collection of the Tripitaka was made 
by his orders in a.d. 971 and furnished with a preface of his own. 
This was the first printed edition, previous collections having been 
in manuscript only, and the labour and expense involved in tMs 
gigantic undertaking are a proof of the esteem which the literary 
world must have felt for Buddhism. Under T'ai-Tsu’s successors, 
it contiaued to flourish, religious intercourse with India was active, 
and the Emperor Jen-Tsung encouraged the study of Sanskrit. 
Hui-Tsung, the last Emperor of the Northern Sung, a patron of the 
arts and a painter himself, fell under the influence of a Taoist priest 
named Lin Ling-Su and at first endeavoured to suppress Buddhism, 
not by ordinary persecution but by amalgamation. The Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas were enrolled as members of the Taoist pantheon, 
and temples and monasteries were allowed to exist only on condition 
of describing themselves as Taoist. But, as on previous occasions, 
the reaction was rapid. Lin Ling-Su fell owing to pride and 
insolence : the Emperor reversed his edict and his convictions and 
proceeded to legislate against Taoism. But grave events interfered 
with His Majesty’s religious and artistic interests. In 1126 the 
Kin Tartars conquered his kingdom and carried him off captive, 
in which unhappy state he died. 

An interesting feature of tins period is the attempt of Wang 
An-shih to introduce a sort of State Socialism (1021-1086) into 

BUDDEISM IN CHINA 

151 

CH. V] 

CKina, which met with considerablej though irLtermitteut, imperial 
patronage. It does not appear that there was anything definitely 
Buddhist in his theories, but one of his proposals, which his opponents 
violently attacked, was to introduce Buddhist iind Taoist subjects 
into the public examinations. Had this reform been successful 
it would have meant a change in the intellectual and social life of the 
governing classes which it is difficult for Europeans to understand, 
but in the crash which brought about the fall of Hui-Tsimg no more 
was heard of Wang An-shili. 

The Chinese Government, imable to face the Tartars in the north, 
retired to the south of the Yaiigtse and the Empire was recon- 
stituted at Hangchow under the Southern Sung djmasty, which 
perhajis witnessed tlic perfection of Chinese culture, though not 
of genius. Buddhism was not persecuted : indeed, the Zen school 
remained fashionalibi, but clearly the interest in religion was not 
very lively. This was the only great dynasty •which did not publish 
its own edition of the Tripitaka, and not a single translation or 
Buddhist treatise is recorded as having been made under its 
auspices.^ The system 'which was influential and charaefieristw; 
of the period -was the new Confucianism of Chu-Hsi (rioO-1200), 
a restatement of the Master’s teaching wliich has received the 
approval of succeeding ages. Though Chu-Hsi was aiiti-Buddliist, 
yet he evideutly felt that the old philosophy which treated 
exclusively of social and political ethics bad neglected large dex)art- 
ments of knowledge of whicli other religions took account. He 
devotes much space to cosmology and the doctrine of world periods 
ill which growth and decay alternate : he teaches the transformation 
of matter into various forms of life and also something very like 
Karma or the retribution of good and evil actions. There is nothing 
necessarily Buddhist in such ideas, but one can hardly doubt that 
they assumed prominence at this time because Buddhism had 
posed the perplexing questions to which they seek to find an answer. 
Chu-Hsi’s contemporary, Lu Clnu-Yuan, though one of the worthies 
who.se names are inscribed in Confucian temples, taught that 
learning is not indispensable and that the mind can by meditation 
attain to a perception of absolute truth. There is clearly more of 
Bodhidharma and of Lao-tzu than of Confucius in this doctrine. 

Religious conditions in China entirely changed with the advent 
of the Mongol dynasty known as Yuan (1280-1368). The Mongols 

Observe the blank in Nanjio’s Catalogue. 

152 BUBmiBM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

were tolerant, tliey liad no religious prejudices, and were ready to 
consider impartially wMcIl creed suited them best. But when 
Khubilai bad once decided in favour of Buddhism, it became the 
State Church and so remained while his house ruled. This was 
something entirely new, for in previous ages the devotion of the 
most pious Emperors, such as Wu~Ti, had been purely personal. 
They had never been able to make the Empire a Buddhist insti- 
tution. But now the Church was recognized as a department of the 
Government,, and huge sums of public money were expended on 
ceremonies and subventions to monasteries. Naturally a new 
edition of the Tripitaka was printed and many other religious books. 
Still, the change did not promote the welfare of Buddhism in China 
so much as might have been expected, for the sect which practically 
became the established Church was Lamaism, the peculiar form of 
the faith developed in Tibet, and a Lamaist ecclesiastic was 
recognized as the hierarchical head of all Buddhists, other religious 
receiving toleration and being placed under the supervision of a 
special board. It does not appear that under the Yuan dynasty 
any distinction was drawn between Lamaism and other sects. 
Nevertheless, the difference both in ritual and doctrine was real and 
made itself felt with time : a Chinese of the present day regards 
a Lama as quite different from a Buddhist monk. The subject has 
only a negative interest for our present inquiry, since Japanese 
religion was not influenced by Lamaism. Khnbilai Khan made 
two attempts to conquer Japan. They were successfully repulsed, 
but naturally the Yiian dynasty was an object of popular detesta- 
tion, and when intercom^e with China was renewed the Japanese 
turned to the old art and literature which they already knew and 
admired, not to importations from Tibet and Mongolia. The Ming 
dynasty, too (1368-1644), which drove out the Mongols and claimed 
to restore Chinese civilization after the havoc wrought by a foreign 
invasion, were not disposed to regard the religious institutions of 
their predecessors with favour, but political reasons induced them 
to treat the Lamaist hierarchy with great consideration. Until the 
eighteenth century the Chinese Court could not rid themselves of 
the apprehension that the Mongol tribes might unite in an attack 
on the Empire, and obviously one of the best means of restraining 
them was to use the good offices of the Lamas, for whom they had 
an extraordinary respect. 

The establishment of the Ming dynasty was an act of national 
self-assertion and an escape from foreign bondage, but it was not 

CH. V] BVBDHmM m OHIN A 163 

accompanied by any strildng revival or development in thought, 
art, and literature. Authors, painters, and sculptors were indeed 
numerous, but they showed distinction rather than genius, and 
perhaps it is only in porcelain that art reached the highest standard. 
In philosophy the most remarkable figure is Wang Yang-ming 
(1472-1628), called 0 Yo Mei in Japan, where he had some in- 
fluence.^ His teaching shows affinity to that of Lu Chin-yiian, 
already mentioned, but was even more clearly influenced by 
Buddhism, though he professed to base it on the Chinese Classics. 
He held that truth can be obtained by meditation, and used the 
expression Liang-chih,^ taken from Mencius, to designate intuitive 
knowledge which is present in all hiinian minds but in different 
degrees, since it can be developed or allowed to atrophy. To develop 
it should be our constant object, and in its light when pure all 
things are understood and peace is obtained. The influence of Zen 
is here obvious. 

Buddhism was no longer the State Church as under the Yuan 
djmasty, and reverted to the position wliich it had held under the 
T'ang and which is so difficult to define in European formnlm, 
though perfectly natural to the Chinese. Education and adminis- 
tration were in the hands of the Gonfucian literati, who regarded 
both Buddhism and Taoism as iinscliolarly superstitions. The 
Emperor was, however, free to patronize them, though he might 
receive memorials and protests if he went too far. The earlier 
Ming Emperors were on the whole favourable to Buddhism, though 
from, policy more than devotion. The founder had been a novice 
in .his youth and seems to have left his monastery with a grateful 
regard for the Church which had sheltered him, together with 
a kno wledge of its weaknesses. He treated the clergy with courtcvsy, 
but issued edicts restricting their mimhers.and raising the standard 
of learning necessary for candidates. He caused a new collection 
of the Tripitaka to be made, and in 1377 he published an edict 
ordering that the priests of the Ch'an (Zen) sect should compose 
commentaries on the Lanl^avatara, Vajracchedilca, and Brajna- 
paramitahridaya sutras and that all the clergy should study tliem.^ 
Though this was a century before Wang Yang-Ming, the choice 
of works is interesting as showing the direction which the thought 

^ Japanese pronunciation Ryochi. 

® See Kanjio's catalogue, ISTos. 1613-15. 

154 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

of tlxe age tended to take. Similarly, the third Emperor Ch'eng-Tsu 
was educated by a Buddhist priest whom he greatly respected. 
Yet he was so drastic in limiting the number of priests that on one 
occasion he ordered 1,800 candidates for ordination to be enrolled 
in the army instead. On the other hand, he not only pubhshed 
yet another collection of the Tripitaka ^ but wrote prefaces and 
laudatory verses which were included in it, and even compiled the 
memoirs of 209 remarkable monks with an introduction.^ His 
Empress went so far as to imagine that a siitra Tvas revealed to her 
in a vision, and it is duly registered.'^ 

It is about this time, too, that we begin to hear of the secular 
clergy. Edicts against them were issued in 1394 and 1412, but they 
continued to increase. Apparently when restrictions were placed 
on the number of monks many persons acted as priests, though they 
married and did not live in mona.steries.^ In 1458 an edict ordered 
that ordination should be held only once a year, but in 1607 in the 
reign of Wu-Tsung we hear that no less than 40,000 persons became 
monks, either Buddhist or Taoist. Wu-Tsung was a learned and 
pious Emperor, but he was in the hands of a band of eunuchs who 
w^ere known as the Eight Tigers, and it must be confessed that at 
this period Buddhism often prospered through this not very 
creditable form of Court influence, especially in the reigns of Ying- 
Tsung and Ching-Ti (1436-1464). But its power among the masses 
also seems clear, and the early Catholic missionaries evidently 
regarded it as their most formidable rival. Thus Ricci, who arrived 
in China in 1682, and his pupils disputed -with the Buddhist clergy 
both in public controversies and in written polemics. As late as 
1666 the Obakn sect was introduced into Japan. 

The Ming dynasty succumbed in 1644 before another invasion 
of Tartars, the Manchiis, and since thought, art, and literature had 
shown little hrilliancy in the last days of native rule, they were 
not likely to revive under foreign invasion. The beautiful porcelain 
which was produced in the reigns of the earlier Manchu Emperors 
makes Europeans think of the period too favourably. There was 

1 Called the Northern Collection because it was printed at Peking. 

® Nanjio, 1G16. A small volume containing ten imperial compositions in prose 
and verse, and Nanjio, 1620. 

“ Nanjio, No. 1657. 

* Their status was long a troublesome problem to the Chinese Government. 
In 17,35 Oh'ien tried to make them either enter monasteries or become ordinary 
laymen, hut he abandoned the attempt and ultimately they were allowed to 
continue and have one pupil each. 

cfL V] BUDDHISM IN CHINA 155 

no religioiLS or intellectual movement of any importance until the 
influx of Western ideas, political and other, in the last century. 
It is generally agreed that in quite recent times the interest in 
Buddhism., particularly in Buddhist philosophy, has also increased. 
But it owes nothing to ofiflcial patronage. Unlike the Mongols, 
the Manclms as a race had little taste for Buddhism, and not one 
of their Emperors showed signs of being a convinced believer. 
But they were abo not persecutors, although they limited the number 
of monks from time to time as other dynasties had done. K'ang- 
Hsih attitude, which I have already described, was characteristic 
of his successors. They were courteous to the Buddhist clergy, 
especially the Lamas and Tibetan Church, for political reasons, and 
this courtesy often took a form which seems to imply more belief 
than it really did. Thus K'aiig-Hsi published the Tibetan scriptures, 
the Kanjur, with a preface of his own. His son and grandson issued 
the last collection of the Tripitaka (1735-7), and the latter, the 
Emperor Chheii-Lmig, wrote a complimentary preface to a siitra 
for producing rain.^ He is also said to have prmted the Tripitaka 
in Tibetan, Mongol, and Manchu as well as in Chinese.^ 

. 2 ' 

In. early times Chinese Buddhism already existed in the form of 
sects, or rather schools, some imported direct from India, some the 
result of native reflection on the new foreign doctrines. There was 
little hostility or even aggressive rivalry between them, and with 
time the.,lr differences tended to disappear. But when the Japanese 
■first souglit iii.strnction of their neighbours these schools were still 
fresh and vigorous. The Chinese teachers who came to Japan 
taught the special doctrine of one or other of them, and the Japanese 
students and inquirers who went to China -usually resided in a 
monastery and brought back with them its special system. It will, 
therefore, be well to see what they were likely to find there at 
various epochs. 

Two early schools, the Cheng-shih-tsung and San-lun-tsuiig,® 

^ Nanjio, Nos. 187-8 and 970. See, too, Beal, Gateim of Buddhist Bcriptures, 
pp. 417-19. 

" See Mollendorf in China Branch of J.A.8., xsiv, 1890, p, 28. 

“ ^ ^ ^'^<1 H 

156 

BVDDEISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

liavo only a historical interest since they have ceased to exist, and 
wlien they flourished were pldlnsophical rather than popular. 
They had, however, sufficient vitality to reach Japan in 625, though 
therei also they have now no temples or adherents. The former, 
called Jojitsu in Japanese pronunciation, apparently represented 
the ancient Indian school called Sautrantilvas which was in some 
ways a bridge between the Hina' and Mahiiyana. Their chief text- 
book was the Satyasiddlii of Harivarman, which is not extant in 
Sanskrit but was translated into Chinese by Kiiniarajiva, probably 
about A.D, 408.1 San~hm or Sanron, that is, the school of three 
treatises J was so called because it accepted as its authorities three 
works of Nagarjima and Aryadeva and taught their negative 
dialectic. 

Another early school which taught the worship of Aniitahha is far 
more important, for even at the present day it continues to be one 
of the most potent influences in Far Eastern Buddhism. Its name 
is Chiiig-t'n ® or the pure land, perhaps better known in its Japanese 
pronunciation as Jodo, Chinese tradition credits the Parthian 
Prince An-Shih-Kao with having preached tliis doctrine and trans- 
lated the Siikhavati-vynha about x\.i). 148, and, however much such 
statements may be criticized, it is clear that the Chinese themselves 
considered that the worship of Amitabha was introduced at a very 
early date. 

Hui-ytian, who lived from 333 to 418, is generally regarded as the 
founder of the school, that is to say, he made it in some sense a 
brotherhood or corporation. He was originally a Taoist, and after 
he was converted to Buddhism is said to have still used the writings 
of Chuang-Tzii to explain his new faith. He settled finally in the 
Ln-Feng monastery in Hupeh, which was famous for its ponds 
covered with white lotus. The school was hence known for some 
time as the Pai-iien-chiao, or A\diite lotus creed, but in later times 
a similar name was used by a powerful and persistent secret society 
and it Avas hence dropped as a religious designation. Nor did the 
Lii-Feng monastery continue to be the centre of the school, AAffiich 
Acas for some time a definite sect and produced a series of e mi nent 
teachers, very well known in Japan, AAdiere they are called the five 

^ N.TOjio, No. 1274. 

2 The thrc€i treatises are the Madlwaniaka sastra, N. 1179, the Dvarlasanikaya 
SHuStra, N. 1180, both attributed to Nagarjuna, and the 8ata sastra of Aryadeva, 
N. IISS. All three were translated by Kumarajiva. 

^ m ±. 

CM. V] „ BUDDHISM' IN' CHINA 

patriarchs.^ They did not foIlo\v one another in immediate 
succession, and tliougli the school soon spread all over China the 
provinces of Shansi and vSlieiisi were the chief scene of their lafjonrs. 
Taii-Liian (called Doiiraii in Ja,pai:iese)2 was a native of the former 
province and lived from 4-76 to 542. He was an ardent student 
of the Saiiron school and set about writing a commentary on the 
Mahasaiiiiipata-sutra, which, had recently been translated into 
Chinese. But he .fell ill and tlie difficulties of his task' made him 
feel that a scholar could accomplish nothing witliout long life, m he 
went to consult a celebrated herinit at Nanking wlio was apparently 
a Taoist, and asked him how to obtain it. On his way l>ack lie met 
the Indian monk Bodliiniclii, who said that the liermit’s advice was 
useless and, handing him a copy of the Amit.ayurdliyana-sutra, 
told him that he would find eternal life there. Honran accejtted the 
doctrine, and devoted the rest of his life to preaclnng the pow'er of 
Amida and the efficacy of invoking liis name. He resided at 
Fen-Chou in Shansi ^ and wrote a commentary on VasuhanJbu's 
treatise on Paradise.'^ 

Tlie second Patriarch, Tao-CIi'o or Doshakir'* (5G2 -Gl-5), was born 
near T'ai-yiian-fu and at first studied the Nirvana-sutra, hut whf*n 
about forty-five abandoned it and made a vow before, tlio memorial 
to Donran erected m bis monastery at Feu-Cliou that be would 
preach notbmg but the doctrine of .salvation by faith in .\inicia. 
He made a celebrated collection of scriptural passages respecting 
the Happy Land,® in which he emphasized the rloctrine that common 
mortals can be born there if they simply utter the holy name, wdiicli 
he himself is said to have repeated 70,000 times a day. He appears 
to have been the fii’st to use the terms Holy Path and the Pure 
Land ’’ (which are practically equivalent to salvation by ivorks and 
salvation by faith) to designate the two methods of leading the 
religious life. Accorduig to the legend he never turned his 

’ 3£ li . Their biograpliies are contained in the second and third part.s 
of the .series called the Lives of Eininent Lriests, Xanjio, Nos. 1493 and HfCJ. 
They appear to be credible in the main, though they include legends. 

“ In the temple called Hsuan-ehimg-ssu, or in Japanese pronunciation, Genchuji. 

* Nanjio, 1204. 

® ^ ^ ^ Anrakusliu. 

^ ^ ^ Shodo and 'ffS- db 'todo. The passage is quoted by Honon. See 
his Life, translated by Coates and IshiKuka, p. 340. 

158: ; BUDDHISM IN '.'INDIA AND CHINA .. [cii. .y. 

back to the west or spat westwards.^ He died in the Genchiiji 
temple. 

The most celebrated of the Patriarchs was the third called 
Shan-Tao, or Zendo ^ (613-~681). He was considered as an incar- 
nation of Amida and his works were accepted as equivalent to 
scripture. Hoiieii, the founder of the Jodo sect in Japan, says 
of him, Zends was an incarnation of Amida and so, though we 
have had many teachers of the Pure Laud sect, we should depend 
solely upon Zendo/’ and again, speaking of his own book the 
Senchakiishfi, The most important passages give you the heart 
and soul of Zendo, the founder of the Pure Land sect.” ^ 

Zendo (613-681) was born in Shantung and, like his predecessors, 
was at first a student of the Sanron school, but accidentally dis- 
covering the Ainitayurdhyana-siitra in a temple library, thought it 
much better suited to his spiritual needs. He therefore studied under 
Doshalai and subsecpiently settled at Ch'aiig-An, where he devoted 
himself to preaching the doctrines of his new sect. He is said 
to have made ten thousand copies of the Lesser Snkhavatt-vyuha 
and to have painted three hundred pictures of Paradise. His most 
important work was his coimnentary on the Amithyiirdhy&na-sutra, 
in which he insists that meditation on Amida and invocation of his 
name are all important, though it is only just to add that he also 
dwells on the need of combining faith with good deeds. According 
to one story lie committed suicide, but this seems improbable, 
as such an act was contrary to his own teaching. The dated 
inscriptions in the caves of Lung-men indicate that the worship 
of Amida was specially prevalent from a.d. 647 to 715, and it seems 
very probable that this vras due to the preaching of Zendo. 

The date of the fourth Patriarch, Huai-Kan or Bkan,^ is not 
known accurately, but we are told that he was a priest of Ch'ang-An 
who had doubts as to whether admittance to Paradise could be 
obtained by the mere invocation of Amida's name. He accordingly 

^ But }ie was beaten, at this particular form of piety by Eensei, a companion 
of Honen’s, who whenever he used to travel from Kyoto to the Kwunto would 
always put the saddle on the horse backwards and ride facing west. Eonen^ 
the. trans. by Coates and Isbizuka, p. 494. 

3 Ibid., pp. 467 and 718. In 1930 it was announced that the 1250111 anniversary 
of the death of Zendo would be celebrated in China, and nineteen priests were sent 
Ifom Japan to represent the Jodo sect at Tientsin, Mnkden, and Peking, where 
inemoriaT services were held. 

CH./V] 

BUDDHISM IN . CHINA 

159 

laid Ms difficulties before Zendo and by bis advice practised medi- 
tation ^ for three years. His mind was then at ease and he wrote 
a book called Gungiron in which he discussed and solved various 
difficult points of doctrine.^ The date of the eminent priest Fa-Cliao 
(Japanese Hossho) is also uiicertaiii, but he appears to have been 
alive in 770. He ffisited Wu-Thi-Shaii and there received a reve- 
lation from Manju&i extolling the worship of Amida as the best 
of all rites. He wrote both hymns and musical services described 
as consisting of “ five intonations”, which were studied by 
Jilvulvu Daislii when he was in China about S40 and introduced 
by him in the temples of Hieiaan. Fa-Chao’s special teaching is said 
to have been derived from T'zu-Min (680-748), who went to India 
in 702 and spent eighteen years there.^ 

Shao-K'aiig or Slioko,”* the last of the Patriarchs, was separated 
from the others by a considerable interval, for he died in 805 and 
his sphere of activity was also somewhat different. He was born 
and laboured in Ch^-kiang, but having heard of Zendo’s doctrine 
went to Ch'ang-An and prayed at his tomb. There he heard a voice 
bidding him preach to the world faith in the Pure Land, and 
he executed this commission by returning to his native province 
and building a temple on Mount Wu-Lung near Yen-Chou^ where 
he taught for many years. Like Fa-Chao he was celebrated as a 
musician and composer of hymns. 

Though the doctrine of the Pure Land continued to be and still 
is very popular in China, yet after the ninth century the sect seems 
to have had a less definite existence as a corporation than others. 
Nanjkrs Catalogue of the Tripitaka describes many authors as 
belonging to the T'ien-tai, Avatamsaka, or Dhyana schools but none 
as belonging to the Pure Land, and though the Tripifalva contains 
numerous ■writings dedicated to the praises of Amida, the authors 
appear to belong to all schools and not, as we should expect, to the 
one which .preached his worship as the only way to salvation. 
The explanation seems to be that the doctrine of salvation by faith 

1 That is, Keuibiitsu-Zainmai ^ ^ tho special form of meditation 

practi.sed by the Pure .Land Sect. 

® ^ ^ Gungiron. For instance, Honen quotes his decision that if 

a man has recited the Kcrabutsu whe>n he is in good health and his mind is clear 
and so laid up a store of merit., he •will be born in Paradise even if at the hour 
of death his mind is confiised j-iiid he is not able to pray. 

^ vSee Gcminyo Ono in Froc. Imp- Acad. ofToJcijo, i02(i, vol. ii, No. 8, pp. 361-3. 

IGO 

BUDDHI83I: IN^ INDIA AND^ CHINA [ch. v 

■was so easy and popular that no section of Buddliists could afford 
to neglect it, and it became not so niiicli tlie creed of a special sect 
as an aspect of all sects. Something of the kind had already 
happened in India. For instance, the Friendly Letter (attributed 
to Nagai'juna) and the Awakening of Faith distinctly countenance 
the worship of Amitabha, though it is not their main teaching. 
It is noticeable, too, that the introduction and dissemination of 
Amidisni in Japan is not like the history of the other sects. The 
Tendai, Shingon, and Zen all arrived in the same way. Japanese 
studied in Chinese monasteries, and finally (sometimes after 
unsuccessful attempts) a man of talent mastered the doctrine and 
practice of the sect which appealed to him and on returniag estab- 
lislied a similar organization in his own country. But in the case 
of Amidism things went differently. The worship of Amida and 
the scriptures concerning his paradise were known very early, at 
least as early as 640, and the knowledge was spread by other sects, 
for instance, the Tendai, which approved of tliat worship. Later 
various priests, such as Kuya, Geiishin, and Ryonin, gave it special 
prominence, and finally in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries Honcn 
and Shinran founded the two great sects which still flourish. 
But though they express profound veneration for Zendo and other 
Chinese Patriarchs, neither of them visited China. 

Bodhidharma,! the reputed founder of the school called Gli'an 
or Zen wMch has played so large a j)art not only in the religion and 
philosophy but also in the art and even in tiro social life of the Far 
East, arrived in Canton from India about A.n. 520. The common 
account says that he was the son of a king in southern India and 
also the twenty-eighth Patriarcli. - of a school whose teaching is 
summed up in four weli-Iarown lines-- - 

A special tradition outside the scriptures : 

Not to depend on books or letters : 

To point direct to the heart of man ; 

To see (one’s own) nature and ])ecomc Buddha.® 

Study of the scriptures, prayer, and even good works are all equally 
vain. All that man need do is to turn his gaze inward and see the 
Buddha in his own heart. The 2 )ious Emperor, Wn-Ti, -was then 

® See above. Ill, 5 (p. 89). 

’ m. » s'i ^ A, S; It tB A *. a tt jiE «• 

Tliongli often attribxited to Bodhidharma, the iines are pi-uLably ranch later. 

cir. V] BUDDHISM liV CHINA IGl 

at Nanking, and. o)i liearing that a distingiiislicd Biiddliisfc 
teaelu-i’ had arrived ironi India summoned Mm to the capital. 
.But tl.ie intoinacw was not a success. Wu-Ti did not .relish l>cing 
lold l)limtly that he had acquired no merit hy causing temjdcs to be 
huilt and the scriptures to be translated into Chinese, and Bodlii- 
<l.?iarma considered that His Majesty had no eye for tlio c-sscutiais 
of religion. So he left Nanking, crossed the Yangtse, and hidook 
himself to Lo-Yang, where he lived in a country temple avoiding the 
cninpany of princes and high ecclesiastics and, acconling to one 
popular legend, spent nine years sitting and gaising at a wall until 
at. last Ins h^gs dropped off. The expression Avall-guxijig was 
proluihly in its original sense metaphorical. The legend is per- 
[)etnat<‘d in a kind of legless doll ^vdiich is a pojnilar pla}1.hing 
aiuotig Japanese children and is still called Daruma. 

It is not otjsy to ascertain how much real liistory tlicre is in this 
iiarmtivc. Bodhidharma’s visit to China seems to be a fa,ct.^ 
TIis ])(TsonaIity and even his foature.s, which, as represented in 
numerous paintings, are not at all Chinese and show remarkal)le 
individuality, struck the popular imagination ; but in seeking for 
facts one must bo cautious in admitting the evidence of art, for 
some of tlie. liest known portraitKS represent Ms miracnlous passage 
across the. Yangtse standing on a reed. It is most remarkable that 
no reference to him has been discovered in Indian or Tibt.‘tan 
writings and the Oliincse statements about his career in India 
are noithei* detailed nor lucid. He is generally described as liaMng 

I’l'lliot in T'onng Fan, 1923, p. 253, observes : “ Non senkmcnt BodhiUhanna 
n’ii pas de notice dans les Annules des Wei ou dans les Amialcs des Leoiig, inai.s je 
no crois pas qu’ii soit noinme,” but, as evidences for his existence, lie cites fiTUt 
Yanp: Ilsuaii'chili, autbor of the Lo-Yaug-CIYie-lan-chi, written about 547, who 
says that at- a date wdiich is calculated to be between 516 and 534, but nearer 
the latter, Bodbidharma who was a prince of Po-sa& {Persia) was at Lo-Yang, and 
8P.mndly “ raneieime liistoire des T'aiig dont rivuteur a du mourir on 946 ”. This 
liisfc (.'outaius most of the elements of the legendary biography. The Lo-Yang- 
C'h'ie-lan-chi, which is printed in vol. 51 of Takakusu’s Tripitaka, is a description 
of forty-five Buddliist temples at Lo-Yang and mentions under the first temple 
(Ei-noi-ji) that when the author visited it an Indian priest called Bodhidharma, 
a foreigner from the Po-ssQ country, was stopping there {p. 1000, col. 2). He is 
also mentioned under Shubonji, the 8th temple on the list. Now other Chinese 
accounts (e.g. the transmission of the Lamp, N. 1524) say that Bodhidharma was 
a Prince of Kan-Chi ® m.) or Conjeevaram, As the Pallava dynasty was 
connected with this city and was likewise supposed to have come from Persia, it 
seems possible that the author is alluding to Bodhidharraa’s Pallava lineage, real 
or imaginary. The reality of the connection of the Paliavas with Persia does not 
affect the question. 

102 

BUDDHISM IN INDIA: ■AND . CHINA [ch, y 

been a prince of aoiitbern India but, in tke earliest mention of liim, 
as of Ftn'.sia ; and his title of tweiity-eigiitli Patriarch offers diffi- 
culties. As I have already mentioned, more importance was 
airaeliod to the Patriarchs in the Far East than in India, and 
a {'CO !•< I i iig to most sects there were only twenty-three or four, of wlioni 
the last was ])ut to death by the Huns and left no successor. Tlic' 
r(‘ckoniin<- which makes Bodhidharnia the twenty-eighth must 
T'i'prcscnt the tradition of some school ahont which we have no 
iidbrma.tiou from Indian sources and which had special views about 
tlie suec-ession. Oh'ie-Sung, who wrote a history of the Zen school 
and (lie<i in 1071, criticizes the account of the Patriarchs “ accepted 
l>y other sc'cts and says that when Siiiiha was in danger of deatli 
he transmitted his office to Basiasita, a native of Kashmir, who 
proccu'ded to travel in Central and South India and appointed 
Punyamitra (the name is doubtful) as his successor. Punyamitra 
wtmt to the east and designated Prajnatara, who theren|.ioii 
reinoved to the south where he travelled for some time and finally 
passc-d his dignity on to a prince called Bodhitara, who on hecomiug 
])a.tdareli changed this name to Bodhidharma. It is quite prohablc 
tiiat during the persequtioii of the Huns eminent Buddhists left the 
north and wandered about in the central and southern districts, 
but if Bodhidharma arrived at Canton in 52G the chronology offers 
great difficulties. In Chinese ecclesiastical histories we find the 
Patriarchs dated in terms of the reigns of Chinese Emperors wffio are 
supposed to have been their contemporaries. But this apparent 
accuracy hides an entire ignorance of Indian history. Also the 
works treating of the Zen Patriarchs are relatively late. Thus 
Tao-Ylian’s Transmission of the Lamp ® was composed in 1004 and 
Nien-Chang’s History of Buddhism^ wdiich. comments on it and 
sometimes corrects it, in 1333. These two hooks date the appoint- 
ment of the first Patriarch Kasyapa at 905 n.o., Asvaghoslia (tlie 
twelfth) about 332 b.c., Nagarjuna (the fourteenth) at about 212 
B.C'., Simha at about a.I). 258, and Bodhidharma at a.i>. 495. This 
strange chronology is clearly due to antedating the death of the 
Buddha by about 400 years and, if alio wai ice is made for this, 
Asvaghoslia and Nagarjuna fall into approximately their right 
periods. But the dates to be assigned to Siralia and the later 
Patriarchs on the same principle are impossible and the last four 
of them up to the. death of Bodhidharma are made to cover nearly 

CH.v] BmmmM IN CHINA K!3 

;300 yeiirs. Nor are earlier works more satisfactory. Cli i Cliia-^ye's ^ 
history of tlie Patriarclis wMck ends witli Simlia saj^s that he. was 
lahoaded by Miralmtsu in Keiliin. Nanjio states that this work 
was translated— more probably compiled — in a.d. 472, but the 
Hun chieftain Miliirakula, who is apparently meant, is usually 
believed to have ruled about A.D. 630, 

The accounts of Bodhidliarma’s doings in Chino, liove also 
iivoiised much scepticism. The most trustworthy is pciliaps tlio, 
luography in the Su-kao-seng-cliuaii - composed by '.roo-llsi'um 
bi'tween A.D. 645 and 667, but it does not mention his iiUi.nvic.w 
with Wu-Ti. Later is the work called Eecords of the Trausiiiission 
of the Lamp,® a collection of notes respecting prominent Zon teafher.s 
(ionip,iled by Tao-Yiian about 1004. It contains an account of the 
imperial interview and obviously regards Zen as a recognized brunch 
of Buddhism with definite doctrines of its own, which the earlier 
work can hardly be said to do. There are also four t,reati.ses in 
Cliinese attributed to Bodhidharma liimself but probably s])urious,-* 
though tliey may contain some of his sayings. The second of them 
describes his reception by tlie Emperor and the sermon which he. 
prcaclujd on the occasion. In it he insists that religion means 
nothing but the vision of the Buddha nature in one’s own heart. 
It is a simple natural eAperienco like a physical act and to those 
to whom it comes it gives light and deliverance : it is inevitable and 
convincing. If we substitute atmaii in passages like this for 
Buddha nature the doctrine ascribed to Bodhidharma closely 
resemldes certain weli-lmown passages of the Upanishads.-'”' It is 
generally admitted that there was much interchange of ideas beBveeii 
Brahinanic and Mahayanist philosophy and that the main con- 
ceptions found in the Vedanta as expounded by ^a.nkara, though 
Brahinanic in their origin, had been elaborated by Butldhists 
lieforo Imn, for he was accused by his opponents of being “ a 
Buddhist in disguise ”. It may be that Bodhidharma belonged 

^ Kanjio, 1340. Bee vol. vi. 

: .Nanjio, 1403. ■ 

JSTanjio, 1524, ^ ^ Ohmg-te-cLuan-tong-Ju. It is Huid 

to have been presented to the Emperor by the author in A.i). 1006. 

^ Such different authors as Pelliot {T'oung Pao, 1023, p. 253 ff.) and Suzuki 
{Essays in Zen Buddhism, p. 218) agree iu thinking them, late compositions made 
when the school had become flourishing. They are in the supplement to the 
TripHaka, 13. 15, 5. 

There arc noticeable verbal coincidences. Thus it is said that tlie Buddha 
nature reveals itself in dreams : that it embraces the whole Universe and yet 
is so small that a needle cannot prick it. 

164 BVmmSM IN INDIA AND CHINA [t-u. v 

to some siioli seliool ijitermediate between Buddlu'srn. and \’’(Hla«1'is3n 
and that lie left India because his special teaching did. not win many 
adherents there. It is clear, however, that in China students of 
Taoist philosophy were m sympathy with it and the difficulty is to 
find out what ivas imported from India and what was due to native 

influences. Great as was the prestige of Confucius’s ethical system, 
it was not satisfjdng to all minds, and another current of thought 
which was old and strong bade men abstain from action and look 
for light within. The ideal of the amiable hermit was at least 
as old as Ohuang-Tzh and in spite of disputes there was much 
similarity in thought and language between Buddhism and. Taoism. 
In later times Chinese Buddhists studied Taoist books.^ 

Tradition is iiiianimous in reporting that Bodhidha.rnia attached 
little importance to the .scriptures and held that knowdedge of the 
truth is obtained by sudden enlightenment, well-known by its 
Japanese name of Satori. This disdain of scripture is very un-Indian, 
and a weU-known legend which is often cited to justify it appears 
to be a Chinese invention and cannot be traced to any Sanskrit or 
Pali source. It relates that Sdkyaniuiii, wishing to explain to his 
disciples the essence of his doctrine, said nothing but held up before 
tliem a bunch of flowers. None of tl],em understood wffiat he meant 
i?xcept Kasyapa who looked at him and smiled, also in siien.ee.- 
This story is considered typical of the right way to impart instruction, 
not by explanation or reference to books but by a sort of telepathy, 
and the biographies of Zen saints contain countless instances of liow 
some trivial and apparently irrelevant action of a master brought 
.sudden illumination and peace to his pupil. Nevertheless, the Zen 
school, thongh it disparaged the scriptures, did not neglect letters, 
and both in China and Japan produced a long succession of 
ecclesiastical authors. More than twenty of their treatises are 
included in the Chinese Tripitaka and it is said that two hundred and 

' l-Cliitig ill Ills Memoirs of Eminent Monks mentions tliree })ilsrims who hiiH 
stuflkvi the works of Chu.ang>tzu and his own writings show an aequaintance with 
thi.s author, Knmarajiva is said to have written a commentary on tho I’ao-tt;- 
ohing. I do not know if it is extant but it is froqneutly quoted in tlio work called 
^ Ko.shiyokn of the Chinese scholar ^ ^ fihoko who collected 
fiixty-fonr commentaries on Lao*tzu (a.d. 1573-1010). Tho Yiian-jcn-lun 
(N. 1504), w'riLtcn by the fifth Patriarch of the Avatanisaka school who died in 841, ; 

criticizes Taoism and tho Hinay&na as imperfect rather than erroneous systenus, i 

2 The story is found in the chapter called ^ ^ nongehon of tho | 
apocryphal antra called ^ ^ 3E 1^ fife ^ ^ Pai-hondeno-nionbntsu \ 
ketsugi-kyo, which was apparently composed in Chinese and has no Sanskrit ■ 

original or counterpart. J 

'*********^**^^ 

ni. v] BUDDHISM IN CHINA 165 

tliirty works on Zen were publisked under tlie Mancku djnastyd 
li is stated, but also denied,^ that Bodliidliarma regarded tbe 
Ijaiikavatara-sutra as the best exposition of his teaching and 
handed a copy of it to his disciple Hni-K'o for his own guidance 
and the salvation of the world. One may doubt if Bodhidharma 
gave, his approval to the sutra, but in China it had a certain 
connection with the Zen school and it was one of the tlnee works on 
wliich the first Ming Emperor ordered the doctors of that school 
to write commentaries.''* Though studied by modern scholars in 
Japan, it does not seem to be commonly regarded as a specially 
sacred book. 

Bodhidbarina is credited with a fiibulous age but there are 
various accounts of his death, all legendary. Tradition, however, 
is agreed in asserting that he transmitted his teaching to a line 
of five Oliinese Patriarchs, making six including himself.^ He 
handed the insignia of office, a robe and bowl, to Hui-K'o 
(Elva), the most eminent of his pupils. Hui-K'o had studied 
Taoism till his thirty-third year, but, hearing of Bodhidharma, 
desired to be instructed in his doctrine. In spite of his eagerness to 
learn lie met with a cold reception, and, according to the legend, 
at last cut off liis own arm and handed it to the master in order to 
attract his attention. The vStory goes on to relate that when he had 
become Patriarch he associated freely with butchers, debauchees, 
and the lowest of the people, avoiding the company of Buddhist 
prie.sts, though he was a learned man. His preaching was most 
popular and the hierarchy at last induced the authorities to put him 
to death. 

The third Patriarch, Seng-Ts'an (Sosan), wrote a celebrated poem 
called the Hsiii-hsin-mei ® but lived a retired life, as did also his 
successor, but the fifth Patriarch, Hung-Jen (Konin), was well- 
known as a teacher and his residence, the Yellow Plum monastery 

^ Wieger, Bouddhisme Chinois, p. 108. 

“ Sec Suxuki, Siudies in the Lanicdvatdra-siltra (1930), p. 44 fF., where tlie question 
ia (lisfiiissed. The statement is made by both TaO'Hsiian (Nanjjio, 1493) and Tao- 
Yiian (Nanjio, 1524) but criticized and denied by Ta-kuan T'an-ying (a.I). 985- 
100 1 ). 

3 Another of tho three works, the Vajracchedika, is also reported to have had 
an early connection with Zen and to have influenced the sixth Patriarch. 

'* Their names are : 2. M Hui-K'o (Eka or Yoka), t593. 3. ^ 

Seng-ts'an (Sosan), f606. 4. Tao-Hsin (Doshin), fOSl. 5. 

Hung- Jen (Konin), fG75. 6. ^ Hui-Neng (Eno), pTlS. 

= m In JaiJauBso pronunciation Shin-jin*iaoi. 

166 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cii. v 

ill iliiliiii, became celebrated. Hither came a foung man from 
Hsin-Choii in the south called Hui-Neng (Bno), who, though 
illiterate, is said to have been attracted by what he heard of the 
teaching of the Vajracchediira-sutra and was allowed to serve as 
a lay brother in the bakery. A well-lniowQ anecdote relates that 
Hmig-Jeii, feeling he was growing old, decided to hold a poetical 
coinpetition and to nominate as his successor the composer of 
the best quatrain. The following lines, composed by Shen-Hsiii, 
his most eminent and learned disciple, called forth universal 
admiration : — 

The body is the Bodhi tree ; 

The mind is like the bright mirror’s stand. 

Clean your mirror continually 

Lest the dust make it dim.^ 

Hiii-Neng as a lay brother was not qualified to compete aud moreover 
could not write, but he induced another servant to inscribe the 
following lines on the monastery wall : — 

Bodhi is not a tree : 

The mirror has no stand. 

From the beginning nothing exists. 

How could dust cover it ? ^ 

Hung-Jen was so struck by these lines that though Hui-Neng was 
an illiterate lay-brother he made over to him the insignia of the 
Patriarchate and secretly designated him as his successor, though 
he himself lived four years longer. The appointment, however, 
Avas contested. Shon-Hsiu was learned and adroit. He attracted 
the attention of the Empress Wu and became a conspicuous figure 
at the capital. The doctrine which lie taught is sometimes called 
the Northern School of Zen, or the gradual teaching, because he 
laid stress in the orthodox manner on study and meditation. 
But little is heard of this school in subsequent years and it died 
out. Attempts which were made to introduce it into Japan did 'not 
succeed. The illiterate Hui-Neng, on the other hand, is imivcrsally 
accepted as the sixth Patriarch and as head of the Southern School 

buddhisbi in china 

. wastAieUfe aiid fatoeof Zen. Refusing all loqno^ts n) 

1 --t il lie tau<Tlit in the country and liad many pupils, the mo>t 

totliecapitalhctau„ntin^^^^^ nf the noein called SliudOka. 

e 

f :4 - -.1 hn t/nicrnij in ullt? tjuuuui. y ^ x x. ■’ . ^ 

,0 tlu, capita o was Yoka, author of the poem called BhudOKa 

contains a colkotion of di— s attnl.uted 

and compiled by liis disciple Tsuug-Pao, wlucli is luucli 
rirtoUly contains some of bis gennine nttemncesd 
venerated and p y Nortbcni Scliool, 

k ■“’’CZt is the msnlt. not of preparation but 

lie insisted tm _ ^ _ see that this doctrine contains 

Ae^'^erms of contmnpt for ritual, learning, and ecclesiastical msliiu- 

!• * H,d-It 6 na refused to nominate a successor, becoming tin a 

llTvi-t as well as tbe sixth of tbe Chinese Patriarchs.^ Tins absence 

nii'emichy and the individualistic character of his teaching, oi a 
oi hietatohy ana ^ p j 

rdftee exShrfect that Zen split into .several scots after 
mth ttec, exph , 

his death. , 4 improbable. Nevertheless, the 

“ aui. or at any rate mi early 

11^ n Patriarch, was Ma-Tsii (Baso), who is said toluiAC 
reckoned .is a iatiiaic , Within about a century 

l::rreirkvow:reofg™^^^^ 

the bin-chi (M 

coming to the tef- .oaf name was T-Hsiian (tSfiT), 

[:: 3 t«ofariwi.i^^^ "Zft“ 5 ^ 

C— HW! ikt more " Thc^^:^ 

kabit of answering questions with a blow oi his 

c 1525, 

Rutra (spoken <m) the raised place on -which ordinations 

wcrc'performcd,tnd it is to mu<ti 

i.r— rthi;:“ ^ 

Patriarch. 

= ® W IH- 

168 

BUmHim IN INBM AND CHIN A [gh. v 

teachers of this period were so imconventioiial and so auti-ritiuilistic 
that they seemed to be almost anti-Bnddliist. A well-known 
anecdote relates how Tan-Hsia ^ (738-824) was once stopping 
in a temple where he felt chilly and calmly made a fire with one of 
the sacred images to warm himself. But in spite of this spirit the. 
Einzai sect flourished, and clearly Zm was not merely eccentric ; 
there was also an orderly and constructive impulse. Thus Pai- 
Chang 2 (Hyakiijo, 720-814) made regulations for Zen monasteries, 
especially for the discipline of the meditation hall, and laid down 
the very practical maxim no work, no food ”. It would appeiii; 
that up to this time the school had no special establishments or rule 
of its own but had shared cloisters with other monks. 

In the eleventh century two new subdivisions arose called after 
their founders Yang-chi (Yogi) and Huang-Lung (Oryu), but the 
name Lin-chi remained and the school became dominant to such 
an extent that at the present day the majority of Chinese monasteries 
profess to belong to it. It is consequently difficult to ascertain 
what were its original and distinctive tenets, but it clearly adhered 
to the doctrine emphasized by the Patriarch Hni-Neng that enlighten- 
ment comes by sudden illumination and transference of thought 
from teacher to pupil, not by meditation, prayer, or study. 

The Ts'ao-Thing school, foimded by the two teachers loiown as 
Ts'ao-Shan and Tung-Shan ® (869), was not so influential in China 
as the Lin-chi but had great success in Japan, where it was known 
as Soto. It laid stress on the need for silent introspection as a 
preparation for enlightenment and also on ethics. The Lin-chi 
is not antinomian but, like the Upanishads and the Vedanta, it 
regards the knowledge of the Buddha nature or Brahman as an end 
in itself, all-satisfying and all-engrossing. When once the eye of the 
spirit is opened to the divine vision, nothing more is said about 
worship or conduct or any human ideal. But the other school held 
that it is necessary to have Enlightenment after Enlightenment,^ 
that is to say, that the inner illumination must display itself in a 
good life. The Lin-oliij however, did not become the dominant 
school and absorb all others without assimilating their doctrines, 

3 Strictly speaking, these are the names of two mountains whore they resided, 
their persozial names being Ryo-kai and ^ Honjakn. ^ 

Soto or Ts'ao-Tiing is formed by combining the first syllables of the name of 
the mountains in Japanese or Chinese pronunciation. 

• ts ® 0 {§. Pronounced in Japanese as Go go no satori. 

niitl Zt'U could never have inlluenced Cliinesc philosophy, me 
Cdufucian pliilosophy, if it had not contained an 
element. 

The Lin-chi (liiimi) was introduced into Japan by Eisai (1215) 
and the Ts'ao-T'img (Sutu) by Dogen. (1353), both of whom studied 
ill Ohiiia wlien the Sung dynasty was reigning at Hangchou. 

The materials for the history of Zen consist chiefly of biographical 
nnf(!s. How anecdotes are notoriously easy to invent and easy 
transfer from one celebrity to another, iiarticularly in universities 
and inonastei'ies. Zen xirodiiced a well-marked tyxie of master or 
pi'oh'ssor who taught l>y brief paradoxical sayings varied ])y lilows 
and kicks, but this eccentricity heconuis so monotonous that it is 
dilticult to follow the growth and development of doctrines and 
institutions which undoubtedly took place. Three stages can be 
traced with some certainty. 

First of ail a great teacher comes from India. In spite of the 
legends which have grown round tlie name of Bodliiilliarma in China 
and tlio absence of any record of him in the West, it seems impossilile 
to doubt that he arrived at Canton and preached a doctrine which 
was called Buddhism, though in the form in which it is reported 
to us in Chinese literature it seems more like Vedantism expressed 
in Buddhist terminology. It is true that we cannot be sure that 
wliat is reported is really the preaching of Bodhidharma, It may 
ho a later invention but, if so, it is not easy to see by what 
this Vedantist influence reached China. 

The century following Bodhidharma is filled by the lives of his 
five successors called Patriarchs. Some of them lived in retirement. 
Contemporary Buddhist opinion seems to have regarded them as 
outside the limits permitted by orthodoxy and they even suffered 
some xDcrsecution. They appear to have been influenced by 
Taoism. Hui-K'o, the second Patriarch, was a student of Chinese 
j)hilosophy and Seng-Ts'an, the third, speaks of the Way 
in exactly the same manner as Lao-Tzu and his followers. His poem, 
fclie Hsin-hsiii-mei, opens with the words : “ To attain the Way is not 
hard : only reject all relative ideas ” (that is, ideas such as Self and 
others, good and evii).^ Under the last Patriarch, about a.i>. 700, 
we see signs of a division in doctrine and temper. Part of the school 
tended to follow the lines of traditional orthodoxy, but though it 
enjoyed the favour of the Court, it was evidently wanting in spiritual 

170 BimmmM m: INDIA. and GHINA [on. V 

vigour wliicli was abundantly present among tlie adherents of Hui- 
Neiig. The Patriarchate came to an end ; mmieroiis schools arose ; 
the whole tone seems protestant and aiiti-ecolesiastical. Tlieii 
comes the third stage. In spite of divisions the sect grew and 
flourished as a whole : numbers and success made the need of 

discipline and ecclesiastical manners to be felt : special monasteries 
and a special rule of life were established, and the external usages 
of Buddhism were respected, to such an extent that the Lin-chi 
became the typical form of Chinese Buddhism. But it long preserved 
its originality and it is precisely this original element which was an 
inspiration for art and philosophy. 

In the sixth century arose another most important school, the 
T'ien-t'ai or Teiidai, which had also a long and eventful history in 
Japan, Lilce Zen it was truly Chinese, that is to say, it was not an 
importation from India but a reconstruction of Buddhism made 
with Indian materials, of course, but with plenty of native mortar. 
In other respects it was very unlike Zen. It rose from the &st like 
some stately cathedral duly equipped with prelates, chapter, 
cloisters, and library, a home for theology, approved metaphysics, 
literature, sacred art, and music. 

Hui-Wen (foSO) ^ is reckoned the first patriarch of this school, 
but its real founder was Chih-K'ai or Chih-I (531-597).^ He was 
a native of Hupeh and a pupil of Hui-Ssu,'^ also . regarded as a 
Patriarch. In 575 he retired to the mountains called T'ien-t'ai, 
“ the platform of heaven,” in Chekiang, from which his school tooic 
its name. ^\Tien fifty years of age he began to lecture on the Lotus- 
sLitra, No less then twenty-two works attributed to him are 
mcluded in the Chinese Tripitaka, but nearly all of them are really 
notes of his lectures and sayings taken down by his disciple Kwang- 
Ting.^ Three of them a.re considered of such importance that they 

are known as “the Three Great Works The first and second 

^ Hui-Wen or Emon. • 

^ ^ uM Ct’t-I, also called ^ ^ Chili-cM-tai-sliih and commonly 

known ill Japan as Tendai Daishi. 

^ ^ ® Hui-Ssu (t577) was a teacher of some importance in tlie history 
of tile school. The Tripitaka contains four works attributed to him, Nanjio, 
Nos. 1541-2, 1547, ami 1576. 

IM • I” Japanese pronunciation Kwanjo, H> was also called Shoan. 
® S The names are: (a) ^ ^ ^ ^ Miao-fa-licn- 

hua-cliiiijr-hsiian-i. The profound mouiiing of the Lotus-sutra. JSianjio, 1534. 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Miao-fa-lien-hua-c.hing-hsiian-i-wcTi'chu. 

Commentary on the above. JSTanjio, 1536. (c) pHT jh ^ Ma-ha-chih-kuan. 
Naiijio, 1538. 

171 

cm. V] BUDDHISM IN CHINA 171 

iire couiTneiitaries on the Lotus, one being a systematic exposition 
of Buddhist philosophy and the other an explanation of the text. 
The tliird is a treatise on meditation as understood by the T'ien-t'ai. 
These three works are usually accompanied by commentaries 
written on them by Chan-Jan, the ninth Patriarch of the school. 
Another series of similar records is called the Pive Small Works ^ 
and consists of explanations on the Samantamuldia chapter of the 
Lotus, the Suvarnaprabhasa-siitra, and the Amitaymdhyana-sutra, 
the first two works having each two commentaries, one compre- 
hensive and the other textual. In all the Tripitaka contains 
about seventy works ascribed to the doctors of the T'ien-t'ai, by far 
the largest output wliich any one school has to show in the Cknon. 

The teaching of Chih-I is more than any other school an inde- 
pendent attempt of the Far Bast to deal with the literary and 
metaphysical problems which confront the student of Buddliism. 
It is marked by its catholic, many sided, and almost encyclopardic 
character. Chih-I regarded the Lotus as the quintessence of truth 
but fully approved of the worship of Amida and died invoking 
Ids name. He wished to find a place for every kind of religious 
exercise and a point of view from which all forms of thought might 
be seen to have some value. His method is illustrated by his 
classification of Buddhist doctrines under the headings the Five 
Times and Bight Teachings, of which I have spoken already.^ 
He sees no antagonism between the Hina- and Mahayana or between 
the various schools. All scripture is good and true if considered 
as a revelation made at a given time to suit the minds of particular 
hearers. Ordinary maiilcind cannot understand 'the absolute and 
complete truth all at once ; they must to it through 

relative truth which, though provisional and imperfect, is not 
orroUeous. And though the literal division of the Buddha’s life 
mto five periods of activity as a teacher will hardly be accepted 
by modern criticism, there are indications that Chih-I was not 
merely thinking of his human existence hut conceived of him 
(quite in the manner of the Lotus) as always preaching and always 

^ 3l /L fjR Wu-hsiao-pu. See Nanjio, 1555-7, -48, -52, -59. 

® Even iti the ehoiee of a saered book hifi love of comprehensiveness and combina- 
tion is visible. He is .said to be the author of the arrangement by ■which the 
Lotius as used by tiie Tondai sect is combined with two other siitras, the 
^ ^ Mutyogi-kyo (Nan., 133) and the ^ W ^ ^ ^ ® 

K-ft'an Fugen Bosalsu gyoho-kyo (Nan., 394), 

“ Chaiher 1, p. 7. 

172 BUDDHISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cu.v 

offering to tlie various types of intelligence the form, of fcriitJi wldcli 
is best suited to their comprehension. 

Since the T'ien-t'ai regards the Lotus as its principal seripturo. 
Slkyammii has naturally a prominent place in its public worship. 
He is the Nirmanakaya,the Hharmakaya, and Sanibhogakaya , being 
respectively represented by Yairoeaiia and Locana..^ But, in 
harmony with the general priimiples desoiibed above, the tliree 
bodies are regarded as one, or as tliree aspects of one, not as a triad 
in wiiich tlie secondary bodies are dei-ived from, the Dharinakaya 
or produced by it. .Further, the essential nature of the Bharmakaya 
is constant activity for the good, of ail .men, and a distinction is 
drawn between tlie fundamental Buddhahood (pen) and tlie trace 
(chi) left among men by the Buddha to educate tiiem.^ Aniitablui, 
Kuan-Yin, and the other great Bodhisattvas are also worshipped 
and there is a sxiccial procedure for mcditatiiig on Ainitfiblia. 

The T'ien-t'ai doctors do not like the assertion that their teaching 
is derived from, the Zen, and indeed it is not correct to represent 
it as a. mere amplification or develojnneiit of that school. But 
Ghiiiese texts certainly represent the first three Patriarchs as liaving 
started by being adherents of Zen and there is nothing uncompli- 
mentary to the TTen-t'ai in supposing that they found it inadequate 
and careless of all sides of religion except one. The ecclesiastical 
biographies of Tao-Hslian ® describe, both Hni-Ssu and Chih-I as 
Ch'an-shih, teachers of Zen, and Hien Ch'ang’s History of 
Buddliism ^ a}ipKes the same epithet to Hui-Wen. 33engyo Daishi, 
too, who introduced the TTeii-t'ai into Japan, traces Ids sphitual 
lineage to Bodliidiiarma.® 

The. monasteries, for there wore several of them, in the T'ien-t'ai 
hills were long a centre of learning. In the eighth century llourislied 
the ninth Patriarch Ghan-Jan, who wrote important commentaries, 

^ ® JM. ^ ^ Pi-lu-ch6-na, iS, ^ Lii-che-na. See above, 
Chap. IV, p. 107-9, for these names. 

3 jije. pon, ^ chi. 

3 Nanjic, 14:93, Su-kao-seng-clraaii, vol. xxi, sheets 7, 11-12, 

and 10-17, Obaku edition. In the table of contents both Hui-fcJsu and Chih-I 
are classed under Zen. The same title of Cli'an-shih is given by the Transmission 
of the Lamp (Nanjio, 1524) to Hni-Wen and Hui-Hsh (Obaku edition, vol. xxvii, 
sheet 6) and Chili-I (sheet 8) and also to Hni-Wen and Chih-I in Cli'ih-P'an’s 
history of the Patriarchs, K. 1661, vol. vi, sheet 5,1 in the Tokyo edition. 

* Naniio, 1637, x, shecd 70, Tokyo edition. 

® In his book called ^ ^ jfil w w Naisho Buppo Sosho 

Kechi-myafcu-fu. 

BUDDHISM IN CHINA 

CIL V] 

l.ivit in tlio disturbed period known as tbe Five Dynasties (907-960) 
tlip (jstablisliments and libraries of tlie sclioor suffered severely. 
Intrkinately it had a branch in Korea, and Ti-Kiiarid a leai'ued 
Korean priest, came to China in 900 bringing with him copies of tlie 
principal sacred ))Ooks wliich had l)een almost entirely lost. Owing 
to Itis (‘X(n’tions the. school again became flourishing and until tlu' 
fourteenth century continued to produce works which wtu'c admitted 
to ilic Tripitaka, But after the fourteenth century its distinctive 
foa hires timded to become less conspicuous. 

In the seventh and ciglith centuries three sects based on Indian 
works flourished in China and reached Japan, when*. t,lu‘y are 
known as Kuslia, Hosso, and Kegon. But though tlu*y hastily 
to the lively interest in Indian pliilosojjliy tlien prevalent, tluiv Avert* 
somoAvliat literary and scholastic and had not suffick*nt vitality 
to acc[uire more than a restricted popularity. Hence, they have 
(•ither disa.])pearod or remain only as Iiistorical survivals. Tlie 
Kuslia School ^ concerned itself with the study and exposition of tlai 
Ahhidharmakosa, vAdiich occupies in Buddhism a position somewhat 
similar to that of the Siim-ma. Thcohgioi of Thomas Aquinas' in the 
Catholic Church. The name pronounced Fa-Hsiang ® in Chinese and 
llnsso in Japanese is a translation of Dharmalakshana. The school 
traces if.s origin to Silabhadra, the Indian teacher of Hsiian-Tsang, but 
the groat pilgrim himself was its real founder. Its textliook is the 
Yuishiki, of whicli I have already spoken and which is based on the 
Trimsika of Vasubandhu. The Hua-Yen or Kegon School has 
a distinguish ed literary record, for about twenty-five Avorks composed 
liy its adherents, including four patriarchs, are contained in the 
Tripitaka ; but tliough for a time it enjoyed tlie respect of 
ecclesiastical and learned circles, it does not seem to have had much 
general influence. Its doctrine is simply that of the Hua-Yen or 
Avatainsaka-sutra. It was founded by Tu Fa-Shim, Avho died 
in 640, and it appears to have declined after the tenth century. 
Both tins school and the Hosso still nominally exist in Japan, for 
they arc represented by ancient and learned corporations which 
administer very considerable ecclesiastical properties, but they do 
not claim to teach a special doctrine differing from that of other 
sects. 

^ ^ 111* Ho w'as the author of a Avork on the four methods of teaoliiing. 
Niinjk), 1551. 

* iM' Chine.se Chii-shc. 

174 

BVDmnSM IN INDIA AND CHINA [ch. v 

Tlio, scveiitli century was obviously prolific in literary and 
pbilosoplucal sects, but there may iaive been a tendency to foiyet 
that Buddlusiu moans not merely indulgence of intellectual tastes 
but a life lived under a fixed nile. Such seems to have been the 
appr(di(msion of Tao-Hsiian ^ (SfiS-fiGT), a distinguished priest who 
ibuuded tlui Lii (Japanese Ritsu) or Vinaya School. He laid 
(‘•osupaj'atively little, stress on doctrime but held that strict morality 
and diseipliin^ are the foundation and essence of the religious lile. 
-Might of his woi'ks are included hi the Tripitaka and indieate a 
pi-actieai iJiiiul inclined to such suljjeots as ecclesiastical history, 
biogi'aphy, and Church government.” .He also compiled a catalogue 
of the TriiiitaJca as it existed in his time.® In mattens of discipline 
hc on! irely followed Indian precedents and made the Dhariuagupta 
'Vinaya, commonly known as the Code, in Four Sections;^ his chief 
authority ; but still the idea of thus emphasizing the V^'inaya, seems 
to have originated in China and not to have been imitated from any 
Indian movement. He was highly respected duruig his life, and 
long after his death the Emperor Mii-Tsimg (821-5) wrote a poem 
in Ins honour. The school still exists in China, and its monasteries, 
though not numerous, have a high reputation for learning and 
strict discipline. It was introduced into Japan by Kanjin in the 
Tempyo era and for some time played aii important part in questions 
of ecclesiastical administration, but, though it still exists, it has only 
ten temples. 

In the eighth century the formative period of Chinese Buddhism 
came to an end .Only one sect of gencual importance arose, and that 
was a direct importation from India and not a native growth or 
reconstruction of foreign materials. It is called Chen-yeu,® the 
true word, or Mi-chiao, the secret teaching. It is simply the 
Maiitrayana or Tantric Buddhism which was prevalent at that time 
in India, esx^ecially in Bengal, and had borrowed from contemporary 
Hindnism many of its least admirable features, such as the use of 

'"I'hut! lie continued the serie.s called Memoirs of Eminent Priests and wrote 
fort,y volumes about those who lived between 519 and 645 (Nanjio, 1493). He 
wrote a history of the Buddha’s family and country (N., 1469-70), and compiled 
collections of documents respecting controversies between Buddhists and Taoists 
(H., 1471) and other matters. 

^ Nanjio, 1483. The fifth catalogue. It is generally known as Nei-ticn-lu 
and was pul)li,shod in 664. 

'* Nanjio, 1117. It is similar to the Vinaya used in Tibet. 

ctr.v] BVBDEim IN OEINA TO 

Spells imd magic ritual. Sucli ceremonies were only too miicli to tlie 
tasre of the Chinese public and in later times it is hard to see tliat 
this school was in any way a good influence. But in its earlier 
stages it may have been better. It attracted the attention of the 
great Kobo Daishi when he studied in China and Avas introdueed 
by liim into his native country in 806, where it speedily became and 
still is one of the largest and most iinpoi'taiit .sects. Its wonderful 
(•-'•I’c monies and ample pantheon were naturally attractive, and in 
skilful Japanese hands its many deities lost much of the grotescpie- 
ness which mars Indian tantrism and rivalled Zen as a source of 
artistic inspiration. The founder and first Patriarch was Vajrabodlii, 
who came from Molaiye, which appears to mean the extreme south 
of India, in 719 and remained in China imtil he died in 732. He maile 
eleven translations, many of which are connected with a tantric 
work called the Vajrasekhara-sutra, but both as a translator and 
teacher his fame is eclipsed by his pupil and successor Amoghavajra, 
whose name is rendered into Chinese as Pu-K'ung.^ Amoghavajra 
was apparently a native of northern India who came to China with 
his master in 719, and after the latter’s death w'ent again to India 
and Ceylon (741-6) to collect manuscripts. His return was well- 
timed, for he arrived in the reign of Hsiian-Tsiing and remained 
at the capital under his successors Su-Tsung and Tai-Tsung just 
at the period when Buddhism enjoyed great but perhaps not very 
healthy favour at the T'ang court. He wished to go hack to his own 
country but pemnssion was refused, and in compensation he %vas 
loaded with titles and honours. He played a prominent part in the 
lengthy and elaborate ceremonies which were performed on behalf 
of the Emperor’s deceased mother in 758 and subsequent years, 
aud it seems that it was from this date that the custom of holding 
services for the dead according to Buddhist rites was officially 
recognized. Amoghavajra is also said to have introduced the 
practice of placmg the images of the four kings at the entrance of 
temples. He lived till 774 and no less than one hundred and eight 
translations from his pen are contained in the Chinese Tripitaka,, 
but they are mostly short tantric works and spells of a few pages 
which cannot be compared with the heroic efforts of Hsuang-Tsang 
and other earlier translators.® 

^ ^ ^ Pu-K'uiig. 

A portrait of Araogliavajra by Li-Chien, who was perhaps hia contemporary, 
is reproduced in Tajima’s Masterpieces, vol. viii, pi. ix. 

17C 

BUBDEISM IN INDIA AND CHINA [cir, 

When treating of the Shingon in Japan it will be necessary to 
consider its special and highly complicated doctrines, but I do not 
propose to describe tliein now. ‘Nor is its history as a sect in Cliina 
eventful. Like the Pure Land school it l)ecanie not so much a 
separate cru-poration as an aspect ol' almost every sect, and in 
particular it is responsible for most of the superstitious eercmonies 
whic'h form a la.rge part of Chinese funeral rites. 

BOOK II 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM 

CHAPTER VI 

PREFATORY REMARKS 

Japan is miiqiie among Asiatic count' vios and it is not siirjirising 
to find ttiat Japanese Biiddliism, tlioiigli imported IVoin China, 
lias a flavour of its own. The first impressions of the tourist are 
confirmed by the researches of the historian. Any technical 
definition of Japanese Buddhism as aforinof Mahayfina isinaderpiate. 
Whatever its pedigree may be, whatever the doctrines which it 
accepts in theory, its various phases not only to-day hut in some 
thousand odd years of history smack of the soil. Yet havmg said 
this it may be well, at the risk of seeming inconsistent, to point 
out that the singularity of Japanese Buddliism is partly due to the 
fact that it is the only instance of Mahayanisin now flourishing 
as a vital religion among people intellectually comparable to 
Siamese, Sinhalese, or Burmans. Whatever Chinese Bu<ldhisni and 
Laraaism may he for individuals, they are for the masses more 
superstitions like the notions of the ignorant peasantry in tli<i 
eoimtries that follow the Roman or Eastern Churches. But 
Japanese Buddhism, in spite of national influences both political 
and artistic, is the lineal and recognized descendant of the creed 
held by Mgarjuna, Vasubandhu, and ^antideva. Special sects 
treat special doctrines as the whole of religion, but this probably 
happened in India too. If the language of Japanese Buddhism 
often seems odd, this is because the writers who introduced it to the 
notice of Europe (such as Ryaiion Fujishima, Lafeadio Hearn, and 
Kiiroda) employed a terminology different from that used by Pali 
and Sanskrit scholars. 

The most salient feature of Japanese Buddhism is its intimate 
connection with the general condition of the nation, both political 
and social. It has vibrated in response to many and abrupt 
political changes, it has registered them in its sects and expressed 
in its art the special note of each. This, perhaps, is only another 
way of saying that the history of Japan, in spite of long periods 
of seclusion, is unique among Asiatic peoples for variety and 
sensitiveness to foreign impressions, and that these characteristics 
appear in religion as elsewhere. But, at any rate, the result is that 

170 

180 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cii. vi 

we liave here an. attitude to religion common in Europe but rare 
in AvSia. Though Asiatic creeds are intimately connected witn tlie 
life of the people, though they may flourish or decay as tlie fu.voiir 
of princes is extended or withdrawn, they still seem to be something 
aloof and superhuman like the forces of nature- But in Japan we 
have phenomena that recall Europe. Ancient churches worldly 
and artistic, intriguing with Emperors and ministers to establish 
a theocracy or eiideavoiuiiig more dhectly to grasp temporal power 
by maintaining troops and turning monasteries into feudal castles : 
protestant sects casting aside tradition and ritual to offer the 
common man salvation by faith but not disdaining political pownr : 
sects preaching national or universal religion but remaining in a 
minority ; and in the eighteenth century a comfortable Established 
Church, not unlike that of England at the same time, bidding people 
maintain their parish temples but putting no great strain on conduct 
or belief. For a devout Buddhist the record is not edifying, but for 
the student of religious evolution it is interesting to see how 
Buddhism could adapt itself to a new and vivacious country, 
fertile in fresh ideas and subject to periodic metamorphoses* To us 
the most conspicuous of these is the assimilation of European 
methods in the nineteentli century, but the earlier changes 
occasioned by the reforms of Shotokii Taishi and the establishment 
of the Kamakura and Tokugawa Shoguriates were hardly less 
drastic. 

Buddhism is, of course, not the only religion of Japan. The 
position is much the same as in China. People may follow Buddhism, 
Shintoism, or Confucianism, any two of them or aU three together. 
The movement called Shingaku,^ which was active at the begimiing 
of the nineteenth century, actually attempted such a combination. 
Still, the resemblance to China, if not superficial, is also not quite 
complete. Confucianism, though a potent influence at more than 
one epoch, hardly obtained the status of a separate religion. 
Buddhism on the other hand may be said to have been the State 
Church, though in no exclusive sense, during some ten centuries 
until in 1868 it was suddenly superseded by Shintoism. 

The ancient religion of Japan was originally without a name, but 
after the introduction of Buddhism was called Shinto, the way of 
the Gods, to distinguish it from Butsudo, or the way of the Buddha. 
It consists in the veneration of ancestors and nature spirits and is 

^ “ Heart Learning 

cH.vi] PJREFATORY REMARKS 181 

thus analogous to the most ancient religion of China, but fliffers 
in the total absence of any monotheistic idea corresponding to 
Then or Heaven. Some anthorities, especially W. G. Aston, <leny 
that Shintoism includes ancestor worship, and in support of this 
it may be urged that it considers corpses as impure and that funeral 
rites may not be performed in Shinto temples. But on tlie other 
liand the veneration of ancestors is imdoubtedly an ancient and 
important part of Japanese religion : there is absolutely no indica- 
tion that it was a separate creed, and the principal deity of Shinto, 
the Sun-goddess, is venerated less as a personification of the sun 
than as the ancestress of the Imperial Family. 

We have little historic evidence of the nature of pre-Biiddliist 
Shintoism except the legends contained in the Kojihi and Nihongi, 
but what survives to-day is so little affected by medieval or modern 
ideas that it may be considered the exact reproduction of the ancient 
creed, just as the wooden temples of Ise which are rebuilt every 
twenty years preserve the architecture of almost prehistoric times. 
If popular religion in China reminds us of the beliefs and praetic^es 
prevalent in the early Roman Empire, Shinto takes us back to older 
forms of thought and to the 'archaic strata of Greek and Latin 
religion. It is strange that this ancient ceremonial paganism should 
have survived among an unusually intelligent and progressive 
race. It is not even artistic, for it worships ho images and the 
strange dreamlike legends of its gods resemble the stories of the 
Kalewala or of Polynesian mythology. It has no moral code; 
its prayers and sacrifices aim at obtaining temporal prosperity and 
indicate no desire for moral or spiritual blessings. Yet tbese 
strange lacunm are somehow filled by its intensely patriotic spirit. 
For it Japan is the land of the Gods : the greater preside over the 
Empire, the lesser over towns or hamlets ; the noble or the humbler 
dead have their due place in the cult of the State, city, or family. 
So primitive is the thought of Shinto that it is hardly correct to say 
that natural features or individuals are deified. They are simply 
accepted as important facts in the continuous national life and 
addresses or appeals are made to them about such things as concern 
them. This sense of continuity in national life, though expressed 
in almost childlike language, is really equivalent to saying that the 
individual exists only as the member of a family and the family 
as a member of the State : that the present must sacrifice itself 
to the traditions of the past and the needs of the future. And thus 
the heroism of Japan grows naturally out of a religion which if 

182 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM lpE. m 

coiiHidfi'Ccl iiiisnupatliefcically in tlie liglit of pure reason is as fVjolish 
as a foil V tale. 

It is a fnrtlier testimony to tlic strengtli of Shinto that it did iiot 
collapse with the introduction and acceptance of anotlicr cr(;ed. 
Its .siii’vival was partly due to the tolerant temper of Buddhism so 
ol'te'n noticed in these Images, but still it did not become a popular 
Kupc'cstit-ion like the worship of the Hats in Burma. After a, 
period of hostility a compromise was arrangt;d Icnown a,s Ityoljii- 
tShiiito, or twofold Shinto, by which the Shinto gods wore recognized 
as incarnations of Buddhas or of Bodhisattvas and the control of 
their teni])les, except in Ise,Izunio, and some other special localities, 
was lianded over to Buddhist priests. This arrangement ach'd 
as a preservative. Shinto, being intimately associated with a vast 
religious system which had iiifhrite receipts for satisfying the 
emotional, speculative, and moral aspirations of a progressive 
pe.ople, felt no obligation to cliange or expand. Yet it was not 
smothered or embalmed : it remained the State religion for certain 
solemn functions, and when in tlie middle of the nineteenth century 
a wave of political feeling demanded not only a Japanese Emperor 
but a Japanese creed, it eme.rged in its pristine simplicity. 

In fact, it is Buddhism that shows the influence of Shintoism 
rather than vice versa, for it has been obliged to sanction the venera- 
tion of ancestors as a general principle and also many local l)elicfs 
and customs. Yet the peculiarities of Japanese Buddhism cannot 
be explained as an imitation of Shinto. They are due rather to the 
bold freedom with which the Japanese made selections from the 
umvieldy mass of Indian and Chinese ideas presented to tliem. 
In religion as in other matters they showed a talent for combining 
imitation with transformation. 

One obvious feature of Japanese thought, illustrated ])y this very 
compromise of Ryobu-Shintu, is its tendency to unite religions. 
All creeds have met with tolerance, except those which like Catholic 
Christianity in the past were intolerant themselves, and all are 
assumed to mean much the same. Thus Bakin the novelist says ; 
“ Shinto reverences the way of the sun : the Chinese philosophers 
honour heaven : the teaching of the Buddha fails not to make the 
sun a deity. Among differences of doctrine the fundamental 
doctrine is the same.’^ This is not really true as a historical state- 
ment respecting the original teaching of these religions, but it is not 
an incorrect description of them as professed in Japan. The Shinto 
Sun-goddess was identified with the Buddha Vairocana, who is 

*wiwi>wirijriiiiiMi'>i»iii»>iN,: 

nr.vr] PREFATORY REMARKS 1S3 

perliaps a Po]-sian Sun-god imported into Buddhism, and tlie 
assertion that, these two deities are the same contains an obviou.s 
tnitli and it makes for peace. Even the intolerant hlichireii seems 
to luiTc had no doubts about the Sun-goddess. In a letter written 
towards the end of his life he saj's : ‘‘ Tiiough Awa is far from tlu» 
centre it is somewhat like the centre of Japan, because the Sun- 
goddess found there her first abode . . . and T, Nioliiren, began tlie 
j)ropngation of the true religion by proclaiming it first in Awa.’' *• 

The. simple Shinto view that groat men are supernatural luhigs 
is })ractically the same as sul^tlo Indian theories about iiuairtiations, 
and a religion whicli rocoguizod the Hindu fathers of the Chiu’ch 
as Bodhisattvas felt no difficulty in extending th(', same honour 
to the pillars of the faith in Japan. Shotoku Taishi, Kobo Daishi, 
Honcii, Shinran, and many others receive a veneration hardly 
inferior to that accorded to deities. The founder of the sect is often 
regarded by his followers as an incarnation and the hall dt‘dicated 
to him is one of tlie most conspicuous parts of a temple. Buddhist 
and Shintoist ideas thus coalesced and the title of Bodliisattva was 
conferred on departed Emperors and statesmen 2 — on those, for 
instance, who are described as Hachiman, the patron of soldiers, 
and Tenjin, the Ood of Calligraphy, and even on so recent a personage 
as leyasii. 

This last step seems a parody of Buddliism, yet the view of the 
ordinary Japanese Buddhist is not unreasonable. He holds that 
it is right to be grateful to the heroes of the past and to commemorate 
them : that all men have in them the power to become Buddhas aiul 
that those who obtain distinction may justly bear the title of 
Bodliisattva as being near the final phase. This liberal appreciation 
of talent and learning in every form finds expression in the statement 
that ihe Buddha preached 84,000 varieties of doctrine. Similar 
ideas are found in India and China, and on this as on other points 
I ought to say that in describing a belief as characteristic of Japan 
I do not mean to deny its existence in China. Japanese Buddhism 
is at least relatively clear cut and well-ordered ; its doctrines can 
be formulated, even if the process (as in other religions) provokes 
surprise from the plain man on learning what he believes. What 
is obscure or forgotten in China is often stated plainly in Japan. 

^ See Anosaki’.s NicMren, ilia Buddhist Prophet, p. 106. 

“ Ojin, the lifteonth Emperor of Japan, is considereU to be the same as Hachiman, 
Sngiwara Miohizano (845-903), a statesman who was exiled in life, was deiiicd 
as Tenjin. and has a temple in most Japanese towns. 

18 - 1 - 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE 7??7-Di5//i™ [ch. vi 

Japanese Buddhists admit that the truth, if one in essence, need 
not one in expression. The Zon holds that absolute truth i.s not 
taught in scripture and is not expressible in words. It must lx 
discovered by intuition or learnt by telepathy. Yet hohen} 
or accommodations of this absolute truth to the intelligence of the 
hearer, such as anthropomorphism or doctrines of heaven and liell, 
are not condemned. They are real and justifiable helps for somt* 
natures. 

Something very like this view is held by apparently dogmatic 
sects though they do not emphasize it. The followers of the Jodo 
schools, while advocating faith in Amida as the best means of salva- 
tion in a degenerate age, do not theoretically deny other mctliods 
and admit that Amida as a personality is merely “ an accommo- 
dated " truth”, a form of the eternal oneness but not ^absolute. 
The Tendai sect divides the life of the Buddha into five 
periods devoted to promulgating as many doctrines, the Tendai 
teaching being, of course, the last, best, and all inclusive. Even the 
intolerant sect of Nichiren, while claiming a monopoly of the doctrine 
proper to this age, admits that by the Buddha’s ordinance different 
doctrines were preached at different times.'"^ In most sects this 
theory of ages is coupled with the idea that the present period is 
Mappo, or the destruction of the Law. A new period in which the 
true faith will flourish again is to he inaugurated by the next 
Buddlia Maitreya. MeSvSianic ideas arc not very prominent Imt are 
not unknown, as is shown by the legend that Kobo Daishi is not 
dead but merely awaiting in his tomb the coming of a new era. 

With such views as to permissible variations in belief, it is 
remarkable not that there should be so many sects of Buddhism in 
Japan but rather that they should be so clear and so well defined, 
not mere schools of thought but sects in the European sense of the 
word, self-assertive and even militant. The individualism of the 
faithful is as strong as the tendency to thinlc that every one means 
much the same, so that the Buddhist world of Japan combines 
fervour with toleration. This distinction of sects is partly due to 
the simple fact that their teaching is distinct. The creeds of the 
Zen, Nichiren, and Shinshfi are not really the same ; they hardly 
have a common origin, for the Shinshu is not so much a development 

^ Sco o.g. “ A Catcehism of the Shinshu Sect,” Trans. As. 800, Japan, 1912, 

p. 268. 

® This is a legitimate deduction from the Lotus-sutra. 

»<lm<HiilitiiriiiHiir-|ini im 

an. VI] PREFATORV REMARKS 185 

of Bufldliisin as n set of nev ideas ingeniously fit real on to it. 
Sectarian difleiviices liave also been streiigtliened by social and 
political cireuinstaneos. Some sects are old and aristocratic, 
einliodifid in great monastic foundations, whose vitality as cor]->ora- 
tions outlasted the importance of their special tenets. Others arc 
j)opular and protestant, striving wlion they were founded and still 
striving now to bring religion up to date. Among these ]H5pukr 
st;cts some are reactions against others. Almost all liavc at some 
lime or a.nother fought as corporate bodie.s and in defeuct^ of tlicir 
tmnporal ]X')S3essions. H'enci' side by side vrith the .sentiment that 
a w'spcct.-ible family should follow the rites of its palish temjsle there 
is nob v'anting religious enthusiasm. The former aeuiitn.e(ii' is 
a legacy of the Toliugawa regime. Tn the troubled period whitdi 
preceded it there ^\■cre philosophers, but the average religious man 
was a partisan and combative. 

In Japan as in all Far E.a stern countries Buddhism is closely 
(‘oniieticd with the veneration paid to the dead. Until the Meiji 
tu'a all fuiKU'cils were pcaformod ])y Buddhist priests, and even now 
tuany .Tapanese who have little to do with Buddliism during tlieir 
lives are buried according to its rites. Some of the older sects sfuau 
to he literally religions of the dead. For instance, it s<.*emetl to im? 
ndien, I was visiting the great temple of Tennoji at Osaka that tlie 
priests and tlie numerous worshippers were ail engaged in inter- 
oossory or commemorative ceremonies on behalf of the departed. 
In Buddhist families the mortuary tablets are placed licfore the 
household shrine wliich occupies a shelf in one of the inner apa,rt- 
ments and the dead are commonly spoken of as Buddhas (liotoke- 
sama). This hold language is, so far as I know, peculiar to Japan 
and is an imitation of Shinto. The Shinto dead become (it is not 
explained how) Kami or superhuman beings, for the translation 
“ gods ” is an ex-aggeration : it could hardly be allowed that tlie 
Buddhist dead had an inferior status and they were therefore 
termed Buddhas, Buddha and Kami being, according to popular 
ideas, much the same. 

Further, the notion that every one, nay even every grain of dust, 
can become a Buddha, though not unknown to Indian Buddhism, 
is more popular in Japan than elsewhere,^ and to Japanese politeness 
it does not seem an exaggeration to speak of the commonplace dead 
as having achieved the highest destiny. This close connection with 

^ A common saying is “ Grass, trees, land and earth will become Buddha 

18G 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM 

family and national sentiment lias preserved Buddliisin from many 
dangi'i's, particularly during its letliargy under tlie Tokuguwa 
regime. It is remarkable how in the %airions religions of tlie world 
sentiment and practice vary with regard to intercessory and 
commemorative, services on behalf of the dead. Such rites are 
not countenanced in the Old or New Testaments nor in tlie Koran, 
and apparently did not appeal to SeJiiites. On tlie other hand, tlioy 
formed the greater part of religion among the Chinese, Japanese, 
and ancifnt Egyptians and a considerable, though Ic.ss conspicuous 
part among Hindus, Slavs, and .Homan Catholics of all nations. 
Protestants of all races seem to eschew them. Tlie desire to 
perform such ceremonies seems to depend partly on race and partly 
on religion. 

Tlio externals of Japanese Buddhism are its own and increase 
the feeling that wo are dealing with something native and individual, 
thougli such a sect as the Shingon is hardly separable in theory from 
the theology of China or Tibet. There is little that is grotesque 
or monstrous, perhaps little that is majestic. But evcr^dliing 
is marked by reticence, grace, and kindliness : pathos and liiimoiir 
are nut absent. There are colossi and pictured demons for those 
who want them, but in most temples the worshipper is welcomed 
by compassionate angels and gods of healing : the images are natural 
and benevolent and are often set behind screens or in cabinets, thus 
suggesting the worship of some half-seen presence rather than 
idolatry. 

The pantheon offers some peculiarities. Dogmatic, though 
perhaps not popular, theology recognizes tihe existence of a 
Universal Buddha mind manifested in various forms. According 
to the older sects these are theoretically five, but in practice one is 
selected for adoration. Thus the Shingon sect reveres Dainichi 
(Vairocana) : the Shinshii worships Amida (Amitabha) only, 
rejecting all other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. The Nichiroii sect 
declare, s (with considerable histo.rical truth) that Dainichi, Amida, 
etc., are mere inventions and regards Shaka, that is Gotama the 
historical Buddha, as the one manifestation of the Eternal Buddha- 
hood suitable for veneration in modern times. It admits, however, 
the worship of Bodhisattvas. All sects except the Shinshii pay 
reverence to a great number of these, the distinction between a 
Buddha and Bodhisattva being often ignored in practice. As in 
China, Kwannon (Kuan-Yin) is much worshipped and corresponds 
to the Madonna or Goddess of Mercy. Ancient masculine images 

PBEFATORY RE31ARK8 

187 

CH. Vl] 

of tliis deity occur, but in modern times she is universally regarded 
as feminine, tliougli perliaps it would be truer to say tliattlie figure 
is sexless like a Cliristian angel. Tbougli tbe images of the great 
Bodhisattyas Monjii and Fugen often stand by the side of Slrnka, 
they do not receive much attention, but Jizo (Kshitigarbha), a deity 
inconspicuous outside China and Japan, is, so to speak, a male 
Kwannon, He is regarded as the helper of all in trouble and in 
particular as the protector of dead children. 

It is somewhat remarkable that several Indian deities wlio arc 
little known or forgotten in China should still he well loiowti in 
Ja])ini. Such as Slioden or Kwaugiten (Cauesa) : Kishi Jlojin 
or Hariti, another protector of dead cliildren and, like Jizn, hoitouiH'd 
by many toucliing olfcrings : Beaiten or Sarasvati, and Fiido, 
commonly, though perhaps erroneously, regarded as the god of lire. 
Etymologically his name is equivalent to the Sanskrit Acala and 
he appears to be a form of Siva. Biiizuru (or Puulola) is another 
figure at present apparently known only to the Buddhism of Japan, 
though he has Indian antecedents. He is regarded as the god of 
medicine and his image may often be found outside temph's reprt^- 
senting him in a sitting position. I find it somewhat difficult 
to explain the presence of these Indian deities in Japan ■when they 
arc unlviiown or neglected in China. The absence of Ganesa in that 
country ^ may perhaps be due to a prohibition of liis worsliip, and 
in Binzuru, Kompira, and perhaps other figures there may be a 
mixture of a Buddhist original with something native. But how 
are wo to account for Bciiten, Fudo, and others ? The Indian and 
Cambodjaii priests ■who settled at Nara in early days do not seem 
to have been suiliciently numerous to explain the wide diffusion 
of these cults. 

Apart from sects and doctrines, there are at least three types of 
Japanese Buddhism. One may be called the old parochial form. 
Japanese when born are registered in a certain temple : when they 
die, their funeral rites are performed there or in another of the same 
sect. During their life they are mostly not regular worshippers 
but from time to time subscribe money for pious objects and go on 
pilgrimages wliich arc half picnics. The second form, exhibited 
by the Shinshu and Nichireii sects, is an active and popular redigion. 
Its temples are beautiful : it has created many excellent institutions, 
both educational and jihilanthropic : among its leaders are men of 

^ See Chapter IV, p- 139, 

,188 

HISTORY or: JAPANESE BUDDmSM Ism. n 

learning, intelligence, and ability. Yet neitlier sect can be said to 
represent educated public opinion. A large class of people in 
England, important botli socially and intellectually, would l)e 
astonisbed if asked whether they attended the services of the 
Salvation Army and revivalist meetings. A similar class in Japan 
would be equally astonished at the idea of attending Buddhist 
services. 

A third form of Buddhism may be studied by English readers 
in the writings of educated Japanese such as Soyen Shaku and 
M. G. Mori,i who endeavom’ to combino Buddhism with European 
scie.nce and philosophy. Their wrritings remind one of those western 
apologists who attempt the same task for Christianity. In reading 
these Japanese works we feel that the words remain, but that the 
sense given to them is not that which they bore in Sanskrit or even 
in Chinese. The expositors are less anxious to let the Buddha 
or Nagaijuna speak for themselves than to prove that their sayings 
are agreeable to the latest European theories in science and 
philosophy. Yet though the reader feels that these reinterpreta- 
tions give him neither what the ancients meant nor what ordinary 
modern Buddhists believe, they are not unreasonable, for the 
fundamental principles of Buddhism are more in harmony with the 
results of scientific researeh than are the postulates of Christian 
theism. A considerable, amount of valuable learned literature 
dealing with Buddhism— such as dictionaries of Buddhism in 
general and of special sects, biographies, critical editions, and 
historical studies— is being published in Japanese. The principal 
works are noticed in the ^bibliographies which appear from time to 
time in the BuHetin de VEcoh Francaise ^Extreme Orient. Arclneo- 
logical expeditions also have been sent from Japan to China and 
.CentmlAsia.'-' 

It may seem that I do not credit Buddhism with much influence 
in Japan. That assuredly is not my intention, but it would be 
misleading to speak of it as havmg the same position as Islam used 
to have in Turkey or Hinduism still has in large parts of India, 
It Iras often been asked whetlier the Japanese are a religions people 
or not and the question has received diametrically opposite answers.^ 
Tlie affirmative is, I think, the truer, if religion is taken in the wide 
sense of devotion to something beyond individiiai existence, of 

^ Soyen Shaku, Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot. Mori, Buddhism and Faith. 

2 e.g. from Lafcaclio Hearn and .'B. H. Chamberlain. 

1R9 

CH, VI] PREFAWBY mm ARKS 

readiness to sacrifice to it earthly welfare and life itself, nay, even 
;i ])assioii for such sacrifice as the true end of man, Tliis teinj)er 
is prol)ably commoner in Japan than in any other country. But the 
daily external signs of piety do not assume the serious forms common 
elsewhere, such as frequent religious services attended hy the laity. 
In Japan there has survived the old pagan spirit (pagan for want 
of a better word and in no semse a reproach) which identiiies celigion 
with Government, with law, vvitli fiimily duties arui festi viri(>s, 
Tliey are identified in. the strictest sense : religion doi's not. regulate 
them: they are religion. 

But it may be urged that wliether this sentiment is religion or 
not, it certainly is not Buddhism, for Buddhism is eoucerm'd with 
the salvation of individuals. It is true that the Buddha, like 
Christ, took little heed of states or families but concentrated his 
attention on suffering human personality, and the peculiar conditions 
of life in ancient India caused the non-social, ascetic, indi\fidual side 
of religion to be emphasized in most sects. Yet the morality of the 
Sigillovada-sutra and of Asoka’s edicts is practically the same 
as tlie rnorality of tlie Far East, and though Buddliism may not 
hold up the state or family as realities or ideals, yet it persistently 
inculcates self-sacrifice, and if it bids the individual work out his 
own salvation, he must do so by learning that he does not really 
exist as an individual. And though the monastic law is anti-social, 
it has much that fits in with the. national spirit. Self-control and 
self-conquest are the ideal of the Samurai as imich as of the priest. 
The archaic, heroic temper of Japan finds a simple and direct 
expression in Shinto, but that expression is hardly adeipiate, and 
those who require an intellectual complement find it in Buddliism. 

As already mentioned, the connection between Buddhism and 
the political history of Japan for both good and evil is very close. 
The change wroiiglit by its introduction is clear, for native documents 
admit that pre-Bn<klhist Japan was barbarous and, though it may be 
difficult to discriminate between the results of Chinese, civilization 
and of Biiddiitsni, yet the increase in humanity and sympathy seems 
immediately traceable to religion. A little later an attempt was 
made by Dokyo to establish direct ecclesiastical control over the 
stafce.i This was frustrated, but during the long Fujiwara epoch the 
comicction between the Court and the Church was close and took 
special fo,rms. Thus it became the custom for the Emperor to 

^ Seo Chapter VIIL 

100 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cir. vi 

abdicate early and become a monk, retaining the real power while 
a minor occupied the tlirone.^ 

On the other hand, Church and State often came into collision 
owing to the growth of great monasteries which kept armies of their 
own and nsed them to get their own way in secular as well as 
ecclesiastical affairs. But in spite of such differences the Pujiwara 
regime was essentially religious and its religious character was one 
cause of its long duration. In the struggle between the houses 
of Taira and Minamoto the collapse of the former was largely duo 
to the hostility of the clergy. In the Kamakura period when 
Japanese institutions underwent a thorough change, Buddhism 
showed that it was in sympathy with the pulse of the people ])y 
assuming new forms, all permanent and infliieutial, and again under 
the Ashikaga Shogunate it supplied what was wanted not only in art 
and culture but in political advice. In the troubled period of 
Nobunaga and Hideyoshi, it is clear that the Buddhist monasteries 
were one of the strongest powers in the land and that those leaders 
feared the establishment of some form of ecclesiastical rule. 

It is perhaps useless to speculate what position the priesthood 
might have achieved had vigorous measures not been taken against 
them, but two points may be mentioned. First, the Chm:oh never 
showed an approximately united front. It is difficult to imagine 
the forces of Hieizan, Kofukuji, and KSyasan combining to support 
any serious political question : it .is almost impossible to tbink of 
them maldng common cause with the more modern sects. 
Secondly, the great monasteries and even the newer warlike sects 
seem to have kept their clerical and military activities distinct. 
They were great corporations which insisted on receiving the same 
respect and having the same influence as feudal lords, but, with the 
exception of the Nichiren sect, they did not unite politics and 
religion or maintain that the State ought to be ruled by those who 
have seen the vision of truth and know the will of higher pow;ers. 
The Kichiren sect did dream of uniting all Japan in the kingdom 
of the Buddha, but they were so intolerant and quarrelsome, 
so apt to split into factions themselves, that they had less chance 
than any other body of making this dream a reality and of founding 
a Church which could direct the policy of the State. They received 
a few sharp raps over the knuckles but otherwise did not attract 

^ The aaiae practice has survived to the present day in humbler spheres under 
the name of inhyo. That ia to say, elderly persons hand over the cares of their 
household and huainoss to the younger generation and take their ease. 

oil. vi] PREFATORY REMARKS 191 

ruticli at.tontion, \Th.crea5? tlic fate of the ^reat inoiiastcrifs sliows 
ill wliicli direction the, fears of tlie Governiiw'iit lay. Tlie nitliloss 
dt'sfi-uclion of Hicizan and Negoro sliook the political power of 
.Buddhism, and that power might have collapsed but for the struggle 
against Christianity. The opponents of fdmstianity wine actuated 
by political motives, and siiicci they needed somotliing native to sid 
against the foreign creed, they reafUruied, not without oceasionally 
coiitvadicriiig tlnunselves, that Buddhism was the national ridigion. 

Tlie del't of art to 'Buddhism is even greater in Japan than in 
Cliina, for on tht? wlioie tlie gift of Binhilusm to China wa.s ideas 
rather tlian teclmique, whereas in ancient Japan tliore was no art 
■worth mentioning. Painting, sculpture, and architecture, as well 
as engraving, printing, and even w.riting, were all introduced in 
connection with Buddhism. It might be urged that art came, to 
Japan as a part of Cliinose civilization and was brought not by 
Buddhism but together with it. But the 'first manifestations of 
Japanese art, whether in pictures, statues, or buildings, are all 
definitely religious, and had Chinese civilization brought only 
Confucianism, it is clear that Japanese art would have been entirely 
different. 

The revolution wrought hy Buddhism was moral as well as 
literary and artistic. It was the wish of Bhotoku Taishi, who may 
bo regarded as tiie real founder of Japanese Biiddliisni, to give his 
piioplo a Ixdter moral code, Althougl'i in later ages the austere 
prin<.'iples of Sltintu may have had a salutary and tonic eirecfc, yet 
it was clear that in tbe sixth and seventh centuries there was a iac-k 
of humanity. Modern as well as ancient history testifies that the 
Japauesf^ chiiractiu' lias a vseverc us'ivell as a kindly side, and if this 
kiiidl}' siile has become the more usual an<i conspicuous that is 
mainly dm*, to .Budilliiat influence, Behictaiice to kill animals and 
the general use, of a diet restricted to fish and vegetables are direct 
results of Buddhist tea,ching. In 675 tlie Emperor Temmu forbade 
the ])eoplo to cat the flesh of kine, horses, dogs, monkeys, or barucloor 
fowis.i Although the relsirth of a human ]>oing as an aninuil does 
not seem to ])o a conunon idea in modern Japan and the Jatakas 
are not popular as religious literature, yet animals are believed to 
have future lives. No^v' that eating meat has become the fashion 
under European influence, Imtclicr’s guilds have masses said 
regularly on belialf of the souls of slaughtered cattle. Thus the 

^ Aston, Nihongi, vo], ii, p. 328. 

192 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDBUISM. [ch. w 

newspapers ^ report liow on Ttli November, 1930, a simple but 
impressive service — ^tbe eighth annual one — ^was held at the Kobe, 
municipal slaughter house for the thousands of animals killed for 
human consumption dining the past year/’ Prayers were offered 
that their souls might ])e blessed in Paradise and reincarnated 
ill a higher form, and “ brief elegies ” were read from the Governor, 
the Mayor, and the head of the Plealth Office. After the earthquake 
of 1923 special services were held in several Buddhist temples for 
the souls of the animals which had perislied in the disaster. 

The magnitude of the revolution wrouglit in moral conceptions 
becomes plain if we consider that though literature, folklore, and daily 
language are full of the idea of Karma or the inevitable result of 
actions, good or bad, for the doer of them, this idea is not indigenous 
and is entirely due to Buddhism. Shinto, too, like Confucianism, 
had nothing to say about the state of the dead. The doctrines of 
future reward and punishment, golden paradises and blazing hells, 
of successive existences wherein new bodies and dcvstinies are built 
out of the good and e\nl deeds of previous lives, the custom of 
performing good deeds on behalf of the dead, so that the merit may 
accrue to them and help them on their way to higher realms, all this 
is purely Buddhist. Shintd had no educational side : its priests did 
not teach or preach. But the Buddhists took in hand the education 
of almost all ranks of society except the military class, and even the 
military class often supplemented its special instruction by studying 
under them. The parish temple gradually became the parish school 
where children received for a very small cost an excellent education, 
not purely religious but permeated with religion. The parish 
priest, besides being a teacher, acted as Government registrar and 
kept a record of births and deaths. The very different positions 
of Buddhism in Japan and China are closely connected with this 
question of education ; the literary knowledge so much esteemed 
in China was the special property of Gonfneianists, and Buddhist 
priests wore not regarded as repositories of sound learning or as the 
natural instructors of youth. 

The mighty influence of Buddhism not only in the strictly 
religious sphere but in politics, education, and art makes it seem that 
little room was left for Shinto. Yet Shinto, though encrusted with 
Buddhism, remained a living force ready to work openly so soon 
as it received official sanction, and was also recognized by the rulers 

^ e.g. Osaka Mainidhi of 8th November, ] 930. 

cir.vi] PREFATORY REMARKS 193 

of Japan during tlie period when it seemed to be most ignored. 
Tims Cliikafiisa used it about 1340 to prove the divine right of the 
Emperor, and the Yui-itsu, or Unitarian Shinto, was founded 
towards the eiid of the fifteenth century. It was nominally a 
protest against the Ptyobu or double Sliinto, but really a rnixturo 
of Shinto with Buddhist and Chinese ideas. Somewhat later 
lOdeyoslii, in two remarkable letters ^ which he wrote to the 
Portuguese Viceroy of the Indies and the Governor of the Philippines 
in 1591, GX])ressly states that Shinto is the religion of Japan a nd saws 
not a word about Buddhism, Even more remarkable is the testi- 
mony of leyasu. He was a member of the Jodo sect and his policy 
indicates that he was a sincere patron of Buddhism {patron, perhaps, 
rather than follower). Yet the fifty-second section of his Legacy — 
a work which though spurious probably gives a not incorrect 
exposition of the Tokugawa policy- -is as follows : — “ My body and 
the body of others being born in the Empire of the Gods, to accept 
uiirc'servedly the teaclungs of other countries — such as Confucian, 
Buddhist, or Taoist doctrines'— and to apply one'.s whole and 
undivided attention to them, would be in short to desert one’s own 
master a-ml transfer one’s loyalty to another. Is not this to forget 
the origin of one’s being ? ” These -words may seem strange in the 
mouth of a Buddldst, but the explanation, I think, is that Buddhism 
is an iiifixieiKte : it has affected and altered every department of life 
in Japan. Bliintu is not an influence : it is the expression, of 
fundaimmtal ideas about family and national life. Hence come 
both its strength and its limitations. It gave nothing to Japan but 
exiiressed the most private and wtal ideas of the Japanese people. 
Buddhism, on the contrary, gave much : it educated, refinc'd, and 
humanized the national ehara.eter bnt it did not express the national 
iileals, though it accommodated itself to them. The frank state- 
ment that a Japanese should not give his whole attention to 
Budiihisin means little more than that a man’s religion must not 
interfere with the interests of his country, India is perhaps the 
only land wliere the contrary opinion has been not only held but 
put into practice. There under native rule religion has constantly 
oyerriddeu law and political considerations, but in Europe and 
America it is assumed that religion must be useful to the State and, 
if it is not, that the State may interfere in such ways as breakhig up 

* vSoe Murdoch, Uhtory of Ja^wn, ii, 37, for a translation. Hideyoshi’s descrip- 
tion of Japan is far from correct, for ho does not mention the Emperor and implies 
that he himself was the real sovereign of Japan. 

194 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BIWDIIISM [cn. vi 

raoiiasteries or forbidding polygamy. leyasn’s attitude sliould be 
intelligible to a western statesman : a Japanese may believe 
anything be lUms provided that bis beliefs are not hostile to the 
institutions of Japan. 

In the following chapters I propose to trace the part played by 
Buddhism in the history of Japan. Though most educated 
Europeans have now some Imowledge of that history, it may be 
well to recall its general outlines and also to mention two curious 
features which it presents. The first is the constant tendency to 
separate titular and real power or rather to preserve a venerable 
hereditary office which had ceased to be the head of the State and 
to set up beside it a recognized and efficient ruler. Not only was the 
Government administered dining long periods by Shoguns who 
rendered merely ceremonial homage to the Emperor, but the 
authority of the Shogun sometimes passed into the hands of a deputy 
and at other times the real power was in the hands of an ex-Emperor 
who had nominally abdicated. The other feature is the remarkable 
attitude towards foreigners. Japan appears throughout the ages 
to have been the most assimilative of all nations and the most 
anxious to borrow ffiom others, and yet the most deliberately self- 
secluded and anxious to avoid contact with all without. The 
wholesale adoption of Buddhism and of Chinese culture in the sixth 
century wms the work of individuals rather than the result of inter- 
national intercourse, and after about 850 such intercourse altogether 
ceased. The attempted invasions of Khubilai Khan were not likely 
to renew’ it, but relations were more friendly with the Ming dynasty. 
When Christianity arrived from the west, the Japanese were at first 
perfectly friendly and imitation of Christian customs was for a 
moment fashionable, but as soon as political consequences were 
suspected, Europeans, with the exception of a few Dutch, were 
expelled and Christianity was forbidden. One remarkable result 
of this seclusion was that the Japanese, though amilitary nation, 
had no one to fight with except themselves. It is not needful 
to dilate on the evils of civil war and they are amply illustrated in 
the annals of Japan. But for all that, perpetual contests betw’^een 
men of the same race do tend to eliminate the more barbarous forms 
of massacre and devastation and to encourage a chivabous spirit, 
for the simple reason that if you are fighting for the lordship of 
certain lands and their mhabitants your object is to acquire rather 
than destroy. 

The phases through which Japan has passed may be summarized 

PREFATORY REMARKS 

195 

nr. Vi] 

as follows. Before tlie middle of the sixth century a.d. wc have 
to do with arcliLvology rather than history, and authentic records 
begin with tlie entry of Buddhism and Chinese civilkation. Korea 
served as tlio intermediary and was of primary importance to Jax)an 
liotii for foreign polities and internal culture. In G-ir) tlie growth 
of Uliincse inlliieuce culminated in a sudden and complete adminis- 
trative revolution, tlu'. whole government being reiuodo]](*<l <m the* 
■fdan of th<^ Chinese bimauicravy. In 793 the capital whicii iiml 
pre\'iously lieen at Kara was established in Kyoto. The Emperors 
retireil more and more from activt? Hie and from 82<i to ibni) the 
real pt>liti(‘al power was held by the Fiijiwara family. Tins long 
predir,>niimmc(? I>roke u]) in tin? eleventh century, when tlie houses 
of Taira and IVlinamoto came to the front and struggled for 
supremacy. Tlie eonfiiet riisulted in the overthrow of th(' former, 
and Yoritomo, the head of the Ylinamoto, received from the 
Emperor tlie title of Blioguii or Cleneralissimo. 

JAu: the gre-afi.T part of the ]>erio(I from 1190 to 1807 Jajian was 
not- only praiaically but avowe<ily governed by Biioguiis of tlie 
idimimoto family, although the line of Emperors, known 
Europeans us .Mikidos and reputed to be the descendants of the 
Sun-goddess, continued and the theoretical right of this family 
to rule was not disputed. The seat of the Shogunatf3 was at first 
Kurnakura, but for more than a century (1205“-’J 333) the real power 
was held by Kegeiits of the Hojo family, and thus the government 
was exercised by the deputy of a deputy. This singular arrangement 
proved successful in practice, for while it lasted Japan repelled a 
foreign, invasion and enjoyed a century of internal peace which was 
brolceii in 1332 by a dispute as to the succession not of the Blioguns, 
or Regents, but of the Emperors. The powerful Ashibaga family 
took sides in the struggle. Its candidate was established as 
Emperor in Kyoto and the Ashikagas ruled as Shoguns until 1573. 
But the dynasty became effete and the last thirty years of its rule 
vv-ere troubled and eventful. In 1542 arrived the Portuguese and 
with them Christianity. At this critical period, the real power was 
successively in the hands of two soldiers of fortune, llNo])imaga and 
Hideyoshi. The latter invaded Korea and dreamed of conquering 
China, but both died without attaining the position of Shogun. 
This was seized by another favourite of fortune, more a statesman 
than a soldier, namely, leyasu. He foimded the Tokugawa dynasty 
of Shoguns who ruled at Yedo from 1603-1868. 

i 'Fho. Ashikaga and Toltugawa arc koth branches of the Minamofco family. 

196 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. vi 

In 1624 Japan was closed to foreigners, Christianity was prohibited, 
and for two and a hatf centuries the country was completely isolated 

ThisisolationwasbrolmnbytheUnitedStates,whoml863demanded 

the estabHshnient of international relations. The Tokmgrwa 
Government was already tottering from internal wealmess and there 
was a strong party in favour of purely Japanese institutions as 
opposed to institutions borrowed from Chma. European am 
American interference coincided with this movement. The result 
was one of the most sudden changes known to history. Feudalism 
and the Shogunate were abolished : the Emperor was recognized 
as the real as weU as theoretical head of the State : Japan was not 
only thrown open to the world but entered on that phase of develop- 
ment which has made her the equal of European states. 

]?^TR0L)UGTJUX of buddhism 

Thi: oiiii'ial tlah' IVir i.h(‘ ini rot hictioi! of Bufklhisjo, into Jaftan 
iVom K-orra is A.n. 551*. Imt- ii, is |>i’oba])l<^ Hint tlie Ounri u'fn* nni 
wlinlly- iirnoi'iiDf’ it'- at- that tinio, for if is renordad tkai- in the nsun 
(sf till* Eni[St'rr)r Ojin a learnfil man (.‘allod 'WaniX-ln insf rui-raii ilia 
ikar .\])])ajvjit in ('hinasa writing and liteniturod ikti- VVain^-ln, 
if i'hitiaso, cumi' from Koraa atid not diroct. Biidrihistij Isad n-aidied 
till* Koreans in a.i». 372 arid tliey were in close conwnunicatioii with 
China, for tltev jiad relationshy land with the northern kint^iloms atul 
!»y sea witli ilic Yang-tse valley. On the other side they wi-ri* in 
touch with dapan and setit tliitlier at various tiiru'.s weavers, 
masons, carpenters, Chinese seholui'S, j)hysi(uau.s, diviners, and 
])('rs()ns skilled in the mysteries of tlm calendar. But tlmuyh Korea 
was the int(‘rniediary it is clear that it was Chinese culture which 
the JapuiK'se wish<'‘d to atajuire. 

Tti tlie .ri.vili eeiitujy Korea, was divided into several states, of 
wliicli the princi])al wer(‘ Kokuli or Kokiiryd ^ in the north, Bekelie^^ 
or Kudara in tlie soutli-west,. and htilla or Shiragi in the souili-east. 

Between tin.' sout.hern ext;i‘..'miti(‘S of the two latter lay a territory 
called imna or '.Mimana, in which the Jfipanese had certain rights. 

Tlicre was a, considerable. Japanese population and a Japanese 
Resideiit-Oeneral. Both Japan and .Pekche had constant diiliculties 
with the kingdom of Siila and hence an alliance arose, hetw'een them, 
the King of Bekndie sending many missions to tlie Emperor to offer 
presents and request the dispatch of troops. Buddhism had Inam 
accepted by Kokuryo in 372 and by Pekche in 381, but it was not 
predominant in Siila until considerably later. The chief authority 
for the events which follow is the Japanese chronicle called the 
Nihoii-shoki or Nihongi which was presented to the Enijiress Gensho 

^ Aston, Nihongi, i, p. 262, thinks that this was probably in a.t>. 405, but the • 
chronology of the ijorind i.s Hoiiuiwhal uncertain. ^ 

The iiaiiic is spelt in ^'arion.■? way.s, Kftkuli being that used in the oflieial 
publication.s of the Goveriuuent-Geiierui of Chosen. Koguryu andKoryd are also 
found in some writers. 

® Also spelt Pakehe and Faikehoi. 

I 

CHAin^Eii 

YTl 

197 

I1I8T0RY OF JAPANESE BUBDHmi [oh. vri 

ill 720 and brings tlie history of Japan down to 697.^ It is 
apparently a collection of extracts from older somces arranged 
in chronological order but forming a somewhat disjointed narrative. 
In the earlier period the chronology appears to be seriously inaccurate, 
but as it becomes correct after about a.d. 500, it may be accepted 
for our purposes. 

In 5d5 )Sy6ng-Myong, the King of Pekche, found himself in a very 
dilHcult jiosition because the local Japanese authorities at Imna 
were inclined to conspire with Silla. He made representations to the 
Emperor and the chronicle adds ^ that in the ninth month he “ made 
image of the Buddha sixteen feet high (the traditional dimensions) 
and drew up a written prayer saying . . . By the merit which I have 
accpiired in reverently constructing this image I pray that the 
Emperor may attain great virtue and that all the land of the Miyake 
(Japanese possessions in Korea) may receive blessings. I also pray 
for the final emancipation of all living creatures under Heaven ”. 
It is not plain whether the image and prayer were sent to any 
Japanese authority, but the entries for the year 552 arc more 
explicit. The King of Bekclie sent a mission to Kimmci, the 
Emperor of Japan, to inform him that the two kingdoms of Kokuryo 
and Silla were contemplating a joint attack on Pekche and Imiia 
and to ask for the dispatch of an auxiliary force. The Emperor’s 
■was gracious, though not very clear, and in the tenth month 
the King of Pekche sent another mission with presents consisting 
“ an image of Shaka'Butsu in gold and copper, several flags and 
umbrellas and a number of sutras ”, the names of which are not 
mentioned. He also presented a memorial in w^hich he spoke of the ;; 
merit of diffusing religion, saying, “ This is the most excellent among ; 
all doctrines but it is hard to explain and hard to understand. 

the Duke of Chou and Confueins had not attained to a know-* 
ledge of it. It can give merit and reward without measure and 
bounds and so lead to a grasp of the highest wisdom. 
Imagine a man possessing treasures to his heart’s content and able 
to satisfy all his wishes. So it is with this wonderful doctrine. 
Every prayer is fulfilled and naught is wanting. Moreover, it has 
spread from distant India to the three Han (Korea) where ail receive 

^ It was ti’analated by Aston and originally published by the Japan Society. 
But niy refereiices are to the reissue (two volumes in one) published by Eegah 
Puifl in 1!;)24, though I have occasionally altered the wording. I have not always 
referred to the pages because the date is given in the margin, and the mention 
of the year when an Went is recorded is therefore sufficient, 
a Nihongij ii^ p- 

('ll. VII] INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHISM lini 

it witli reverenoe. Your servant tliorefoiL* lias liuniltiv (lisj'jateljed 
his retainer to transmit it to tlie Iiuperial Court and C» spre.-n'i it 
throijgliout the Iiorne provinces^ in order to fullil the voids of the 
Buddiia., i\ly Law shall spread to the East.’* 

Tlie jjolitical consequences of the Kiny of Thdechtr's piciy were 
not what he hoped, for he. was killed and Isi.s country conqucrod. 
In 50*2 Billn, destroyed Lnna and massacrctl the pofiuhition. It. was 
a lony tiim^ hefore Japan reyairi<*d any foot he Jd in Korea.." Hal. 
thoujfb the intruduetiun of ihiddhism i!d<t Japan nahiirdly ish-I with 
some, opposition, it dties not a;ppear tlial- these disasters iinp-'dcd 
its progress or were regarded u.s a had oiium. 

The presents and letters received from Pekeho engaged the- serious 
attention of tin? Japanese Court. 'Die Emperor, we are toid,'^ 
leaped for joy hut thought it pruilent to consult his ministe'.rs. 
Opinion, was divided. On tlie one hand it was argued that rlapan 
ought to follow the example of other civilized countries, on the other 
that the native gods might be offended hy the respect shown to a 
foreign deity. The cleavage of opinion was indicated at the bust 
council held to disemss the matter : the 8oga family was for 
Buddhism, the Moiionobe and Nakatomi were against it. Tliey had 
old grounds of difference with the >Soga and held important charges 
connected with Bhintoism which seemed threatimed by these 
religious inuovatioiis. It was finally decided that the Boga should 
take the image and worship it as an experinumt. But thi; experi- 
ment wa.s not a .sueeivss. Wlaui Soga no Iname turned his liouse 
at .i^rukuhara into a temple and installed the iinagi' there a pesti- 
lenec broke out. His rivals d('monstraied that this was due to the. 
foreign cult aiifi obtained imperial ptu’mission i.o burn liu! temple 
and throw the, image into tlie Nauiwa canal.^ 

^ '.riu* namo of hoitie jiroviiK-cs oi' Go-klnai was coimuoiily givc'H to llio live 
pruviiK'os iioarost to the old eapital, Yamashiro, Yamato, Kawaehi, Setlsu, ami 
Izuimi. 

® The intineiiee of tlio Japanese in Korea appears to have really eoiuc to an 
end in r>02, but tht^y continued to send expeditions and to receive inib.sions from 
itiilla, de.scribcd as bearing tribute ” for some years, lint in 6G1 Siila with tire 
aid of the Chinese annexed Pekohe and decisively defealeil the Japanese. 

® See Mihongi, ii, p. 66 If., for the naiTatlve, Soga’s full title is given as Soga 
no Oho-Oini Inanio no Suknne. 

* A magnificent temple called Mukuliara-dera was subsequently built on tlio 
site and ihe pre.sent Kogenji temple in the village of Toyura in Yamato is said 
to be a portion of it. 

* The place is still known as Hori-e Mafdix in O.saka. According to tradition 
the image is still preserved in the Zonkoji temple at Nagano. 

300 HISTORY 01 JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. vn 

But tlie gradual iniUtratioa of Buddliism continued. In 577 
anotlicr mission arrived from Pekche with three priests, a nun, 
a temple architect, and a maker of images. Two years afterwards 
Silla sent “ tribute ” and a Budhist image. According to the 
Niliongi, the successor of Kimmei, the Emperor Bidatsu (572-585), 
“ was not a believer in Buddhism but was fond of literature ” and 
seems to have been fairly tolerant. In 584 ^ Umako Soga (the son 
of Iname), with the assistance of a person called Shiba Tatto, began 
to seek for Buddhists. He erected a temple in which he enshrined 
a stone image of Miroku (Maitreya) and inahitained three nims. 
He also built another temple at Ishikawa. ‘‘ From this,” says the 
Nihongi, “ arose the beginning of Buddhism”, but the events of 552 
above related are generally considered to mark its introduction. 
The narrative goes on to say that next year Umako was taken ill and 
was told by a diviner that this was a curse sent by the Buddha wlio 
had been worshipped in Ms father’s time but now, apparently, was 
neglected. One would have expected this incident to occur earlier 
in the story before the construction of the temples was mentioned 
and perhaps something is wrong with the text. At any rate, tlie 
Soga wore allowed to resume Buddhist worship, on which the 
pestilence reappeared. The other party found no difficulty in 
haffing the permission revoked, for the connection between the 
reintroduction of the new worship and the recrudescence of the 
epidemic seemed clear. Mononobe went in person to the Soga's 
estate, burnt the temple and images, again threw the ashes into the 
canal, and heat and imprisoned the Unfortunate nuns. But the 
anti-Buddhist arguments became less convincing when in spite 
of these summary measures the pestilence grew worse, “ old and 
young said privately to one another : Is this a punishment for 
hurning the image of the Buddha ?” The Soga were then 
permitted to practise Buddhism as a family cult, but not with too 
great j)ubHcity, and the three nuns were released. The Emperor 
died but Umako apparently recovered, for he had an unseemly 
quarrel with Mononobe at the imperial funeral. 

^ Nihongi, ii, p. lOi £F. On p. 104 the Nihongi notices that there aro slight 
variations in the story and that according to “ one book ” Soga would not allow 
the temples to bo burnt. The name Shiba Tatto has not been satisfactorily 
explained. His son became a monk for the sake of the Emperor Yoraei (sec holow), 
and ill 606 his grandson successfully accomplished the difficult business of 
erecting a sixteen foot statue of the Buddha at Gangoji. On this the Empress 
Suiko conferred on him various honours and addressed to him a most gracious 
rescript enumerating the, services which his family had rendered to religion. 

JNTRODUCyTION OF BUDDlimJ 

Of tlie next sovoreig'ii, Yuniei, Oic Oiironiclo says that lu- 
in tlio law of tho 'Buddha and reverenced the way oi’ the Mods 
He reigned less thuTi two years and the most rciiiarka,l>k? tinny ahont 
him was his death. When taken ill he expressed a wish to aei-ept 
tlse three. Treasures— tluit is, to lii^conio a Buddhist —hut askt'^l hd- 
iuinist(n,'s’ advie<!. The old dispute hroke out at once, Menoneilie 
and Nakatoine taking sides ayaiiist Boga. While a violent ;;lier“ 
(‘ation was proceeding an. Imperial Prince (perhaps Bhu?»>ku 'rai-lu 
hinivSelf) ijitrodueed a. Buddhist prie.st into tlie Imperiad I'ulaeed 
As tlie hhnperor's end approached, we are told that ti)e son of 
Htui.ia '.ratto above nnadinniid eaine forward and said ilnit Im wmjlii 
rcuoimcf* the world on His Mtijesty's hehalf and tnake an image 
of the Buddha and a. temple. The dying monarch was de-ejsly 
moved. Though tliis narrative is not very lucid, it implies 
that Biiddlusni was already well-known at Court, '.riie Kniperor, 
when taken ill, thinks of emhracing it, doubtless as a nmmis 
of recovery, not of going to heaven: priests are a,hout who eati 
be introduced into tiie Palace anfl Imperial Princes rtanly 
to introduce them. 

On the d<;atli of Ybmei there was a tierce dispute as to the siic.- 
co.ssion, in which tiui two bitter s.mcnne.s, Soga and Monouobi*. wt;r(.‘ 
naturally on different sides. The latter was defeated and slain, and 
tlie Nihongi “ relates how Boga and Prince Umaya,d<ii, th,e, future 
Shotoku Tadshi, who fought vvitli him both made Bmhihisf: vows 
before entering battle a.nd severally jiroinised to build temjiles to the 
Four Heavenly Kings if they were successful. Boga also swore to 
spread the- worship of the three Treasures. In fultilimmt of th(‘se 
promises the .Prince- erected the temple of Tennoji at Osaka, to which 
part of !\lononobe\s estare ami slaves w'ere dedicated, and B(.>ga the, 
temple of Hokoji, near Xara. ■'dSujun was proclaimed Emperor and 
dui'iuM his short reign (o8T- 592) we hear that another mission a rrh'ed 
from Pekche with ])riests and relics, that many temples w’ere built, 
and tliat the, tains whom IMononobe had flogged were sent to Korea 
for a course of study ami returned safely. Unfortunately for 
himself, the Emperoi* disliked Soga and gave liim cause for alarm. 
Soga on. this had him assassinated and proclaimed his own nit-ce, as 

^ The narrative is verv ahrupt and ohst^ure. It is wot clear who ilu^ liia{X-rial 
Priuee Avas nor why tlu- son of Hhiha 'Fatto was there. 

" ]!^ihongi, ii, 114. Thi; Priuet; made w-ooden images of the Ponr ’.Kings and 
bonnd them in his hair, A\-hich (as he was only a boy) was tied over Ids teinple.s, 
Soga also invoked llnijiniiu, the great Spirit King, said, to bo Mahakala. 

202 

mSTORY OF JAPANESE [CH. vii 

Empress witli tlie title of Suiko.^ Slxe reigiied for twenty-five years, 
but tlie really important figure in this period, although he never 
became Emperor, %Yas Umayado who became Pruice Imperial and 
Regent and is known to history as Shotoku Taishi.^ He was the 
son of the Emperor Yomei and had Soga blood in his veins. He was 
the real foimder of Japanese Buddhism and worthy of the task at 
which he laboured. 

The dihut of the faith had not been glorious, but though it was 
judged by the crude standard of its power to stop plague and though 
it triumphed as part of the principles of a noble house, these accidents 
must not blind us to the fact that it came as the epitome of Indian 
and Chinese civilization and wrought amoral as well as an intellectual 
revolution. The Sogas had clearly not attained a high standard 
in either learning or political morality. But Shotoku Taislii was 
of a different stamp. He was perfectly sincere in his convictions. 
He was the greatest scholar of his time, a student of the Chinese 
classics as well as of the Buddhist scriptures and a lover of art ; 
his life was above reproach and as a ruler he won the hearts of his 
people. When he died in 621 at the early age of forty-nine, the whole 
nation wept for him, the young as if they had lost a father, the old 
as if they had lost a child.® 

Niiturally Buddhism spread and flourished. The direct and public 
instructions of the Empress encouraged the zeal of the Regent and 
ministers. Officials “ vied with one another in erecting temples 
In 605 orders were issued for the construction of representations of 
the Buddha in copper and embroidery, sixteen feet high, and in 
607 the great monastery of Horyuji was founded, which became 
not only a cathedral but a national museum. Two Korean priests 
named Hye-cha and Hye-chhong were energetic in propaganda and 
the former became the Regent’s tutor.® Several missions from 
Korea presented images and were accompanied by priests. In 608 

^ Her fatlier Avas the Emperor Kimmei and her mother the sister of Soga no 
Umako.'" ■ ■ , . , ■ . 

2 His various names are perplexing, for the Nihongi also calls him Jh. ^ 
Karoitsiimiya or Jogu. The name Umayado — ^Prince Stable-door — is explained 
by a story that he AVas born unexpectedly while his mother was inspecting the 
offices of the Palace and had just arrived at the stables. Sec Nihongi, ii, p. 121. 
It adds that ho was able to speak as soon as he was bom. 

** Niliongi, ii, p. 148. 

* Hihongi, ii, p. 123. 

® He is apparently the same person who is called Eji or Weji. 

(ni. V.U] INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHISM 20:] 

oinbassies were cxcliaiiged with Chinad whither a Japanese envoy 
hail been sent in tlio previous year. The Emperor of China stated 
in his letter that he wished to diffuse civilization, but it is not 
nioutioneti that he sent Buddhist books or emblems like tht* Korea.n 
potentates. Wlien, liowever, the return mission wa.s dhpatelu.ul 
])v the Ja])a.iK?se Government, persons described as .siudenrs and 
student priests we];e sent with it in order to complete i heir educai ion 
in Cliina and. reiuained there until 622. The iNihongi statf.s- 
tliat iii 02:5 there v'cre in Japan 46 temples, 816 piie.sis, a ini btib 
nuns. As one- priest struck his grandfather with an axe, the i jut'si i* »n 
of discipline arose. Superintendents: were appointed vsiih tlie 
titles of Sojo, Sodzii, and Hoto, and a list of priests aiul mins 
recording the dates and ciiomnstaiiccs of their ordination was 
compiled. An important step was taken in 616 when the oracle 
of Miwa declared that Buddhist priests were the proper persons 
to perform funeral rites. 

.In 604 Bhotoliu Taishi published a celebrated edict known as I lie 
Jfi-shichijo no keinpo, consisting of seventeen clauses, but not as ihe 
name seems to imply, a constitution or a code of laws. It is a serh's 
of ethical maxims in Chimtse style and containing no illusion to 
Shinto. The first, quoting Confucius, dwells on the need of harmony. 
The second runs as follows; “Sincerely reverence the Three 
Treasures. These three — the Buddlia, the Law, and the Order — are 
the refuge of the four classes of living tilings ® and are in all countries 
the supremo object of faith. What man in what agi' can fail to 
reverence this Law 1 Eew men are utterly bad. They may be 
taught to follow it. But if they do not betake themsedves to the 
Three Treasures, how shall their crookedness be made straight '? 
Tills seems to make Buddhism almost the Established or at least 
the Approved Church, and so indeed it was for the Court and iqiper 
classes, but this did not mean such a break with other religious ideas 
as would be implied by the conversion of a country to Christianity 
or Islam. In 607 the Empress issued an edict ordering that there 

^ The, Nihongi calls China T'ang, but the word must bo used retrospectively 
for the T'aiig dynasty did not begin till 61S and in 608 Yang«Ti of the Rui dynasty 
was on the throne. 

® The numbers do nut seem large, for it is stated that on one occasion — when 
Snga fell ill in 014 — a thou.sand per.sona entered the order. But perhaps there 
is some mistake in tlio liguros. 

® Living tilings are divided into four cla-sses according to their supposed method 
of birth. (1) From a womb, (2) from eggs, (3) from moisture, as insects, (4) from 
no apjiareut cause, us Bodhisattvas. 

204 

mSTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM Ifm. Yii 

slioulcl he no reinitssness in tlie worsliip of tlie gods of Eartli and 
Heaven. It saj'S not a word about Buddliism but speaks in 
Chinese phraseology about the Imperial Ancestors, temples dedi- 
cated to mountains and rivers, and th(; male and female principles 
in nature (the Yang and Yin). A few years previously she had 
oi‘dered that sacrifices sliould be offered to the G-od of Earthquakes 
in nil districts. Y’et her devotion to Buddhism is not to be doultfed. 

Like Asoka, Shotoku Taishi was naturally kind and humane and 
perhaps was a greater constructive statesman. He was not made 
good by ihnldhi.sm bub was attracted by the humanity which it 
inculcates. His maxims seem to us trite moral commonplaces, but 
there is no doubt that ancient Japan was terribly barbarous and 
that the simplest injunctions to avoid cruelty were almost a rev’-c- 
latioii. The Nihougi ^ relates how Sliutoku Taishi fed and clothed 
with his own raiment a starving man whom he found lying by the 
road as he was travelling, but it evidently does not regard such 
deaths by the wayside as remarkable, and speaking of the year 
562 it observes “ now at this time between father and child, husband 
and wdfe there was no cominiseration Compare the edict issued 
by the Emperor Hotoku in 640 in which he complains that a younger 
brother will not help his elder brother if he dies by the way or is 
drowned, and the edict of 691 about younger brothers being sold 
as slaves by elder brothers and children by parents. To such 
people the admonitions to beliave with frieiidliness and decorum 
(the Coufucian Af) and avoid gluttony, covetousness, and envy were 
not superfluous. And sometimes the maxims refer pointedly to 
the special abuses of the period. Forced laliour is to be required 
only at seasonable times and in moderation. Pro^dncial authorities 
are not to levy exactions. For “ in a country there are not two 
lords. The Sovereign is the master of the people of the whole 
country But this does not mean arbitrary despotism, “ De- 
cisions on important matters should not be made by one person 
alone. They should be discussed with many.” 

Quite apart from his position in the history of religion, Shotoku 
Taishi was one of the best and most benevolent— -perhaps the very 
best and most benevolent — of all the rulers of Japan. His literary 
activity was considerable. He was well acquainted with the 
Chinese classics as the style of his edict shows, and in conjunction 

^ Nihongi, ii, 144-G. 

“ Niliongi, ii, p. 84. It is perhaps only just'to observe that tlie remark is made 
respecting the manners of Japanese in Korea. 

cn, viij 

lyTRODUCTION OF BUDDIIISM 

with 8oga no Uniako ho coinpilod various historical works on Japaiu^ 
must of which unfortunately pcrisliod in the couthigratioii, which 
ac(;onipani>‘d tlie. downfall of the Sogas a few years later. But liis 
most serious studies were, no doubt devoted to the 
scriptures. At the request of the Ifnipress he lectured durin.g three 
days on the Hhoinaii-kyo and also on the IjOtus." Tliougli 
Nihongi does not rnenlion the, fact, it appt'ars to he true that lu* 
wrote seven volumes of eommtuitaries called Jogu go fSeisluo w 
are often referred to and cited in tt^mple archivt.'s, such as 
Hnryuji Engi. Four volumes deal with the Lotus, om? with the 
Slnlnmn-kyo, and two with tlie yuiiuu-kyO. A copy of t he cojunieu- 
tary on tlie Lotus Ijclicved to he in ids own haiahvritiiig is 
in the Tmjterial Palace at Tokyo. He had indepeudent judgment 
as a commentator and was not bound ]>y tradition : for instance, 
he sometimes criticizes standard Chinese e.KpIanations making 
remarks such as “ my own view clifters sliglitly ” or “ this view 
is no longer accepted 

The Lotus and the Shoman-kyo arc the only sutras mentiomnl 
in the Nihongi during this rtugn, ])ut later authors agree in stating 
that the Yuinia-kyo also was |>opu]a,r.'^ 

In the Shusuin at Nara are preserved manusc-ripts of the following 
works which are said to date from Shotoku Taishi's time : — 

(1) The iMahasfmnipata-sutra. Nanjio, No. <>L 

(2) An extract of tlu' sjime. Nanjio, No. 80. 

(3) Part of tlie Ivegon-sutra. Nanjio, No. 00. 

(4) The AkshaiYiiriati-sutra. Nanjio, No, 74. 

(5) The Siivarnaprabhiisa-sutra. Nanjio, No. 120. 

Bhofcokti Taishi and Boga no Umako had been good friend.s 
these amicable, relations did not continue between their dccsceridants. 
The Sogas Avere obviinisly dreaming of supplanting the 
family, and as Yamashiro, the son of Shotoku, wars popular he was 
attacked liy their orders. He died like a martyr, amid 
portents as wc are told,‘^ and Avorthily of his father. “ If,” he 
“ I had raised an army and attacked Soga I should certainly have 
conquered. But for the sake of one person, I was unwilling to 

^ This w<as in the year before his tlealh. Sec Nihongi, ii, p, 148. 

* Nihongi, ii, 135. The Hhornan-kyo is Nanjio, No. 59. Srimultidevisimharada, 
translated by Gunabhadra about A.n. 440. 

® See IJumn, the. Buddhisi Baird, trails, by 
^ Nihongi, ii, 1S2. 

206 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE J3r7DI)mW [ch. vn 

destroy tlie people.” So lie and Ms fiiroily strangled tlieniselves. 
But tHe arrogance and ambition of tbe Sogas provoked a conspiracy 
in the reign of the Empress Kogyolm in which the heads of the house 
were lolled and its power and pretensions brought to an end. One of 
the chief conspirators was Kamatari, a man of great ability and 
known by many names, for he received subsequently the appellation 
of Eujiwara and became the head of that celebrated family. But he 
was also by birth a Nakatomi, descended from the Minister who ha,d 
originally opposed the introduction of Buddhism in 662. He wars 
possibly influenced by hereditary emnity against the Sogas, but 
he does not appear to have had any religious animus, for when the 
Empress, after seeing Soga killed in her presence, thought it prudent 
to abdicate he selected as her successor the Emperor Kotoku, 
of whom the Nihongi says more decidedly than of any previous 
sovereign that /' he honoured the way of the Buddha and despised 
Shinto ” . It is noticeable that Prince Eurubito, a possible candidate 
for the tlirone, avoided the dangerous honour by shaviug Ms head 
and becoming a monk, but only temporarily, for he subsequently 
rebelled and was killed. This practice of princes entering, or being 
made to enter, a monastery in troubled times afterwards became 
very common. ^ 

The reign of Kotoku is memorable in history on account of the 
reforms of Taikwa enacted in 646 by wMch the Japanese of the 
seventh century adopted as much of Chinese civilization as suited 
them, just as they made use of European civilization some 
twelve hundred years later. The title is significant, for Taikwa 
is a name given according to Chinese custom to a certain series 
of years. This became the regular method of calculatiag time in 
Japan and is still in use. But at present one nengo {such as Moiji 
or Taisho) covers the whole of the Emperor’s reign, whereas in 
earlier ages the interval thus designated was often quite short and 
arbitrary, any event regarded as a good or bad omen being a 
sufficient reason for instituting a new nengo. 

The object and result of these reforms, supplemented in 702 by 
the code of Taih6,was to organize and centralize the administration, 
the Emperor becoming a sovereign analogous to the Son of Heaven 
in China, instead of being merely the head of the principal clan. 
The arrangement of details and the organization of “ the eight 
departments of State and hundred bureaus ” now created was 
entrusted to two commissioners, both of whom had studied in 
China and one of whom was a Buddhist priest called Bin or Min. 

CH. VII] INTRODUCTION OF BUDDni83I 207 

It doGfj not appear, liowevcr, tliat any formal diangi^ was niaile iti 
the State religion, and the board called Jingikwan attended to the 
due performance of Shinto ceremonies. Nevertheless the intro- 
duction of Chinese institutions was favourable to Buddhist interests, 
for tlie best authorities on such subjects— -for instance, the C’aheidar 

-were generally priests, either immigrants or Japanese who liad 

been sent to study afiroad. And in one respect the progress of 
Bnddliisni w'as easier and quicker than in. China : tluo’e was no 
organized non-Buddhist literary class corresponding to rlio Coii- 
fuciunists. On the contrary, it was the Buddhists who rould 
pose, especially in early times, as seholara and the gUiudiari.s of 
learning. 

.An edict of 516 restricting the size of funeral monn meats and 
forludding cruel ceremonies like the sacrifice of men and horse.s at 
burials wasdoubtle.ss due to Buddliist influence. The exjiensc of tlie.se 
monuments and the hardships entailed by levying forced labour 
for tluir cotLstruction were a burden of ’which, the nation was graf .<‘ful 
to 1)0 relieved. It is true that under the new rfSgime enoi-mou.s 
suras wau’c spent on building temples and erecting gilded images, 
but Buddhism, as observed by Murdoch wdio was by no means 
prejudiced in its favour, at least encouraged art, whereas “ frisni the 
mausolca the nation }ia,d got no return whatsoever ’’J The edict 
also {.ondemned the riiic which required those who have been iii 
contact with the dead to undergo rigorous purification, because it 
led to eu'uol consequences. If people died by the roadside or ’were 
drowned , tho.se who liad been with them had to be purified (which 
'was apparently an arduous ceremony), and hence even brothers 
would not help one another in such disasters. 

Wlieii the Emperor Kotoku died the Grown Prince Naka-no-Oye 
refused to ascend the. throne and reinstated iiis mother, th,e late. 
Empress, who reigned a second time with the new name of Saimei 
from A.D, G55 to 661. Tlie Niliougi ® not only mentions the 
performance of several Buddhist ceremonies by imperial order 
during this period but suggests that BhintS w^as treated with scant 
courtesy, for the Empress provoked the wrath of the gods by 
cutting down trees belonging to the Aiiakura shrine in order to 
clear the ground for a new palace. Many courtiers died and she 
herself expired in the offending building two months later. The 

^ IMurcioch, llislory of Japan, i, p, 176. It should be mnembered, bowev<'r, 
that many of Ihu objeot.s found in them are of fine workmanship. 

2 tSec* Nihongi, ii, pp. 2, '17, 259, 263, 205, and for Asakura, 271. 

208 

HISTORY OR JAPANESE BUDHIIISM [ch. - m 

Crown Prince at last became Emperor under the name of Tenclri, 
tbongli lie did not assume tlie title and dignity for some years. 

A si i gilt cliange in religious sentiment seems olrservable at tliis 
period. Possibly Ills mother's rasli act and its apparent punislmiciit 
were talrcn a.s a warning : at any rate, both ho and liis successor 
Teiumu paid more attention to Shinto than had lieen usual of latiu 
Tenchi “ laid out Shinto places of worslu]) " with ajipropruite 
offeriiigs and litanies, but still when his last illness came upon 
him he felt the. claims of the rival creed.'’- A hundred Buddhist 
images iian'o consecrated in the palace and rich, presents sent to the. 
temple of dlukoji. Teinniu was most assiduous in sliowing his 
regard for the native cult. The Nihongi records his veiieratioii 
for the hhm- goddess, the numerous ofl'criugs made to the gods of 
Tatsuta and others, the worship of tlio impi'rial ancestors, and th,o 
repeated performance of the Sliinto rite of national purification.- 
When we remember the dangerous power subsequently acquired 
by the Buddhist clergy w^e are inclined to suspect tluit even at this 
early period the Court may have thought it well not to let them 
have cverytliing their own way, but the rest of Temmu's legis- 
lation was in no resj^cct anti-Buddhist or restrictive and his motive 
was probably merely to keep the Shinto deities and their priests 
in a good temper. 

It was ill this reign that a most remarkable step was taken to 
popularize the new creed, which had hitherto flourished mainly 
in the immediate vicinity of the Court, Orders were sent to all 
the provinces," says the Kihoiigi,'’ “ that in every house a Buddhist 
shrine should be provided and an imago of Buddha with Buddhist 
sci-iptnres placed there. Worship was to be paid and offerings of 
food made at these shrines." “ .Every house " doubtless means 
every official house, but in time the practice spread to private 
dwellings, and this edict is probably the origin of the Butsudan, 
or family oratory, still to be found in Japanese households. The 
chronifdc adds no explanation or comment, but does not appear to 
regard the enactment as directed against Shinto, and the next entry 
(also without comment) is that “ worship w^as paid to the deities 
of Hirose and Tatsuta Religious in the Far East are not mutually 
exclusive. 

1 Nihongi, pp. 293 and 297. 

- hlihongi, ii, pp. 307, 322 ; 332 and often, alfio 334-5 and 373. For the Purifica- 
tion see pp. 333, 338, 352, and 378. 

® Nihongi, ii, p. 369, speaking of A.n. 685. 

v.ii.Yii] L\TRn}}fTr20}i OF BUDDIimi 2(»0 

MiiiiV oIIk']' iii?ran(-«‘s of iuipt-rial favour to Buddhism aiv rtn or-h'd, 
.such as uifis ;u:d vcjivtariaii hanqiiets oIVcrcd to ])rh'srs and iuuH, 
ojdijiatiuns hi the Falacc. liuiiple ;ijhl rt'j'ula lions (uj no wi-M' 
rest rii-tivi-) ahotil the inaniCTjcnionfe of tcnqilcs and tin? .-ituius of 
the ch-rj^y. A cn])y of the Issai-kyrd or ontim jhjddliist' canon was 
made atut rci'ited, and dtumi^ tlic Kuipcrorhs last illness noth 
Ihiddhist “ and Hhintu ctu'cmonit'S were pcrfornn'd on his hchalf, 

llis s!it;i*{-ssur thi' Empress Jilu (A, in iJSti fhtT) showt'ti a .'.iiniiarly 
imnariial piety, for tlamirh .she aln^ady was inelim-d to Hutidldsin 
there i.s a loiur list, of the Shiuto ('(‘remouies whie.ii .she had performed 
atid of the yifts wliich she to Shinto .shrines. As for ihidtlhi'^in, 
Ix'sides the tisiial gifts and }iam|nets the following items of itiferest 
are nottid. The clergy grew in numhers ; as many as T,:kld helontiiiig 
to seven teniple.s ])eing ])resent on a single oeeasioii. It i.s tiiree 
times recorded tliat a “ puldic great congregation ” w'as Indd in t.lje 
Palace. Priests came from Korea and students who had t‘oui])leted 
tlieir studies returned from China, in <i8ih images of .Amida,-* 
Kwannon, and Daiseshi were l)roiight from Silla. Tlio killing of 
aniniiils was prohibited in eertain jdaee.s. In (59:1 the Ninnu-kyo^ 
was e.xpounded “in the liimdred provinces” and in the previ<nis 
yc'ar the Viceroy of Tsiikushi (Kyushh) was orde.re<l “ to ]n’opagiite 
the Bnddhi.st religion Alo.st reniarkalde of all, when the 
Empress died kIlc was e.remated, whieh must liave .sc('m.ed astrangi*. 
and almost terrible- innovation in, imperial eoremojiial.*’ 

In 7,10 Kara W7i.s made the imperial re.sidenco and remained no for 
more than seventy years, Hitheiho it had l)(‘(m the. custom for the- 
Court to move at the l)eginiiing of every new reign and its migrations 
arc generally described as a efiaiigo of capital. As a matter of fact, 
the various sites were nearly always in the Siime district ami the 
change meant little more than removal to a new palace, the reason 

1 — ■ flj Nilionfri, ii, p. 322. Five colleotions of tlieTripipika had already 
been made in Cluiia between a.p. 518 and 615. 

® Three sutr.is were read to cure him : the Yakushi-kyo or sutra of the Bnddha 
of healing (sec Nanjio, 170, 172, 173), the Kon-kwo-myo or Suvarriaprahhiiaa, and 
the Kw-anrion-kyd or (diap. xxiv of the Lotu.9. Also 180 j>eraons took the vow's 
and a hundred images of Bodhi.sattvas were sot up in the Palace. 

® This i.s the earliest mention which 1 have found of images of Amida, but the 
Sukhavati-vy aha was recited in 640, and bos Nihongi, ii, p. 408. 

* Narijio, No. 16. A portion of the Prajfmparamita. 

s Nihongi, ii, p. 408, He was ordered to send priests to jiropagate it in Ohosnmi 
and Ata, that is the .southern part of the modern provinces of Osinni and iSatsuma. 

® Thi.‘<i was 701. The. finst insUincc of cremation was the priest Dosho in the 
previous year. 

210 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BVmmSM:^^^ 

being tbat a bouse was supposed to be defiled by deatb. Buddbist 
influence bad no doubt sonietbing to do witb tbe decay of tbis 
superstition, and tbe selection first of Nara and then of Kyoto 
as tbe permanent residence of successive Emperors did mean tbe 
creation of a new capital. It also meant tbe opening of new chapters 
in tbe bistory of Japanese Buddhism, and it will be well at tbis 
point to look back for a moment at tbe first chapter or preface, that 
is to say, tbe century and a half which bad elapsed since a.d. 552. 

Tbe introduction of Buddhism into Japan was not due to 
missionary enterprise or comparable to tbe efforts of Asoka to spread 
tbe Good Law. Tbe King of Pekcbe no doubt thought that bis 
action was meritorious, but still bis main object was clearly political. 
He wished to make an alliance with tbe Emperor of Japan, and there- 
fore to please him and knowing tbe desire of tbe Japanese to acqune 
Chinese civilization, be thought be could not do better than make 
them acquamted witb Buddbist literature and ritual. It may seem 
strange that be did not think of Confucianism as representing 
Chinese culture. Possibly bis own knowledge of it was slight. At 
any rate, Buddhism was much easier to transplant and acclimatize, 
for it bad abeady made its way from India to China and from China 
to Korea. Evidently it was considered that the King of Pekche’s 
presents bad made a good impression, for duruig many years the 
various Korean states continued to send images, sutras, and priests 
whenever they thought it expedient to humour the Japanese. 
Yet it does not seem that these priests were exactly what we should 
call missionaries. They were sure of a good reception and were 
ready to instruct and advise. Somewhat later, when tbe condition 
of Korea was disturbed, the influx was considerable. Thus in 666 
tbe Nibongi records that 2,000 people of Pekcbe were settled in tbe 
east country and maintained by tbe Japanese Government for three 
years without any distinction being made between priests and 
laymen. Still less did the Chinese act as evangelists in this early 
period, that is before a.d. 700. The missions recorded seem to have 
been entirely political and not to have brought religious presents 
like the envoys of Koread 

On the other band, there can be no doubt of the desire of the 
Japanese to learn. When once they had made up their minds that 
Buddhism was a good thing, they were not evangelized by self- 
denying foreigners ; it Was they who encouraged and besought 

^ Still, the Nihongi, ii, p. 408, raentionS the “ image of Ataida, niado by the T'ang 
Envoy Kuo Wu-Ts'ung ” and apparently left in Kyushii. 

mmODUGTlON OF BUDDHISM 

211 

CH. VIl] 

foreign priests to settle in Japan with, as much eagerness as modern 
Orientals show in importing guns and military instructors. They 
also sent numerous batches of young men to study in China. 
A peculiarly interesting example of this is the dispatch in 658 of 
two priests who received instruction from the great Hsiian-Tsang.^ 
Naturally there was some hostility between the imported faith and 
native religious institutions which had hitherto had neither com- 
petitors nor special designation, but were now styled Shinto, the 
way of the Gods, in opposition to Butsudo, the way of the Buddha.^ 
At first the quarrel was acute and followed the lines of rivalry 
between certain noble houses. Then when Buddhism had estab- 
lished its position, Shinto seemed to have fallen somewha,t into 
neglect, but it soon recovered and in the last half of the seventh 
century the Emperors, though clearly encouraging Buddliism, 
were careful to honour both creeds. Their attitude was dictated by 
statesmanship and superstition alike : they could see that the 
Shinto priesthood must be reckoned with as a political force and 
they probably believed that the Shinto deities were capable of 
sending pestilence or earthquake if annoyed. 

This impartial piety led to the religious compromise called 
Eyobu-^Shinto ^ or twofold Shinto, which lasted until 1868 and more 
or less fused the two religions, though not so completely as to cause 
any difficuity when there was a desire to separate them. This 
arrangement has been attributed to both Gyogi Bosatsu (670-749) 
and Kobo Daishi (774-835). Both of them helped to formulate 
it, but it represents a natural tendency of the Japanese mind and 
not the work of one man. Perhaps Dosho (c. 665) was one of the 
earliest priests to approve and propagate the idea. Both in China 
and Japan it has always been considered quite natural to follow the 
observances of more than one religion and Buddhism raised no 
objection to the practice. As mentioned in previous chapters, the 
earliest texts fully recognize the existence of Hindu Devas. The 
Buddha himself is represented as recommending the laity to honour 
them. They are not guides to salvation but they are defenders of 
the true faith, they protect from evil and they can give the good 
things of this life. It was precisely in this spirit that early Japanese 
Buddhism raised no objection to the performance of Shinto 

^ Niliongj, ii, p. 2.54. 

^ The word appears to occur for the first time in the Nihongi, 

hook xxi, in speaking of the year 685. 

" fo U J# 

212 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM YU 

ceremonies. Tiieories identifying tKe native deities witli Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas came a little later. 

It is said that four sects were introduced into Japan before 
A.D. 700, namely, the Jojitsu and Sanron both in 626, the Hosso 
in 654, and the Kusha in 658. But they were not sects in the later 
sense, that is corporations pledged to support particular doctrines, 
but simply philosophical schools which expounded certain text- 
books. How little rivalry there was between them is shown by 
the statement that the Korean priest Bkwan, who resided at the 
Genkoji temple, introduced both the Sanron and Jojitsu and that 
the two Chinese priests Chitsu and Chitatsu propagated both the 
Hoss5 and Kusha.^ Also some sects are said to have been intro- 
duced more than once. This probably means little more than that 
learned persons from time to time lectured on their doctrines, 
which concerned philosophy rather than practical questions such as 
what deity one ought to worship. Little is heard of Amida before 
the Nara period, but the Nihongi mentions that in 640 and again 
in 662 the priest Eon who had studied in China for thirty-one years 
was invited to the Palace to expound the Mury6ju-ky6, that is, the 
Greater Suldiavati-vyuha. On the second occasion it is said that 
a thousand priests were present. But there is no hint that Eon 
represented any special school. 

I have said something about the tenets of these four sects in 
speaking of China in the last chapter. They have all disappeared 
in both countries except the Hosso, which still exists because it 
owns the temples of Horyuji, Yakushiji, and Kofukuji in or near 
Nara, ancient and interesting sites which are protected by the 
Government. The Hosso is said to have been introduced no less 
than four times. First in 664 by Dosho,® who was one of a large 
body of priests sent to study in China in the previous year and who 
received instruction from Hsiian-Tsang himself; then in 658 by 
Chitsu and Cliitatsu, who are said to have also propagated the 
Kusha : later in 703 by three priests called Cliiho, Chiran, and 
Chiyu, and finally in 735 by Genbo, the adversary of Eujiwara 

^ Peri (IJ.E.F.E.O., 1917, p. 17) maintains that the Kusha no.ver had an inde- 
pendent existence in Japan and that its special textbook was merely studifjd in 
the Hosso sect. This may bo true, but all lists which I have seen, Japanese as 
■Wf-'ll as foreign, reckon it as one of the J-Iasshu or t'igbt ancient sects. 

® Statements vary as to the exact, date. Some give 653 or 657. Dosho was 
not one of the priests mentioned in Nihongi, ii, 254. Like Oyogi and Kobo .Daishi 
he- is credited with many useful practical enterprises such as making bridges, wells, 
and roads. 

213 

OH. Vii] INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHISM 

Hirotsu^u. It had two branches Imown as Northern and Southern 
and thus illustrates, even at this early date, the tendency of 
Japanese sects to sjdit into subdivisions. In the eighth century the 
Hosso sect was influential in politics and produced many ambitious 
priests such as Gcnbo and the more celebrated Dokyo. 

An interesting figure is En-no-Gyoja (634-701), ^ a hermit and 
mystic who lived on Mount Katsuragi in solitary communion with 
the winds and forests. He was credited with miraculous powers, 
which brought upon him an accusation of sorcery, and he was 
banished to the islands of Izu but subsequently pardoned. He is 
said to have remembered that in previous births he had been a 
disciple of Gotania and also an Emperor of Japan. This type of 
recluse became frequent in later times, but in the earliest records 
we hear little of the mystic and ascetic side of Buddhism.^ Our 
information, which comes mostly from the Nihongi, is perhaps 
incomplete, for it is only natural that an ofiicial publication should 
deal chiefly with matters affecting the material prosperity of the 
country, but still the utilitarian and quid pro quo view of religion 
implied by this record is very noticeable. Ceremonies which seem 
to have an educational or devotional value are constantly inter- 
preted as if they were magical rites performed for the public good. 
Thus when we read that men were sent to all parts to expound 
the Kon-kw6-myo (Suvariiaprabhasa) and Nimio sutras ” ^ we are 
inclined to suppose that propaganda and popular instruction were 
the object, but numerous passages show that sutras were thus 

expounded ” as a measure of public security, to give peace and 
prosperity to the Empire, to bring rain, to stop pestilence, or to 
avert the consequences of evil omens such as eclipses. The Ninpo- 
kyo ^ was considered especially efiicacious for such purposes. 
It is a portion of the great Brajnaparamita and relates how sixteen 

1 AIho known as Enniio-Shokakii and En-no-Otsumi. 

2 There are "also intcresiiing legends about the monk Hodo, who is said to have 
come from India riding on a purple cloud and to have lived on Hokkosan in 
Satsuma sunk in meditation. He had friendly relations with the Emperor Kotoku 
whom he cured of a disease in 649. See Visser, Ancient Buddhism in Japan, 
p. 195, and for other instances Takakusu’s article " What Japan owes to India ” 

in The Young Bast, Sept., 1925, pp. 106-7. . 

3 Nihongi ii, p. 335, speaking of the Emperor Tommu. Of, p. 413 for similar 

orders of the Empress Jito. The best authority for ancient Buddhist ceremonies 
is Visser’s Ancient Buddhism in Japan in the series called It deals 

mainly with the seventh and eighth conturies, but also contains much mterestmg 
information about later Japanese ritual and parallel usages in China. 

Nanjio 17, translated by Kumarajiva. 

214 

HISTOBY OF JAPANESE p 

kings headed by Prasenajit of SrS,vasti waited on the Buddha, who 
explained to them in eight chapters the best way of protecting their 
countries. In the eighth century Ninno-e or assemblies for reading 
the Niuno are frequently recorded, ^ and ultimately they seem to have 
become a regular spring and autumn festival. They formed part 
of the Court ceremonial at Kyoto until the troubles of the Onin 
era (1467--9). 

Even more remarkable is the practice of entering the Buddhist 
order not for one’s own salvation but as a species of self-sacrifice 
on behalf of another person.^ We have already seen this illustrated 
in the account of the last illness of the Emperor Yomei when the 
son of Shiba TattS became a monk for the salce of his dying 
sovereign, and many other examples are recorded in the Mhongi. 
Thus in 614 one of the principal Ministers fell ill and a thousand 
persons, men and women, entered the Order for his sake. In 665 
three hundred and thirty did the same on account of the sickness 
of the Empress Dowager, and in 682 one hundred and forty for the 
Crown Princess. Shortly afterwards three men became monies in 
the vain hope of saving the life of a comparatively small ofEcial.^ 
So completely had the practice become recognized as a method of 
propitiating the higher powers that in 696 the Empress Jito ordered 
that on the last day of every year ten persons of pure life should 
be made to enter the Order, apparently as an expiation for the sins 
of the past and a good omen for the future. 

In the chronicle of the three months preceding the death of the 
Emperor Temmu there is a long catalogue of the pious measures 
taken for his welfare and Shinto rites were also performed. (1) Eiefs 
of several hundred houses were granted to various temples ; 
(2) images and lanterns were presented ; (3) the clergy were 
entertained at vegetarian banquets ; (4) the ncng5 was changed ; 
(5) taxes and forced labour were remitted, debts were cancelled, and 
a general amnesty proclaimed ; (6) sutras were read ; (7) finally, 
seventy persons of pure conduct were selected to retire from the 
world.” First eighty and then a hundred others followed their 
example. It is clear that loyalty and filial piety, the principal 

^ HE # Ninno-e. See Visser, loc. cit., 117-18, for dates. 

“ Even in modern China it is popularly believed that if a man. becomes a monk 
his ancestors will go to heaven. Cf. Paraphrase of the Sacred Edict, vii. 

® .Nihongi, h, p. ill. The Empress Suiko subsequently praised his conduct 
in a rescript. . . , ' 

^ Nihongi, ii, p. 375, 

CH. VIl] 

INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHISM 

virtues of old Japan, had mucli to do -witii promoting devout 
practices. In 694 the Nihongi tells us that all provincial officials 
vied, with each other in erecting Buddhist shrines for the benefit 
of their lords and 'parents’’', and images of Amida andKwannon dating 
from this period have been discovered which bear inscriptions 
showing that they were votive offerings made on behalf of father 
and mother. 

The list of ceremonies performed for the Emperor Temmu, as 
described above, comprises most of the rites recorded at this period. 
Vegetarian banquets offered to the clergy (sai-c) ^ were a specially 
frequent form of piety and can be traced back to the ancient custom 
often spoken of in the Pitakas of inviting the Buddha and his 
disciples to partake of a meal. The Nihongi mentions them first 
in 584 under the Emi)eror Bidatsu and innumerable times in subse- 
quent reigns. We soon detect a tendency to regard them as a sort 
of mass pcrfo.rmed annually for the repose of departed souls seven 
days after death, and in 735 the Emperor Shomu made it a rule that 
after the decease of an Imperial Prince a himdred priests should be 
entertained on the seventh day during seven years.® Any act of 
clemency and kindness, such as sparing life and preventing suffering, 
is a means of acquiring merit and this merit may legitimately hope 
for its reward. Therefore in times of danger it was the custom 
to proclaim amnesties, remit or reduce sentences, and lighten the 
burden of forced labour, also to refrain from killing animals for a 
certain time or in certain places. In 676, when there had been 
a drought and an ominous comet, the Emperor Temmu mitigated 
punishments by one degree and twice ordered “ living things to be 
let loose ”. In 691 there was dangerously heavy rain and an eclipse 
of the sun. The Empress Jito accordingly prohibited the use of 
strong drink and animal food and subsequently “ long-life places (that 
is places whore animals might not be killed) each of 1,000 paces 
were instituted in the Home provinces and others In a decree 
published the same year she mentions that former Emperors had 
observed six favsting days in each month and it is probable that 
animals were not killed on these days. The formal proliibition to 
take animal life was known as hojo-Oja meeting for liberating living 
creatures.® Nearly all the ceremonies mentioned are described 
by the word E or meeting, Ninii6-e, H6j6-e, Muaha-dai-e, and 

^ ® 't* ^ Shichi-shieM-sai. 

216 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. vii 

so on> Buddiiism in ancient Japan was evidently very sociable. 
The more numerous the priests and the larger the congregation, 
the greater seemed the chances that success would follow. 

In 606 we are told that the 16th day of the seventh month was 
observed for the first time. The nature of the ceremony is not 
further defined, but in 657 and 669 we are told that the Empress 
Saimei celebrated the Urabon-e on this day on behalf of her 
ancestors for seven generations. She also caused a model of Mount 
Sunii— that is, Meru — ^to be constructed.^ The word Urabon 
apparently corresponds to the Sanskrit avalambana and Pali 
olamba, and a learned discussion of the origin and history of the 
festival will be found in Visser.® It appears not to correspond 
to any one Indian rite but to be a mixture of several with Chinese 
additions. In China it is first recorded in the reign of Wu-Ti 
A.D. 538, but its character was considerably modified by Amoghavajra 
(a.d. 746-774), who introduced the idea of making offerings of food 
not on behalf of but to the spirits of the dead. The Bon, as it is now 
called, is stiU celebrated in Japan in July or August, the old calendar 
being used for religious purposes in country districts. 

It will be noticed that most of the observances mentioned have 
a direct reference to human troubles and are concerned with 
averting disasters like drought, sickness, and death. The anniversary 
of the Buddha’s birth has, however, a different character. The 
chronicles lay little stress on it, precisely because it was a recurring 
festival and not connected with special public events, but it is 
doubtless the eighth day of the fourth month mentioned in a.d. 606 
and 647. On the former occasion a copper image of the Buddha 
sixteen feet high was enshrined in the Golden Hall of the Temple 
of Gangoji and a great vegetarian banquet was held. The festival 
is still observed on 4th April, when it is the custom to pour sweet tea 
over the head of an image of the youthful Buddha, this liquid 
having replaced the original water. Fa-^PIsien and I-Ghing both 
mention bathing images as a common religious rite in India. 

The principal scriptures read in public have been noticed in the 

^ For ;tho Musha-dM-e See Visser, loc, cit., chap, vi, A. They were equivalent 
to the Indian Pancavarshika or Mahamoksha-pr<asad. Muaha means limitless, 
i.c. anyone could attend the meetings ; but was probably also a corruption of 
Moksha. 

® Tho Mhongi also mentions the construction of such a model in 612, 659, 
and 600. 

^ Visser, loc. cit., chap. iv. ' 

217 

Gii. VII] INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHim 

above remarks.^ Tlic Lotus (particulariy the chapter about 
Kwanuon), the Sukhavati-vyuha, the Niiino, and the Suvarna- 
prabhasa seem to have been held in special esteem. Doubtless the 
professors of the Sanron, Hosso, and other schools expounded the 
texts on ■which they based their teaching, but we do not hear of these 
works being recited on ofhcial occasions and probably there was felt 
to be a distinction between philosophic works and scriptures which 
could be used to acquire merit. Still, any one who had mastered 
the Lotus and Suvarnaprabhasa must have had a good knowledge 
of Mahayanist doctrine, and some no doubt like Shotoku Taishi 
were serious students, though we have no means of judging how 
many. But the usual method of reciting the scriptures was the 
process called tendohu,^ that is, intoning a few lines at the beginning, 
middle, and end of a sutra, turning over the pages and taking the 
rest as read. The tendoJeu was specially used when the whole 
canon (Issailryo) was recited, as is recorded in 651 when the Emperor 
was about to change his residence and in 677 when there had been 
a great earthquake. There was some excuse for speed in these 
ceremonies, for the collection of scriptures read, if, as is probable, 
it was that made under the Sui dynasty, consisted of 5,058 volmnes. 

1 Tliey are conveniently tabulated in Visser, loc. cit., ebap. i. 

2 ^ “ turning and reading ”. 

CHAPTER VIII 

NAEA PERIOD: THE OLDER SECTS 

In 710, in. tiie reiga of the Empress Gemmyo, the capital was fixed 
at Kara. The step was a natural consequence of the Refor.ras of 
Taikwa, for a centralized administration requires a centre and the 
examjDle of China doubtless weighed with educated Japanese. 
It was also popular, for the frequent construction of new palaces 
under the old system had meant onerous demands for forced labour 
and the clergy were favourable. It seemed most suitable to 
surround the sovereign and ministers with temples and monasteries 
which could bring religious influence to bear on their decisions, 
and the powerful Hosso sect lost no time in establishing itself. 
The new city was constructed at the western extremity of the modern 
Nara, and in the same year the temple of Kofukuji was moved 
to the site where its remains still stand. The great Kamatari had 
originally built it at yamashina, but in those days temples were 
transferred as easily as palaces : it was shifted in 672 to Unasaki, 
and in 710 Kamatari’s.son, Eujiwara Euliito, .removed it to the 
capital, where it became the cathedral of the northern branch of the 
sect and the residence of the ambitious priest Genbo. The still more 
eminent Gyogi belonged to the southern branch which had its 
headquarters at Gangoji.^ Shinto, however, was not neglected, 
for in the same year, 710, Euhito also dedicated the celebrated 
Kasiiga shrine, wh.ich stiU exists, to the tutelary deities of the 
Eujiwara family. 

The Empresses Gemmy5 and Gensho (whose reigns cover the period 
707-723) both patronized lite.rature, and, by the ordersof the first were 
compiled the Eudoki, or provincial gazetteers, and the Kojiki, which 
is almost a sacred book for Shinto, In Gensho’s reign the code 
was revised, and this amended version, known as Yoro-ryoritsu, 
remained nominally in force, though with considerable modifi- 
cations in practice, until 1868. But unlike most Empresses neither 
of them performed any special acts of Buddhist piety. This was 

^ The seven great temples of Nara are often mentioned, namely, TSdaiji, 
Gangoji, Yakushiji, Horyuji, Kofukuji, Daianji, Saidaiji. Many of thorn are 
outside the present town. 

,318 

TEE OLDEB SECTS 

219 

OH. VIIl] 

left for their successor Shom u (724-748), perhaps the most religious^ 
of all the Emperors of Japan. The name of the nengo which practically 
coincides with his reign — ^Tempyo — is often used to designate the 
whole period when art and Buddhism were flourishing at Nara. 
His Empress also, Komyo, the daughter of Eujiwara Euhito, was 
most devout and the heroine of many edifying legends. Eor 
instance, a well-known story relates how she washed and tended 
a leprous beggar covered with loathsome sores who snddenlyrevealed 
himself as the Buddha Akshobhya. 

Shomu has so often been described as priest-ridden and fanatical 
that it may be well to remember that he also had an eye for the 
material welfare of his country. He opened a public establishment 
for dispensing mediciues, he caused a survey of the various provinces 
to be made, he prescribed examinations for candidates desiring 
official appointments, and caused roads, bridges, and dykes to be 
constructed in the provinces. In these enterprises he was greatly 
helped by the eminent priest Oyogi Bosatsu,^ who, like Dosho, one 
of his predecessors in the Hosso sect, divided his time between 
theology, art, and civil engineering. Gydgi (670-749) was, according 
to some accounts, of Korean origin, according to others a native of the 
province of Izumi. At any rate, he is said to have been ordained 
at Yakushiji in 685 at the age of fifteen and to have studied the 
Hosso doctrine under the best scholars of the time. He travelled 
extensively in Japan, occupied in propagating Buddhism and 
improving irrigation and communications. Tradition says that he 
was a remarkable sculptor and invented a new kind of earthenware. 
He is also credited, but no doubt erroneously, with the introduction 
of the pbtter% wheel. It is likewise not accurate to speak of him 
as the author of Eyobu-Shinto, though many authors do so, but 
stni he pursued a consistent policy of preaching that there was no 
antagonism between the two creeds and of promoting harmony 
between them. His many talents won the confidence of the Emperor, 
who conferred on him in 746 the rank of Daisojo, equivalent to 
Archbishop, this being the first time that the Crown assumed the 
right to nominate to that office, and ultimately bestowed on him the 
posthumous title of Bosatsu or Bodhisattva. 

It may be mentioned that, great as the political power of Buddhism 
became in Japan, the Church was always regarded in theory as a 
department of the State. The office called Jingikwan supervised 

^ His life is contained in the Honcho Koaoden, vol. 65, 

220 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE [oh. Xtii 

all matters relating to Shinto, while Buddhism was dealt with by 
the Jibushod one of the Bight Departments which exercised control 
over priests and temples just as other departments did over the 
Army and the administration of justice. Its somewhat miscel- 
laneous functions included the charge, not only of priests and nuns, 
but also of music, the Imperial mausolea, State funerals, and the 
reception of foreigners. It is true that in later times the priests of 
Hieizan were sometimes in rebellion and refused to accept the 
nominee of the Government as Abbot, but this was regarded as an 
act of insubordination analogous to the rebellion of a feudal chief 
which it might be prudent to condone, because punishment would 
involve awkward consequences. In principle the right of the 
Emperor to appoint to ecclesiastical posts and to grant titles, 
posthumous and other, was not disputed and the various priestly 
ranks were tabulated so as to correspond with the Court ranks. 

Shomu had another influential counsellor in Roben (689-773), 
of the newly introduced Kegon sect, who was eminent as a writer 
and an artist, as well as in ecclesiastical matters. He is reckoned 
as one of the founders of theTSdaiji monastery. Less edifying is the 
career of Genbo, head of the hTorthern Hosso and the first of those 
ambitious priests who rendered Httle service to rehgion and ended 
by making the Court afraid of the Church. He studied for nineteen 
years in China and on returning was weU received at the Palace, 
but is said to have been both scheming and immoral. According 
to the common story he attempted to seduce the wife of Eujiwara 
Hirotsugu, the viceroy of Kyushu, who was absent from the capital. 
Hearing what had occurred Hirotsugu demanded Genbo’s removal 
and, being unsuccessful, rebelled and lost his life in 741. Genb5 
himself died in Kyushu five years later and does not figure in the 
most celebrated of the Emperor’s pious achievements, the con- 
struction of the Daibutsu. 

In the earlier part of Shomu’s reign no special acts of Buddhist 
piety are recorded, and though on his accession he presented gifts 
to the priests and nuns of the capital, he uses in his edicts the 
ordinary official language about the gods who dwell in heaven and 
on earth deigning to bless the Empire.^ But his religious inclinations 
were apparently stimulated by a terrible epidemic of smallpox which 
ravaged the country in 735-7 and did not spare the aristocracy, 

^ SIiolai-Nihongi Edicts 6 and 6. For these documents see Sansorn, “ The 
Imperial Edicts in the Shoku Nihongi,” Trans. Asialio BoQkty of Japan, 1924, 

THE OLDER SEGT8 

221 

CH. VIIl] 

especially tlie Fiijiwara family. According to an edict of 737 every 
province was provided witli an image of the Buddlia sixteen feet 
Idgli and a copy of tlie Prajnaparamita, and further edicts issued 
in 741 ordered that in every province monasteries and convents 
(Kokubunji), each for twenty priests and ten nuns, should be 
established and seven-storied pagodas built. The monasteries 
were placed under the supervision of the Todaiji temple and the 
convents under the Hokkeji. 

The Emperor also conceived the project of erecting a colossal 
imago of the Buddha Boshana.^ This idea was probably inspired 
])y Roben, for Roshana is the central figure of the Kegon sutra of 
which he was an enthusiastic student, and he appears to have been 
in charge of the operations at Nara wliile Gyogi travelled about the 
country collecting money. It was, however, thought prudent to 
consult the Sun-goddess before commencing the work and to ask 
if she approved. All versions of the story say that her answer was 
favourable, but they do not agree as to the exact wording and other 
details. The G-enko Shakusho,^ which is perhaps the best authority, 
states that the priest Gybgi mentioned above was sent to Ise bearing 
a Buddhist relic as a present. The oracle which he received began, 
“ The sun of truth and reality shines over the long night of life and 
death ; the moon of the eternal and everlasting dispels the heavy 
clouds of passion and ignorance,” and accepted the relic with grateful 
thanks, but otherwise was not explicit. Tachibana no Moroe, the 
compiler of the Manyoshu, was then sent. The text of the reply 
which he brought back is not given, but the next night the 
Emperor had a dream in which the Sun-goddess appeared to him 
and said, “ The sun is Birushana. Understand this and execute 
your enterprise,” ^ This was imequivocal and satisfactory, but 
the revolt in Kyushu already mentioned interfered with the 
imperial plans and for two years the capital was shifted, 

Shomu first planned to erect his colossus at Shigaraki, but the 
effort was unsuccessful, then at SSnogami,^ and finally in 747 in the 

^ For the name see above. Chap, IV, pp. 108-10. 

2 Written by Kokan Shiron in 1322, This is rather a late- date and tlie silence 
of the Shoku-Niliongi makes the whole episode suspicious. Also according to 
the Shoku-Nihongi, in the reign of Konin the goddess Amatorasu forbade a temide 
to bo built near her shrine at Iso. On tho other hand, one must remember that to 
consiilt tho oracle at Ise was entirely in keei)}ng with the customs of the age. 

® Tho Miryu-Shinto-Kuketsu, attributed to tho Emperor Saga, says (vol. ii) ; 
“ Amatorasu is tho triio body of tho Buddha, all pervading, without beginning 
or end.” 

^ Or iSoekami. Some authorities think that it was a part of Nara. 

222 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BZ7i9I>H7OT [oh. ynx 

Todaiji at Nara. The work lasted three years and the Emperor 
himself took part, carrying earth in his sleeves in order to help 
raise a platform necessary for the operations. The artists made 
no less than eight unsuccessful attempts to construct the image, 
which was formed of a number of metal plates, only the head and 
neck being cast in one piece. 986,180 Japanese pounds of copper 
are said to have been used in the construction besides gold, lead, and 
other metals. The image at present to be seen at Nara and known 
as the Daihatsu or Great Buddha is a figure over 53 feet 
high sitting cross-legged on a lotus throne which is 68 fiict 
in diameter and formed of 56 petals. These are probably the 
original dimensions, but the temple was twice burnt down in 1180 
and 1567. The Daibutsu itself suffered severely and underwent 
serious repairs, the head and upper part having been restored after 
the last conflagration. The brush with which the pupils were 
painted at the original ceremony of opening the image's eyes is still 
preserved in that wonderful treasure house of antiquities, the 
Shosoin at Nara. 

It was regarded as a special sign of divine approval that early 
in 749 gold, which had hitherto been known only as an import, 
was discovered in the province of Mutsu. Accordingly a service 
of thanksgiving was held. The Emperor, attended by the imperial 
family and the Court, preceded to Tddaiji and took his place before 
the image, facing north, that is in the position of a subject before 
his sovereign, while Tachibana no Moroe stepped forward and read 
the following edict ^ “ This is the word of the sovereign who is the 
servant of the Three Treasures that he humbly speaks before the 
image of Eoshana.” The discovery of gold is then announced 
and the Emperor continues : Hearing this we were astonished 
and rejoiced, and feeling that this is a gift bestowed upon us by the 
love and blessing of Eoshana Buddha we have received it with 
reverence and humbly accepted it and have brought with us all our 
officials to worship and give thanks. This we say reverently, 
reverently, in the great presence of the Three Treasures whose name 
is to be spoken with awe,'^ 

If one compares the language of this address with the usual 
phraseology of imperial edicts the difference is astounding and 
must have seemed to old-fashioned Japanese an ominous innovation. 
In previous pronouncements the Emperors (including Shomu 

^ Shoku Nihongi Edict 12, Sansoiri’s translation. 

CH. VIIl] 

TEE OLDEB SECTS 

223 

liimself) described tbemsclves as “ manifest Gods ” ^ and used such 
expressions as “we divinely think ” : now the Sovereign not only 
avoids such majestic phrases but he calls himself the servant 
(Yakko) of the Three Treasures and uses humble language (e.g. the 
verb mosu, to speak) which implies that he is addressuig a superior. 
In another edict, apparently issued about the same time but 
addressed to his subjects, he reverts to the ordinary Court language 
in informing them of the discovery of gold.^ This document is not 
very clearly worded, but apparently its object is to prove that there 
is complete harmony between Buddhism and Shintoism. People 
seem to have regarded the scarcity of gold and the difficulty of 
completing the image as a sign of divine disapproval, “ yet now the 
Three Treasures have vouchsafed this excellent and divine great 
sign of the word and we think that this is a thing manifested by the 
guidance and grace of the gods that dwell in heaven and on earth and 
likewise by the love and kindness of the august sovereign spirits ” 
{i.e. the imperial ancestors). Whereas in the previous edict there 
is no reference to Shinto deities, in this one they are repeatedly 
mentioned with respect and gifts are promised to their shrines and 
priests. 

The relations of Buddhism and Shinto are further illustrated by 
an exceedingly curious incident which forms the theme of another 
edict.® We gather from it that Hachiman, described as the god 
of Yahata (eight banners), had delivered an oracle promising that 
he would assist the construction of the Daibutsu and urge the other 
gods to do the same : he further expressed a wish to visit Nara. 
As a, token of his gratitude the Emperor bestowed on the deity a cap 
of honour (the usual sign of rank in those days) and sent high 
officials with an escort of soldiers to his shrine at Usa near Beppu 
to conduct him to the capital. As images are not used in Shinto 
the god was probably represented by some emblem conveyed in a 
sacred car. He was then installed in a special shrine in the 
compound of the Todaiji where forty Buddhist priests recited 
prayers during seven days and a priestess of Yahata, who was 
also a Buddhist nun, likewise figured in the proceedings. The 
relations between the two cults were thus perfectly peaceful. 
Hachiman is treated as a compeer of the Four Kings, of Indra and 

^ Akitsukami. Tho gods in heaven are invisible. The Emperor is a visible 
god manifest on earth. 

® Shoku Nihongi Edict 13. See Sansom’s notes. 

® Shoku Nihongi Edict 15. ' - ' 

224 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE [ch. vni 

Brahma. But he is not of the same class as Kwannon or Miroku.i 
Like an Indian Deva he is regarded as a protector of the faith ; 
lie is not so much worshipped as given a chance of listening to 
edifying services and he receives a decoration. The term Bosatsu 
is used of Hachiman in an order to the Government of Kyushu 
which was issued in 793. It concerns the property of the Usa 
shrine and refers to events which occurred in 783. But though this 
term is significant, it would probably be a mistake to attach much 
doctrinal importance to its use here, for it had many shades of 
meaning. Even in Indian works it had come to be little more than 
a name for a pious person, and the title of Bosatsu had been officially 
bestowed on the deceased Gyogi. The Yalcushiji near Kara 
possesses an image of Hachiman said to date from the Konin period 
(810-823) which represents him as a Buddhist priest. 

The views of the age, at any rate of enlightened persons, are 
clearly explained in an edict of 765 ® published on the occasion of 
the Shinto ceremony of offering first-fruits. The Empress who 
issues it was a fervent Buddhist and states that she considers her 
duties are first to serve the Three Treasures, next to worship the 
Shinto gods, and finally to cherish the people. Some think. Her 
Majesty continues, that the gods should be kept distinct from the 
Three Treasures, but if they examine the scriptures they will find 
it there stated that the gods ought to revere and protect the teaching 
of the Buddha. Since there is no reason why Buddhists and 
others should not mix together on religious occasions, she considers 
that there is no objection to the participation of priests and mins 
in this Shinto festival, though it has hitherto been considered wrong. 
In a similar spirit Eujiwara no Muchiinaro constructed a building 
called Jinguji or Miya-tera in which the rites of both religions 
were performed, and such edifices became common. 

After taking part in the ceremonies described, Shomu. abdicated 
towards the end of 749 in favour of the lady just mentioned, his 
daughter Koken, and became a monic, being the first Emperor 
to do so, though the practice subsequently became frequent. 
Koken, like her father, was most devout and left the administration 
in the hands of her minister Emi no Oshikatsu,-* but was probably 

In the eleventh, and twelfth centuries ho was identified first with the spirit 
of the ancient Emperor Ojin and also spoken of as a Bt.)(lliisattva or even a Buddha, 
It is still mofo straiigo to find that the Buddlnst reformer, Hoiien, was idcntifi(,'d 
with him. Sec Coates and lahizuka, Honen, the, Buddhist Saint, p. 644. 

® Slioku Nihongi Edict 38. 

^ II is family name was I’ujiwara no Nakamaro. 

cH.vin] THE 

personally responsible for many ordinances concerning religion, sucb 
as a prohibition to take animal life. But Chinese learning was not 
neglected, for another edict ordered every household to provide 
itself with a copy of the Classic of Filial Piety. 

Though the Daibutsu had been installed in 749, it was not solemnly 
dedicated until 752, and in connection with both ceremonies we hear 
of the presence of interesting foreigners who had arrived some time 
previously. It is probable that at this period there were not a few 
learned strangers at Nara, natives of India and Central Asia as well 
as Chinese. Prominent among them was Bodhisena, sometimes 
known as Baramon Sojo or the Brahman Bishop, whose life is an 
instance of the adventurous odysseys not infrequent in those days. 
He was by birth a Brahman of South India and according to 
tradition went to China in the hope of finding Manjusri. Instead 
of this, however, he made the acquaintance of the Japanese 
Ambassador and was persuaded to visit Japan. On the same ship 
with him were the notorious Genb5 and several other interesting 
passengers, including Dosen, who introduced the Kegon sect into 
Japan, and Kibi-no-Makibi, who is said to have brought back with 
him the arts of embroidery, of playing the lyre, and the game of 
Go (a kind of draughts). Kibi is also said to have invented the 
Kata-kana syllabary, and, if this is true, he may have learned some- 
thing of the Sanskrit alphabet from Bodhisena and made use of 
knowledge. The party arrived at Haniwa (the modern Osaka) 
in 736 and were met by Gyogi, who conducted Bodhisena to Nara 
and presented him to the Emperor. He was treated with great 
honour and lodged in the temple called Haianji, where he taught 
Sanskrit. He died in Japan in 760.^ 

With Bodhisena came also a Cambodj an priest and musician 
called in Chinese Fo-t'ieh,^ who likewise resided at Daianji and 
wrote a work on the Sanskrit alphabet. He also composed religious 
dances representmg subjects taken fron Indian mythology and 
called Rin-yu or Champa dances.® These have survived, and I 

^ For some interesting information about Bodhisena see Takakusu’s article, 
“ Le Voyage de Kanshin,” in B.E.F.E.O., 1928 and 1929, p. 24 ff. He mentions 
that the Manyoahu compiled by Bodhisena’ s fellow-passenger Kibi contains a 
poem about a crow that fed on rice grown by a Brahman. 

^ fife -^tso pronounced as Buttetsu and Fat-triet. 

® Eight kinds arc enumerated. See Takaku8\i, loc. cit., in B,E.F.E.O., 1928 
and 1929, pp. 27, 28, and Dcmicville, La Musigm dame au Japan. Music 
dancing were highly esteemed in ancient Japan. Religious dances formed part 
of Shmt5 worship, and Edict 9 of the Shoku Nihongi refers to a dance composed 

Q 

22G 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE 5r7I)Z)//LSM [ch. viii 

the pleasure of seeing some of them performed at Horyuji in April, 
1928, in honour of the anniversary of the Empress Suiko. A dais 
was erected in the courtyard of the temple : the dancers and the 
numerous clergy present were dressed in ancient costumes taken 
from the temple stores and the whole scene was probably a lifelike 
reproduction of the pageants of Nara in the eighth century. 

The Empress had apparently taken Httle interest in secular 
matters, and in the years following the dedication of the Daibutsu 
was troubled by conspiracies and plots against the throne. It did 
not, therefore, seem surprising that she should abdicate in favour of 
a grandson of Temmu, the Emperor Junnin,i and become a nun. 
But, as often happened in later history when the practice of 
abdication became frequent, she felt the attraction of mundane 
pleasures and interests more strongly after renouncing the world 
than when she was in it, so much so that she played a not very 
digiiiiied part in an astounding clerical romance which has few 
parallels in the political and ecclesiastical history of any country. 
She fell under the influence of a handsome and ambitious priest 
called Dokyo and at his instigation continually intervened in public 
matters. Hence there quickly arose a serious rivalry and quarrel 
between Dokyo and her former Minister Oshikatsu, who aspired 
to rule in the name of the young Emperor. Oshikatsu began the 
attack, which was perhaps unwise, for the high rank and many 
favours conferred on him had made even his kinsmen jealous, and 
he further put himself in the wrong by stealing the imperial seal, 
which was in the custody of the ex~Bmpress, and by using it for the 
issue of commissions to iraise troops agamst Dokyo. He was 
defeated and killed. The Emperor was exiled to the island of 
Awaji on the ground that he was privy to his minister’s misdeeds, 
and was subsequently made away with. The Empress reascended 
the throne with the new title of Shotoku (765-9) and all authority 
was in the hands of Dokyo, who was appointed first Daijin-Zenji,^ 

by the Era peror Tomirai and performed by the Princess Imperial in 743. It observes 
(quoting the Chinese classics) that for good government it is necessary to have 
everywhere and always two things — namely, ceremony and music. Eour kinds 
of music were in vise at the Court — Ohineso (T'ang), Korean (Kan), that of Champa, 
and that of Tamra or the Quelpaert Islands. 

^ Strange to say, this title was not conferred on him till 1871. History had till 
then known him simply as Awaji-no-baitei, the deposed Emperor of Awaji. 

^ flip j ^ WC 'Jc Ho-o is the modern Japanese 

translation of Pope, but in that sense it is written with slightly different characters 

ms.)- 

THE OLDER SECTS 

227 

cii. vm] 

wliicb. may be rendered as Minister Priest, then Dajo-daijin, 
or Chancellor, and finally Ho-o, the two latter titles having hitherto 
been reserved for members of the Imperial Family. 

And it was in that direction that Dokyo’s overweening ambition 
now turned. He caused to be circulated stories that the God 
Hachiman of Usa ^ had appeared in dreams and recommended that 
he be appointed Emperor. The situation was most grave, and it is 
to be noted that at this moment and also in the sixteenth century 
when the great monasteries were dangerously strong, it seemed 
by no means impossible that Japan might be ruled by an 
ecclesiastical Government lUre Tibet. The attitude of the Empress 
is not very clear. Perhaps she had sufficient dynastic and family 
sentiment to raise objections. At any rate, she insisted on specially 
consulting the oracle of Hachiman and dispatched a trusted official 
named Wake no Kiyomaro to Usa with instructions to put the 
question directly and return with the reply. Dokyo interviewed him 
before his departure and endeavoured to win him over by promises 
and threats, but he proved worthy of the trust reposed in him and 
reported that the answer was unequivocal : Hachiman declared 
that only persons of the Imperial Family which is descended from 
the gods were eligible as Emperor. Dokyo was furious, and strange 
to say had still sufficient influence over the Empress, who was 
probably in bad health, to have an edict ^ issued degrading and 
banishing Kiyomaro, who was also punished by having the sinews 
of his legs cut, and would probably have been killed on his way to 
exile had he not been protected by the Fujiwaras. The Empress 
died next year and DSkyo’s power was at an end. He was at once 
exiled to the province of Shimotsuke in northern Japan, where 
he died three years afterwards. Kiyomaro was recalled and made 
Udaijin, or Minister of the Eight Hand, the third highest office 
in the State. 

Konm, who succeeded to the throne, was elderly and easy-going 
and nothing remarkable is reported of his twelve years’ reign, but 
doubtless the memory of Dokyo’s audacious attempt was one of the 
chief reasons which induced the next Emperor, Kwammu, to move 

^ The relations of the Hachiman shrine with the monarchy were perhaps unsatis- 
factory, though we do not know enough to form any definite opinion. In 749, 
when Hachiman was brought to Nara as related above, a Shinto priest and priestess 
arrived in his train and were lodged in the Todaiji, In 765 they wore found to be 
involved in a conspiracy and punished. 

“ Shoku Kihoiigi Edict KTo. 44. ' - 

228 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cn. vm 

tlie capital from Nara in 784. Anotlier result was tliat for a long 
time there were no more reigning Empresses. In the last two 
centuries there had been six, two of whom had reigned twice, but 
there were only two more in all Japanese history and the next did 
not come to the throne till a.d. 1630. In the twelfth century the 
ex-Emperor Toba had promised his favourite wife that in the event 
of their son dying one of their daughters should ascend the throne, 
but when the death actually occurred in 1155, he found that the 
national sentiment against a female sovereign was so strong that 
he had to break his pledge. It was evidently felt that ladies were 
too susceptible to ecclesiastical and other personal influences to he 
safely trusted with the supreme power. 

The seventy-five years or so during which the Court resided 
at Nara (710-784) form a well-marked epoch in the history of 
Buddhism and are often spoken of as the period when it was 
most prosperous. And prosperous it was in a certain sense. The 
monasteries were well endowed with estates and treasure and 
their property tended to increase, for it paid no taxes and hence 
the peasants were ready to surrender their lands to the Church 
and then hold them as tenants in return for a rent less than 
the imposts exacted by the Government. Never were the clergy 
more wealthy or more powerful : they enjoyed and sometimes 
dispensed the imperial favour and rarely met with any serious 
obstacle. The extravagant ambition of Dokyo alarmed the civil 
administration, but merely because it was extravagant and took 
no account of the venerable traditions on which the Empire, the 
imperial house, and the whole system of government as then under- 
stood were founded. Otherwise public opinion seemed to regard 
it as perfectly natural that the Church should be the principal part 
of the State : that prelates should be as powerful or more powerful 
than officials or soldiers, and that more money should be spent on 
temples and ceremonies than on all the other needs of the country. 
Even the old native religion and its priesthood joined in the general 
acquiescence. 

Yet it may be doubted whether the really great influence of 
Buddhism in Japan dates from this epoch, except in matters 
relating to art, and did not rather begin a little later when new 
conditions gave a new impetus to all human activities, including 
religion. Clearly it would be absurd to deny that Buddhism, left 
its mark on Nara and the neighbourhood in art. Many Buddhist 
priests were themselves artists, whereas Shinto had no images and 

OH. vni] THE OLDER SECTS ' 229 

little in the way of architecture. But now there arrived from China 
a new religion offering a copious series of sacred subjects, mostly 
Indian or Central- Asiatic in their ultimate origin, and specimens 
showing how they could be represented in painting and sculpture. 
At this period statuary in wood or bronze seems to have appealed 
to the Japanese more than painting, and they cultivated the new 
art with signal success, sometimes transforming by the charm of 
their own genius what they had borrowed, as for instance the 
Kwannon in the Chuguji nunnery.^ 

In literature the debt was less remarkable. A special department 
attached to the Court under the Presidency of an Imperial Prince 
was charged with the duty of making copies of the Tripitaka, one 
of which was supplied to every monastery, but the literature of the 
period does not show so many signs of Buddhist influence as we 
might expect. The chronicles called Nihongi and Shoku Niliongi 
(the latter not completed till 797) record impartially events of 
interest for Buddhism and Shintoism. The former opens with the 
origin of the world and the Age of the Gods. It accepts the Chinese 
doctrine of the two primnples called Yin and Yang and quotes with- 
out naming them ancient “ writings But it does not allude to 
Buddhist theories. It duly records the advent of Buddhism but does 
not celebrate it with pious fervour as do, for instance, the chronicles 
of Ceylon. The Manyoshu is an ample anthology of ancient and 
contemporary poems ^ and the desire to preserve them does credit 
to the nascent literary spirit of the age, as do also the compositions 
of Akahito and Hitomaro. But the religious inspiration of this 
poetry, so far as there is any, seems to be Shintoist rather than 
Buddhist. Buddhist sentiments may be found in it, but they are 
mostly concerned with such obvious themes as the brevity and 
miccrtainty of life. Nor is it clear how far the influence of 
Buddhism extended beyond the capital and the Home Provinces. 
In 685 and again in 737 orders were sent for the erection of temples 
and monasteries in all provinces, but we have no information as to 

Close to tho lioryuji monastery. Shotoku’s mother is said to have resided 
there. Examples of painting are rarer. The best known are the mural paintings 
in the Golden Hall at Horyuji, which are singularly like the frescoes of Ajanta and 
were probably executed by a Korean. The painting of Shbtoku Taishi and his 
two sons is now generally considered to be a copy of an original painted during 
his life. 

® It contains more than 4,000 poems, and I have no pretension to have read 
them all. But I have seen few quotations which contain any definite reference 
to Buddhist doctrines. One poem, however, speaks of its being a rare chance to 
be born as a human being. 

230 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. vni 

tlie practical results of the measure at this period. Still, it is only 
just to remember that the sovereigns and ecclesiastics of Nara did 
not limit their interests to the capital. They obviously wished to 
spread religion throughout the empire. 

It is certainly remarkable that of the older sects of Japanese 
Buddhism the two which became and still are most numerous and 
important, the Tendai and Shingon, did not originate in Nara but 
fixed their centres at Hieizan and Koyasan shortly after the Court 
had moved to KySto, I have already mentioned the four sects 
which were introduced before the capital was fixed. To these must 
be added the Kegon and Ritsu, which were brought from China 
to Nara and as compared with the older four show a certain, 
advance, for the one is a more definite type of religion than any 
previous school and the other more practical. Still, if they are to 
bo judged by their success as appeals to the religious consciousness 
of the nation, they clearly cannot be placed in the same class as the 
great sects of the next century. 

The Kegon is said to have been introduced into Japan by the 
Chinese priest Dosen, who arrived in 73G on the same ship as 
Bodhisena and others, and its success also owed much to the efforts 
of Roben. I have already said something^ about the Buddha 
whom it specially lionours, about its sacred book the Kegon or 
Avatamsaka sutra, and about its fortunes in China. The monastic 
code called Bomino-kyo ^ describes how Roshana is seated on a lotus 
throne of a thousand petals, each of which is a universe with a 
presiding Shaka, but each containing millions of worlds like ours 
with smaller Buddhas of their own. Just as the Japanese Court 
jiaid special attention to the portions of the Niimo-kyo which deal 
with good administration, so they saw an edifying political analogy 
in this vision. Roshana, the great Shakas, and the smaller Shakas 
seemed to their bureaucratic eyes to correspond to the Emperor, 
his officials, and the people. Yet, exactly as in China, the sect 
though wealthy and not without learning did not show real vitality. 
The imposing colossus at Nara attracted and still attracts crowds 
of devout admirers, but Roshana or Birushana was never a popular 
figure like Shaka or Amida, for he was cosmic rather than human. 
If for a large bod.y of the intelligent clergy he became a great world 
force whose manifestations in nature they strove to understand 

1 Chap. IV, pp. 108-10 ; Chap. V, p. 173. 

^ The Brahmajala-sufcra, Nanjio, 1087, Dosen is said to have composed a 
commentary on it. 

and depict in symbolic art, 

Shingon ratber tbaii of tbe Kegon scbooL Yet for many centuries 
it produced men of erudition, energy, and holy life sucli as Sboseii, 
Keiga, and tlieir pupil Kobcn or Myoe (1173-1232) of Takao-Zan. 
The last named was the friend and adviser of Hojo Yasutoki and 
may be responsible for some of the vigorous measures taken against 
tlie clergy, for he is said to have declared that “ if Buddhism were 
such a religion as is represented by the monks of the present day, 
it would be the worst in the world Another story relates how 
he successfully stopped military violence within the precincts 
of his temple, saying that not even animals might be killed there, 
much less men. He was a strong opponent of Honen, the founder 
of the Jodo sect at the end of the twelfth century, holding that for 
salvation it was essential that every man should form for himself 
the aspiration to become a Buddha, and that trust in another, like 
Amida, was not sufficient. 

The Risshu or Ritsu ^ sect was the Lii-tsung founded in Chiua 
by Tao-hsiian, its main principles being the importance of strict 
monastic discipline and, above all, of the correct transmission 
of holy orders. It was introduced by a celebrated priest of Yang- 
chou called Kanjin,^ who was invited to Japan as early as 738, 
though his journey was delayed by an extraordinary series of 
misadventures, due to pirates, storms, and the unwilhngness of the 
Chinese Government to let him depart, for the Emperor Hsiian- 
Tsung who was then on the throne was in favour of Taoism rather 
than Buddhism and did not approve of a Buddhist priest 
officially invited to Japan. On his fifth attempt to leave, 
was shipwrecked and lost his sight, but in spite of this 
he tried once more and at the age of sixty-six arrived in 763 at 
where he was lodged in the Todaiji and treated with great honour. 
A Kaidan or platform for performing the ceremony of admission 
to the Order was erected, and 400 persons, including the Empress 
Dowager, received ordination at his hands. Others whose previous 

1 Ilitsu is also the name of a branch of the Shingon sect, and is 

wise sometimes used to designate the Shinzei division of the Tandai sect. 

^ ■M- Chien-Chen in Chinese pronunciation. In Japanese it is in- 

differently Kanjin or Kanshin or Ganjin. The authorities of the Todaiji temple 
at Kara use the last pronunciation. For more about him see Takakusu’s articles 
already referred to in B.E.F.E.O., 1928 and 1929 ff., entitled " Le Voyage de 
Kanshin en Orient The work in question was composed in 779 by Genkai, a 
pupil of Kanshin and grandson of the Emperor Kohuu. 

232 

mSTOEY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. viii 

admission as monks or nuns was considered to be invalid for any 
reason were reordained. 

Although, according to strict doctrine (though perhaps popular 
beliefs may not always agree with it) the Buddhist clergy have no 
special power of adnoinistering sacraments, not only in the Far East 
but in Hinayanist countries such as Burma, the greatest importance 
is attached to what the Clrristian Church calls Apostolic succession. 
Ordination is regulated by stringent rules which no doubt had their 
origin in very early times when the community of monks enjoyed 
many privileges and for the sake of its good name had to keep a sharp 
look out for unworthy candidates. According to the Bitsu sect 
holy orders could be conferred only by a properly selected chapter 
and only in a specially delimitated area, the aforesaid Kaidan. 
Previous to Kanjin’s arrival the Japanese had probably been some- 
what lax in such matters and his regulations had serious consequences 
for the ecclesiastical polity. 

At first there was only one Kaidan where ordinations could be 
performed, that at Kara, but in 761 for the convenience of the more 
distant provinces the Empress Koken ordered two more to be 
constructed, one for Kyushu at the Kwannonji temple in Chikuzen 
and one for the northern districts at the Yakushiji in Shimotsuke, 
But difficulties arose when new and vigorous sects sprang up at 
Kyoto. In 819 Dengyo Pai^i, the founder of the Tendai, wished 
to have a Kaidan of his own at Hieizan, but though there was 
nothing irregular in this ambition, the opposition of the Kara 
priesthood was so strong that for some years the Emperor, who had 
come to be regarded as the arbiter in such matters, withheld his 
sanction and did not grant it till 827, after BengyS’s death. 

After the establishment of this new Kaidan, the Bisshu seems to 
have declined, though it somewhat revived in the twelfth century 
under the leadership of Shosho Shonin, who wrote a treatise called 
Kaidan Shild on the ceremonial to be observed at ordinations. 
Its principles were excellent, but everyone admitted them in theory 
and it had no a\ithority to enforce them in practice. But it still 
exists, though it has only ten temples, of which the Toshodaiji 
near Kara is the principal. Ordinations are now held in any large 
temple which has the necessary accommodation. 

CHAPTER IX 

HEIAN PERIOD : TBNDAI AND SHINGON 

In 784 tlie Emperor Kwammu removed his Court from Nara to 
5 Nagaoka, but as the new site shortly became distasteful to him he 

I decided to transport the capital again in 793 and selected another 

; locality in the neighbourhood to which he gave the name of 

HeiankyS, or the capital of peace and tranc|uillity, though it became 
more commonly known as Kyoto, that is simply the capital. 
This time the change was permanent : a new city was constructed 
j on the model of Chang-An, the imperial residence of the T'ang 

\ dynasty in China, and continued to bo the official metropolis of 

I Japan until 1868. From the end of the eighth to the end of the 

i twelfth century — that is, until the rise of Kamakura — it was also 

the centre of Japanese Buddhism, though Nara occasionally 
endeavoured to assert its claims. 

There is little doubt that this resolution to leave Nara was mainly 
due to the fear that ecclesiastical influence was growing unduly 
strong and that so long as the Imperial Family was overshadowed 
I by the great fanes and their priestly occupants it had little chance 

i of being independent and its own master. Yet the change implied 

! no hostility to Buddhism and, as if to show that all was well, the 

• Church actually forestalled the imperial movements. In 788 a 

i young priest called Saicho built on the mountain of Hieizan a 

I monastery afterwards called Enryakuji, which was destined to be 

■ regarded as the guardian of the Emperor and Court and their 

protection against the noxious influences which, according to the 
Chinese science of geomancy, came from the north-east. 
Enryaku was the name of the period (782-805) in which the reign 
of Kw^ammu commenced and in which the two transferences of the 
I capital to Nagaoka and Kyoto took place, but the temple was not 

I so called until the reign of the Emperor Saga, who rightly bestowed 
the designation on it as being the most remarkable monument 
of a great epoch. Kwammu himself recognized it as being in some 
sense the metropolitan cathedral, for in 793 Saichd was requested 
^ to hold in it a ceremony for the purification of the site of this new 
capital, and again on visiting it in 797 the Emperor is said to have 
I saluted it as the^^true guardian of the Empire. 

233 

234 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BlWHllISM [ch. ix 

It can liaidly liave been mere cbance but ratber sometbing in, tbe 
spirit of the time, some new ardour and freedom, which caused two 
young men, Saicho above mentioned (767-822) and Kukai (774-835), 
who were nearly contemporaries, to have careers so similar in their 
incidents and their consequences. They are better known by their 
posthumous names of Dengyo Daishi and K.5b6 Daishi, Daishi or 
great teacher being a title of honour first bestowed upon Saicho, 
Each of them studied for a short time in China, and each of them 
returned master of the doctrines of a great Chinese school which 
he popularized so successfully that Tendai (T'ien-t'ai) and Shingou 
(Chen-yen) became the dominant types of Japanese Buddhism 
until the rise of new sects, which may be termed protestant, in the 
twelfth century, and even in spite of these formidable rivals are 
strong in numbers and influence at the present day. And though 
according to the standards of later times their doctrines seem 
complicated and their ceremonies elaborate to excess, yet they offered 
residence in some paradise to every one who tried to obtain it, 
whereas the older Kara sects denied the possibility of such high 
destinies to the '' cOmihon man " J : 

SaiehS was born in Shiga,® a town of the province of Omi, and 
became a priest at the age of fourteen. After building the monastery 
on Hieizan when still quite a young man he attracted the notice 
of the Emperor Kwammu and was sent to pursue his studies in 
China in 802. He investigated there the doctrines of the Cheu-yen 
school and likewise of the Zen, but seems to have given the 
preference to the T'ien-t'ai. It is noticeable, however, that the 
connection between these three sects is closer in Japan than in China 
and that there has been considerable interchange of ideas between 
them. On Mount T'ien-t'ai he resided at the Euo-ch'ing temple 
and there received instruction from the priest Tao-Sui, In 805 he 
returned home and resumed Ms position as abbot of the Enryaku-ji, 
but soon found himself embarrassed by the hostility of the older 
sects of Nara, who did not at ah relish the importation of what 
seemed to them to be impertinent novelties. The Tendai was indeed 
recognized as a sect, that is to say, the higher clergy registered as 
belonging to it received funds from official sources, but it was not 
allowed to conduct ordinations of its own, the right of performing 
that ceremony being reserved to Nara and the two supplementary 
Kaidans founded by the Empress Koken. Saicho had been 

^ See llonen, the. JBiiddJmt Saint, pp. .188 and 107 ff. 

® Said to be the modern Otsu on Lake Biwa. 

TENDAI AND SHINGON 

CH. IX] 

reordaiaed at T'ien-t'ai according to wliat was considered tlie correct 
ritual there, and he considered himself entitled to continue the 
succession and to make arrangements for the ordination of others 
at his own monastery. He appears to have held one such ordination 
in the last month of 807, which is described as being the first ichijo- 
tai-kai held in Japan, this being the name given by the Tendai sect 
to the precepts laid down in the Bomm5-sutra and held by them 
to represent what is universally binding (the one vehicle) as opposed 
to the regu]a,tions of the Sarvastivada and other schools of the 
Vinaya. But permission to hold further ordinations was long 
refused in spite of the efforts made to obtain it, and it was only in 827, 
after Saicho’s death, that his disciples Kojo and Jdraku succeeded 
in obtaining the imperial sanction. AVhen once established the 
Kaidan on Hieizan became the centre at which most of the celebrated 
pjiests of Japan were consecrated, and the monastery grounds 
grew hito an immense enclosure containing a multitude of magnifi- 
cent buildings, destined, alas, to destruction in the sixteenth century. 
It is said there were no less than 3,000 temples and halls arranged 
in three sections to the east, west, and north called Todo, which 
which lay in the middle, with Said5 and Yokawa more or less 
surrounding it. The whole sacred mountain was sometimes styled 
Miyako-Fuji, and its superior was an Imperial Prince who lived 
in the temple called Seirenji.^ But at the time of which we are 
speaking Hieizan had not yet attained the material prosperity and 
power which ultimately proved its ruin. 

There can be no question of the magnitude of Saicho’s achieve- 
ments : the institution which he founded beccame a great sobool 
of art, and all the later scots, whetlier they were Japanese creations 
or adaptations of Chinese originals, arose from within the Tendai. 
But he himself had only a moderate success after his return from 
China. He wrote several books, of which his commentary on the 
Lotus and a wmrk called the Defence of the Country ^ are the best 
known : he was respected and duly honoured at Court but apparently 
was neither a favourite nor very influential. Perhaps he was over 
zealous and too much disposed to religious controversy. Shortly 
before his death the title of Dengyo Hoshi was conferred on him, 
which was changed by the Emperor Seiwa in 866 to Dengyo Daishi. 

Kiikai, who was his junior by only a few years, was born at 

^ Originally on Hieizan but afterwards removed into Kyoto, 
® ^ ^ ® ^ Shugo Kokkai-sho. 

236 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BV DDE! 8M [ch. lx 

Zentsuji, where an interesting temple erected in Ms hononr still 
stands, not far from the town of Kotohiro in Shikoku. He studied 
Chinese literature under the guidance of his imcle and at first 
followed the Sanron sect, but when he was twenty-one years of age 
was ordained at the Todaiji at Kara. Three years later he is said to 
have written a book called Sankyo-shikid in which he endeavoured 
to harmonize the teachings of BuddMsm, Confucianism, and Taoism. 
This is interesting, if true, as showing the same tendency which led 
hi m later to advocate the doctrine known as Ryobu-Shinto. In 804 
he went to China and landed at Tu-chou, whence he proceeded to the 
capital Ch'ang-An, and studied imder Hui-Kiio the mysteries of the 
Chen-yen or, in. Japanese pronunciation, Shingon sect which was 
still very influential and popular although its great exponent 
Amoghavajra had been dead some twenty-seven years. It is also 
recorded that he studied Sanskrit under Prajna, an Indian who 
is said to have collaborated with Adam, the Nestorian priest who 
is celebrated on account of his connection with the monument 
known as the Nestorian stone. After spending about three years 
in China he returned to Japan and his life was one long series of 
triumphs. He was a persona gratissima at the Court and, though 
he cannot be accused of flattery or subservience, was evidently 
of a gentle and conciliatory disposition, anxious to be on good terms 
with Buddhists of all sects and also with Shintoists. But besides 
tMs he impressed the popular imagination more than any teacher 
had done, nor has he been ousted from his position by later figures 
him Shinran and Nichiren. He is still the most celebrated of 
Japanese saints, the hero of countless legends, the reputed author 
of a hundred books and more works of art than any one man could 
have executed, and in the estimation of his followers an incarna- 
tion of Vairooana not yet dead but awaiting within his tomb the 
coming of the future Buddha. 

On arriving in Kyoto he introduced ® the rite known as Kwanjo ® 
(Abhisheka) or sprinkling with water, wMch offers inany analogies 
to baptism. It is not, however, regarded as a sign that the recipient 
has entered the Buddhist religion but rather that he is on the way 

H ifc tW If - The same tolerance finds expression in the saying 
attributed to him that Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism (Shinto) are the three 
legs of a tripod on which the welfare of Japan rests. 

2 According to some accounts it was Saicho who first brought the rite to Japan. 

® ^ ^ - As at present performed the ceremony occupies several days and 
includes at least six sprinklings. 

CH. IX] 

TENDAI AND SHINGON 

to tlie liigliest spiritual enlightenment and has taken the first step 
in the road which leads to Buddhahood. At the present time it is 
practised chiefly by the Shingon sect, but Kukai is said to have 
administered it to many priests, including Saicho, and even to the 
Emperor Hoijo, the son of Kwammu. He was appointed abbot 
of the Toji in the south of Kyoto and organized there a popular 
school, in which connection it may be mentioned that one of the 
many inventions ascribed to him is the Hiragana syllabary. He also 
induced the Emperor Nimmyo to build the temple of Shingon-in 
within the precincts of the Palace, in which Buddhist rites were 
performed on the occasion of the principal festivals. But the 
architectural enterprise dearest to his heart was the foundation of 
the great monastery of Koyasan, of which the first temple called 
Kongobuji was built under his own supervision. Koya was then 
a lonely mountain in the province of Kii and even now is not much 
•frequented except by pilgrims. But perhaps Kukai had a better 
instinct than Saicho in the choice of sites, Koyasan has suffered 
severely from accidental fires, like many ancient buildings in Japan, 
but it escaped the political notoriety and the consequent destruction 
with which Hieizan was visited. Kukai died there peacefully in the 
spring of 835, after exhorting his disciples to follow the precepts 
of the Buddha, and an enormous cemetery containing the corpses 
or cenotaphs of many celebrities has grown up near the tomb in 
which he is supposed to be merely reposing, for it became the fashion 
to be buried near the saint in the hope of sharing his resurrection. 
In 921 the Emperor Daigo conferred on him the title of 
DaisM by which he is commonly known. 

In origin the Tendai and Shingon are different. The first 
a Chinese attempt to found a great "eclectic school recognizing all 
known forms of Buddhism as phases of true doctrine but accepting 
the Lotus-sfltra as its crown and quintessence. The Shingon is 
really the Mantrayana, a late form of Indian Buddhism which was 
successfully transported not only to China but to Tibet and Java. 
How similar some of its ideas are to those of Lamaism may be seen 
by looking at the plates in the pubHcation called Art Treasures of 
Koyasan f which depict terrible spirits quite in the manner of Tibetan 

1 Published by the Kokka Company, Tokyo. See, for instance, 

61, 73. Compare also plato 5 {sacred, objects possessed by Kob 
the figure in. Waddell’s Buddhism of Tihe.t {p. 341) representing a 
sceptre held by Lamas during religious rites, or the eleven-headed statue of 
Avalokitefeara reproduced in Kokka No. 20 with the similar figures in Waddell 
(p. 15) and G-riinwedei’s Mythologie (p. 65). See also the figui’es from Bali 
represented in Pleyte’s Indonesian Art, plates ii and xvi. 

238 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BVDDHISM [cir. ix 

paintings. Its doctrinal system is extremely intricate and is 
complicated by the fact tbat a distinction is drawn between the 
esoteric or secret and the ordinary teaching. I shall attempt to 
elucidate this obscure subject in a subsequent chapter when con- 
sidering the special tenets of the various sects, and here will simply 
give a brief epitome which may be sufi&cient to explain the important 
part played by Shingon in Japanese history and art. 

Its fundamental doctrine is that the whole universe is a mani- 
festation of the Buddha Vairocana, but the manifestation is twofold 
and is divided into the categories called Diamond or indestructible 
and Womb or material and perishable^ in Japanese Kongo-kai and 
Taiz6-kai. These two principles may also be contrasted as spiritual 
and material or as static and dynamic, and their precise meaning 
is explained only in the secret doctrine communicated to adepts but 
not set forth in literature. But the manifestations of Vairocana’s 
body to himself, that is the various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, 
are represented symbolically by diagrams called Mandara. Ma^dala 
in Sanskrit means a circle, but its equivalent in Japanese usually 
signifies a rectangular arrangement of figures or of mystic Sanskrit 
letters which stand for the figures of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, 
each set within a square or circle. These Mandara are often of 
high artistic merit and reproductions of two of them representing 
the Material and the Diamond cycles of existence, which may be 
seen in Anesaki’s work on Buddhist Art,^ will give the reader a 
better idea of this intricate symbolism than any attempt at 
description could do. But though the elegant shapes of the 
Devanagari letters in a slightly modified form play a considerable 
part in this symbolism, yet it also revels in human or super- 
human figures representing various Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, and 
spirits. In some ways the Shingon could give better inspiration 
to painters than other schools. The fault of most Buddhist art 
in Japan is a monotony of kindliness, an infinite repetition of 
benevolent deities and bland clerics. Bnt the Shingon with its 
doctrine that the whole cosmos is the expression of the Buddha 
nature did not hesitate to represent the terrible and even the 
grotesque as aspects of tlie divine. 

As already mentioned, the Ch&i-yen sect from which the Shingon 

^ iSanskz'it Vajradhatu, Garbhadhatu ; Japanese Hi] Jf- Ivongo-Izai and 
1'aizO-kai. 

- Anesaki, Buddhist Art, jilate xvi, A and B. 

is derived does not liold a higli position in Clima. It probably bad 
more vigour when it attracted tbe attention of KobS Daisbi, but for 
several centuries it would seem that it bas been occupied ratber witb 
magic and incantations than witb tbe idea that tbe whole universe 
is an expression of tbe Buddha nature. And certainly that same 
charge of confusing prayer witb spells and magical formulae or 
ceremonies can be brought against the Japanese branch of the sect. 
But still Sbingon is entitled to the credit of emphasizing tbe main 
idea which seems in danger of being forgotten in China and of 
giving it adequate expression in art. The merit of this is no doubt 
partly due to Kobo Daisbi himself. He was attracted by the good 
elements in the school which commended itself to him : his learning 
was a process of selection not of mere absorption. But some credit 
must also be allowed to the artistic nature of the Japanese people 
which seized upon the nobler and not the more superstitious side 
of the new religious system presented to it. In tracing the history 
of rehgious ideas one has too often to follow a process of degeneration, 
and such a process is ]3ainfully evident in the history of later Indian 
Buddhism, especially in Bengal, where the teaching of the founder 
gradually decayed away and disappeared. But in China, as also 
in Tibet and Java, it was for a time, at any rate, revivified. In 
China it purged itself of the evils commonly known as Saktism 
in Japan it took on a new lease of life : it eliminated numerous 
dangerous abuses which were growing up, it taught noble and 
profound ideas and gave them worthy expression in. art. On the 
other hand, this profundity and copious use of symbolism was its 
greatest danger. Its adherents, except those rare 
could fathom its deep mysteries, mistook the symbol for 
and lapsed into polytheism and superstition. Unlike Amidism 
it had no message for plain men who want simple definite teaching 
and not mysteries and beautiful allegories. 

In Japan the Shingon and Tendai sects axe closely 
and represent a type of Buddhism which was prevalent during the 
Heian or Fujiwara period, say from a.d, 800 to 1100. They 
imported from China almost simultaneously and it does not seem 
that there was any hostility between them in that country. The 
Tendai was obviously and professedly eclectic and was able to agree 
with the Shingon on many points of doctrine. Thus while holding 
the Lotus-sutra and the person of Sakyamuni in the utmost 
reverence, it did not hesitate to recognize Vairocana as representing 
the Dharmakaya. And the Shingon tended to become equally 

240 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BVDDHISM [oh. ix 

tolerant and compreliensive in practice. Its fundamental doctrine of 
a great cosmic force wMcli displays itself in many manifestations 
was not likely to raise objections to the inclusion of any personage 
ui its already numerous pantheon or to make difficulties about any 
rites whicli might be considered specially appropriate in his worship. 
Jikaku (the posthumous name of the priest Bnnin), who was 
appointed abbot of the Tendai in 864, had a special sympathy for 
the Shingon, from which he borrowed much, thus obliterating 
many of the differences between the two sects. Also, although the 
Tendai and Shingon both became no inconsiderable forces in 
politics as well as in religion, their secular aspirations do not seem 
to have brought them into direct collision. This was largely the 
result of Kobo Daishi’s wisdom in locating the headquarters of his 
sect at Koyasan at some distance from the metropolis. The 
quarrels of Hieizan were rather with the monasteries of Kara and 
with its own offshoot and rival, the great temple of Onjoji or Miidera 
near Otsu, than with the Shingon. 

This conciliatory and comprehensive spirit had important results 
in another sphere, namely, the relations between Buddhism and the 
national cult or Shinto. I have already traced the beginnings of 
this tendency to identify the two religions, or rather the two 
pantheons, in the Kara period and even earlier, and found that though 
it is clearly laid down that the Shinto deities respect and protect 
Buddhism, the idea thatthey are simply another form of the Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas had hardly yet obtained general acceptance, 
though the current of popular opinion was evidently setting in that 
direction. It can scarcely be said to have become the popular 
belief before the Kamakura period and the twelfth century, but still 
the whole influence of Bengyo Daishi and Kobo Daishi was favour- 
able to some system of amalgamation. . The former wffien he first 
selected the site of the future Enryakuji was careful to enter into 
good relations with the Shiiito deity who was regarded as lord of the 
place, and showed him afl honour under the name of Sanno, or the 
King of the Mountain.: There is some uncertainty, however, as to 
whether he was one or many, for we also hear of the seven Sanno 
gods as heing the guardians of the monastery A couple of 
centuries later Gryoen, a priest of Miidera, saw a profound meaning 

^ There were seven kS'anno shrines situated in the province of Omi, one of -which 
■was dedicated, to a deity of healing considered to be an incarnation of Yakusbi 
ISTyorai. One legend, possibly late, states that Sanno appeared to Dengyo in the 
form of the three Buddhas — Amida, Shaka, and Yakushi. 

cH.ix] TENDAI AND SEINGON 241 

ill the two Cliincse characters [I] 3E Sanno, used to write the deity’s 
name. He considered that the three strokes, perpendicular in the 
hist character and horizontal in the second, signify af&rmation, 
negation, and that which is neither the one nor the other but yet 
is both, while the single stroke horizontal in the first character and 
perpendicular in the second shows the mysterious union of this 
trinity in a unity expressed by the Tendai formula Isshin Saiidai. 
This ultimately developed into what was called Sanno ichijitsu 
Shinto or the One truth Shinto of the mountain god, according to 
which a Shinto deity, like the Buddha of the Tendai philosophy, 
represents the affirmations and negations of the phenomenal world 
and their synthesis in a higher unity. Even more rcmarkalile 
is a legend related of Kciniyo (965-1038), who was head of the Tendai 
sect. He prayed to Oraiya, one of the seven Sarmo deities, and 
besought him to reveal his true nature, on which the deity replied 
that he had for ages been striving to save all living beings. This 
reminded Keimyo of a passage in the Lotus ^ in which it is said that 
in all the Universe there is not a spot as small as a mustard seed in 
which Shaka has not sacrificed his body for the sake of living 
creatures, and he felt convinced that Omiya was only another name 
for the Buddha Shaka himself. 

It is said that the name of Ryobu-Shinto was given to the doctrines 
of Kobo Daishi by his admirer the Emperor Saga (810-823). It is 
clear that the teaching of the Shingon sect was particularly well 
adapted to theories of amalgamation, for it began by stating that 
the vhole Universe is a manifestation of the Buddha, and starting 
from such a premise it was easy with a little good -will to identify 
deities who represent natural features and forces (as most Shinto 
deities undoubtedly do) with roughly similar manifestations of the 
Buddha. The process was further facilitated by the singular 
vagueness of Shinto deities and the legends concerning them. 
Any tendency towards monotheism, to imagine a being resembling 
Jehovah or Allah, was conspicuously absent. The gods w’-ere not 
represented by statues or pictures or by any form, and few of the 
stories told about them give them any definite characteristics. 
There was no objection to identifying them with anything which 
was majestic and benevolent. 

Nevertheless, the process of identification was gradual : it was 
complete in the Kamakura period when we find, for instance, that 

^ Chapter "xi, after verae 48. 

242 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [on. ix 

tlie Sliiato deity HacMman is accepted as a Buddlia — sometimes 
as being tbe same as Amida — or as a Bodbisattva, tbe use of both 
terms being a significant reminder that we are not in the realm 
of strict Buddhist orthodoxy. Yet it would seem that in their 
undoubted works Bengyo Daishi and Kobo Daishi use the older 
language which describes Shinto deities as guardians or protectors 
of the faith. When the complete fusion of Buddhas and Shinto 
deities is spoken of in later times the phrase Honji Suijaku ^ meaning 
“home land and footprints” is often used. It appears to have 
been originally employed of the Lotus-sutra, which is regarded as 
composed of two parts, that which deals with the nature of the 
Buddha as it exists in eternity, that is in its true home, and 
that which describes his appearance in this world as ^akyamuni, 
that is the traces which he has left of his passage across the 
world of phenomena. But subsequently it was used in a much 
more extended sense to signify the true nature of any Buddha 
and his appearance in Japan as incarnate or manifested in a 
Shinto deity. 

The process of amalgamation was probably favoured by the rise 
of a hermit section in both the Shingon and Tendai, known as 
Yama-bushi, those who sleep on mountains, or Shugenja,^ those 
who practise austerities, for they frequented the sacred places of 
Shinto and made them sacred also to Buddhists. The ascetic and 
mystic who dwells alone in the forest is of course a well-known 
figure in India among Brahmans as well as Buddhists : the type 
was sympathetic to a large section of Chinese, as is shown by the 
example of the Taoist sages, , and it appealed to the Japanese love 
of nature and of wild scenery. An early example of this spnit is 
offered in the seventh century by En no Gyoja already mentioned, 
and later it received the recognition of orthodoxy in both the 
Shingon and Tendai sects. . In the former the celebrated priest 
named Shobo (or Rigen Daishi), who flourished 832-909, founded 
associations called Shugendo, and his example was followed in the 
Tendai by Zoyo about a century later (1090). The members of 
these confraternities frequented the wild mountains and peaks of 
Yamato, especially Mount Online or Kimbu in the county of Yoshino, 
where the two branches held an annual meeting and performed 
religious exercises in unibu. Yamato was one of the holy lands 
of Shinto : its high placM and forests were all under the protection 

CH. TX] TENDAI AND SHINGON 243 

of Shinto deities and now Buddhist pilgrims and hermits made them 
their haunt, not in any spirit of aggression but honouring and 
respecting their guardians, as Saicho had honoured SannS when 
he founded, his establishment at Hieizan. Mount Omine came to be 
regarded as the very body of the Buddha Vairocana and the 
smaller peaks were similarly identified with other Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas. The three temples of Kumano in Kii are a striking 
example of Eyobu-ShintS in its fully developed form. They were 
originally dedicated to various Shinto deities, one of whom was 
afterwards known as Shojo Gongen, Gongen ^ being a word used to 
express the incarnation or manifestation of a Buddhist deity. 
The Life of Honen states that this deity was really Amida and relates 
how he advised a certain Yamabushi to apply to Honen and learn 
the way of salvation. He is also said to have revealed to Ippen 
the special views about Amida professed by the Ji sect. Shirakawa 
and several other Emperors made numerous pilgrimages to Kumano 
after abdicating. 

Nor did the movement towards assimilation and amalgamation 
come only from the Buddhist side. The Shinto priests were not 
in the habit of defining their dogmas, or the nature of their gods, 
but the number of applications made for permission to build Buddhist 
temples within the precincts of Shinto shrines is in itself a proof that 
they considered such union as desirable. In the great majority 
of cases a request for the foundation of such a Buddhist temple 
was based on an oracle said to have been delivered by the Shinto 
deity of the shrine and promulgated by his ministers. Indeed, if an 
amicable arrangement had not been made, if Buddhism, had 
struggled with Shintoism as Christianity and Islam struggled with 
paganism in Europe and Africa, it is probable that the victory would 
have remained with Buddhism. It is true that Shinto could count 
on the conservative instinct of the peasantry and agricultural 
classes, hut smee in the Nara and Heian periods the whole weight 
of the official and educated world, including the Emperor and 
Court, was on the Buddhist side and Buddhism was long considered 
as another name for civilization and progress, it was pretty clear that 
Shinto bad all to gain and very little to lose in responding to the 
advances made by antagonists who would have been powerful and 
probably irresistible if things had been allowed to come to an open 
rupture. 

244 HISTORY OR JAPANESE BUDDHISM [gh. ix 

But tlie union between Buddhism and Shinto was not so complete 
as isolated quotations from Buddhist doctors or others might lead 
one to suppose. When we try to explain it, it is not to be defined 
in terms of European logic. At the end of the last century, when 
the two religions were declared separate, there was no difficulty in 
disentangling them. The ownership of ecclesiastical property may 
have given rise to disputes, but neither system showed any signs 
of being encumbered with the doctrines of the other. And this 
distinction of creed seems to have existed even in the days when 
Ky6bu-Siiint5 was most flourishing. Honen, for instance, was 
regarded by some as an incarnation of Hachiman,^ but his works do 
not contain any mixture of ShintS and Buddhism. He writes as 
a Buddhist and appeals to Buddhist scriptures. Neither did 
Shinto entirely lose the sense of its own separate existence. Though 
almost all its temples except those of Ise and Izumo were managed 
by Buddhist priests and showed signs of Buddhist influence in their 
images and architecture, yet in a limited sphere it asserted itself. 
The goddess Amatexasu in the reign of the Emperor Konin is said 
to have forbidden the construction of a Buddhist temple near her 
shrine at Ise,^ At the same shrine the name of the Buddha might 
not he pronounced.® He was spoken of as “ the child of the centre ” 
and many Buddhist terms were also tabooed.^ Curious rules are 
mentioned which seem to indicate that Buddhism was regarded 
as a distinct, not to say hostile, creed. Thus a Buddhist priest who 
wished to make a pilgrimage to the shrines had to hide his shaven 
head by wearing a wig, and in the Middle Ages such wigs could be 
purchased in special ^ops in the ontskifts of the town. 

Again, though it is obviously true that the Japanese had a strong 
tendency to iinite and amalgamate religions, they had an equally 
strong proclivity to create sects and multiply divisions. This is 
perhaps partly due to the fact that local sentiment was specially 
strong, A sect was generally connected with the foundation of a 
particular temple such as Todaiji or Enryakuji. When another 
temple was built, if ; the priests, who managed it were active and 
zealous, it was apt to appear not merely as another cathedral of the 

^ Homn, the Buddhist Saint, trans. by Coatea and Ishizuka, p, 644. 

® Sboku-Niliongi, xxxvi. 

^ See Wdlej, Genji Monogatari, rol. iv, p. 207, chapter called Wakana, 

* e.g. Buddhist temples, sutras, sthupas, monks, laymen, etc. Sec Genchi Kate, 
A Study of Shinto, p. 94, quoting the iCotaijingu Gishikicho or Records of the 
Shinto rites at the inner shrine of Ise. 

I OH. IX] TENDAI AND mimON \ 245 

I same sect, but as an institution having certain usages and peculi- 

i arities of its own of which it was justly proud, and in fact of 
possessing and preaching a more exact version of the truth. These 
claims to doctrinal superiority, especially if combined with questions 
of territorial jurisdiction, led to violent quarrels between the various 
establishments and branches of the same sect, and it is often 
difficult to ascertain -whether any real distinction of doctrine and 
I ideas was involved or whether the whole difference was not analogous 
to the quarrels which divided noble houses. The Shingon sect had 
a comparatively peaceful history, but at an early date its great 
temples in or near Kyoto, such as the Toji (816), Daigoji (874), and 
Ninnaji (885), became the centres of various branches which, while 
avoiding public disputes, had peculiarities of their o-wn. Thus the 
last-named is the headquarters of the Omuro branch which specially 
j studies certain scriptures ^ in addition to those accepted by the rest 
of the sect. But about tliree centuries after the death of Kobo 
Daishi, a priest named Kakuhan or K6ky5 Daishi founded the great 
I monastery of Negoro in Kii and with it a new division of the sect 
I called Shingi^ or the reformed Shingon, from which again sprang 
I two divisions known by the names of Chizan and Buzan. Kegoro 

i brought upon itself a disaster which most Shingon sects managed 

i to escape, though it was only too common in the history of medieval 
Japanese Buddhism. The huge estates which it owned, its wealth 
and prosperity, and the army of mercenaries which it maintained 
made it a great feudal power and it was destroyed by Hideyoshi 
ill 1586. Nobunaga had dealt out the same treatment to Enryakuji 
a few years previously in 1671, and it is tbe Tendai sect which must 
bear the blame of having originated a system which deprived the 
great monasteries of much of the moral force they ought to have 
exercised and which ultimately brought upon them the most 
jj terrible vengeance. 

There was an eminent priest of Hieizan who bore the name of 
I Bncliin and the posthumous title of Ohisho Daishl.®^^^ 

I in China from 853 till 858, visited the temples of T'ien-t'ai, and 
I retmmed with immerons copies of the scriptures and also certain new 
views. On his return he founded a temple called Sannoji, where 

^ Nanjio, Nos. 1024 and 1025. 

® ^ ^ ^ W Siiingi Shingon. 

, ^ These names are somewhat confusing, as the eminent- head of Hieizan, who 

was to some extent his opponent, was called Ennin and received the posthumous 
title of Jikaku Daishi. 

246 HLSTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. ix 

lie preached the doctrine as he learned it in a form somewhat 
irritating to the disciples of Jikaku, the chief abbot of Hieizan, 
who had himself studied in China and had become the successor 
of Dengyo Daishi. In 873 Enchin was appointed head of the temple 
called Onjoji, or Miidera, at Otsu, and the two branches of the sect 
became known as the Sammon and Jimon or Miid He does not 
appear to have abandoned his connection with Hieizan, which 
lasted until his death in 891, but when one of his followers named 
Yokyo (919-991) became head of Hieizan the quarrel grew acute. 
Yokyo was strongly opposed by the section which followed the 
older teaching of Jikaku and he and his adherents had to retire to 
Miidera leaving Hieizan in the possession of their opponents. 

Henceforward there was bitter enmity between the two divisions 
of the Tendai. About 960 a dispute broke out between Ryogen 
(also called Jie Daishi) and the Gion temple in Kyoto. Ryogen, 
who enjoyed the esteem of the Court, used force to get the better of 
his adversaries and then for the protection of his rights proceeded 
to organize a body of mercenaries Imown as Sohei ^ commanded by 
priests.. This example was followed by other monasteries such as 
Miidera and at Kara by Kofulmji and Todaiji. In 968 these latter 
had a dispute about the possession of certain ricehelds and the 
matter was settled by an appeal to arms. In 989 Hieizan started a 
disastrous precedent by using similar methods against the Govern- 
ment. They refused to accept the Emperor’s nominee as their 
abbot and resisted with violence. Nor were they satisfi,ed with 
asserting their independence : they also had recourse to arms to 
enforce their pretensions. In the eleventh century it became the 
custom for a monastery which claimed some privilege or considered 
itself wronged to send into Kyoto armed bauds together with a sacred 
emblem. They were thus able to use force themselves and to 
complain of sacrilege if any one showed disrespect towards the holy 
object.® After 1080 these demonstrations grew frequent and mobs 
of many thousand monks or their mercenaries were wont to blockade 
the honses of the ministers and even imperial palaces, so that the 
Emperor Shirakawa (1073-1086), who was a most fervent Buddhist, 
once remarked that there were three things which he could not 
control : the inundations of the river Kamo, wliich hows through 

^ After careful inquiry I have been unable to find that there was any diircrencc 
of doctrine between them. 

® f^: Chinese SSng-ping or monk soldiers. 

® See the Heike Monogatari, j, xii-xv,, for a description of one of these affrays. 

TENDAI AND SHINGON 

OH. IX] 

Kyoto, tlie hazards of gambling, and the monks of Hieizan.^ 
Purely ecclesiastical quarrels became equally violent. It is said 
that during a little more than two centuries beginning from 1081 
Miidera was nine times burned down by the priests of Hieizan.^ 
The prestige and wealth of the successful monasteries increased but 
their moral and intellectual life was in danger of decay, for they 
became garrisons of armed adventurers and, apart from, this 
decadence, their continual squabbles occasioned much loss of 
property. 

Such a state of things was obviously unhealthy, and indeed the 
whole condition of Japan during the Kara andHeian periods presents 
so many singular and abnormal features that one cannot be surprised 
if the religious situation was unsatisfactory. Japan had absorbed 
Chinese culture and organization with extraordinary rapidity, from 
the written characters and a copious Chinese vocabulary to the 
system of political administration and religion, which latter naturally 
included much that had reached China from India and Central Asia. 
But how far this enormous mass of imported materials had been 
really asshnilated may be doubted. In the Kara period history 
tells us of little except the affairs of the capital and the province 
in which it was situated : we hear of the doings and bickerings of 
courtiers, officials, and ecclesiastics.: ecclesiastical influence threatens 
to control the whole machinery of government. But we have little 
information as to whether such questions interested the bulk of the 
population or how they affected it. 

In the Heian period the horizon becomes wider : there is a 
national movement and there is a certain freedom and development. 
Yet the stage is small and there is extraordinary uiiiformity in the 
characters who play their parts on it. It is not merely that we have 
not escaped from the world of courtiers, officials, and ecclesiastical 
dignitaries but that this world is isolated in a manner unparalleled 
in history.' 

Japan as an island adjacent to a great continent has often been 
compared with England, but the greater breadth of the separating 
Straits produced a marvellous difference. The acquisitiveness of 

^ A similar plionomenon is noticeable in Egypt in the fourth century. ” The 
monks appear as hordes of turbulent fanatics who could be summoned from their 
desert monasteries to riot and slay in the streets of Alexandria. In this way they 
wielded enormous power.” Scott Moncrioff, Paganism and Christianity in Egy^t, 
p. 214. 

2 The present temple dates from only 1690. 

248 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. ix 

the Japanese and their extraordinary desire to learn from their 
neighbours overcame these natural barriers. Considering the 
difficulties of communication they showed surprising eagerness to 
study abroad and they even induced learned foreigners to visit 
their shores. But they could not be expected to take voluntary 
lessons in the hard school of foreign invasions in which all the great 
nations of Europe and Asia have had to graduate. With the 
exception of the unsuccessful Armadas dispatched by the orders 
of Khubilai Khan in the thirteenth century, Japanese history does 
not contain any record of attempted incursions by foreigners, and 
when Europeans arrived in the sixteenth century the only result was 
that after a short trial of foreign intercourse the Japanese again 
deliberately and successfully isolated themselves from all outside 
influences until the middle of the nineteenth century. The people 
were brave and warlike, yet after the easy subjugation of the non- 
Japanese aborigines their military instinct found an outlet only 
in internal struggles and feudal quarrels. The Korean expedition 
of Hideyoshi merely showed how little such enterprises were to the 
taste of the nation of that time. There was no cosmopohtan life 
such as resulted in Greece, Borne, Alexandria, and even Persia and 
northern India either from the clash of arms or from more peaceful 
intercourse. Perhaps the history of southern India offers some 
resemblances, though even there the presence of a land frontier 
in addition to a coast line renders the analogy far from complete. 

The Emperors who succeeded Kwammu were devoted to literature 
and had little taste for active hfe. With the exception of ex- 
peditions against the Ainus there were no wars and fop the moment 
no pressing questions of domestic policy. The Emperor Saga, for 
instance, was prouder of his poetry and of his handwriting than 
of his administrative achievements, which were considerable, and 
with Kobo Daishi and Tachibana Hayanari formed the triad knowm 
as the Sampitsu or three pens of the age. Chinese learning was all 
the fashion, yet relations with China were not intimate and in 804 
the practice of sending periodical embassies to the Chinese Court 
was discontinued. The introduction of Buddhism had brought with 
it not merely the Buddhist scriptures but the Confucian Classics 
and Chinese poetry. Extraordinary importance was attached 
to good calligraphy and the power of composing elegant Chinese 
prose or,' still better, well-turned verses was the surest passport 
to official promotion, nay, it was almost indispensable for success. 
Most of those who rose to high posts in the Heian administration. 

OH. IX] TENDAI AND SHINGON 249 

if not members of great families, were distinguished Confucian 
scholars like Shigeno Sadanushi (785-852), the Minister of the 
Emperors Juima and Mmmyo, who took a leading part in com- 
posing an anthology of Chinese prose in one thousand volumes. 
This style of composition, or rather compilation, was exactly suited 
to the talents and taste of the age. The number of anthologies and 
commentaries published during the ninth century was astonishing, 
particularly if one considers how restricted was the public that could 
make any use of them. In this century were also written the Sholni- 
Nihongi (continuation of the Mhongi) and four other chronicles 
which give a pretty complete record of the events of the period and 
are mostly the work of members of the Fujiwara family.^ 

This great house has justly given its name to the whole epoch, 
winch is often known as the Fujiwara period. They became the 
principal power in Japan at the expense of the Imperial family, and 
until the time of Go-Sanjo (1068-1072), who in a short reign of only 
four years succeeded in asserting the sovereign’s right to personally 
superintend the government, their power was unchecked. They did 
not use the later title of Shogun, but the most influential male of the 
family acted as regent and so many of the daughters became 
Empresses that one Fujiwara was the father-in-law of four Emperors 
and the grandfather of four more. It became the custom to put on 
the throne a child who retired into a monastery at a comparatively 
early age with the title of Ho-0. But this arrangement led to a 
further complication, for the Ho-O did not always retire. Although 
the affairs of the country were nommally in the hands of a child 
Emperor under the supervision of a regent, the ex-Empcror in his 
monastery retained much real power and often used it to the 
advantage of the Church, which was thus brought into even closer 
connection with the government and worldly affairs. This system 
by which the administration passed into the hands of an Emperor 
who had abdicated was called Insei and, paradoxical as it may seem, 
abdication became the Sovereign’s best chance of ruling. Princes 
who became priests were known as Nyudo-Shinno or Ho-Shinno. 
A Court official of the third rank or higher who had nominally 

^ They are — 

(а) The Shokn-Nihongi (covering the period a.b. 700-791) in 40 volumes. 

(б) The Nihon-Koki (792-833). 

(«) The Shoku-Nihon-Koki (833-850). 

(d) The Montoku Jitsuroku (850-858). 

(e) The Sandai Jitsuroku (858-887). 

250 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDmSM \cm:ix 

retired from tte world was described as Nyudo, a title often, given to 
Kiyomori, tbe Head of tKe Taira clan. 

Even in the time of the Emperor Saga the imitation of Chinese 
luxury had caused the cost of living to rise so much among princes 
and Court officials that it became the practice to grant them domains 
or Shoen which were exempt from taxes and not subject to the 
provincial authorities. This led to grave economic evils, and the 
situation was complicated when there was not merely one Court 
to support but several. As early as 986 there were three Emperors 
living and in 1300 there were as many as five, each with his own 
establishment, and long before this the expense of maintaining 
ex-Bmperors, which included many items strictly speaking ecclesi- 
astical, became a serious fiscal burden. Thus Shirakawa (1063-1129) 
came to the throne at the age of ten, abdicated at thirty-three, and 
became a priest but continued to have a Court, ministers, and guards 
of his own. He expended immense sums on temples, images, and 
religious ceremonies, and in order to obtain funds extended the 
practice of selling provincial governorships and of alienating large 
tracts of land as quasi-independent manors. His grandson Toba 
became Emperor at the age of five and abdicated at twenty-one. 
When Shirakawa died Toba stepped into his place and ruled in the 
sam.e manner and by much the same means for twenty-five years. 

We have two remarkable pictures of this period in the Genji 
Monogatari or Tale of the Genji, by Murasaki Shikibu, and the 
Makura no Soshi or Pillow Book, by Sei ShSnagon, both of whom 
were ladies in waiting about a.b. 1000 at the Court of Akiko, consort 
of the Emperor Ichij S, for the subordination and seclusion of women 
did not begin until the Ashikaga period some centuries later. 
They represent Japanese life at Kyoto as an aesthetic coterie, 
intensely interested in art and literature and, after a fashion, in the 
things of the mrndi hut so preoccupied with stylo and culture as to be 
intelligent rather than intellectual. Calligraphy and prosody are 
as important or more important than vigour or originality. There 
is little that deserves the name of philosophy or science. The art 
of blending the fragrance of various brands of incense demands 
as much attention as.the selection of sutras to be read or of doctrines 
to he accepted. In its way the age was not irreligious. Retired but 
still powerful Emperors were dignitaries of the Church : the lands 
owned by ecclesiastical foundations and the troops with which they 
protected themselves placed them on a level with the greatest 
territorial magnates, and in less material ways Tendai and Shingon 

TENDAI AND 8HING0N 

251 

OH. IX] 

Buddhism was the main inspiration of the age, for instance, in art 
and to some extent in literature, for the recitation of sacred texts was 
an important branch of a gentleman’s education and the standard 
of correctness required was exacting. Also then, as now, there was 
a national taste for uniting ritual with the enjoyment of natural 
beauty, for combining a pilgrimage with a picnic in one excursion 
to view the cherry blossoms at some holy place. 

Yet though the chief note of the age may be found in this assthetic 
culture, so simple in its naive enjoyment and so artificial in its 
limitations, there were other currents of religious feeling destined 
to burst forth with a mighty rush in the twelfth century and mean- 
while preparing their strength. The most noticeable of them was 
the worship of Amida. *As I have already mentioned in treating 
of China, it came to be regarded less as a separate sect than as an 
aspect of most sects, and we find it so accepted in the Heian period. 
It was not unknown to the Buddhism of Nara and later we find it 
countenanced by the Tendai and Shingon. We have seen that these 
two sects were somewhat weak as popular forms of religion. They 
addressed themselves to the educated classes, and the Tendai, 
in particular, strove to be wide and catholic in its intellectual and 
artistic appeal. But they were in danger of either holding up ideals 
which seemed difficult to practise or even to understand or of offering 
superstition and magic to those who desired an easier way. 
The invocation of Amida’s name which purges of sin and leads to 
rebirth in his paradise was a happy middle course : it was not too 
difficult and it seemed to be a prayer addressed to a merciful and 
mtelligent being rather than an arbitrary magical formula. At this 
period the repetition of the hTembutsu,^ as prayer to Amida was 
ordinarily called, was not made, as later by Honen and Shinran, the 
one and universal method of salvation. It was simply field that to 
fix one’s mind on a Buddha was the easiest way to secure forgiveness 
of sin and the certainty of heaven and that Amida was the best, 
though by no means the only one, for the purpose. In this spirit 

pronounced Nembutsu in Japanese, is the name of the well-known 
formula Namii Amida Butsu, equivalent to the Sanskrit Namo ’mitabhaya Bud- 
dhaya. Jt appears to have originally meant thinkmg of the Buddha, and the 
Tendai and older .sects understood it as implying meditation. But the later 
Amidist sects expressly deny this and hold that it means simply calling on the 
name of Amida. Thus Honen {Eonen, the Buddhist Saint, chap, xxv, § 9) says 
categorically, “ The Nembutsu does not mean calling to mind the Buddha’s being 
or meditating on his signs of eminence but calling with all one’s heart upon the 
sacred name of Amida.” 

262 mSTOBY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. ix 

DengyS DaisM is said to liave built tbe ball called Jogyodo on 
Hieizan for reciting the praises of Amida, and bis successor Jikalcu 
to bave introduced there the musical services invented by I'a-Cbao 
which he had heard during his stay in China. We are also told that 
there were special halls for reciting the Nembutsu at the Todaiji 
at Nara and at Koyasan, the latter called the Shinbessho. 

In the tenth century we hear of a remarkable personage called 
Kuyad who was, according to some accounts, a son of the Emperor 
Daigo and who lived from 903-972. He travelled all over Japan 
dancing and chanting the Nembutsu. This Hembutsu of Kuya 
is sometimes performed in the Todaiji at Hara.^ Like many 
Buddhist priests he had also a taste for practical activity such as the 
construction of roads and bridges. He came up to the capital and 
was received at Hieizan in 948. A year or two later Kyoto was 
devastated by a pestilence whidh he is said to have quelled by 
carving a large statue of the eleven-headed Kwannon and by 
carrying it about the plague-stricken city until the outbreak 
abated. 

Shortly afterwards Genshin (also known as Eshin, 942-1017), 
who was renowned as a painter and sculptor, did much to popularize 
the worship of Amida by his life and by his writings. The most 
celebrated of his compositions is the OjSyoshii ^ or a collection of 
the principles essential for rebirth in Amida’s paradise, which is still 
read with approval by the followers of Honen and Shinran. It is 
remarkable for its vivid descriptions of the corrupt human life from 
which one should fly, of the terrors of hell and the bliss of heaven, 
the whole forming a popular appeal to the religious sense of the 
masses. We hear that in his time there were two great schools 
on Hiei which taught slightly different methods of reciting the 
Nembutsu, one called after him the Bshin-in school and the other 
after one of his colleagues who was head of another temple on 
Hici, the Danna-in. 

In 1124 was founded the first Amidist sect, known as the Yuzu 
Hembutsu,'^ which still exists though far inferior in numbers to the 
j5do and Shinshu. It owes its origin to Ryonin, a priest of Hieizan, 
who after long study of the Tendai doctrines became convinced that 

^ ^ lE _t A- Kiiya Shonin. 

® I witnessed a ijerformance of it which was part of the (ieremony performed 
on 2nd May in honour of the.Eniperor Shomu, 

3 ^ 

® IS Yuzu Nembutsu, Ryonin. 

CH. IX] TENDAI AND 8H1NQ0N 253 

they were not suited to the needs of the age. He therefore retired 
to a temple in Ohara where he is said to have recited the Nembutsii 
60,000 times a day. Once while he was thus engaged he had a 
\nsion in which Amida appeared to him and warned him that the 
Nembutsu was infinitely more meritorious if repeated on behalf 
of others than for one’s own selfish ends. It brings salvation not 
only to hhn who utters it but to the whole human race, and if a man 
teaches others to repeat it, their merit will become his own. It is 
said that he was inspired by the deity Bishamon to found a new sect 
and to travel throughout the country bearing with him a book in 
which were inscribed the names of all who became his followers and 
recited the Nembutsu according to his directions. He enjoyed the 
favour of the ex-Emperor Shirakawa and does not appear to have 
encountered any opposition. It is noticeable that he based his 
teaching chiefly on the Lotus and the Kegon~ky5 and not primarily 
on the Amida sutras. The criticism of later schools on his doctrine 
was that it would do very well for divine beings but not for 
ordinary men.^ 

About the same time as Ryonin lived two other distinguished 
priests, Yokwan (1032-1111) and Chingai ^ (1091-1152), who 
advocated the invocation of Amida’s name by their teaching and 
writings. The former was Abbot of the Zenrinji monastery at 
Kyoto and wrote a work called Ojo-ju-in,® or the ten conditions for 
attaining rebirth, in paradise, among which he emphasizes not only 
the protection of Amida but also meditation and good works. 
Chingai was a learned priest of the Todaiji temple at Kara who 
practised the recitation of the Kembutsu and wrote a well-known 
treatise called Ketsujo Ojo shu,^ or a collection of passages on the 
certainty of rebirth in paradise. 

l^akuhan, or Kokyo Daishi, who founded the great monastery 
of Ncgoro in 1130 and also a new branch of the Shingon, completely 
accepted the doctrine of salvation by calling on Amida but accommo- 
dated it to the principles of his sect. Amida, he taught, is the same 
as the Buddha Vairocana, of whom the whole world is a manifesta- 
tion. Hence we are already in Amida’s paradise : we have only 
to reahze it in order to know that we are saved. 

1 Honen, the Buddhist Saint, trans. by Coates and IsMzuka, p., 626. 
" ^ H and ^ 

CHAPTEK X 

EISB OF NEW SECTS: JODO AND SHINSHU 

By the middle of the twelfth century it is clear that the condition 
of Japan, both political and ecclesiastical, as described in the last 
chapter, had reached a point when collapse or revolution had become 
inevitable and, as might be expected from so virile a nation, it was 
a revolution which occurred in both spheres. That a thorough- 
going political revolution was accomplished with comparatively 
little violence was largely due to the ingrained Japanese habit 
of not abolishing ancient hereditary offices but of leaving their titles 
and to a great extent their privileges intact while their duties were 
performed by a deputy or even, as the period to which we are coming 
illustrates, by the deputy of a deputy. The religious revolution, 
too, was mild, if compared with similar struggles in Europe. 
The armed contests of the great monasteries are certaialy not 
edifying reading : they occasioned much bloodshed while they lasted 
and ultimately brought on many of the offending institutions a 
bloodstained revenge. But this was the result of the priesthood 
interfering in secular matters. On the other hand, in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries there arose four new sects which entirely 
changed the character of Japanese Buddhism. One of them, 
founded by Shinran, was subversive of most conventional Buddhist 
institutions : another, founded by Nichiren, was most provocative 
and pugnacious. Yet there was comparatively little persecution. 
We hear Of reformers being banished, of temples being burnt, and 
of restrictions bemg imposed j but martyrdom was rare and most 
martyrs were accused of some political crime. 

By the middle of the twelfth century the long predominance of 
the Fiijiwara came to an end. The race became luxurious and 
effeminate and the power passed from their hands into those of the 
great military houses wffiose prestige and influence steadily increased 
owing to the system of granting manors which were tax free and 
which tended to become veritable imperia in iniperio, not subject 
to the jurisdiction of the local officials. The sovereignty of the 
country was bound to belong to the feudal lord who could acquire 
the most extensive manors, and by partitioning them judiciously 

CII. x] JQDO Am SHINSHU 255 

among liis retainers secure tlie services of tlie largest number of 
troops ready to assist Ms enterprises in time of need. The Heian 
period closes VT-jtli a struggle for supremacy of this kind between 
the groa,t families of Taira and Minamoto, both of them descended 
from the younger sons of former Emperors. In the end the 
Minamoto were victorious and established themselves as Shoguns 
at Kamakura, but about 1160 the Taira had the upper hand and 
the reversal of this position was partly due to the animosity of the 
clergy. The quarrel between the Taira and the Church went back 
to as early as 1039, when the monks of Hieizan, who were dissatisfied 
with the ecclesiastical appointments made by the Regent Eujiwara 
Yorimichi, entered Kyoto and besieged him in his palace. The 
Regent asked assistance of Taira Naokata, who dispersed the priests 
not without slaughter and imprisoned their leader. 

Taira Kiyomori, the famous protagonist of his clan in the final 
contest with the Minamotos, was a man of much the same metal. 
His father had enjoyed the confidence of the Emperor Shirakawa 
and the son found an influential position ready made for him. 
After the civil wars of the Hogen (1156) and Heiji (1159) eras he 
was master of Japan, for the strength of the Minamoto seemed 
broken, although Kiyomori with a clemency wMch did more credit 
to Ms heart than Ms head spared the life of Minamoto Yoritomo, 
then thirteen years old. He showed a similar inildness in dealing 
with Yoshitsune, Yoritomo’s younger brother, being moved by the 
charms of the youths’ mother whom he made Ms concubine, and the 
two young men lived to bring the house of Taira to ruin. In 1160 
Kiyomori had a serious ilMess and took the tonsure according to the 
custom of the times in such circumstances, whence in the Heike 
Monogatari ^ he is commonly spoken of as the Nyudo, a title given 
to those who had taken Buddhist orders. As soon as ; he had 
recovered, however, his clerical duties sat very lightly on him. 
Hot only did he live in splendour and luxury but he showed 
continual enmity to the Buddhist priesthood. Thus he executed 
the priest Saiko (a Eujiwara vrho had become a monk) and Ms sons 
for conspiracy against the Tairas, but raised far more indignation 
by his conduct respecting the ceremonies attending the abdication 
of the Emperor Takakura who had married his daughter. 

^ A Court official down to the third rank on taking the tonsure was known as 
Nyudo A IE. ono who has entered on the path. Those of lower grade were 
known as Shimpotchi ^ H6-6 and Nyudo clearly observed as many 

of the rules of clerical life as they chose and no more. 

256 HISTORY OF JAPANESM BUDDHISM [ck. x 

It was usual for the ex-Emperor, immediately after reuouneiug 
his position as reigning sovereign, to make a solemn pilgrimage 
to one or more temples belonging to the monasteries of Hieizan, 
Miidera, or Kofukuji, and great importance was attached to the 
visit owing to the prestige which it conferred and also owing to the 
largesse incidentally distributed. But the young ex-Emperor— 
he was only twenty — ^in order to please his father-in-law decided 
to make his pilgrimage to the island of Miyajima, where were the 
shrines of Kiyomori’s tutelary deities. The troops of Hieizan and 
the other great temples prepared to detain him by force, but 
Kiyomori succeeded in dispersing them without violence and in 
escorting the imperial cortege to Miyajima and back with a great 
train of Taira retainers. But this apparent success was really 
a formidable danger, for it united the monasteries by giving them 
a common grievance. Their considerable military strength was 
usually dissipated in quarrels between different temples, but if they 
once made common cause, they were perhaps equal to any one of the 
aristocratic houses. 

Minamoto Yorimasa, who though he apparently enjoyed the 
confidence of the Tatra was secretly their enemy, took advantage 
of this to revolt against them, relying on the support of the 
monasteries. The rising was unsuccessful, partly because Kiyomori 
was able to detach Hieizan by bribes, and Yorimasa committed 
suicide, though supported by 30,000 troops from Kofukuji. Eor 
the moment the influence of the monasteries was strong enough 
to prevent them from being punished, but shortly afterwards 
Kiyomori’s sons burnt Miidera and at Kara Kofukuji and Todaiji 
shared the same fate. It must be admitted that the priests of the 
latter town invited misfortune, for they not only maltreated the 
messengers sent to them but, according to the Heike Monogatari,i 
they made a great wooden head which they struck and lacked about 
calling it the head of Kiyomori. But the punishment which he 
meted out to them brought him no luck. There followed a pesti- 
lence and famine interpreted as the wrath of the Buddha, and the 
Taira had to struggle not only against the hostility of the Court, 
the Minamoto, and the Fujiwara, but against the hatred of the 
Buddhist hierarchy and the resentful feelings of all respectable 
and superstitious persons. Kiyomori in Ms desire to escape from 
his priestly enemies removed the Emperor, who was an infant, 

Heike Monogatari, r, chap, xv. 

JODO AND SIIINSHU 

257 

CH. X] 

to liis estate at Eukuliara near tlie modern. Kobe and attempted 
to make it tlie capital, but tke plan raised suck a storm of indignation 
that it liad. to be abandoned after a few nronths, and to crown all, 
shortly afterwards in 1181, Kiyomoii liimself died of an awful 
disease, but not before lie had heard that Yoritomo was preparing 
a rising in tlic East. His body is said to have becom.e so hot that 
it was difhcult to approach him and cold water poured over him to 
relievo his agony began to bubble and boil. His wife had a terrible 
dream in which she saw a flaming chariot come to take him to the 
lowest hell for his crime in burning the great bronze image at 
Todaiji. His son Shigehira, who had actually perpetrated the crime, 
also did not escape the vengeance of Heaven, or at any rate of the 
priesthood. He was subsequently taken alive and handed over to 
the monks of Nara. It was proposed, we are told,i that he should 
be executed with ignominy and torture, but the older monks 
objected that a religious body ought not to pass so severe a sentence 
and he was simply beheaded, worshipping in his last moments 
an image of Ainida which was brought to him by a former retainer. 

The end of his father Kiyomori was less edifying. When dying 
in torments he summoned up his failing strength to review briefly 
the glories of his career, and added, “ The only thing I have to regret 
is that I camiot see the head of Yoritomo. When I am dead do not 
perform any Buddhist ceremonies or make offerings for me : do not 
build temples or pagodas. Only make haste to slay Yoritomo and 
cut off his head and lay it before my tomb. That will be the best 
offering you can make to me either in this world or the next.” 
So deep was his guilt, adds the Chronicle. But the ceremony proved 
impracticable. The Minanioto advanced on Kyoto : Kiyomori’s 
son fled with the child Emperor and after a series of defeats the power 
of the Taira was finally annihilated by Y'oshitsune at the sea fight 
of Dan-no-ura in 1186. 

Yoritomo after many quarrels w.ith his relatives, whom he put 
out of the way with unnatural severity, assumed undisputed sway. 
He obtained for himself the title of Sei-i-tai-Shogiin (usually shortened 
to Shogun) or generalissimo against the barbarians, a ranlc which 
previous Emperors had conferred on their subjects from time to 
time but which now became permanent and even hereditary, with 
the result that the throne lost control of the troops and in all but 
name the sovereignty of Japan. The administration, of Yoritomo 

Heike Monogatari, xii, chap. i. 

268 HISTOEY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [gh. x 

was called Bakufu or tent government, the simple soldier’s rule as 
opposed to the learned and luxurious Court of Kyoto, and a difference 
becomes perceptible between the life and ideals of the capital and 
of the districts east of Hakone known collectively as the Kwanto. 
Though Yoritomo inaugurated this military system with intelligence 
and vigour, his descendants proved incapable of filling the position 
he had created for them and the power passed away from them just 
as it had passed from the Emperor to the Shogun. From 1200 to 
1333 the Hojos acted as regents (Shikken) or prime ministers in the 
name of a nominal Shogun who was often a minor, and by a strange 
irony of fate these Hojos were a provincial branch of the Taira, 
rather looked down upon by their kinsmen of Kyoto in the days 
of Kiyomori. They were absolute masters of Japan for about 
a century. In 1219 the death of Sanetomo left the Minamoto 
family without an heir to the Shogunate and a child of Fujiwara 
stock was appointed to the post. Immediately afterwards the 
Court at Kyoto attempted to upset the Government of Kamakura 
but failed entirely, the Emperor and the ex-Emperor Go Toba, 
who was the prime mover in the plot, being both banished. When 
this conspiracy was disposed of, the supremacy of the Hojos was 
undisputed. 

The change inaugurated by Yoritomo and continued by the 
Hojos was sudden and prodigious. It meant a new capital, a new 
system of government, new social conditions, a new style in art, 
and it is not surprising if religion also found new modes of expression. 
It was certainly at this period that Japanese Buddhism showed 
most originality and creative power. Japan was cut off from China 
and did not feel the influence which had moulded her intellectual 
and political youth. The feudalism of the Hojos was a native 
and insular institution, A revolution is visible in architecture and 
there was a revulsion against scholarship, etiquette, and rituahsm. 
The life of the nobility was simple and austere. Rough justice was 
administered impartially under a collection of maxims and rules ^ 
which embodied the principles of the Samurai or warrior class. 
In the century from about 1160 to 1260 religion was transformed 
by the rise of four new sects, the Jodo, Zen, Shin, and Kichiren, 
which throw into the shade the eight older divisions. Whereas 
these had been mere importations, the new sects, especially the 
two last named, had a distinctly national character. Though the 

^ Called Joel Shikimoku from tko Joel era (1232) in •whicli it was introduced. 

CH. X] 

JODO AND SHINSHU 

founders of all came from Hieizan, their doctrines were perhaps more 
influential in the Kwanto than in Kyoto. There the great 
monasteries maintained their ascendancy and the Emperor Go-Toba, 
whose object was to get rid of the Ho jo domination, was careful 
to humour them and countenanced the repression of novel doctrines. 
But they were chiefly occupied with their own quarrels. In the 
thirteenth century Miidera at least once burned Hieizan and several 
times suffered the same violence at its hands. In 1235 the monies 
of Nara rose in arms on account of some dispute about property 
and the Court of Kyoto requested the Hojo regent to bring them to 
reason. Hojo Yasutoki did so and confiscated their manors until 
they asked for terms. But as a rule the administration of the Bakufu 
kept clear of the old monasteries and while respecting all forms of 
Buddhism showed more vsympathy with the newer sects. Thus 
Masako, the wife of Yoritomo, who after his death in 1199 ruled in 
the name of her sons until 1225 and having taken orders was known 
as Ama Shogun (the Nun Shogun), was a devout follower of Honen 
and a letter from him to her is preserved.^ 

The most glorious achievement of the Hojo Kegents and of all the 
thirteenth century was the repulse of the two Armadas sent by 
Khubilai in 1274 and 1281 to subdue Japan. In this the Japanese 
were aided by the powers of Nature which sent two tempests against 
the invaders, and though European scepticism may hesitate to regard 
the prayers of the Ghm’ch as the sole cause of these storms, yet it is 
beyond doubt that in this critical period Buddhism came to the front 
as a national and patriotic faith— a part which it has seldom played 
elsewhere. Many of the warriors were already disciplined by the 
austere principles of Zen. Nichiren, the new prophet, not only 
preached the need of national religion but in a singularly acute 
prophecy predicted a foreign invasion as a punishment for the sins 
of the age : and though the older monasteries had no very stimu- 
lating message to deliver, they were at least indefatigable in public 
prayer. It is curious that the Shinto temples do not seem to have 
taken an ostentatious part in the work of intercession. The 
triumphant result was claimed by the Buddhist priests as a testimony 
to the efficacy of their ritual and they received their reward in the 
liberal treatment accorded to ecclesiastical property. Many new 
grants of land were made to monasteries, and estates which had been 
mortgaged or forfeited were restored. On the whole, Buddhism, 

Honen, the Buddhist Saint, chap. xxv. 

■t . 
■ 

260 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE [oh. x 

apa.rt from internal dissensions, had never been more prosperous 
than under Yoritomo and the Hojo Kegents, at least three of whom 
became monies in their later years, and though this period is pooj- 
in art and literature compared with those which succeeded and 
followed, it witnessed the erection at Kamakura of the temple 
of Hachiman, formerly a magnificent structure though now some- 
what defaced by the ravages of time, and of the more celebrated 
Daibutsu, a gigantic image of Amida which is now exposed to the 
elements, the temple which formerly sheltered it having been 
destroyed by tidal waves. Yoritomo was most careful to conciliate 
the clergy and to avoid the mistake made by Kiyomori in antago- 
nizing them. In 1195 with the aid of national subscriptions he rebuilt 
the Todaiji at Nara ^ which had been burnt by the Taira, and during 
the dedication he conceived the idea of setting up a similar colossus 
at his new capital but died before he could execute the project. 
The present figure is said to have been set up in 1252. 

Learning was not the strong point of Ka,makura ; in fact, a very 
large proportion of its stout warriors were illiterate, and whatever 
literature has been preserved was mainly the work of the clergy. 
The Heike Monogatari, a romantic chronicle of the fall of the Taira, 
was composed near the beginning of the tliirteenth century. Its 
authorship is not certain but it is attributed to a certain Yukinaga, 
a layman who had taken orders, and it was chanted by itinerant 
priests. It is strongly tinged with Buddhist sentiment and relates 
how the evil Karma which the Taira had accumulated by their 
impiety brought about their ruin. 

But I must proceed to recount the rise of the four sects which 
render this period remarkable in the annals of Buddhism. The first 
name that claims attention is that of Honen,^ the founder of the 
Jodo or Pure Land School. He lived from 1133 to 1212 and thus 
witnessed the struggle between the Minamoto and Taira, the victory 
of Yoritomo, and the establishment of the Hojo Bcgency at Kama- 

^ On the Jaiianese stage Yoshitsunc and Benkei are represented as wandering 
in the guise of mendicant priests who are collecting subscriptions for rebuilding 
Todaiji. 

® This is the title by which ho is most commonly known, but, like mf)st Japanese, 
he had an enibaTi'assing number of designations. He is frequently called Geuku 
and also Enko-Daishi, the latter a posthumous title. As a child his name was 
Seishiinaru but as a priest he called himself Genkii, compounded of the names 
of his two teachers, Genko and Eiku. He was also nicknamed by his teacher 
Honenbo (Nature’s own priest), and when he was banished and treated as a layman 
he received the secular name of Motohiko Eujii. 

261 

CH. X] 

JODO AND SHINSHU 

kiira. Ample materials for tlie study of Ids career are provided by 
Ids biograpliy written by Sbunjo and translated with most valual')lc 
notes and introductory chapters by Coates and Ishizuka.^ He Avas 
the son of an official in the province of Mimasaka, who was killed 
by an enemy and died bidding his son to take no revenge and become 
a priest. The boy showed such talents that a local priest persuaded 
his mother to allow him to be sent to study at Hieizan. In the letter 
commending him to the attention of the authorities of the Sacred 
Mountain he was called an image of Manjusri (Monju) and quickly 
justified the description by his extraordinary ability. After being 
ordained a priest he retired to Kurodani on the outskirts of Kyoto 
resolving to seek no preferment and to devote himself to prayer 
and study, entirely renouncing the world. He is said to have read 
through the whole of the Tripitaka five times but, though the fame 
of his wisdom and learning spread widely, he did not find any doctrine 
which satisfied him. This was the period of the civil wars of 
Hogen and Heiji and the rise of Kiyomori, and naturally a religious 
and gentle soul like Honen felt that the great need of mankind 
amidst such troubles was religious peace. In spite of the anti- 
Buddhist conduct of the Taira, the age was not in its way irreligious, 
but it tended either to superstition which sought merely to avoid 
temporal misfortunes or to the difficult doctrines of the Kegon, 
Tendai, and Shingon schools. These agreed that all men have in 
themselves the Buddha nature but that it must be realized and 
developed by exercises in which meditation as a rule played a 
prominent part. It was a difficult road for the ordinary man, and 
besides how amid riots and rebellions, in which the clergy played 
a prominent part, was one to believe statements such as that Sam- 
sara is really nirvana and that this troubled life is really identical 
with peace and enlightenment ? 

As mentioned in the previous chapter, the V7orship of Amida had 
already been growing as an alternative to this form of religion and 
had found several exponents such as Kuya, Genshin, and Eyonin. 
They had none of them succeeded in inspiring many followers or of 
leaving after them any body of believers. Hevertheless, according 
to tradition, it was Genshin’s work, the Ojoyoshu, that led Honen 
to the light and inspiration which he needed. It is based on a 
commentary on the Amitayurdhyana-sutra written, by Zendo, the 

^ Honan, ilia Buddhist Saint : His Life and TeaGhing. Printed at the Chion-in 
in Kyoto, 1925. An account of Shunjd’s work and of other Japanese biographies 
of Honen is contained in chapter viii, pp. 77-83. 

t 

. .f. 5 

/ 

262 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. x 

tMrd Patriaroli of tlie Amidist sect in China. Zendo’s works are 
not included in tke Tripitaka, wMcli perhaps accounts for a man of 
Honen’s erudition not having read them earlier, hut now the 
following passage ^ deeply impressed him : “ Only repeat the name 
of Amida with all your heart — ^whether walking or standing still, 
whether sitting or lying never cease this practice for even a moment. 
This is the practice which brings salvation without fail, for it is in 
accordance with the original vow of the Buddha.” ^ In these words 
he thought he had at last found what he was seeking for ; he had 
become convinced that in this turbulent and degenerate age mental 
and moral discipline is of small avail and that peace can only be 
found in self surrender and in reliance on a higher power — in Tariki 
or the strength of another, that is Amida, not in Jiriki, or one’s own 
strength. Zendo showed him how this was to be done, so he 
abandoned all other religious practices and devoted himself to the 
recitation of the Nembntsu only. 

It was in the spring of 1176, when he was forty-three years of age 
and had spent some twenty-five years in seeking after the truth, that 
he reached this conviction and began to teach it to others, and this 
year is commonly reckoned as the date of the foundation of the 
Jodo sect, but as a matter of fact it was not legally recognized 
as a distinct corporation until the time of leyasu. Honen, however, 
conceived that he had a message for his age and his influence became 
considerable. He removed to Yoshimizii near the present Chion-in 
but frequently changed his residence. He was credited with 
miraculous powers and with seeing visions. He enjoyed the con- 
fidence of the Emperors Go-Shirakawa, Takakura, and for a time 
of Go-Toba, assisting them in the performance of their religious 
duties and attending at the death-bed of Go~Shirakawa, who died 
repeating the Hembutsu with his last breath. Many courtiers and 
members of the aristocracy were among his friends and adherents, 
especially Kanezane the Regent, who was the founder of the Kujo 
branch of the Eujiwara family. Many Samurai also followed him. 
Hor was he less successful among the clergy. As he said himself, 
his teachers became his disciples and his biography enumerates 
a number of distinguished priests such as the famous Tendai scholars, 

1 It occurs iu the fourth volume of the Commentary, which treats of good 
works other than meditation. 

Hon-gwan or purva-prajiidhana means the 48 vows of Amida, 
the substance of which is that all who call on his name should be saved. The 
vows are sometimes reckoned as 46. See Nanjio’a note in vol. slix, p. 73. 

CH. X] 

JODO AND SHINSHU 

Kenslim and JicMn, and Myolien of Mount Koya. In 1198 Honen 
wote a -work called tke Senckakushu,^ consisting of sixteen chapters 
containing selected passages from the Amida shtras and of Zendo’s 
commentary together with his own explanations. He sent a copy 
of it to Kanezane, but forbade his disciples to publish it during his 
lifetime and it was not made known to the world till a few months 
after his death. He also wrote a work called Ojo Taiydsho “ 
(an outline of birth into the Pure Land) and many letters, but his 
retiring disposition made him avoid publicity as either a writer 
or teacher. 

I have already spoken of the original literature about Amida. 
Honen follows Zendo’s interpretations of these works and says 
boldly^ that Zendo was an incarnation of Amida and that we 
should therefore depend solely upon him. He draws a sharp 
distinction between the ShSdo, the holy path, consisting of good 
works and religious exercises as recommended by other sects, and 
Jodo or the Pure Land ; and his cardinal doctrine is that the best, 
if not, the only way to obtain salvation in these evil days is to strive 
to be reborn in the western paradise. This result is secured by 
simple faith in Amida and by repetition of the formula Namu 
Amida Butsu. If a man, no matter who, : how wicked or how 
unlettered, repeat these words with a believing heart, Amida will 
appear to Mm in the hour of death and conduct Mm to the happy 
land. The Jodo sect approves of ordinary monastic disciphne and 
religious ceremonial but, as the special fitual for salvation, it 
prescribes the repetition of the Hembutsu. Honen and other 
eminent doctors are said to have recited it not less than 60,000 times 
daily. Still he was not an unreasoning fanatic. While believing 
that even the greatest sinner if he has faith in Amida may bo 
born in the Pure Land, “ So far as you are concerned,” he says, 
“ be not guilty of even the smallest sin.” ^ “ If you have any time 
to spare after saying the Hembutsu, then you may use it to do 
good works.” ^ This is no doubt well meant, but it is a little 
suggestive of the undergraduate’s definition of the Church of 
England’s view of good works as laid down in the Thirty 
Articles that “ a few of them will do no harm ”, But still 
Honen was quite alive to the danger of antinoinianism, 

^ The full title is Scnchaku Hongwan ISrembusshu ^ 

” ft ife ® 

® Honen, the. Buddhist Saint, p. 467. 

* Ibid., p. 403. ® Ibid., p. 495. 

2G4 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BVDDIIISM [ch. x 

doctrine tliat one may do what one likes because Ainida 
loves to save sinners, wMch actually threatened to bring the 
Nembutsu into discredit in later times, “ Those who say that the 
effort to avoid sin and improve oneself is maldng light of Ainida’s 
vow . . . are nothing less than a company of devils and their work 
is heathenish.” ^ Also, unlike Shinran, he was careful not to 
deprecate the worship of other Buddhas : “ You should not thinh 
lightly of, ia the least despising those excellent sutras the Lotus 
and the Prajhaparamita. Though you may believe in Amida your 
faith is one-sided if you despise the many Buddhas or doubt Shaka’s 
holy teaching. ... It is no obstacle in the way of the sole practice 
to pray for worldly good not only by reciting the Nembutsu but by 
praying to the other Buddhas or deities, by reading or copying the 
sutras or by making images of the Buddhas.” ^ 

It is not surprising, however, if in spite of these reasonable and 
tolerant views and in spite of Honen’s not posing as a popular 
preacher, his doctrines were exceedingly distasteful to the clergy of 
the great monasteries, for whatever courteous explanations he might 
make,® they amounted to an assertion that the recitation of the 
Nembutsu, and of that only, was the best way to salvation. In 1204 
the priests of Mount Hiei held a great meeting to petition Shinsho, 
their Chief, to condemn this thesis. Honen replied by an open letter 
addressed to his disciples in which he forbade religious disputes and 
disparagement of the Shingon and Tendai and of other Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas besides Amida. He also expressly condemned 
the teaching that those who recited the Nembutsu might indulge 
in eating meat and in immoral practices on the ground that the 
formula cleanses from all sin. This declaration and a letter 
addressed to ShinshS by Honen’s protector, the Eegent Kanezane, 
had apparently the result of calming opinion at Hieizan, but next 
year the priests of Kofiikuji presented a memorial to the Government 
asking for Honen’s punishment. But only some of his disciples 
were punished and no penalty was inflicted on himself. He issued, 
however, another declaration in which he insisted on the compre- 
hensiveness of Shaka’s teaching and on the incompatibility of the 

^ Hdnen, t7te Buddhist 8ai7it, -p. 4Q5. i 

® Ibid., pp. 404 and 460. See also p. 422. / 

^ See for an instance tbe end of tKe letter quoted in Honen, the Buddhist Sam, I, 
p. 422. “ If anyone has been, learning the scriptures and finds it difficult to believe 
in the Nembutsu, let him bear in mind that everything else which he does according 
to other forms of religious discipline is all right, provided that ho inake.s it an 
occasion for directing his thought and prayer to Amida and to Paradise.” 

JODO AND SHINSIJU 

265 

OH. X] 

Ncmbiitsii witli a life of immorality. The frequency with. wMcli 
lie returns to this point suggests that the charge of teaching that 
everything was permissible to true believers because everything 
would be pardoned was the main accusation brought against him 
and that he felt it sufficiently formidable to require careful 
refutation. 

The ex-Bmperor Go-Toba had been friendly to Honen, but 
doubtless received many bad reports respecting hun and his 
followers from the priests of Hieizan. At the end of 1206 these were 
aggravated by a misunderstanding. During the absence of the 
ex-Emperor on a pilgrimage to Kumano, Jurin, Anraku, and other 
disciples of Honen held special services for the recitation of the 
Nembutsu which were attended by two maids of honour. They 
became nuns, and it was suggested to the ex-Emperor on his return 
that improper affection for the priests was their real motive and they 
were severely punished. Anraku, hearing of it, quoted a passage 
from Zendo in which he speaks of “ infidels, blind to the truth, who 
hate to see others acting religiously This utterance was reported 
to the ex-Emperor, who was furious. Jurin, Anraku, and a few 
more were beheaded and others were banished, and in the second 
month of 1207 Honen was exiled to Tosa. Kanezane, who had 
recently lost his son and had devoted himself almost entirely to 
religion, was determined to do all in his power to have the sentence 
altered, but thought the moment inopportune. He was able, how- 
l ever, to have the place of exile changed to Sanuki, the north-ea, stern 

I district of Shikoku, which -was not so distant as Tosa in the south, 

i and thither Honen repaired after exchanging farewell poems with 

I his patron. On his way he is said to have met some old fishorfolk 

i who were in trouble because they had heard that those who take 

j life must suffer for their sins in hell. But Honen assured them that 

; if they repeated the Nembutsu they would be born hi Paradise. 

‘ So to their great joy they continued to catch fish by day and to pray 

i by night. 

I In Sanuki he spent his time in visiting the sacred spots of the 

province, such as Zentsuji founded by Kobo Daishi, but his sojourn 
j was not prolonged. Though Kanezane died, he obtained a pledge 

I from an influential friend, Eujiwara Mitsuchika, to look after 

I Honen’s interests, and as there was fortunately an amnesty to 
commemorate the erection of a temple by the ex-Emperor, Honen 
was allowed to leave Shikoku in the last month of 1207, but not to 
I return to the capital. He resided for four years in the Kachiodera 

2G6 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDIimi [ch. x 

temple near Osaka, at th e end of wkich, time Mitsuohika, making use 
of a dream, wkicli troubled the ex-Emperor, secured for hkn 
permission to return to Kyoto, where he was received by glad crowds 
at the end of 1211. But his health had suifered and in March, 1212, 
he was taken seriously ill. When asked where a memorial temple 
should be built for him, he replied, “ My memorial shall fill the land. 
Wherever among high or low the Nembutsu is recited, there is my 
memorial temple, be it but the thatched cottage of a humble 
fisherman.” Another anecdote of his deathbed is that, according 
to custom, his disciples brought an image of Amida and fastening 
a five-coloured cord to its hands bade Honen take hold of the other 
end. But he gently replied, “ This is the ceremony for most, but 
hardly necessary for me.” He told them that as a result of 
repeating the Kembutsu he had for the last ten years or more been 
gazing continually on the Pure Land and the Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas which inhabit it, though until his last hours he had 
refrained from speaking of these experiences. He died in his 
eightieth year, at the same age as Sakyamuni. He was buried at 
Otani, but the Sammon priests attempted to destroy the tomb and 
after several removals the bones are said to have been deposited in 
the compound of the Kison-in temple.^ 

Many of the qualities commonly possessed by the founders of new 
religions or sects were wanting in Honen. He was not apparently 
a remarkable preacher, organizer, or writer, his best compositions 
being the private letters which he addressed to his friends. Though 
he most sincerely believed in the truth and importance of what he 
taught, he was not self-assertive. He was, on the contrary, the 
least combative and aggressive of men and most anxious to avoid 
giving offence, to make allowance for the prejudices of others and 
their habits of thought, to smooth over diffi-culties, and to explain 
away or not insist on doctrinal subtleties. His great personal 
influence was due to hissingularly amiable character, which made him 
beloved of all his friends and acquamtances. They flocked to him 
and “ converted his residence into a sort of popular market 
He offered in the gentlest and most persuasive form a simple and 
attractive teaching, and this in a violent age when the strife of 
factions was mingled with pestilence and famine, when the Church 

^ Sen Iloncn, the Buddhist Saivi, chap. xlii. The fate of Honen’s bones is, however, 
far from clear. 

® From Kakunyo Slionin’s LiE of SMnran, i, 6, It says that there were generally 
about 380 persons with him. 

CH. X] 

JODO AND SHINSHU 

was not only worldly bnt turbulent and when at its best its doctrines 
were difficult for tbe unlearned to follow. In such disturbed and 
comfortless times be preached a simple creed which offered salvation 
to those who could justify themselves neither by learning nor by 
good works and he gave a decisive impetus to one of the greatest 
religious movements which Japan has witnessed, for it is not clear 
that without him any previously existing forms of Amidism would 
have become important, or that Shinran’s mind would have 
developed as it did. 

Shortly before his death he is said to have written with his 
own hand at the request of one of his disciples called Seikwambo 
the followmg statement of his belief and teaching called the 
Ichimai Kishomon, or the document on one sheet of paper J 
“ What I teach is neither a sort of meditation such as has been 
talked of by many priests both in China and in our own country 
nor is it an invocation such as is possible only to those who have 
grasped by thought its real meaning. No, all that is needed to 
secure birth in the Paradise of perfect bliss is merely to repeat the 
words Namu Amida Butsu without a doubt that one will certainly 
arrive there. Such details as the three states of mind and the 
fourfold practice ^ are all included in the repetition of the words 
Namu Amida Butsu with perfect faith. Had I any other profound 
doctrine besides this, I should miss the mercy of the two Holy Ones® 
and have no share in the vow of Amida. But those who believe 
in the power of calling on the Buddha’s name, though they may have 
thoroughly studied all the doctrines which Shaka taught in the 
course of his whole life, should behave like a simple man of the 
people who cannot read a word or like an ignorant nun and without 
giving themselyes airs of wisdom should simply fervently call on the 
name of the Buddha.” 

1 ^ fra -fc- The original will be found in Honen Shonin Zenshu by 

Kuroda and Mochizuki, pp. 422-3, where two slightly different versions are given. 

^ The three states Of mind are : (1) a most sincere heart, (2) a deep-believing 
heart, and (3) a longing heart which offers in the hope of attaining paradise any 
merits it may have acquired, the point being not that Ojo or birth in paradise 
can be Obtained merely by personal merit and without faith in Amida, but that 
any merit one may have obtained should not be devoted to any other object. 
The fourfold pi'actico, as prescribed by Zendo, is (1) to treat images and other 
sacred objects with profound reverence, (2) to practise the repetition of the 
Nembutsu only, (3) to practise it continually and, if any sin has been committed, 
at once to purify the heart by uttering it, (4) to observe the above throe rules 
continuously throughout one’s life. 

® i.e. Shaka and Amida. It is noticeable that in this summary of his faith 
Honen alludes to both powers. 

1 

t 

tT'1 ■ 

M 

t 

-1*; 

t . ! 

£ 

/ 

rf,* 

268 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUBDEISM [gh. x 

Tlioiigh Honen’s statement of liis own faith seems remarkably 
simple and to brush aside all technical subtleties as of no importance, 
y(jt the innate Japanese propensity to subdivide sects on minute 
points of doctrine may be scon as clearly in the J 5do as in any other 
community. He had six prominent disciples, Shokobo (or Bencho), 
Zemiebo (or Shoku), Ryukan, Chosai, Kosai, and Shinran, every 
one of whom had his own method of formulating tiie master’s 
teaching and some of whom founded permanent sects. The first 
two founded the Chinzci and Scizan, which are the prhicipal 
divisions recognized in the J5do, 

The Chinzci represents tlie main body of the sect and is called 
simply Jodo, for Shokobo merely elaborated the doctrine of Honen. 
He held that the Nembutsu is an act of adoration addressed to 
Amida as a special personal being : that it should be repeated as 
earnestly as if one were going to die the next moment ; but he also 
held, with a liberality which as we have seen was shared by Honen 
himself, that man could obtain birth in paradise by other practices 
than the Nembutsu. 

The school of Zennebo, known as Jodo-Seizan, held that salvation 
is only possible to those who repeat the Nembutsu and is not a 
result of meditation or other good works, while not denying the 
value of these if accompanied by the Nembutsu. The following 
are extracts from the works of the founder : “ Even if we do good 
works all our lives and wish to attain the Land of Purity, we cannot 
achieve that endJ’ “The belief in Buddha ... is to know for 
certain and believe firmly that we are saved by the original vow 
of Amida : that the doctrine of Shaka teaches this and that all 
Buddhas testify uniformly to its truth.’’ “ Further, Buddha 
means enlightenment or profound wisdom. When this wisdom 
is realized in our hearts we are enhghtened. Shaka and all other 
Buddhas are thus one in the attainment of Narnu Amida Butsu. 
As tliey are all one and possess the same enlightenment, so we who 
pass into this state also share Amida’s own enlightenment.” ^ 

It will be observed that Honen had not succeeded in banishing 
subtle and difficult doctrines so completely as he had wished. 
Ryilkwan advocated the practice of “ many callings ” ; Kosai 
that of “ one calling ”, in which the devotee is united to the Buddha 
in faith ; while Ohosai went even further than Shokobo in holding 

^ See “ Tlic Pure Land Doctrine, as Interpret ed by Shoku, founder of the Scizan 
sect ”, by Shizutoshi Sugihira. Easteni Buddhist, v, No. 1. 

269 

ciL x] JODO AND 8E1NSHIJ 

that Amida definitely prescribed other practices as being of equal 

efficacy with the ISTembutsu. 

These three disciples have left no enduring school, but the sixth 
and last, named Shinran, rivals and perhaps eclipses his master 
in success and celebrity. He was born in Kyoto in 1173 as the son 
of a Court noble named Hino Arinori, and the blood of both the 
Fujiwara and Minamoto flowed in his veins. This much seems 
sure, but the same cannot be said of his biography as a whole. 
A Japanese scholar once told me that Sasaki Gassh6,i the eminent 
writer on Shinto, had confessed to him that the more he studied 
Shinran’ s life the more uncertainty he felt about the incidents 
commonly accepted as authentic. The various accounts of his 
marriage illustrate this. It is usually asserted that his wife was 
the daughter of the Regent Eanezane who had discussed the 
matter with Hoiien and obtained his approval. But the earhest 
biography, written by Kakunyo Shonin about 1296, makes no 
mention of this marriage, though it records a vision in which 
Kwannon authorized the marriage of the clergy in general terms.^ 
Another early biography written by Songaku in 1352 ^ relates the 
conversations between Honen and Kanezane and the marriage 
of Shinran with the latter’s daughter when she was eighteen. 
It says nothing about a second marriage./ But a third a,ccount, 
written by Ryoku in 1715 and preserved in the temple at Takata,'^ 
relates the marriage with Kanezane’s daughter as described above, 
but adds that she died at the age of twenty-six leaving one son and 
that Shinran subsequently married the daughter of Miyoshi 
Tamenori in the Kwanto, by wliom he had four sons and one 
daughter. When he returned to Kyoto his second wife and his 
children remained beliind and Zenran, the eldest son, became 
hostile to his father. 

In the following pages I shall give the account of Shinran’s life 
as ordinarily accepted by his followers, warning the reader that its 
accuracy has been called in question. 

^ Axithor of 27ic Lifft of Shinran Shonin, Tokyo, 1910 {Jai>ancse) ; A Study of 
Shin Buddhism, Kyoto, 1925 (Englisli). 

2 It contains the phrase (i, 3) ^ ^ ^ 

^ mm. in whiiih the words ^ have been interpreted as referring to 
Ivanezane’s daughter. 

® Shinran Shonin Shomyoden ^ ^ Jl A. IE ^ 

* Takata Shinran Shonin Shotoden IR ^ Jh A IE ^ 

270 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. x 

His original name was ZensMn, wliicli lie changed iirst to Shaklm 
and then to Shinran. Being left an orphan, he entered Hieizan 
when only nine years old. As a young man he received rapid 
preferment but was dissatisfied with the Tendai teaching. He also 
visited Nara but returned to Hieizan. Still, he found no rest until 
Kwannon appeared to him in a dream and bade him study under 
Honen.^ He did so in 1201 and became his teacher’s favourite 
pupil. In the Tannisho ^ he says, “As far as I am concerned my 
solo reason for repeating the Nembutsu lies in the teaching of the 
good man who made me understand that the only condition of 
salvation is to say the Nembutsu. ... I should never regret oven 
if I were to go to Hell by being deceived by Honen Shonin.” 
One day Fujiwara Kanezane the Kegent, who according to this 
account must have been the originator of many of Shiman’s views, 
told Honen that he wished his daughter to marry a priest who would 
thus become a householder and combine religion with a layman’s 
life. Honen was not shocked at the suggestion and suggested 
Shinran as a suitable candidate. Shinran hesitated for a year and 
then became Kanezane’s son-in-law. His wife was known as 
Tamahi no Miya (Princess Burning Crystal) and they had six children. 
It is remarkable, however, that Shunjo’s Life of Honen does not 
mention Shinran’s marriage nor indeed anything else about him, 
which perhaps indicates that at the time it wns composed (the 
beginning of the fourteenth century) the Jodo sect did not approve 
of him. If the story is correct, the Shinshii have some reason to 
call themselves the true Jodo sect (Jodo Shinshii), for it implies 
that Honen approved of Shinran’s innovations and countenanced 
monasticism merely from a reluctance to break too violently with 
tradition. It appears that Honen and Shinran were in complete 
harmony. They both enjoyed the favour of Kanezane and were 
both banished from Kyoto in 1207, Shinran’s place of exile being 
Echigo, and both allowed to return in 1211. Shinran, however, 
started on a missionary journey to the north-eastern provinces and 
Honen died the next year. It was not till after this, it would 
seem, that the two sects regarded themselves as separate bodies, the 
one following the practice of Honen who had lived like an ordinary 
priest and the other accepting the innovations of Shinran which 

^ But Kakmiyo Shonin’s biography says that he first became Honen’s disciple 
and then had a vision of Kwannon which merely authorized marriage in general 
terms. 

2 Tannisho Ife ^ § 2. 

CH. X] 

JOBO ANB SHINSHU 

Honen is said to have sanctioned but not imitated. The Shinshu 
was aJso inclined to the doctrine of “ once calling ” to which Honen 
had objected.^ Shinran was far from objecting to the repetition 
of the Nembutsu, bnt he held that the essential thing was to say 
tliat prayer with full faith and confidence in the Buddha ; that one 
such believing utterance is sufficient to secure birth in the Pure 
Land, and that all subsequent repetitions are to be regarded as 
simply expressions of joy and gratitude. He is also reported in the 
Tannisho ^ to have said that even a good man is reborn in the 
Pure Land, much more a wicked man. People generally put this 
the other way, he added, and say that even a wicked man is so 
reborn, much more a good man, but the first statement is really 
more correct. For a good man who trusts to his own merits and 
not to the strength of another is not the object of Amida’s vow : 
but one who does not rely at all on himself but entirely on Ainida’s 
strength is the person contemplated by the vow and in virtue of it 
will be born in the Pure Land. 

Shinran lived with his wife in the province of Hitachi and 
preached his doctrines among the inhabitants, whom he probably 
found less prejudiced than the population of the capital. In this way 
he spent more than twenty-five years and settled for part of the time 
at Inada, where he appears to have first founded a new sect called 
Jodo Shinshu or the True Sect of the Pure Land and also Montoshu 
or Ikkoshn,® and in 1224 to have published an exposition of his 
teaching in six volumes called Kyogyoshinsho,^ or Doctrine, 
Practice, Faith, and Realization. It is a collection of 143 passages 
from various works such as the Avatamsaka and Nirvana sutras 
which, in Sliinran’s opmion, justified his views, and is regarded as the 
fundamental textbook of the Shinshu sect. He was not any more 
than Honen a great writer, for the work just mentioned is largely 
an anthology, but there are also ascribed to him Wasan, or hymns 
to Araida, and a longer poetical composition called the Shoshinge,'’ 
describing the history of the faith and praising the seven Fathers 

Honun, the, Buddhut Saint, chap. xxix. 

2 Tannisho, § 3. 

= Or IE ft % Shoshin-nenbutsu-ge. It is translated in Lloyd’s 

work Shinran and his Work and Haas’ Amida Buddha, 116. Some of the 
Wasan were published with an English translation by the Western Hongwanjl in 
1922. The complete edition (Sanjo-Wasan) consists of three volumes. 

M 

ki 

272 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cii. x 

or Patriarclis — ^two Indians, Nigarjuna ^ and Yasnbandhu ; three 
Chinese, Donran, Doshaku, and Zendo ; and two Japanese, Genshin 
and Gcnkti (Honen). This work is frequently recited at Shmshu 
services. Some time after his death Yui Embo, who was one of his 
immediate disciples, wrote a collection of his sayings entitled 
Tannisho ^ in order to put an end to misunderstandings of his 
teaching. The Shbshinge and the Kybgyoshinsho are written, as 
was the custom, in Chinese, but the Wasan are in Japanese^ and 
Shinran seems to have favoured the use of the Kana script and of the 
national language as being more intelligible to the uneducated.'^ 
The clergy of the sect disclaimed all learning and a common 
Japanese proverb says Monto mono shirazu— the Monto know 
nothing — which was certainly untrue of Honen and Shinran and 
many of their followers, who were learned theologians. 

Finding that he was growing old, Shinran returned to Kyoto 
about 1230, but stopped at Kamakura and other places on the way. 
In the capital he apparently spent his time quietly. At any rate, 
few incidents are recorded of his last years, but he lived to the 
advanced age of nearly ninety and apparently he composed hymns 
after he was eighty. The first two volumes of the Sanjo Wasan 
contaia references to the year 1248, when he was over seventy, and 
the last to 1258, ten years later. When asked where he should 
be buried he is said to have repHed : “ Throw my body mto the 
Kamogawa and let the fish feed on. it.” But he was cremated and 
his ashes buried partly at Higashi Otani and partly at Takata. 

Though the Jodo-SMnshu seems to have been speedily recognized 
by popular opinion as a distinct sect and is indeed rendered 
conspicuous by some differences of discipline, for instance, the 
marriage of the clergy, it is not easy to separate the doctrines of 
Honen and Shinran. They lived together as teacher and pupil, 
each approving the Hfe of the other. The Jodo does not differ 
conspicuously in discipline and ritual from the older sects; it 
honours other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas besides Amida, but it 
teaches that salvation is best obtained by invoking his name. The 

^ On the statement (L. 49) that Shaka foretold Nagarjnna’s advent in the 
Ijankavatira-sutras see Suzuki, in the Lankdmtdra-sutra, -p, 24i, whence it 

appears that the Sanskrit text does hot support the assertion. 

® ^ M It has also been attributed to Nyoshin , Shonin, the grandson 

of fSljiiiran ; but the name of Yui Embo occurs in the text (§ 9 and § 13) in a way 
which suggests that he was the writer. 

® Koa Shonin (1264-1330), an eminent priest of the Jodo, wrote a work called 
Sambu-kana-sho. Three volumes in Kana. 

JODO AND SHINSHU 

273 

CH. x] 

Sliinsliii has abolished nionasticism and its temples are easily 
distiugiiishable from, others : worship is offered to Amida only '; 
salvation is obtained by faith which is the gift of Amida and it 
begins in this world as soon as faith begins in the believer. But 
most of these distinctions, though valid as a rough statement, are 
; not absolute. Shaha and other Buddhas are invoked in the funeral 

I ceremonies of the Shinshu.^ The doctrine of salvation by faith 

' is old — it is found in the Joclo as clearly as in the Sliinshu — and the 

; Shinshu is emphatic in extolling the eflicacy of the sacred name.“ 

;; The doctrine of immediate salvation, too, was not an invention 
i of Shinran, for Honen said, “ How happy the thought that though 

: we arc still here in the body we are numbered among the holy ones 

I of Paradise.” 

I Both the Jodo and the Jodo Shinshu spread rapidly, Zennebd, 

\ one of Honon’s six disciples mentioned above, with his pupils 

; laboured at Kyoto : Ryfikan when banished to the north-eastern 

i provinces was assiduous in propaganda ; Konkobo was sent by 

Honen himself to evangelize Mutsii, while Hyocho, who is reckoned 
: as the third Patriarch of the Jodo sect, was tlie apostle of the 

i Kwanto and converted the Hoj o Regent Tsunetoki, whom ho induced 

i to build a temple at Kamakura. The Jodo Shinshu were also active. 
In 121 2 Shinran himself founded the Bukkoji, or temple of Buddha’s 
Light, at Yamashina near Kyoto, originally called the Koshoji or 
restoration of right, in allusion to his return from exile, and in 
1235 the Kinshokuji in Omi. His grandson Nyoshin built the 
' Hongwanji temple at Otani, which became a sort of imperial 
chapel. Shinran is also credited with having founded during his 
J wanderings the Senshuji at Takata in Shimotsuke and other temples. 
I Although the older sects persuaded the Government to prohibit 
the Nembutsu, it is clear that the new creed was too strong for them. 
' In 1235 we are told that the capital and country ahke swarmed with 
people who wore black priestly robes and who recited the Nembutsu.^ 
t A small sect which still exists as a corporation was founded in 

1276 by Ippen (1239-1289). He was originally a priest of the 

1 Sec Lloyd, Shinran and Ma Work, p, 136, and also the interesting account in 
The Times of Hth August, 1910, of a memorial service held by the Shinshu in 
honour of King Edward VII. 

2 It is remarkable that modern Japanese Amidists constantly speak of the whole 
formula Namu Amida Butsu as the name, though they are clearly aware that it 
is an invocation like Ave Maria.. 

So the Azuma Kagami, a history of Japan, from 1180 to 1266, written near 
the end of the thirteenth" century by an unknown author. 

k' 'h;": "T: 'Af' 

Tendai, but not being satisfied with its teaching took lessons of 
Sliotatsu, a pupil of ZennebS already mentioned as the founder 
of the Seizan sect. He then went and prayed for a hundred days 
to the deity of Kumano, who was beheved to be Amida himself^ 
and received from him a direct revelation communicating certain 
special doctrines. These are somewhat extravagant : the mere 
sound of Amida’s name, even when uttered by an unbeliever, is 
declared to be efficacious and by reciting it all living beings can 
become Buddhas. Another tenet of Ippen’s was that faith is useless 
and powerless to effect salvation, because it is an activity of the 
corrupt human mind. One must simply repeat the sacred name, 
without relying upon anything that comes from oneself. Ippen’s 
theories were probably influenced by Zen, which was affecting 
Japanese thought at this time. He said, for instance, “ When 
I repeat the Hembutsii, there is neither myself nor the Buddha but 
simply the invocation.” And again : “ Single-mindedness is when 
one discards all thought of the body and is absolutely one with the 
Hembutsu.” Dancing formed part of the worship of this sect 
which was called Ji,^ or the Time, because its founder maintained 
that it was the proper religion for the times in which he lived. 
He spent his time in travelling and preaching, whence he was 
popularly Imown as Yugyo Shonin, or the wandering priest. In 
1886 he was given the posthumous title of Ensho Shonin. 

It will be observed that the story of the foundation of the Ji sect 
illustrates the extreme development of Eyobu-Sliinto. Shojo, the 
Shinto deity of Kumano, is not only regarded as a form of Amida, 
but his explanations of the niceties of Amidist theology are accepted 
as authoritative, just as if they were passages from some recognized 
sutra. Hachiman also was regarded as an incarnation (if indeed 
that is the riglit word) of Amida, and Tadachika Nakayama, who 
died in 1196, is cpioted as saying that the Emperor Ojin, who was 
identified with Hachiman, “ was called Hachiman Dai Bosatsu 
because at Iiis birth eight banners came down from heaven. This 
showed that he was an incarnation of the Amida of the Eightfold 
Path.” Ippeii was at least anxious that the Shinto deities, if 
accepted as Buddhas, should behave as such, for he is said to have 
persuaded the priests of the Mishima shrine to abstain from making 
offerings of fishes and bhds. 

^ See for a direct statement to this efleefc the story of Sabutsnbo in Hanen, the 
BuddJmt Saint, pp. 389--390. 

= B# S- 

■'* Honen, the Buddhist Saint, p. 107. 

CHAPTEK XI 

RISE OF NEW SECTS : NIGHIREN AND ZEN 

Natueally such a simplification of religion as that described 
in the last cliapter could not become current without exciting 
protests. They took shape, not only in the jealousy of the older 
sects but in the preaching of Nichiren, whose followers are still, 
with the Shinshu, the most active and influential, though not the 
most numerous, among the Buddhists of Japan. Both put unusual 
animus into their doctrines, for w%ile the Shinshu assert that Amida 
and none other should be worshipped, the other side retort that a 
single invocation of his name requires long expiation in 
purgatory. A well-known anecdote relates Nicheren’s indignation 
when on one of his missionary journeys he found some children 
playing with the image of Shaka, which had been cast out of a village 
temple to make room for an image of Amida. His anger was typical 
of his doctrine and manners : he reinstated the original Buddha, 
or at any rate the Shaka of the Lotus-sutra — ^whom the Shinshu 
had entirely dethroned — but his real importance in Japanese 
thought is that he held religion to be something national and not 
merely individual. Again and again; with a vehemence which 
recalls the Hebrew prophets, he summoned the Government to 
suppress all sects except his own, with the result that he was twice 
banished and narrowly escaped with his life. His numerous 
writings contain so many personal touches that we are able to form 
an unusually vivid picture of his eventful career, which is a contrast 
to the monotony of most Buddhist Acta Sanctorum even when they 
include travel and exile.i 

Nichiren was born in 1222 in Kominato, a little fishing town on 
the east coast of the province of Awa or Boshu, where the place 
of his birth is still commemorated by a celebrated temple. 
According to local tradition, however, the site of the house where 
he first saw light is now covered by the encroaching sea and is 
marked by the shoals of i^a^-fish which frequent it and are carefully 

^ For Nichiren^s life and teaching see in English {a) A. Lloyd, The Creed of 
Half Japan, 1911, chaps, xxiv and xxv, which includes a partial translation 
of tho Rissho Aiikoku Bon, (6) M. Anesaki, Nichiren, the Buddhist Prophet, 1916. 

275 

276 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [oh. xi 

respected by the local fishermen. His father was a fisherman 
himself, but is said to have been of good lineage and to have l^een 
exiled for some political offence to this distant spot. Nichiren was 
originally named Zennichimaru, and when eleven years old was sent 
to a neighbouring monastery on a hill called Kiyozuini, where 
he was ordained at the age of fifteen and received the name of 
Rencho. He had apparently been instructed to recite the Rembutsu, 
but began to have doubts and passed through a violent crisis which 
affected his health. His active and precocious mind formed the 
idea of purifying and unifying Japanese Buddhism, and with that 
object he resolved to study it in all its varieties. He visited 
Kamakura and other places, and spent ten years (1243 -1253) at 
Hieizan. The conclusion at which he arrived was that the Truth 
is to be found in reviving the Tendai doctrine — ^that is, the Tcndai 
as preached by Dengyo Daishi — ^in a form suitable to the needs 
of the age and, if he did not approve of Hieizan as he knew it, he 
still had a double portion of its combative spirit. He returned to 
his old monastery on Kiyozumi, and on 17th May, 1263, proclaimed 
his new doctrine, the watchword of which was Namu Myoho Rcnge 
kyo or Homage to the Sutra of the Lotus of the Good Law,^ that 
is, the sutra called Saddharraapundarika, which he declared to be the 
final and x)erfect revelation of the truth. He evidently felt the 
need of a formula to set against the hated Hembutsu. 

He expressed his views with so much violence and so much 
vituperation of all who differed from him that no monastery would 
shelter him and the most that his former imstructors would do was 
to aid him to escape the attacks which threatened him from both 
clergy and laity. After wandering about for some time he built 
himself a hermitage near Kamakura and rapidly made a reputation 
as an itinerant outdoor preacher. But the times were troubled : 
earthquakes, pestilence, and famine were mingled with political 
disorder. There were plots against the Hojos, who succeeded 
in defeating them, and no one knew what was going to happen next. 
As Nichiren hiimself says, " Many minds were turning to religion,” ^ 
but turning in perplexity. So he determined to give them a clear- 
and definite answer. He retired to the monastery of Iwamoto and 

^ ^ It is diffioulfc to say liow myo in this fornuila should 

be translated. It means in Japanese wondrous rather than good. On tlie other 
hand, it is the accepted translation of Sat in Saddharma and is also used to render 
the Sanskrit Su. See Sumati in the title of Nanjio, No. 23 (30). 

2 Opening passage of the Rissho Ankoku Ron, 

NICEIREN AND ZEN 

277 

GH. xr] 

there composed a tract called Eissho Ankoku Bond or A Treatise 
on the Establishment of Eighteousness and the Peace of the 
Country, which he presented to the Hojo Eegent in 1260. It is in 
the form of a dialogue between the master of the house— no doubt 
meant to be Mchiren studying in his hermitage — ^and a visitor who 
conies to talk about the signs of the times. 

This striking work shows the characteristics which mark Nicliiren 
and Ms sect. One of its remarkable features is the identification 
of religion with national life. This was to some extent a fact in the 
Fujiwara times but it was not formulated as a principle, whereas 
the theme wMch gives life to his tract is that religious and national 
life are one, whether in health or disease. Equally remarkable 
is the intolerance of its tone. It is definitely laid down that to 
kill heretics is not murder and that it is the duty of the Government 
to extirpate heresy with the sword. Honen and his works receive 
special censure, which shows incidentally what progress his teaching 
had made by this time. It is also remarkable that Shinran is not 
mentioned, possibly because he did not preach in the same districts 
as Nichiren and possibly because his doctrines were not yet 
sulficiently distinguished from, those of Honen. Of the latter 
Mchiren says that he was worse than Zendo and the ancient 
Chinese whom he imitated, for he bade men reject the scriptures 
of the Mahayana and the hosts of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of 
whom they speak. “In this he preaches not Buddhism at all but 
his own perverse opinions. His words are false and wicked beyond 
comparison and no blame is too great for him. People all believe 
Ms false words and all admire his Senchaku.^ So they prize the 
three Sutras of the Pure Land and reject the rest. They depend 
upon the one Buddha of the Western Paradise and forget all other 
Buddhas. In truth he (Honen) is the enemy of all Buddhas and 
all Scriptures, the foe alike of saints and common people. This 
wicked doctrine has spread widely and penetrated in all directions.” 

A third feature of the tract is the apocalyptic character of 
Mcheren’s speculations, wMch was also prominent in his sermons. 
He divided the history of BuddMsm mto three millenhiums, starting 
from the Buddha’s death, wMch is dated 947 after the Chinese fashion. ' 
The first of these is the period of Shobo or the Hinayana. The 
second is the period of Image-law or Zobo, beginn.ing about the time 
of the Christian era, that is to say, the period of the Mahayana 

^ aC IE ^ la 1^. 

® Honen’s book, Senoliakushu. Seo last Chapter, p. 263. 

278 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [oh. xi 

as revealed by Avaloldtesvara and other BodMsattvas. It is 
apparently admitted that this doctrine, though, contemplated 
by SMcyamuni as a revelation to be made in his name, was not 
taught by him in his human lifed The third period is called Mappo ^ 
or the destruction of the law, and began according to hlichiren 
about A.D. 1050. 

The Lotus-sutra, especially in chapters xii and xiii called Energy 
and The Peaceful Life, contains the germs of Mchiren’s apocalyptic 
theories, and it relates how a Bodhisattva called Vi^ishtacaritra ^ 
was commissioned to preach the truth after the Buddha had passed 
away. Nichiren considered that he was Yisishtac§,ritra appearing 
in a new birth to fulfil the command. In the Kissho Ankoku Ron 
and ill his sermons Nichiren clearly warned his countrymen that 
an invasion was imminent, and he lived to see his prediction fulfilled 
by Khubilai Khan. As an inquirer he may have been in touch 
with Chinese priests and have learnt from them something about 
Chinese politics which accounts for his prescience. 

The doctrine which is to be the hght and guide of the Mappo 
period, which is to unify Buddhism and to give the nations peace 
and prosperity is the teaching of the Lotus concentrated in the 
invocation Namu myo-ho renge-ky5. The essence of this teaching 
is that Sakyamuni, not as the man Gotama but as the eternal 
omnipresent Buddha mind, is one with all reason and with all 
nature. Neither realism nor idealism as generally taught is the 
whole truth. Phenomena are real inasmuch as they exist in the 
Buddha mind and share its essence. Every grain of dust can 
become a Buddha. There is little in the substance of these doctrines 
which is new, though it is unusual in Mahayanist works to find 
the personality of Sfikyamuni thus emphatically connected with the 
Dharmakfiya. What was new and what aroused attention and 
anger was Nichiren’s uncompromising denunciation of other sects 
and other Buddhas. In the Rissho Ankoku Ron the Jodo sect are 
chiefly attacked, but in other of his writings of this same period the 
Zen fare no better, and in later works he wrote with equal violence 
against the Shingou and Risshu, Hardly one of the most venerated 

1 See llojdCB m the Seigoroku (a 

collection of extracts from Nichiren’s Works), p. 645. 

2 Tho characters for the names of the three periods are : jR Shoho, 

Zobo, ^ ^ Mappo, 

3 Lotus, chaj). XX, near beginning. Vi^ishtacaritra is rendered as 
Jogyo. 

fl3 Nembutsu Muken. 
Shingon Bokbku. 

mmm 

names is spared. He bluntly said that Aniida and Bimsliana were 
figments ; that every repetition of tbe Nembutsn cost those who 
uttered it ages in hell : that Kobo Daishi was the biggest liar in 
Japan (Nihon no dai mogo), and the Zen a doctrine of demons and 
fiends. It is said that at the beginning of the Meiji era a conference 
of representative Buddhists was held with the object of drawing 
up an account of the doctrines of the twelve sects, but when it came 
to formulating the views of the Nichirenites the meeting found it 
impossible to proceed and ended in a lawsuit. Nichiren’s opinion 
of other religioiis bodies is often quoted in the concise form of 
‘‘ The Nembutsu is hell : the Zen are devils ; Shingon is national 
ruin and the Risshu are traitors to the country 

The Hojo Government were shocked on receiving a memorial 
couched in such, language as the Rissh5 Ankoku Bon, and Nichiren’s 
ecclesiastical opponents incited a mob to attack his hermitage. 
He escaped for the moment, but on returning to Kamakura was 
arrested and banished to what was then the desolate coast of the 
peninsula of Izu (1261). Here he formulated the five fundamental 
principles of his preaching. 

The banishment in Izu did not last long. It is not known why 
Nichiren was released, but he returned to Kamalmra and was well 
received by his adherents, who, however, requested him to moderate 
his attacks on other forms of faith. But he refused to compromise 
or to admit that salvation is to be found outside his own creed, and 
work which he composed about this time called the Ji Myo-Hokke 
Mondo-sho,^ or Questions and Answers as to how one should hold 
the Lotus of Truth, is even more violent than his earlier wi’itings, 
1264: he was recalled to his native place by the serious 
of his mother, who, however, recovered in answer to his prayers, 
as he believed. He subsequently set out on a four years’ missionary 
journey in the Eastern provinces; Soon after leaving home he was 
attacked by a band of his enemies but had a wonderful escape. 

who often writes of the incident as the Peril in the 
Forest, regard.ed it as a miracle and a manifestation of the Buddha’s 
power to protect his servants and the faith entrusted to them. 

1268 he returned after making many converts, and, though there 
is some uncertainty as to his movements in the next four years, at 

CH. xi] 

NIGHlRm AND ZEN 

280 

EISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM ApR. xi 

first his vigorous attitude was not without success, for the troubles 
of the time lent colour to his diatribes against the Church and 
State. But he would not learn moderation and is said to have 
introduced into sermons personalities unusual even in militant 
theology, such as that the late Ho jo Kegent, Tokiyori, was already 
in hell and that his young son and successor, Tokimune, was on his 
way there. The arrival of the Mongol envoys, who came at the end 
of 1268 to demand tribute, stirred him to action. He addressed 
letters to the principal officials and ecclesiastical dignitaries recalling 
the warnings of a foreign invasion which he had issued eight years 
before and insisting that the only way to savm the country was to 
adopt as the national religion the faith which he preached. He also 
sent a circular to his followers telling them what he had done with 
the purpose of awakening Japan from its torpor : he awaited exile 
or death with composure, he said, and urged them to do likewise 
and not to fear the authorities. 

Nevertheless, he was not interfered with till 1271, when he re- 
appeared at Kamakura. He was arrested, tried, and apparently 
sentenced to banishment, but, according to the custom of the times, 
his custodians had the right to dispose of his life and prepared to 
execute him at midnight on 17th October. On the way to the 
execution ground where the temple of Kyukoji at Katase now stands, 
he passed before the temple of Hachiman and upbraided him and 
the Sun-goddess for not keeping their oath to guard those who 
work for the truth. There are different stories as to how he was 
saved at the last moment. According to the more sober version 
a messenger from the Government arrived just in time to stop the 
execution and to order that the prophet should be merely banished. 
But Nichiren himself relates ^ that just as his head was about to be 
struck off something bright lilce a ball of fire flew across the slcy 
from the south-east to the north-west. The sword fell from the 
executioner’s hand and all was panic and confusion. At any rate, 
it is certain that the execution did not take place : Nichiren was 
detained for a month and then removed in December, 1271, to the 
island of Sado, which lies in the Sea of Japan off the coast of Echigo. 
Here he spent about two years suffering considerable hardships but 
absorbed in meditation and the composition of various treatises, 
especially one celebrated work entitled the Eye-opener,^ in which he 

^ Nichiren’s works, Tokyo, 1904, p. 1394. 
® @ ^ Kaimokusko. 

CH. XI] NWHIMEN AND ZEN 281 

velieinently reiterates liis intention of continuing to work for the 
establishment of the Truth and says, in words which are often called 
Nichiren’s three vows, “ I will be the pillar of Japan ; I will bo the 
eyes of Japan; T will be the great vessel of Japan.” ^ He also 
designed a Mandara or graphic, representation of the universe and 
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas mentioned in the Lotus. It was 
apparently at this period that he first definitely enunciated the 
conviction that he was Visishtacaritra or Jogyo, the Bodhisattva 
whom Shaka had charged with the defence and propagation of the 
faith.^ 

But this exile, like the first, was comparatively short. Nichiren 
had friends, especially among the officers of the Bakufu army, and 
the Hojos were evidently not entirely hostile to him. In 1274 ho 
was released and allowed to return to Kamakura. The Government 
again endeavoured to come to an arrangement with the troublesome 
prophet and induce him to accept recognition on a par with other 
sects. But in vain : he would hear of nothing but the union of 
Japan under feuddhism as he understood it. He left Kamakura and 
settled with a few disciples at Minobu on the western side of Mount 
Fuji. His prestige was greatly increased by the occurrence of the 
Mongol invasions which he had predicted, and the remainder of his 
fife was spent in peace. He founded the temples of Minobu and 
Ikegami which are still the chief sanctuaries of his sect, and he 
dreamed of establishing a Kaidan which should be a central cathedral 
for the Universal Church and the Kingdom of Buddha on earth. 
He died at Ikegami in 1282, repeating with his last breath stanzas 
from the Lotus.® On the first anniversary of his death his disciples 
met together and collected his writings. It was not until 12th 
October, 1922, that the posthumous title of Rissho Daishi was 
conferred on him. 

Nichiren left a vigorous sect behind him. His six chief disciples 
were sturdy propagandists, and one of them, Mohiji, is believed to 
have started on a missionary journey to Siberia in 1295. But there 
is little to be said about the history of the sect. Its temples are 

^ Great vessel apparently meains the giver of life. 

® Ho is mentioned finst in cliax^. xiv as one of the four cliicds of the hosts of 
BodhisaUA^as who issue from the earth and are declared to be all sons of the 
Tatliagata : in chap, xx lio accepts the commission to preach the Truth after the 
nirvana of the Tathagata : after being mentioned once or twice ini:irlentally his 
name rcappeans in the last sentence as the leader of tho host of newly appeared 
Bodhisattvas. 

'•* The passage which he is said to have recited is the verses at the end of chap, xv. 

282 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [oh. xi 

beautiful and spacious, but it had not much obvious influence on art, 
and strange to say, though pugnacious and self-assertive, it never 
cut the some figure in politics as the older sects of the Shinsliu. 

There are many records of the violent attacks made by the 
Nichirenites on other religious bodies by which they alienated the 
sympathies of the Government and probably of the respectable 
public, and naturally they received hard blows in return. In 1632 
they had a prolonged conflict with the Tendai known as the Tembun 
no Horan, or the religious war of the Tembun period, in which they 
suffered severely. A little later Hideyoshi sent to Korea two 
regiments, one of Nichireiiites and one of Christians, and probably 
felt that Japan was the better for getting rid of both. 

The sub-sects, of which nine still exist, could not refrain from, 
fighting with one another and weakened the power of the body as 
a whole. Though they were bitter opponents of Christianity and 
thus helped the Tokugawa Government, it is remarkable that 
lemitsu, when prohibiting Christianity, also prohibited the most 
extreme section of the Niohiren Imown as the Fuju-fuze,^ “ No give 
or take’” branch. The edict of 1614 makes the nature of their 
offences clear and is an interesting statement of the Japanese 
official view respecting differences of religion. Christians and 
Fujufuzes were alike in insisting on having their own priests and 
temples and in refusing to support the worship of the parishes where 
they might reside. The Government’s reply is that people might 
have their own preferences in doctrine and add to every day religion 
special observances, but that those who ostentatiously reject the 
form of Buddhism prevalent in their neighbourhood are antisocial, 
“ enemies of the Empire and the object of the people’s hostility.” 

It remains to speak of one other very important sect which was 
introduced into Japan in this same eventful period and which still 
attracts attention, for its adherents are hot only numerous at the 
present day but an unusually large proportion of them belong to the 
aristocratic and literary classes. It is the DKyfina sect which 
claims Bodhidharma as a founder and which we have already met 

^ ^ ^ It was founded in 1595 by Nichi-O, a priest of the Myoza- 

kuji temple in Bizen. It was suppressed in 1624 and reauthorized in 1868. 
According to the statistics published in the Bulletin de la Maison Franco- Japonaise 
(1927, i) there are at present two sections recognized : one, the Nichiren-Shu-fu- 
ju-ze-ha, with three temples and one abbot : the other, the Niohiren-shu-fuju- 
fuze-komon-ha, with only one temple and one abbot. 

CH. XI] NIOHIBEN AND ZEN. 283 

witli in China under the name of Ch'and In Japan this name was 
pronounced as Zen and, though the success of the teaching was 
tardy, it was remarkable when it once began. It is said to have 
been first introduced in 654, but the notices about it are obscure 
and at any rate it died out, probably because it did not satisfy the 
need which was then felt for a simple and definite faith capable 
of becoming a national religion. About 815 a Chinese priest called 
Giku ^ is said to have preached the doctrines of Zen at Kyoto. 
He was well received by the Emperor Saga and his Empress, but 
appears to have returned to China without making much impression. 
Again, we hear that a certain Japanese monk called Bgaku visited 
China about 858, and after studying Zen there made an attempt 
to import it into his own country without success.^ 

But the real founder in Japan was Eisai ^ (1141-1216), a native 
of the province of Bitohu in the west, but educated at Hieizan. 
In 1168 he went to China and visited the temples of Then T'ai 
but soon returned. In 1 187 he started on a second voyage, intending 
to proceed to India, but was detained by bad weather at CheMang 
and studied again at Then T'ai until 1191, when he went back to his 
native country. His visit to China coincided with the rule of the 
Southern Sung dynasty at Hangchou, when the philosophy of 
Chu Hsi and Zen were all the fashion, and it is not surprising to find 
that he brought back the latter to Japan and preached it there. 

He is sometimes said to have also introduced tea, but it appears 
that this honour really belongs to Kobo Daishi. Tea, however 
(like the Zen itself), was not appreciated in the ninth century, and 
Eisai can at least claim the credit of making it fashionable and of 
inventing the tea ceremonies. These had originally a religious 
object. Tea kept the mind wakeful and alert for midnight devotion 
and was therefore drunk as an accompaniment to Buddhist services. 
In time the ceremonial became more secular, and during many 
ceiituries had a singular fascination for the upper classes, who 
regarded its complicated etiquette as a test of the manners, tastes, 
and temper of a gentleman. Eisai wrote a book about tea and is 
said to have cured an indisposition of the young Shogun Sanetomo 
by inducing him to drink it instead of wine. 

His return coincided with the advent of Yoritomo to power and 
his relations with the Kamakura Shoguns were extremely good. 

® See Johnston, Buddhist China, p. 320, 

284 

UISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM 

[CH. XI. : ■ 

a JL KJ j. . 

Oa fi.t amving from Chma Im 

KjmaKa,tatml202hewaB^po^a^theSh^^^^^^^ 

of tl.o '1™ yoar. Subseieatly he was 

ocdesiaatocal the erection of the 

suninioned to ilamak .r, Ik « qae of seventy-five. 

JfUuhuji shortly Einsai. the Lin-chi of the 

The sect introduced hj Em j spoken,* 

Chinese, of whose onpn and p Z jw jn Chinese and as 

The other chief f Japan hy his pupil 

‘;r Ta*:'; —Sm *; s- - •> » 

liim in 1880. He was ot ansxocia studying Zen 

Micliicliika wlio held tlie pos o - CMna, wliere 

nndei he followed first at the 

lie remained for five • . •p'iPeiii near Fukui in Bcliizen, 

Konninii,butsuhseTuentlyhudtthe Biey^^^^^^ 

finest monastery m Japam ^ the same time 

conferred on liim the tit x^iiile too polite to return 

sent him a robe of honour. P .5;pa in a well-known quatrain 
the imperial rescript and ^ at by the monkeys and 

in which he said that ho would be ,obey 

cranes among whom ho hved as e j 2en is the Chinese 

Another figure in the eariy permd o«yP" attention of 

Tokiyori, was subsequently transferred 

tolf; wf towHch Tokiyori himself retir-ed when he took the 

^^CeL d -d Sfita (is wefi as the muc^t«^^^^ 

in 1656) are often reckoned “ most numerous 

branches (ha) of one sect. ^ fjody without subdivisions, 

and has the distinction of a Ja Th^ SSto is also, 

whereas the Einsai is to any charge 

aslhavementionedins^l^aho^^^^^^^^ 

I Chapter V. 

3 The lines in Japanese- are: 

7C 

^ 111 ^ 

f) ^ 

-X 

^ /S*” 
7E m’ 

NICHIREN AND ZEN 

286 

CH. Xl] 

i]i the least open to the charge of immorality, emphasizes the 
importance of sudden spiritual enlightenment without insisting 
so strongly that a good life is the best training for such an enlighten- 
ment and the sure 1 ‘esult of it. 

In many Japanese sects there is a small but extravagant sub- 
section. In Zen this is the EukeshaJ started as early as 1254 by 
the priest Kakushin. He visited China and learnt there not only 
theology but music. On his return he wandered about Japan 
preaching and playing the flute. The sect thus formed is often 
called Konmso, from the name of one of his successors, and tlie custom 
grew up for wandering Samurai and outlaws to ioin it. It became 
so much a method of evading juwStice that leyasu subjected, it to 
strict regulations and it was entirely suppressed in 1871. But in 
springtime strolling flute-players may still be seen in various 
country districts (for instance, at Nara) wearing large hats shaped 
like beehives which entirely cover tbe upper part of the face and are 
part of the traditional costume of the Eukeshu. But I believe 
that these modern minstrels claim, no connection with Buddhism. 

Zen, so far as our knowledge of its history goes, is a Far Eastern 
religion and it is not easy to say anything definite about its 
connection with India. Even if the Lankavatara-sutra ^ expresses 
its main doctrines, it expresses them in a thoroughly Indian way 
and the idea of “ not depending on books and letters ” is not at all 
Indian. Though Bodhidharma is stated to have brought Zen 
from India to China, no reference to it in Sanskrit is known and 
the influence exercised on it by Taoism is clear. At tunes certain 
sections of it at any rate rejected not only the study of the scriptures 
but ail the conventionalities of Buddhism. It was thus exceedingly 
pliant and appealed to classes who had little taste for dogma or 
ceremony. 

It was not a suitable religion for Japan in the seventh or eighth 
centuries because what was needed then was a clear and decided 
creed which could school and civilize a people among whom the 
masses were in a rudimentary stage of culture. But things were 
very different about 1200, when nren’s minds were weary of the old 
religious forms, and new sects, national and Japanese, were coming 
into being. Zen did not spring up like the systems of Shinran and 
Nichiren : it was introduced by the time-honoured process of 
Japanese going to China and bringing back the instruction which 

® See on this point Studies in the Lankdvatdm Sdtra, by D. T. Siiznki, j). 89 ff. 

286 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [oh. xi 

they iiad received there. Still, the instruotion was so flexible and 
contained so little that was in any way suggestive of Chinese 
nationality and usages that Zen has become as decidedly Japanese 
as tea ceremonies or No plays. 

The future which awaited it was not what might have been 
expected. It might have been supposed that in a troubled period 
this contemplative and mystic doctrine, which finds truth not in 
scripture but in the immediate experience of the human mind, 
would have flourished in monastic harbours of refuge among those 
who had left the storms of the world, but not that it would have been 
accepted as the favourite rule of life for the military class. Yet such 
it became and the cause of the transformation is clear. Soldiers 
were not repelled by a doctrine which held that book learning 
is useless, and Zen is essentially discipline. The mind in which it 
trusts is not the wayward impulsive mind but the mind which is in 
training to win the race for truth, the mind which is receptive but 
under control, which remains calm and collected though threatened 
by physical danger from without or assailed by passion from within. 
Such a mind makes a soldier as well as an abbot. A well-known 
story relates that when Nobunaga was fighting against Takeda in 
the province of Kai his troops surrounded and set fire to a temple. 
The priest Kwaisen Shoki with his companions perished in the 
flames as he recited an impromptu poem which he had composed 
saying that even fire is cold to the mind that thinks it is. This 
shows how the mihtary, priestly, and poetic ideals can sometimes 
■"unite. . . 

At the present time soldiers in Japan do not perhaps study Zen, 
but fencers do so and are not considered perfect unless in addition 
to acquiring manual skill they have also mastered a secret treatise 
which is confided by teachers to their pupils. The main idea 
is that the mind should be kept “ empty ”, that is, clear, un- 
prejudiced, and ready to follow any inspiration. 

Another instance will perhaps explain what is to Europeans 
an unusual view of the function of religion and of the advantages 
which come from studying it.^ A Japanese school-girl applied 
to a well-known missionary in Tokyo and stated that she wished 
to become a Christian. When questioned as to her reasons she 
replied that her great desire was to go up in an aeroplane. “ On 
being invited to explain the connection between aeroplanes and 

1 The story is taken from the Kobe Chronide of 3rd May, 1927, which quotes 
it as being told by Miss Susan Ballard in The East and West. 

287 

CH. XI] NICHUtEN AND ZEN 

Cliristiaiiity, site replied that she had beea told that before she went 
up in an aeroplane she must have a very calm and well-regulated 
mind and that this kind of mind was only acquired by religious 
training. She thought that among the religions Christianity was 
probably the best and so she came to ask for teaching.” 

The warriors of the Bakufu reasoned very like this school-girl, and 
it is not surprising if Zen, which laid so little stress upon scriptures 
and ceremonies and so much upon mental discipline, became popular 
among them. But its transformation into a military creed is for 
all that most remarkable : it makes Zen as essentially Japanese 
as is the teaching of Nichiren, for the ■ development of the school 
in China gives no indication of the future which awaited it on the 
other side of the Straits. Zen priests in China may perhaps have 
been more ready than others to consort with aU sorts and conditions 
of men, but probably, like most literary Chinese, they held soldiers 
in scant esteem. At Kamakura Zen was not the only new form 
of Buddhism which was popular : the Baibutsu is a proof of that. 
But Eisai received marks of high favour from the Government w’-hen 
the young Yoriie (son of Yoritomo) was nominal Shogun under the 
direction of his mother, Masako, the daughter of the first Hojo 
Regent, who herself became a nun, but of the Jodo school. 
Eisai himself did not live long enough to see the Hojo power 
completely estabhshed, but his successors continued to be 
influential. The fifth Hojo Regent Tokiyori became a monk in 1256 
and resided in the Saimyoji monastery, but is said to have made 
frequent journeys incognito in order to learn, the real feelings and 
needs of the people. Though he had received full initiation into 
Zen, we also hear that he confessed his belief in the efficacy of 
Amida’s vow.^ / 

Under the Hojo there were five great Zen temples known as the 
Go-zan,2 of Fhich three were at Kamakuraj namely, the EnkaJtuji, 
Kenchoji, and Jufiikuji, while two were in Kyoto, the Kenninji, the 
earliest Zenmonastery, built by the Shogun Yoriie in 1202, and the 
splendid Tofukuji which it took the founder of theKujo family nearly 
twenty years (1236-1265) to constructs Subsequently (1336) there 
were five chief temples in Kyoto and as many in Kamakura. In the 
former, in addition to those already mentioned, were the Tenryuji, 
an imperial villa which was turned into a temple and had the 
distinguished Soseki as its first abbot, the Shokoloiji or Sokokuji, 

^ See Hdnen, the Buddhist Saint, p. 467. 

3£ llJ- 

288 mSTOBY OF JAPANESE BVDDmSM [ oh . xx 

Id tuc : m 

Above tliem ®;' jJ ’.geteated priest Mukwau was 

f T*" and produced somewhat 

Kyoto were disc a centie 

later several elation neglected. The 

records or even s. ^ .^.pools, which were 

t’^hi ‘tiie hS of Ze^ priests, taught the young people of the 

THE DAKK AGES 

Though the administration of tKe Kamakura Bakufu had won 
for it general confidence and credit, and though the successful 
repulse of the two Mongol invasions in 1274 and 1281 had crowned 
it with glory, yet in the next century it began to show signs of 
weakness and suddenly collapsed. The earlier Hojo Regents were 
men of exceptionally high character, but after the abdication of 
Sadatoki, the seventh, the real power was wielded by Ministers 
of doubtful probity, and the ninth and last Regent, Takatoki, is 
generally described by historians as a youth of weak intelligence 
and vicious habits. 

In addition to this the administration of the country and the 
political position was incredibly complicated. There was an 
Emperor at Kyoto, often a child, and at least one, and sometimes 
several, retired Emperors who exercised in Ms name what imperial 
authority was left. Then there was a Shogun, who was at this time 
an imperial Prince ^ but officially the successor of Yoritomo, and, 
thirdly, there was the Hojo Regent, nominally the Deputy of the 
Shogun who was the Deputy of the Emperor. But the Regeiit 
himself might be a minor, as wasJMratoM, an^ hands of 

regents. But this is ofily the beginning of the intricacies. The 
Emperor Go-Saga (1242-6) had two sons and made a will 
directing that the future sovereigns should be chosen from the 
descendants of these two alternately, a rule which seemed bound 
to produce trouble. The Regent Hojo SadatoM further complicated 
matters by ordering in 1288 not only that the Emperors should be 
chosen alternately from the two branches but that each Emperor 
should hold office for only ten years. One wonders that this 
complex machinery of government could have lasted even for a 
short time. It is also a reraarkahle proof of the permanence of the 
monarchical principle in Japan that the result of it should have been 

^ When the last Minamoto Shogun died in 1219, the Hojo appointed a child of 
the Fuji-wara family named Yoritsune as Shogim. He abdicated and -was succeeded 
in 124.4 by his son, who, however, was deposed in 1252 beoauae Yoritsune was 
implicated in a plot against the Hojos, The remaining four nominal Shoguns 
tili 1332 were Imperial Princes nominated by the Hojos. 

290 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [oh. xii 

not abolition of the Empire but tbe collapse of the Hojo Regents 
and tlie rise of a new dynasty of Sboguns, tbe AsMkagas. 

Tbe Court of Kyoto bad on several occasions participated in 
plots against tbe Hojos wbom they naturally disliked, and tbe 
Emperor Gro-Daigo, taking advantage of tbe unpopularity of Hojo 
Takatoki, made an attempt on a large scale. Only tbe merest 
outline of a most complicated story can be given here, but it is 
uiteresting to note that one of Go-Daigo’s preparations was to make 
two of bis sons enter tbe priesthood in order to win tbe great 
monasteries to bis side. In brief, be failed and was banished but 
escaped bi 1332 : tbe sudden defection of Asbikaga Takauji, the 
commander of tbe Bakufu army, completely changed the position ; 
the Hojo Regent committed suicide and Go'Daigo, entering 
Kyoto as Emperor in 1333, attempted to restore civilian govern- 
ment, as it had been, without Shogun or Regent. But Takauji, 
when bis request to be made Shogun was refused, proclaimed himself 
as such and was master of tbe situation. Go-Daigo took refuge 
in Hieizan which underwent a blockade, but he ultimately escaped 
and set up an independent Court at Yosbino which was Imown as 
tbe Southern Court, while Takauji recognized the other branch of 
tbe imperial family as Emperors and established tbe Northern 
Court at KySto- Eor fifty-six years there was a double succession 
of Emperors and constant war, and the real power tended to be in 
the bands of the Shugo or constables, a rehc of tbe institutions of 
Yoritomo. Unity was restored 'only in 1392 under tbe third 
Asbikaga Shogun, Yosbimitsu"” who was Hie virtual ruler of Japan 
with tbe Emperors of the Northern Court as nominal sovereigns. 

It is hardly necessary to observe that this troubled period, which 
at best can be called romantic, was far from favourable to the 
interests of Buddhism. A war between the branches of tbe imperial 
family appealed strongly to the worst instincts of the old monasteries, 
to their love of political intrigue and of military adventures. We 
hear little of religious movements in Kyoto and the neighbourhood 
at this period, and in temporal matters, in wealth and power, 
Hieizan and other holy places suffered severely. The Zen, perhaps, 
came out of the conflict best. The emiuent priest Soseki was first 
of all patronized by Go-Daigo, but subsequently enjoyed great 
influence as the confidential adviser of Takauji, who appears to have 
had pious scruples and regrets about many incidents in his 
adventurous career and to have done his best to make amends 
by vows and temple building. Also Kusunoki Masashige, the 

THE BARK AGES 

291 

OH. XIl] 

celebrated ebampion of G-o-Daigo, is said to have been encouraged 
to sacrifice liis life for his imperial master against overwhelming 
odds by a Zen priest called Sosliun, who told him that life and death 
are not more real than the empty space which a sword divides. 

The Shinshu sect also flourished, but at this period its record 
is eventful rather than edifying. The marriage of the clergy had 
as one important consequence the institution of hereditary abbots 
and, though the founder had felt Hieizan too worldly for the peace 
of his soul, his successors showed no aversion to war or politics. 
The fact that ecclesiastical office was transmitted by descent within 
the family made a Shinshu religious establishment very like a barony, 
as one of them actually became, and though the sect had no 
monasteries, it very soon began to construct fortified temples. 
It also soon split into ten sub-sects which did not differ in doctrine 
but recognized the jurisdiction of different temples whose abbots 
were descended from Shinran or his disciples.^ They were, in fact, 
analogous to bishoprics, but the authority of a Christian see is local, 
wdiereas in the Shinshu the succession of the abbots was hereditary 
and sees were moved from one place to another, particularly in 
disturbed periods. One often reads in Japanese records of temples 
being transferred, as if they were portable objects. 

In 1272 the daughter and the grandson of Shinran erected the 
Hongwanji temple at Kyoto to which the Einp^tif "Kameyama 
accorded the status of an imperial chapel.,.. -Iff subsecjucntly suffered 
much violence, the temple being' burned and the see frequently 
transferred. The direct descendants of Shinran continued to hold 
it, however, and in spite of minor differences received general 
recognition as primates of the whole sect. Another important 
temple was the Bukkoji, or Temple of Buddha’s Light, which was 
founded by Shinran himself in Yamashina, one of the suburbs of 
Kyoto, and was his residence for fifteen years. It was subsecpiently 
handed over to his younger brother Shimbutsu and his descendants. 
The seventh abbot called Byogen ^ removed it to Higashiyama in 
1320 and also acquired some celebrity by his contest with a faction 
within the sect who called themselves Akunin Shoki,^ Evil doers 
whose faith is right. As already mentioned, antinomianism, though 
expressly repudiated by the founders, from time to time made its 
appearance in the Amidist sects, and in the troubled times of the 

^ The division into the Eastern and Western Hongwanji is later and dates 
from the time of leyasu. 

292 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xii 

Emperor Go-Daigo it was very convenieEt to interpret justificatioa 
by faitli as meaning that deeds do not matter provided tbat the 
belief is correct. TMs creed was openly preached, and when 
Eyogen. equally openly opposed it he was waylaid and assassinated 
by his adversaries. The monstrous doctrine does not appear, 
however, to have been publicly advocated after this period. 

Shinran is also said to have founded in 1225 and 1235 respectively 
the Senshuji at Takata and the Kinshokuji at Kibe in Omi. The 
former was transferred to Isshinden near Tsu where there is now 
a celebrated temple. The latter had as its first abbots Shinran’s 
son Zenran and his great-grandson Kakunyo. Kakmiyo was 
appointed abbot of the Hongwanji, and the administration of the 
Kinshokuji passed into the hands of Kogen who claimed to be of 
Eujiwara lineage. His descendants, who bear the title of Baron 
Kibe, are still the heads of this section. The Shmshu had also 
temples in Echizen, Echigo, and Kaga which played an important 
part in local politics, but their activity began a little later. 

The Jodo sect was less prominent and enterprising than the 
Shinshu. It worked quietly and steadily increased its infl.uence, 
but it had to suffer a good deal of minor persecution and hardships. 
Jodo temples were often burned and the priests of Hieizan attempted 
to confiscate or destroy all Jodo books. Six editions of Honen’s 
work, t£e denchaKushu, are said to have been publicly burnt and 
his biography had to Be--|>T;ibjyh.ed under another name. The Jodo 
was not even recognized as h separate body until Tokugawa times, 
and in 1322 Shiren, a Zen priest who wrote a Biographical History 
of Buddhism, calls it a parasite because it had no independent 
domicile of its own.^ It is interesting to find that in this period of 
confusion it was the only sect which produced important novelties 
in theology. Ryoyo Shogei (1341-1420), ^ the author of a work 
called Jugi ® and reckoned as the seventh patriarch of the Jodo, 
enunciated a new doctrine which materially modified the teaching 
of Honen. He taught that birth in the Pure Land does not mean 
rebirth in another region. All language about being born again 
is purely metaphorical. The Pure Land is everywhere and to go 
there is a change of mind and condition, not of place. This idea 
has had considerable influence in recent times. Slioso or Yuyo 
Shonin was a celebrated disciple of Ryoyo Shogei and built the 

^ See Honen, tlie Buddhist Saint, p. 60. I am, indebted to the same work for 
the account of Ryoyo Shogei and Ms doctrines. 

» A # « ra. ’mm- 

OH. XII] TEE DARK AGES 293 

Zojoji temple wMdi now stands in Shiba park at T5ky5, though that 
is not its original site and the present building is a reconstruction 
due to leyasu. 

Ashikaga Takauji had established a new Shogunate which bears 
his family name and which lasted for more than two centuries 
(1338-1573), but the first fifty years or so, when there were two 
rival Courts, naturally had special characteristics and it is only 
after the year 1392, when the double line of Emperors was abohshed 
by the recognition of the Northern Court, that the Ashikaga period 
can be said to begin.^ It was m many ways a remarkable contrast 
to the Kamalaira period. During the greater part of the Hojo’s 
rule there was internal peace, few dealings with China except one 
successful war, little productivity in art and Hterature, but a 
disciplined and chivalrous military spirit as well as religious move- 
ments of force and originality. The Ashikaga rule was marked 
by chronic internal dissension, onerous taxation and economic 
distress, intercourse with China and an influx of Sung culture, some 
graceful literature and many brilliant works of art, by luxury and 
corruption in social life, and in the monasteries by turbulence or 
artistic indolence.^ 

The most remarkable of the Ashikaga rulers was the third, the 
Yoshimitsu (1358-1408) already mentioned. He succeeded as a 
minor and for many years his rule was trojftfc^dr- 'He had time, 
however, to cultivate the arts o|.,.pea.fif_^hd maintained friendly 
relations with the Mii'g di^'astyr He was a fervent follower of the 
Zen and built the monastery of Sokokuji. At the age of thirty-six 
he nominally abdicated and became a monk, following the example 
set by Emperors and the H5jos. In reahty he continued to rule 
until his death and built for his residence the Kinkaku or Golden 
Pavilion which is still one of the sights of Kyoto, In his reign 
flourished the painters Cho Densu, Shubun, and Josetsu, who were 
all priests, the last two from Sokokuji. Josetsu had among his 
pupils the celebrated Sesshu and Masanobu, the founder of the 
Kano school and father of the more celebrated Motonobu. Most of 
the great artists wore priests, for monasteries, though they often 
took part in the prevailing turbulence, were on the whole a welcome 
refuge in troublous times and this is specially true of Zen 

The Ashikaga period is often called Muromachi from the name of 

the quarter of Kyoto in which the Ashikaga Shoguns lived. The period 1336 to 
1392 is known as Nambokucho It At 10. 

But see Binyon’s works for a more favourable estimate. 

294 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cii. xii 

monasteries. As miglit be expected, tlie work of these painter- 
monks often deals with religious subjects. Even when it does not, 
the inspiration seems to come mainly from Zen pMlosopky wMcli bad 
a special influence on landscape painting. An anecdote relates that 
a Zen teacher when asked what was the essence of Buddhism replied 
‘ ‘ the oak tree in my garden It is not wise as a rule to paraphrase 
Zen apophthegms, but tliis utterance at least indicates that a love 
and understanding of nature were regarded as an aspect of religion, 
just as much as introspection. 

Literature was almost entirely in the hands of ecclesiastics, but 
their writings breathe an eclectic and easy-going spirit. Thus the 
Taiheild, a romantic and poetic chronicle like the Heike Monogatari, 
is ascribed to a monk of Hieizan, but the author attempts to reconcile 
Buddhism not only with Shinto but with Chinese philosophy. 
The Ashikaga Gakko, or College, in the town of the same name in the 
province of Shimotsuke, patronized by the Uesugi family, became 
a great centre of Chinese culture under the priest Kwaigen, and 
Chinese learning also flourished in the five Zen monasteries of 
Kyoto. Yoshida Kenko, the author of the Essays and Anecdotes 
called Tsure-Dzure Gusa ^ and master of an admirably light and 
easy style, was a Zen monk but spoke sympathetically of Shinto, 
Tabism,‘ 3nd Confucius as also of gallantry. The Ko ^ or older and 
more solemn form of drama, which arose in this period and apparently 
had its origin, in part at least, in the recitations of itinerant monks, 
shows the same mixture, but the predominant line of thought 
is Buddhist, and priests and temples play a large part in the 
dramatis personee and scenery. 

The most prominent and flourishing sect during the earlier 
Ashikaga period was the Zen. I have already said something about 
its rise and influence at Kamakura and about the ten great monas- 
teries which it possessed, five at Kamakura and five at Kyoto, all 
subordinate to the head monastery of Nanzenji in the latter. 
Especially celebrated was the Sokokuji, built by the Shogun Yoshi- 
mitsu to be a mortuary temple of his family. It became exceedingly 
wealthy and was the home of many celebrated artists and also 
gained notoriety in another way, as two of the fiercest battles of 
the Onin war (1467-1477 ) — a complicated contest arismg out of the 
succession to the Shogun Yoshimasa — ^were fought for its possession 

^ Translation published by Sansom in Trans. As. Soc. Japan, 1911. 

CH. XII] THE DARK AGES 295 

and recapture. Tor tlie credit of Zen, however, let it be said that 
its monks are not recorded to have maintained troops or fought like 
Hieizan and the other older monasteries. Indeed, it sometimes gave 
way, as in 1344 when the violent opposition of Hieizan prevented 
the Emperor from attending the dedication of the Tenryuji, and in 
1368 Hieizan was made to listen to reason by the intervention of the 
Shogunate, not by direct military resistance on the part of the Zen. 
Its great influence was exercised by diplomacy rather than by force 
of arms. Its abbots were powerful in the Council Chamber of the 
Shoguns. Soseki (or to call him by his posthumous title Muso 
Kokushi) and, later, Manzai were both of them influential and 
capable advisers. 

The clergy, too, were strong in the lower branches of the Civil 
Service, for monies were employed as clerks in the Government 
secretariat, and also a department which is not usually considered 
as ecclesiastical, namely, shipping and commerce, was in the hands 
of the Zen hierarchy. When Takauji was turning an old palace 
into the Temple of Tenryuji, he sent Soseki, who was then the 
abbot, to China on the ship called Tenryuji to buy appropriate 
decorations and ornaments. This was in 1342, but the voyage was 
so successful that Tenryuji-bune became the regular name- for a 
ship trading with China. In 1452 there ■^s.,a fleet pf-ten’such ships 
which, though managed by the clergy ,'»etigaged in ordinary 

commerce. Books and pictflY'es, however, formed a considerable 
part of the cargo imported to Japan, The Myoshinji temple of 
Kyoto, which is charged with the supervision of 3,800 others, was 
celebrated for its businesslike activity, its management of clerical 
finance, and its accurate accounts. 

Meanwhile the political situation in Kyoto had undergone material 
changes. Though the Ashikaga Shoguns had paid no attention 
to an agreement made in 1392 that the Emperor should be chosen 
alternately from the northern and southern branches of the imperial 
family, the southern branch made several attempts and the various 
military houses were continually fighting among themselves. 
It became almost impossible to collect dues from the imperial 
estates in the provinces and the Court and nobility fell into great 
poverty. 

One result of this was that the custom of abdication and of 
maintaining separate establishments for ex-Bmperors, who generally 
entered the Church, fell into abeyance for want of the necessary 
funds. Whereas in 1300 there were five Emperors living, each with 

296 HI8T0RY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xn 

Ms own Court, in the whole period from 1400 to 1500 there were 
but four reigns and two ex-Bmperors, and the funeral of the last 
Emperor of this century was delayed for forty-four days because 
no money could be found to defray the expenses. Nearly aU the 
princes except the Crown Prince had to become priests, whereas 
previously only certain temples had been allowed the privilege 
of having a princely Abbot (Miya Monzeki). TMs does not, however, 
imply a close connection between the Court and the Church. 
The imperial power and prestige suffered considerably, whereas the 
magnificence of the Shoguns increased, and even a single door in one 
of their palaces is said to have cost twenty thousand gold pieces. 

Hieizan and the older monasteries indeed suffered from financial 
straits like their imperial patrons, but the Zen accommodated itself 
to the new regime. At the instigation of Soseki, Takauji had 
ordered that in addition to the imposing array of temples at Kyoto 
and Kamakura, a Zen monastery and pagoda to be styled Ankokuji 
should be built in every province, so that Zen came near to being 
the State Church. This, no doubt, was one of the motives wMch 
prompted Takauji and Soseki, but the former also desired to show 
ti^s regret for the many deaths and misfortunes which he caused. 
Similarly he established the Tenryuji already mentioned as a 
propitiation to the woimded spirit of Go-Daigo. 

The Shoguns, however, did not neglect the interests of other 
religious bodies. Temples and Shinto shrines were relieved of the 
burdens of taxation, and in many cases a tax caffed Dansen, a some- 
what miscellaneous impost, Mtherto levied for special ceremonies 
such as coronations, was collected in order to repair monasteries. 
It had become the custom to erect barriers for the collection of 
transit dues on all important roads and the proceeds of a particular 
barrier were often assigned to the upkeep of some religious foundation. 
Thus Kofiilmji was given the right to the customs of the port of 
Hyogo, But monasteries were not allowed to erect toll-barriers 
or to collect dues themselves, though they showed some desire to do so . 
They were practically the only non-military manors which survived 
tlu'ough this period and many of them can hardly be called non- 
military, though the Zen have a better right to the title than others. 
The monks of Hieizan were under arms in 1435, but were suppressed 
and suffered the same fate in 1499, when they took part in the 
quarrels between the Shogunate and the Hosokawa family. 

Besides the military monks attached to various monasteries there 
were “ wandering swash-buckling priests ” called KomusS or Boro. 

ci-T.xii] THE DARK AGES 297 

The Tsure-D 2 ;iire Gusa says that they were dissolute and cruel in 
appearance but praises their bravery and relates how one challenged 
another in the middle of a religious service. It was objected that 
they would pollute the temple if they crossed swords in it, so they 
went outside and fought till both were killed. 

An example of another kind of eccentric itinerant priest is 
furnished by Ikkyu ^ (1394-1481), said to have been a son of the 
Emperor Go-Komatsu. In his youth he entered the Zen monastery 
of Daitoku-ji in Kyoto, of which he became Superior, and won 
renown as a poet and painter. He is more celebrated, however, 
as the hero of innumerable anecdotes which represent him as a 
wandering monk, eccentric and apparently contemptuous of holy 
things, but really a profound philosopher. He is said to have died 
advising his disciples to eat fish and live long enjoying themselves. 

The fifteenth century was also important for the history of the 
Shinshu. I have already mentioned the trouble occasioned by the 
section called Akiinin Shold or Evil doers whose faith is right. The 
disappearance of such abuses was probably due in great measure to 
Eennyo Shonin ^ (1415-1499), whose influence on his sect was so 
great that he was styled its second founder. He was the son of the 
head of the Hongwanji temple in Kyoto, and on the death of his 
father succeeded liim as eighth hereditary abbot in 1457 and rendered 
himself conspicuous by his reforming energy and his literary work. 
He was favoured by the Emperor Go Hanazono who restored his 
temple. But this aroused the jealousy of the monks of Hieizan, who 
in 1465 made a sudden attack on his residence and burnt the building 
to the ground, he himself barely escaping with his life and carrying 
with him the image of Shinran. He spent many years as an 
itinerant preacher and at last settled in 1471 at Yoshizaki in Echizen, 
where crowds flocked to hear his eloquence in the temple which 
he built for himself. It was here that he began to write his Ofumi 
or Epistles. But again he was the victim of jealoiisy and this time 
at the hands of a subdivision of his own sect. The priests of the 
Senshuji, belonging to what was called the Takada-ha, attacked and 
burnt his temple in 1474 and he again took to a wandering life. 
In 1480 he obtained permission to rebuild the Hongwanji, which 
had been burnt by the priests of Hieizan, and transferred the site 
to Yamashina. But a wandering life had become part of his 
nature. He handed over the management of the new temple to his 

^ — "ffc. ® ^ ^11 Jh A. 

298 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cii. xii 

successor and began another missionary tour, wliicli was only ended 
by Ids death at Osaka at the age of eighty-four. 

In spite of the attacks made upon him by the priests of Senshuji, 
Kennyo’s preaching greatly contributed to strengthen the cause of the 
Sliinshu in Echizen and the neighbourhig provinces, where it became 
not only a spiritual but a political force of considerable importance. 
The end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century in 
these regions is knowm by the name of Ikkoto no ran,^ or the wars 
of the Ikko sect, in which the priests made war on the Daimyos 
and seized a great number of estates. Kaga was distracted by a 
Cjuarrel between two branches of the Togashi family, the hereditary 
chiefs of the province, each supported by a branch of the Shinshu. 
Finally, Togashi Masachika was besieged by his priestly enemies and 
escaped to Etchu, where he committed suicide and the power of his 
family collapsed. The clergy came out best in the quarrel and 
remained as practical rulers of Kaga until they were driven out by 
Nobunaga in 1576. 

Though the history of the Shinshu often reads like the annals of 
a fighting clan or feudal house, yet religious activity and develop- 
ment were not lacking. Eennyo wrote a number of Ofumi ^ or 
letters, arranged after his death in five parts, which are venerated 
like the Epistles of St. Paul and still read in the services of the 
sect. He also wrote about 1460 a sort of Creed called Kyogemon.® 
The weakness of Shim’an’s teaching lay in its ethical side. It seemed 
to say that all that is necessary is to invoke the mercy of Amida, 
and although Shinran protested against the interpretation which 
made his words mean that moral conduct is a matter of indifference, 
the existence of the Alomin Shoki was a sufficient proof that there 
was a real danger of such an inference being drawn. Eennyo 
accordingly, who had practical experience of such extremists, laid 
great stress on the necessity of discharging one’s moral duties and 
of living as a good citizen. The last article of hi.s creed deals with 
this obligation, and he appears to have been effectual in putting 
a stop to all theories within the sect which were tantamount to a 
repudiation of the moral law. He insisted that unless the thought 
and mind were sound, no lip-service was of any avail. It was 

' — # iL. Ikko means single-minded. 

® Translated in Haas’s book A niida Buddha unsere ZuflucM, p. 142. It is now 
called liyoge-mon by the Western and Kaige-mon by the Eastern Hongwanji. 
See also Anesaki, History of Japanese Religion, p. 231. 

CH. xii] THE DARK AGES 299 

essential to put one’s whole faith and trust in Amida and that implies 
a pure heart and an absence of selfish striving. 

Rennyo’s teaching about Ryobu-Shinto was also important.^ 
He held that since the Shinto deities are really Buddhas and since 
all Buddhas are comprised in Amida, therefore the worship of Amida 
is sufficient and includes in itself the worship of all other deities. 
Although the members of the Sliinshu declare that in worshipping 
Amida they honour the national deities, it is clear that absorption 
of this kind amounts to ignoring and even rejecting all other cults, 
and the practical result of Rennyo’s arguments has been that the 
Shinshu have for their family worship only an altar to Amida and 
reject all other images and symbols. 

At this same period Shinzei (1443-1495) founded a new sect 
which still bears his name and is justly reckoned as a subdivision 
of the Tendai rather than of the Jodo or Shinshu. He enjoined 
the repetition of the Nembutsu, but taught that it should be combined 
with the observance of all the ordinary Buddhist Code. 

About this time, or somewhat later, there arose among the Shinshu 
a secret sect called Hiji Monto, apparently organized as a protest 
against the autocratic administration of the Hongwanji at Kyoto. 
From Jesuit records quoted by L6on Pages it seems that they had 
some influence in the sixteenth century, but I have been unable 
to find out anything about their origin, their tenets, or their practices, 
except that they still exist and keep their secret. ^ 

After Yoshimitsu the Ashikagas quickly deteriorated, though 
they did not collapse for some time. The Shoguns became feeble 
and dissolute, often minors and mere puppets in the hands of their 
Chief Minister or KwanryS, a post for which the powerful families 
of Hosokawa and Ouchi fought and struggled. The confusion was 
incredible. At one time there were five rival Shoguns living, most 
of them minors and tools in the hands of contending factions. 
Of the last six Shoguns five died in exile and one committed suicide. 
Anarchy prevailed, the only effective power being m the hands of the 
great Barons who were constantly at war with one another. Social 
conditions became changed. The old feudalism had been based 
on the service owed to a chief by those who held land from him ; 
now chiefs began to take into their service landless men and to 
maintain private armies of mercenaries, debtors, and adventurers. 

^ It is said to have been anticipated by Zonlcaku (1290-1373), but Rennyo 
appears to have made it popular. 

2 Anesaki, History of Japanese, Religion, pp. 232 and 305. 

300 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xii 

Tlie oppressed and degraded populace constai].tly broke out into 
riots. Owing to internal dissensions and land troubles tbe ancient 
noble bouses bad lost tbeir pre-eminence, and upstart famibes led 
by some capable ebief became lords of large territories. 

This explains one feature of tbe eventful interval between tbe 
Asbikaga and tbe Tokugawa periods, namely, tbe almost simul- 
taneous rise of three great men, Nobunaga (1534-1582), Hideyosbi 
(1636-1598), and leyasu (1642-1616), wbo, starting with bttle except 
tben- talents, became one after another masters of their country. 
The other feature is tbe arriva] of tbe Portuguese and of Christianity. 
This event would have been momentous at any time, but both its 
immediate effect and tbe subsequent reaction were unusually 
violent because hereditary authority and tradition were at tbeir 
weakest and tbe de facto rulers of tbe country bad tbe power and 
energy to do whatever tbeir varying interests and policies 
dictated. 

I have not space to discuss here tbe poHtical parties of this period 
nor tbe fortunes of Christianity in Japan, and must be content to say 
that politically Nobunaga and Hideyosbi prepared tbe way for 
leyasu. A weU-known caricature represents them as grinding 
flour and baking whereas be eats the cake. Equally apt as an 
illustration of tbeir methods is tbe story which tells bow they tried 
to make a nightingale sing. Nobunaga said If you don’t sing, 
I’ll wring your neck’’ ; Hideyosbi, “ If you don’t sing, I’ll make 
you” ; but leyasu, “ If you don’t sing, I’ll wait till you do.” 
Nobimaga, though be bad bttle constructive genius, brought a 
considerable extent of territory under his sway and thus left to his 
successor the possibility of a united Japan. Hideyosbi made tliis 
possibility a fact, but mstead of consolidating tbe state thus formed 
be dreamed of conquering China and died in tbe midst of bis 
preparations. It was left for leyasu to create a dynasty and 
institutions wbicb lasted more than two centuries and a half. 

Nobunaga was an enemy of Buddhism : he feared the power 
of the great monasteries and in his early days they sided with bis 
enemies. He therefore from purely political motives favoured 
Christianity. Hideyosbi at first followed tbe same policy, but 
subsequently believing that the Catholic missionaries bad political 
designs suppressed them and tbeir creed. The first persecution 
was followed by a lull, but leyasu aiiA his successor lemitsu renewed 
it in an effective form and Christianity was practically exterminated 
in Japan, though it is said that in 1868, when tbe country was thrown 

CH. xii] THE DARK AGES 301 

open again to foreign intercourse, Roman Catlioiic priests found 
Cliristians in considerable numbers in Kyushu and even in Sado 
who had maintained their worship in secret. 

The story of Christianity in Japan at this period is interesting, 
but I cannot discuss it here, for the most strikmg point about 
it is for our purpose purely negative. Whatever influence 
Christianity may have had in the Meiji era, it appears that the 
Catholicism which the Portuguese attempted to introduce in the 
sixteenth century had not the smallest effect on the doctrines 
or ideals of any Buddhist sect. The ardour of controversy may 
perhaps have stimulated the interest in purely religious issues and 
awakened certain sects which had become too engrossed in politics, 
but no mstance is quoted of Buddhism being affected by Cathohe 
dogma. Many writers have shown great ingenuity in attempting 
to discover analogies (often imaginary) between certain aspects 
of Buddhism and Christianity and to find traces of Manichsean, 
Nestorian, and Gnostic influence, but ho one, so far as I am aware, 
has even attempted to produce a particle of evidence indicating 
that the contact of the two religions in the sixteenth century, 
t’ nigh undoubted, occasioned the least change in Buddhism. 

ds should surely make one cautious in assuming that the association 
of Buddhist priests with a few Nestorian priests in China can have 
seriously modified Buddhist beliefs. 

During all the latter half of the sixteenth century Buddhism was 
an important force in Japan, but, strange to say, more conspicuous 
as a military and political force than in its proper sphere. The 
principal monasteries appear on the scene from time to time in 
exactly the same way as the great military houses with armies and 
forts of their owui, wdth territorial ambitions and designs to crush 
or annex their rivals. But the same period witnessed the end 
of this system and the definite defeat of the Church Mifitant. 
There was evidently a danger that the country might be ruled by 
priests like Tibet. The leaders of Japan forestalled this danger, 
but were careful to avoid anything like a war against religion as 
such, which, indeed, was not diflicult since the whole trouble arose 
from the great temples behaving not as if they were religious centres 
but as if they were military or feudal institutions. 

Hieizan was the first to suffer. It paid dearly for its participation 
in politics, for it joined the enemies of Nobunaga and was almost 
annihilated by him in revenge. The enmity between Nobunaga 
and the Buddhists is no credit to the latter, for at bottom its origin 

i : 

I 

302 HI8T0MY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cs. sii 

was ttat tlie great monasteries could terrorize tlie feeble govern- 
ments of tbe Emperor and Sbogun but were kept in order by a 
vigorous military despotism. In 1570 Nobunaga’s rule in Kyoto 
was exposed to a double danger. Tke Miyosbi family in conjunction 
with the Shinshu priests of Osaka threatened the city, and while 
Nobunaga was dealing with them his old enemies the nobles of 
Bchizen and Omi planned another attack on him with the help of 
Hieizan. Kobunaga forced his lay enemies to surrender and next 
year dealt out retribution to the ecclesiastics. It was said that 
there were then 3,000 monasteries on the holy mountain ; all were 
destroyed and most of their inmates, who must have numbered 
many thousands, were massacred, the remainder being banished, 
leyasu rebuilt some of the temples, but the number was limited 
to 125 and the monasteries never regained their political power. 

Another of the older sects, the Shingon, also brought vengeance 
on itself at the hands not of Nobunaga but of Hideyoshi, thus 
making it clear that the severity shown to these turbulent monks 
was not the result of religious animosity. The original Shingon 
monastery of Koyasan had an offshoot — or rival — founded by 
Kakuhan in 1130 in the province of Kii which became extremely 
powerful. It owned 2,700 temples and a large army of mercenaries : 
it was partly responsible for the introduction of firearms into 
Japan, and the Jesuit Vilela compared its constitution with that 
of the Knights of Ehodes. In 1661-2 it offered formidable 
opposition to the forces of the Shogun. In 1584, when Hideyoshi 
was beginning the construction of his great castle at Osaka, no less 
than 15,000 monks from Kegoro are said to have marched against 
the town. They were routed by his generals who killed 4,000, and 
the peasantry clubbed large numbers of the fugitives~a proof that 
these military abbeys were not popular. Hideyoshi completed the 
reduction of Hegoro in person next year. He abstained from 
wholesale carnage, but it is significant that by capturing the 
monastery he obtained the whole of the rich province of Kii. 

In the latter part of the sixteenth century the Shinshu becomes 
conspicuous. As I have already mentioned, its protestant and 
popular theology did not include any objection to the temporal 
power of the Church, and since it did not require celibacy its 
hereditary abbots were even more lilre feudal barons than those 
of other sects. In 1532 the Nichiren drove the Shinshu out of their 
headquarters at Yamashma, near Kyoto, and burnt their edifices. 
Though their influence in the capital temporarily waned, they had 

303 

OH. XIl] 

THE DARK AGE8 

a brilliant career in tbe provinces. They acquired extensive 
estates in EcMzen, K-wanto, and elsewhere and became feudal lords 
of Kaga. As early as 1475 they built a fortified temple at Kanazawa, 
tbe capital of this province, and field it till they were ejected by 
Nobimaga one hundred years later. In 1532, after being driven 
out of Kyoto, they built at Osaka a great castle or fortress which 
enclosed their principal temple. Nobunaga had been able to drive 
them out of Kaga, but in this stronghold Kennyo Shonin,^ the 
eleventh abbot and a most competent soldier, was able to defy him 
for about ten years. At last Nobunaga besieged the castle with 
60,000 men. Kennyo escaped in 1680 and, as both besiegers and 
besieged were coming to the end of their strength, they accepted 
the intervention of the Emperor, who evidently considered this 
prolonged war with a religious body to be a public scandal. It was 
agreed that the priests should surrender the fortress in return for 
estates elsewhere, but before they left they burned all the buildings, 
leaving nothing for the besiegers. The temple, or rather the see, 
was transferred to Nakajima in Settsu and subsequently to Kyoto 
in 1601. Kennyo had to surrender his title in favour of his son, but 
remained a personage of political importance. In 1587 he was 
utilized by Hideyoshi, who found it difficult to obtain information 
about what was going on among the Christians in Satsuma. 
Kennyo visited the district, nominally for the purpose of inspecting 
Buddhist establishments, but really as Hideyoshi’ s emissary, and 
by facilitating the subsequent campaign materially contributed 
to the extirpation of Christianity. Subsequently the population 
took vengeance on the Shinshu monks for what they considered their 
treachery and the local authorities endeavoured to suppress the 
sect. It may be that it was in return for these services of Kennyo 
that in 1591 the Shinshu were allowed to build a great temple in 
Kyoto where their influence had been small since their expulsion 
by the Mchirenites sixty years before. 

The persecutions of Christianity form an interesting chapter in the 
religious history of Japan. The first began in 1587, the second and 
more rigorous in 1616. After what has been said about the turbulent 
spirit of the Buddhist monasteries the reader will not expect to hear 
that they imitated the tolerance of Gotama in dealing with error. 
In fact they were not much more humane than the contemporary 

J;: A. See Murdoch {History of Japan, ii, p. 23 and elsewhere), 
who thinks that the Buddhist priesthood was the greatest political power in 
Japan at this period and that Kennyo aspired to be a Pope or Grand Lama. 

304 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [cn. xii 

Cliristiaii sects of Europe. My knowledge of tke doings of tkese 
latter does not permit me to make a comparison of tlie inquisitions 
established by Japanese Shoguns and by European princes, but the 
followmg points may be mentioned. First, the reasons for the 
persecution of Christianity were entirely political. The rulers of 
Japan wished to be tolerant in matters of belief and had always 
shown themselves so in the past, but they thought, and with justice, 
that Christianity as introduced was not merely a behef but pohtical 
intrigue in disguise. Secondly, the Christians had themselves 
set the example of violence. They attacked with intolerable 
presumption the Buddhist religion and spared no pains to vihfy 
its doctrines and the character of its priests. When the nobles 
of Kyushu took a fancy to Christianity, it was propagated there 
with the same violence afterwards used to suppress it. Thirdly, the 
Government made use of Buddhist priests to detect Christianity and 
certify to orthodoxy. The priests would have been superhuman 
in gentleness had they not given a helping hand to the measures 
directed against their wanton aggressors, but I have not found any 
proof that they instigated and superintended the work of inquisition 
and execution in the same direct way as the Catholic Church in 
Europe. 

CHAPTER XIII 

TOKUGAWA PERIOD : CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE 

CHURCH 

In 1603 leyasu founded the Tokugawa Shogiinate which lasted, 
until 1868. The isolation of Japan during this period (though not 
until leyasu had ceased to rule) is well-known. Japanese were 
forbidden to leave the country and foreigners to enter it, and these 
rigorous proscriptions were surprisingly well observed. Isolation 
was nothing new to the Japanese and this long period of peace and 
seclusion was of value, for without it they w’ould hardly have been 
able to preserve their individuality when subsequently invaded 
by the horrors of European and American civilization. At first 
it was also a healthy change for Buddhism after the irreligious 
inihtarism of the previous century. We hear no more of monastic 
and priestly troops. The strongholds of Hieizan, Osaka, and 
Negoro had been destroyed. The monasteries of the first mentioned 
were restored by leyasu but as comparatively modest and unfortified 
buildings. So, too, the Hongwanji temple erected by the Shinshu 
at Kyoto after their castle at Osaka had been burned, though 
magnificent, was a purely ecclesiastical foundation. But sub- 
sequently in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Buddhism 
sank into a torpid condition, from which it was only awakened by 
the somewhat active measures taken against it in 1868. 

leyasu came of a family which belonged to the Jodo sect, and 
several anecdotes relate that he was influenced by its doctrines. 
When defeated and pursued by Nobimaga in 1560, he retreated to 
the Daijuji temple in his native province of Mikawa. The abbot 
consoled and exhorted him : How can one like you, brought up 
in a Jodo family, behave like a coward ? ” said he, “ Who can resist 
you, if you have the spirit of Amida with you 1 If a man is afraid 
of losing anything, he will certainly lose it, but if he is willing to give 
it up, he will gain it. So be willing to give up your life for the sake 
of your followers.” leyasu took the abbot’s blessing, followed his 
advice, attacked the pursuing army and utterly routed them. 
This shows that the Jodo as well as Zen could inspire soldiers, 
but it must be admitted that it did not usually preach martial 

306 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xiii 

ardour, tliougli the closely allied Shinshu produced an abundance 
of military heroes. 

Another story relates that in his old age, when he was living in 
retirement near Shizuoka, leyasu was visited by the abbot of the 
Zojoji temple at Yedo and confided to him his ambition to become 
a god and protect his country. The abbot replied that the way to 
attain his desire was to recite the Nembutsu and by the power of 
Amida become born as a Buddha in the Pure Land. Then he would 
be able to assume any form he might wish and bestow blessings 
on his descendants and the Japanese race. leyasu is said to have 
gladly accepted this advice and to have repeated the Nembutsu 
regularly till he died. Ofibcially he was assumed to have attained his 
ambition, for the year after his decease the Emperor Go-Mizuno-0 
granted him the posthumous title of Tosho Dai Gongen,^ or the 
Great Manifestation of Divine Light from the Bast, Gongen being 
the name for a temporary manifestation of the Buddha, such 
as the abbot had described. leyasu is still spoken of as Gongen 
sama. He and his grandson lemitsu are both bmied in the 
magnificent mausolea at Nikko which were originally Buddhist 
foundations, though now under Shinto management. lemitsu’ s 
death was marked by the most unbuddhist ceremony of ten of his 
faithful retainers committing suicide in order to accompany him 
to the next world. 

leyasu consistently favoured the Jodo sect. Its ofiB.cial existence 
was duly recognized and many large temples were erected for its use. 
The Zojoji temple at Yedo (Tokyo) was transferred to its present 
position in Shiba Park and magnificently rebuilt. The Chion-in 
temple in Kyoto, which had formerly been a dependency of the 
Seiren-in, was also rebuilt with great splendour and was constituted 
the headquarters of the Jodo sect, as the Nanzenji had previously 
been for the Zen. Eurther, in Yedo and the surrounding district 
eighteen Jodo temples were constructed which under the dheotion 
of the Zojoji paid especial attention to educating candidates for the 
priesthood. The learned priests Tenlcai and Taku-an,^ both of the 
Miura family, enjoyed leyasu’ s confidence and were frequently 
consulted on questions of pohcy. When leyasu erected the temples 
of Ueno, known as To-ei-zan ^ (or Hieizan of the East, suggesting 

'M m 

® He is also celebrated in another way as having invented the Takuanzuke, 
a method of seasoning daikon or large radishes which is still called after him. 

» til Ui- 

CH. XIII] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 307 

that they were the counterpart of the once powerful sacred mountain 
at Kyoto), Tenkai was named as Abbot and at the same time Superior 
of the great temples at Nikko, thus holding an almost arohiepiscopal 
position. leyasu also ordered him to superintend the reprinting 
of the Tripitaka, which took eighteen years (1633-1651) to complete. 
Another clerical intimate of leyasu was his secretary, DenchorS, 
a Zen priest who was head of the Nanzenji and Konchi-in. He not 
only accompanied his master on all his campaigns but occasionally 
rendered military as well as secretarial services. After the battle 
of Mikata-ga-hara he presented three heads as trophies, and the 
Konchi-ji was consequently allowed to use three black stars as its 
armorial bearings. He was subsequently made superintendent of 
all the religious establishments of the Empire, Shinto as well as 
Buddhist. 

But neither leyasu nor lemitsu was single-minded in his piety 
and both used Buddhism as an instrument to ai^ist them in working 
out their general policy. For instance, the abbots of the great 
monasteries in Yedo were often relatives of the Emperor and 
most of the imperial princes and princesses were obliged to become 
priests or nuns until the Shogun leiiobu (1709-1712) relaxed the 
rule which practically forbade them to marry and found houses. 
They served as hostages for the good behaviour of the Imperial 
Court ^ and their celibacy reduced the numbers of the imperial 
family, which was thus drawn into the Buddhist fold, though later 
it was made the representative of Shinto and became almost 
anti-Buddhist. Again, leyasu was insistent in advising Hideyori, 
the young son of Hideyoshi and a possible rival, to spend on 
rebuilding the temple of Hokoji money which might otherwise have 
been used for military purposes. Many disasters overtook this 
edifice and finally leyasu picked a quarrel with Hideyori about 
the inscription which he had placed on a colossal bell destined 
to be its chief ornament. This pretext led to the conflict in 
which Hideyori perished, but the real cause of the quarrel was 
clearly political. 

leyasu also seized an opportunity which presented itself of dividing 
the strength of the Shinshu, It is clear that at the end of the 
sixteenth century the rulers of Japan, however anxious they might 

^ The idea w&a that a Prince Abbot might be ijroclaimed Emperor if necessary. 
Thus m 1868 the last supporters of the Shogunate carried off to the north Prince 
Kitashirakawa, head of the temples of Ueno and Nikko, with the design of setting 
him up as Emperor. He subsequently gave up his orders. 

308 

HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xni 

be to utilize Buddliism against Christianity, feared its political 
power. Though Nobunaga had destroyed the military and 
political importance of Hieixan and Hideyoshi had crushed Negoro, 
the Shinshu remained very strong and the net result of Kennyo’s 
complicated dealings with several Governments was that a 
magnificent Hongwanji temple vras re-erected in Tokyo in 1591 to 
replace the edifice burnt by the Nichirenites nearly sixty years 
before. Kennyo had three sons of whom the eldest, Koju, became 
abbot of the new temple. He had to rethe in three years in favtmr 
of his youngest brother Kocho but did not abandon his prctensi'uns. 
leyasu seized this opportunity to divide the sect by promotm,g the 
building of a second or Eastern Hongwanji (in contradistimption 
to the older or Western establishment) and Koju was madf 3 abbot 
of it. The sect was thus divided for financial and admin., istrative 
purposes and the division restrained its political activity. % But in 
other respects it did not suffer.^ 

The legacy of leyasu, although a spurious documesnt and 
considerably later than the Shogun whose name it bears, i probably 
gives a fairly correct picture of his ideas and principles. I' jb contains 
several references to Buddhism besides that which I hav^e quoted 
above. 2 It deprecates religious disputes and promises t’^oleration 
to all except Christians, described as the “ false an ^d corrupt 
school ” (chap. 31). It alludes to the title to be borne hly temples 
and to the Toeizan at Ueno ^ (chap. 29), and contains an Uvgteresting 
expression of gratitude (chap. 28) in which leyasu is made^ to speak 
of the many dangers that he has undergone in war and the ji eighteen 
escapes that he has had from death. " On this accoi|int,” he 
continues, “I have founded eighteen temples ^ at yecfio as a 
thank-offering. Let my posterity ever belong to the honouiii'ed sect 
of Jodo.” I 

lemitsu, the third Tolmgawa ShSgun, was perhaps th(|f most 
effective champion who ever supported the Buddhist cause, for it 
was mainly to him that the proscription of Christianity wq-is due 
and he was also a builder of temples. On the other hand, | being 
(apart from Christianity) of liberal views, he gave eff^-ective 

% 

^ The temples of the two divisions are distinguished by their archit('.'?etnre. 
Those of the Western branch have one roof only, those of the Eastern tw*^o, one 
above the other. ; 

= Chap. VI, p. 193. 

® This is one of the passages which prove that the legacy, as we have J|it, is 
spurious, for Toeizan was not built until sixteen years after the death of TejVasu. 

^ Danrin, literally sandal groves, a metaphorical expression for temples. 

J 

CH. xiii] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 309 

encouragement to Confucianism and also proscribed tbe extreme 
militant division of the Mcbiren sect known as Fuju-faze. 

Tsnnayosbij tbe fifth Tokugawa Shogun, was the only one of the 
family who could be called a fanatical Buddhist. His devotion was 
due to the loss of his son and his inability to obtain another heir. 
The most elaborate and costly ceremonies were performed in the hope 
of bringing him male offspring, but in vain. In order to explain 
this want of result, Ryuko, a priest who enjoyed the Shogun’s 
confidence, hit upon the idea that in previous births he had been 
guilty of bloodshed, which might, however, be expiated by special 
regard for animal life, in particular the life of dogs. His Highness 
having been born in the year of the dog.^ The taking of life was 
accordingly made punishable with extreme rigour, and not only 
dogs but all animals were protected, for a Court page was beheaded 
for killing a bird. His many laws for the protection of birds and 
beasts made the populace call him the Shogun of Dogs ^ and his 
successors took warning by his unpopularity, for we hear no more 
of extreme religious legislation. Nevertheless, Tsunayoshi was 
not in other respects a bigot. He was a patron of Confucianism, and 
it was on his initiative that the Shinto festivals called Daijo-e and 
Kamo-sai, which had long fallen into neglect, were revived. 

The position of Buddhism under the Tokugawa regime was defined 
by the decree of 1614. The preamble of this strongly anti-Christian 
document ® is in other respects remarkably tolerant, for it identifies 
Shintoism with Buddhism. “ Japan is caUed the land of Buddha,” 
it says, “and not without reason. . . . God and Buddha differ in 
name but their meaning is the same. . . . Japan is the country 
of gods and of Buddha. It honours God and reveres Buddha.” 
It also quotes with approval Chinese speculations about the positive 
and negative priuciples and bestows a high encomium on the Lotus- 
sutra. But when it proceeds to lay down rules for conduct— -that is, 
for avoiding punishment— orthodoxy is defined as attending the 
Buddhist temple of the parish where a person resides, to whatever 
sect that temple may belong.^ Every one is to receive a certificate 
from the parish temple and to be entered in its register ; every one 

The eleventli year ia the old cyclical system, 

® :^r. 

» See VI, i, 1878, p. 47. ^ ^ ^ ^ 

^ The decree is expressly directed against Christians, the rnjufuze branch of tlio 
Nichiren sect, and the Hiden, who are said to he three branches of the sartie sect. 
For conjectures as to the meaning of Hiden see Tr, As, Sog. Jap., vx, i, 47, 

310 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xm 

is to be buried according to its rites. Should any desire be expressed 
to perform funeral or ancestral ceremonies according to the ritual of 
another sect, the officials concerned are charged to make strict 
inquiry. Parishioners are to attend the parish temple on the 
anniversary of the Buddha’s death, certain other days, and the days 
of their ancestors’ deaths on pain of forfeiting their certificates. 
On the last-named days they are also to receive the visit of the 
parish Buddhist priest. It will be seen that the result of this decree 
was to crystallize the Buddhist Church as it was in 1614 and render 
any new development in religion a political misdemeanour. The 
legal status thus accorded to all Buddhist temples preserved in name 
sects which might otherwise have disappeared, but this apparently 
favourable legislation was really dangerous, for though an excellent 
preservative, it was not vivifying. 

Buddhism was also favoured by the prosperity of the merchant 
class, whose solid and generous piety often helped it. There was an 
old connection between religion and trade guilds, which often held 
their festivals in temple grounds. The prohibition of foreign trade 
did not greatly affect existing commercial interests. It stopped the 
growth of new wants and the creation of new industries, but internal 
commerce offered steady profits and the merchants did not feel the 
loss of ventures which they had scarcely tried. On the other hand, 
the temper of the Samurai, who in this period come forward as the 
characteristic national type, was not Buddhist. They might be 
duly registered in their parish temples but many of their principles, 
such as the disregard of human life, the obligation of revenge and, 
in some cases, of suicide, the extreme but not rare form of filial 
piety which held that it might be a daughter’s duty to support her 
parents by prostitution, all this was against the letter and the spirit 
of the Buddha’s law. , 

Thus during the Tokugawa period Buddhism was in most 
respects the established Church, but it had had some hard and 
salutary lessons. There were no more fortified monasteries and 
military monks : the clergy had to learn that their business was 
religion,and not polities or fighting. They did produce a certain 
number of scholars and anchorites, but it must be confessed that 
the majority, being well provided for, lived in ease and inoffensive 
idleness to which the Government did not at all object, for who can 
tell what trouble may come out of a religious movement ? 

The Zen sect showed some vitality during this period in a discreet 
fashion. The priest Hakuin had so reputation that he was 

CTi. xiii] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 311 

considered by the Rinzai school as its second founder and was also 
master of a vigorous and popular style which caused his sermons to 
be widely read. Bashb, too, the poet who brought into fashion the 
httle poems of seventeen syllables called Hokku or Haikai, owed 
much to Zen. He was an official in the Waterworks Department of 
Yedo, but threw up his appointment and became a Zen monk, 
though he was no bigot but mingled Zen freely with Tendai and 
Taoist philosophy. Though the brevity and lightness of these tiny 
poems made them a fashionable craze, Basho regarded his art quite 
seriously (which is the chief reason no doubt why his compositions 
were so much better than other people’s) and as the expression of 
a spiritual mood. He warned his disciples that verse-making was 
not an amusement but almost a religious exercise, based on 
sympathy with nature.^ 

The only new sect which was founded in Tokugawa times was the 
Obalm branch ^ of the Zen introduced by the Chinese priest Ingen, 
who was invited to Japan in 1655. The ex-Emperor Go-Mizuno-o 
and the Shogun letsuraa received him most favourably and accepted 
his teaching. He was granted a piece of ground at Uji near Kyoto, 
where he erected a temple called Mampukuji or Obaku-san. The 
chief pecuharity of this sect is its markedly Chinese character. 
Ingen and the first thirteen of his successors were Chinese by race, 
and though the abbots are now Japanese, the architecture and all 
the appointments of the temple are still thoroughly Chinese in 
appearance. The monks wear Chinese caps and shoes and in 
reciting prayers they use the Ming pronunciation of Chinese, which 
differs from the ordinary Sino- Japanese of other sects. In 1681 
a learned priest of the Mampulmji named Tetsugen published a 
reprint of the Ming edition of the Tripitaka, which is still remarkable 
for its admirably large and clear type and is perhaps the only 
edition of the Tripitaka which can be used without injury to the eyes. 

One may suspect that the favour shown to the Obaku school in 
high quarters was due as much to its being intensely Chinese as to its 
being Buddhist. From the seventeenth century onwards two 
strong currents of opinion, important for religion and politics and 
neither of them friendly to Buddhism, make their appearance, 
namely, the Gonfucian current and the Shinto. 

^ Another clerical poet of some distinction in the Tokngawa period was Bengyokii 
of the Jodo sect (iffiS-lSSO). 

® ^ Chinese pronunciation Hwang-po. ^ TPS Mampukaji. 

^ 7C Ingen. 

312 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xm 

Admiration of CMnese Jearning was nothing new, but rarely had 
Confucianism received so much popular favour and so much 
patronage from Emperors and Shoguns. leyasu, though determined 
to banish Christianity as a danger to the nation, had no desire to 
stint the intellectual nourishment of his subjects. The exordium of 
the decree of 1614 indulges in Chinese philosophical speculations 
in a way which must have seemed unnecessary to a good Buddhist. 
Chinese culture had long been esteemed in Japan as a necessary 
part of the education of a gentleman: Confucianism had a great 
literature, sound ethics, and for ages had been in China the support 
and servant of a most durable empire. It therefore seemed an 
eminently suitable study for the educated classes in Japan ; but 
perhaps in one way the subjects of the Tokugawa Shoguns learned 
more than their masters intended, for the Chinese doctrine that the 
people are the principal part of the State and that unsatisfactory 
rulers should be changed had undoubtedly something to do with 
the revolution which ended the Shogunate.^ 

The form of Confucianism most approved by the Government and 
consequently most studied was called Tei-shu,^ which is a combina- 
tion of the names of the brothers OhAng (in Japanese pronunciation 
Tei) and the celebrated philosopher Chu-Hsi (or Shushi, 1130-1200). 
The more modern school of O-Yo-Mei (Chinese Wang Yang Ming, 
1472-1528) was looked at askance by the authorities, and such 
teachers as Nakae Toju and Kumazawa got into trouble for advo- 
cating its principles. In Japan as in China Confucianism was 
somewhat contemptuous of Buddhism, although the Zen favoured 
Chinese learning. 

Eujiwara Seikwa (1561-1619), the founder of the Teishu-gaku-ha, 
had become a Buddhist priest in order to study philosophy, but 
deliberately separated himseH from Buddhism and was assisted 
by leyasu to found a school in which he taught Chinese philosophy. 
He had a celebrated pupil named Hayashi Doshun or Eazan who 
won the favour of leyasu and was appointed principal secretary and 
recorder of the actions of the Government. In this position he 
used all his influence against Buddhism and endeavoured to persuade 
leyasu to deprive priests of all power and prevent them from holding 
official positions. But that astute prince, who wished to preserve 

^ The school of An^ is said to have had considerable influence on those who 
brought about the change of government. See Dening, “ Confucian Philosophy ” 
in T.A.8.J.t 1908, vol. x:^vi, ii, p. 140. 

\ 

OH. XIII] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 313 

botli Buddliism and Confucianism, arranged that lie should have 
a public dispute with Tenkai, the ablest Buddhist priest of his time, 
in which he did not get the best of it. 

The Shogun Tsunayoshi (1680-1709), who, in his insistence on the 
sanctity of animal life, seemed to be a fanatical Buddhist, was yet 
a most fervent admirer and patron of Confucianism. His Court had 
to listen to Confucian lectures and Chinese scholarship was made 
independent of the Buddhist hierarchy. Scholars were no longer 
required to shave their heads hke priests, as had been the rule, but 
were allowed to let their hair grow long and to wear the swords 
of the Samurai. In 1795, during the minority of the Shogun lenari, 
Hayashi Jussai, an adopted grandson of the Kazan mentioned above, 
persuaded the Government to issue an edict which required all 
candidates for government posts to subscribe to the principles of the 
Teishu school, the followers of O-Yo-Mei being excluded, and this 
edict had an important political effect in contributing to the 
unpopularity of the Shogun’s govermnent. 

Yet, in spite of all this official patronage, Confiicianism never 
became a religion in Japan. Even in China, where its influence and 
authority are enormous, its neglect of emotional and speculative 
questions prevents it from covering the same ground as the European 
word religion, and in Japan of the Tokugawa period it had the further 
disadvantage of being foreign and imported. It hence came into 
collision with the other strong rehgious current of these times, 
namely, the revival of Shinto. Buddhism, it is true, was also a 
foreign religion, but it was an ancient importation and had under- 
gone so many changes and developments that it might reasonably 
be called more Japanese than Chinese, whereas Confucianism of 
ail schools meant simply the introduction of relatively modern 
Chinese ideas in their native dress. 

The establishment of Shinto as the State religion in 1868 is an 
extraordinary phenomenon, but its causes were at least as much 
political as religious. The Tokugawa Shogunate met with less 
opposition than might have been expected, but its unpopularity 
with a certaiu section of its more intelligent subjects, those, for 
instance, who desired to make acquaintance with foreign learning, 
needs no explanation, and this unpopularity found comparatively 
safe expression in extolling native ideals at the expense of Buddhism 
and Confucianism. It was not easy to blame admiration for pmely 
Japanese literature, history, and religion, particularly as the 
Tokugawa professed and to a great extent practised toleration of 

314 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xiii 

all beliefs except Ckristianitj, Still, Confucianism and Buddhism 
received such strong official support that to blame them was little 
less than, to blame the Government, and enthusiasm for Shinto was 
parlously near to enthusiasm for the Emperor, whom the Tokugawas 
wished to keep as a faint but venerable shadow. Yet the Shint5 
movement began in the Mito branch of the Tokugawa family. 
Mitsukuni (1628-1700), the head of this line, devoted himself to 
literary pursuits and founded a school of historians. His great 
work on the history of Japan in 243 volumes was not completed 
until 1716, after his death, but a considerable portion of it was 
published in 1697. Mitsukuni had no prejudice against Con- 
fucianism, for he gave a home to the exiled Chinese scholar Shu- 
Shunsui who collaborated with him in composing his history, but 
in literature and everything else he gave the preference to native 
Japanese products. The practical bearings of his studies on religion 
are shown by the fact that he destroyed a thousand Buddhist 
temples on his estates and that his literary assistants called them- 
selves Samurai and let their hair grow long. This was before 
Tsunayoshi had given the permission mentioned above and in days 
when a shaven head and a clerical demeanour were still considered 
a mark of a man of letters. 

The Shmto movement, which included an ultra-patriotic 
admiration of everything Japanese, became more conspicuous and 
more political in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In 
Kyoto, Kada Azumamaru (1668-1736) opened a national school 
in opposition to fashionable Confucian ideas and appears to have 
enjoyed the favour of the Shogun Yoshimune. His pupil was the 
celebrated Kamo Mabuohi (1697-1769), who was followed by the 
still more famous Motoori (1730-1801). Motoori published an 
edition of the KojOd with an elaborate commentary, in which 
he advocated pure Shinto unoontaminated by either Buddhist 
or Confucian ideas. The work had considerable influence in 
turning popular opinion against both Buddhism and the Govern- 
ment of the ShSgun, yet it does not appear that any of the authors 
mentioned incurred official displeasure. But the works of their 
successor, Hirata, attracted the attention of the cautious or 
somnolent Shogunate. To praise Japan as the country of the Gods, 
superior to all other regions of the earth, was all very well, but 
things looked different when it was made clear that Japan’s greatness 
came solely from the Emperor and not from the Shogun. In 1836 
the latter suppressed a book of Hirata’s which had been warmly 

OH. XIII] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 315 

praised by the Emperor, and four years later the author was 
requested to cease writing and retire to his native town. 

It will be noticed that during more than two centuries of anti- 
Buddhist attacks, no Buddhist champion came forward to defend 
the faith. Even pohtically the position of the Buddhists was not 
indefensible, for the many varieties of Ryobu-Shinto offered them 
a whole arsenal of arguments, and in any comparison of the two 
systems as religions one would have imagined that Buddhism must 
win. But to the best of my belief no such refutation of the 
Shintoists was ever published, at any rate, none which had a tithe 
of the importance and influence of the works of Motoori or Hirata. 
In the early days of the Tokugawa period (1656) one new sect, the 
Obaku, which was practically Chinese, was founded : two editions 
of the Tripitaka were printed or rather reprinted by Tenkai (1661) 
and the Obaku monastery (1681). In the eighteenth and nine- 
teenth centuries the level of scholarship seems to have been 
respectable. Books dealing with history, biography, and dogma 
were published, or more often ancient works were re-edited, but the 
annals of Buddhism contain no mention of movement, remarkable 
personalities, or of stirring events. In fact, the only incident 
mentioned by ordinary histories in which Buddhist priests played a 
part was a quarrel between sects in the regency of lenari (1793-1841). 
The house of Tokugawa followed by tradition the Jodo, but in this 
Shogun’s time one of his favourite concubines was a devout adherent 
of the Mchiren sect. Its priests were admitted to the palace and 
received numerous favours. After lenari’s death there was a 
reaction and the Mchiren priests not only lost their influence but 
were severely punished. But as a rule the phlegmatic apathy of 
the Buddhist clergy was not even disturbed by sectarian quarrels. 
They had comfortable emoluments, they supervised the registers 
of their various temples in which all the inhabitants of the parishes 
attached to them had to be entered, they performed religious 
services, and more especially they buried the dead, a form of public 
service which may be remunerative but is hardly likely to be 
enlivening or stimulating. 

Thus at the time when the Shogunate collapsed and the Meiji 
era commenced Buddhism was at its weakest. It was identified 
with the regime that was passing away and had little more connection 
with the Court of the Emperor than with Western civilization. 
But it was at last awakened by the attacks directed against it. 
In 1855 it was proposed that all monastery bells should be converted 

316 HISTORY OF JAPANESE BUDDHISM [ch. xiii 

into cannon. TKe decree was actually published, but tbe abbots 
of tbe Chion-in and tbe temples at Ueno, wbo were Imperial Princes, 
bad sufficient power to cause it to be withdrawn. Tbe reformers 
of 1868, bowever, were not to be stopped by any sucb clerical 
objections. They declared Sbinto to be tbe State religion : 
Buddhism was disestablished and to a great extent disendowed : 
its emblems and ceremonies were no longer seen in tbe palace ; 
Buddhist images and Buddhist clergy were removed from tbe 
Eyobu-Sbinto temples, which were banded over to Shinto priests : 
Buddhist priests were forbidden to ask for alms and were ordered 
to call themselves by their family names. If we are astonished at 
the torpor of Buddhism during the two preceding centuries, it 
must be admitted that it is a great testimony to its real strength 
that it did not decay after such a catastrophe and has to-day more 
vitality than Shinto. A little rough handling and persecution are 
an excellent tonic for religions. 

From 1868 until 1875 the Government was openly hostile to 
Buddhism and endeavoured to inculcate a patriotic but otherwise 
colourless creed. Officials were appointed to propagate this 
system and a Ministry of Public Worship, which changed its name 
and powers several times, was created. In 1872 a commission 
of priests belonging to the Shmshu sect started to study the 
ecclesiastical organization of European States, and its return in 
1876 seems to mark the turn of the tide. The Government conferred 
on Shinran the posthumous title of Kenshin Daishi (1876), or the 
Seer of Truth, and private interest in Buddhism was shown by the 
dispatch of missionaries to Shanghai and by the publication of the 
Tripitaka with accessory treatises in 1880-1884. This edition, 
which consisted of 8.634 volumes, was known as the Shukusatsu 
Zokyo ^ and was due to the enterprise of a learned Buddhist called 
Bankan Shimada. A society called the Buddhist Patriotic Union 
was formed to oppose the progress of Christianity and was joined 
by many Conservatives who were Confucianists or Shintoists. 
Later, however, the opposite tendency asserted itself and Buddhists 
combined with Christians to oppose the secularists who wished 
to exclude religion from education and the national life. 

In 1884 what remained of the Ministry of Public Worfship was 
abolished, the administration of Buddhism and Shinto was 
entrusted to the heads of the various sects, and the direct control 

CH.xm] CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE CHURCH 317 

of the State over the Church thus ceased. The Constitution of 
1889 granted liberty of religion to all and the restrictions placed 
on Buddhism were removed, but Shinto was made equally inde- 
pendent and the arrangement by which Buddhist priests controlled 
Shinto temples was not renewed. Though the subject does not 
concern us, it may be mentioned that many Japanese maintain that 
Shint5 is not a religion in the ordinary sense but a system of national 
ethics in whose ceremonies persons of all creeds can properly 
take part.^ 

See for a full discussion of modern Shinto the elaborate paper by Dr. Holtom 
called “ The political philosophy of modern Shinto ” in Trans, 800 . Japan, 
vol. xlix, part ii, 1922. See also, for a short statement of the recent official 
attitude towards religions, Honen, the Buddhist Saint, pp. 75, 76. ^ 

BOOK III 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 

CHAPTER XIV 

TENDAI 

The Tendai lias a great record in botli China and Japan, but its 
history in the two countries is somewhat different. In the first 
place, its connection with the Shingon was much closer in Japan than 
in the land of its birth, where the two sects were felt to be different 
in origin and not to be united by any special relationship. In Japan, 
on the contrary, they were both officially introduced at the same 
period, the first years of the ninth century, both under imperial 
patronage and both in the same district, Kyoto and its neighbour- 
hood. They formed a natural body of religious opinion opposed 
in early times to the older sects of Kara and later to the new schools 
which arose about the twelfth century. But, in the second place, 
the Tendai achieved a position as a pohtical and even as a military 
power such as never fell to the lot of any Buddhist denomination 
in China, for even Lamaism under the Yiian dynasty, though it 
became the Established Church, was strictly under imperial control, 
though it was not so in Tibet. But in Japan the Tendai, and to 
some extent the Shingon, were semi-independent organizations 
maintaining friendly relations with the Court, though fightmg with 
one another and with other religious bodies — a fact by no means 
inconsistent with the close connection just mentioned, for one of 
the bitterest quarrels was between Enryakuji and Miidera, both 
temples of the Tendai sect. And just as a certain period in Japanese 
history is commonly known as the Eujiwara period, so for ecclesi- 
astical purposes it may be appropriately designated as the Tendai 
period. We are inclined, and not wholly unjustly, to think of the 
Tendai as primarily a political power actuated by worldly motives 
and to forget that it was, especially in the beginning, a great Church 
inspired by lofty spiritual and philosophical ideals which seemed 
to the priesthood of Kara dangerously liberal. 

Its introduction into Japan was closely connected with the 
removal of the capital from Nara to Kyoto in 793. One of the 
principal motives for this transference was the apprehension caused 
by the ambitious designs of the priesthood, which reached a climax 
in the attempt of Dokyo to usurp the imperial power. A somewhat 

321 

Y 

322 

TEE SECTS AND THEIE DOCTRINES [ch. xiv 

similar mistrust of the worldliuess of the Church as established 
in Nara seems to have worked strongly on the mind of a young man 
called Saichoj the future DengyS Daishi. He was of Chinese origin, 
and after entering a monastery at an early age was ordained when 
eighteen in 786. But the clerical life of Nara was uncongenial to 
him. He left the city and lived at first in solitude on Mount Hiei, 
near which he had been born, but gradually collected a band of 
companions and built a small monastery. But he was by no means 
an unpractical recluse and, though he had found the atmosphere 
of Nara unspiritual, he had no objection to mixing with Courts and 
Princes. Somehow or other the humble cloister on Mount Hiei 
became identified even during his lifetime with the new capital and 
was recognized as the new religious centre just as Kyoto was the 
new political centre of Japan. In 804 he was sent by the Emperor 
to China to inquire what was the best form of Buddhism, and 
studied the school of T'ien-T'ai ^ at its headquarters and also both 
the Shingon under Shun-Hsiao at Yueh-Chou and the Zen at 
T'ang-Hsing. It is noticeable that these were the three important 
sects which had not taken root at Kara. He gave the palm to the 
Tendai which was then at the zenith of its power and fame, but 
evidently retained much sympathy for the other sects. He returned 
next year laden with books and knowledge. I have already given 
some account of the Tendai sect as it existed in China and have 
related in the historical section the striking growth of the humble 
shrine on Hieizan into a priestly city of some three thousand temples 
and its eventual tragic destruction by Nobunaga in 1571, and wiU 
now proceed to inquire what were the religious ideas which Saicho 
brought back with him and which dominated Japan for -about five 
centuries. Though based on what he had learnt and seen in China, 
the doctrines and practices which he taught somehow acquired a 
distinctly Japanese flavour and, as in many other cases, hardly 
seem to be foreign importations. 

The Tendai sect is based on the Hokke-kyo or Lotus-sutra, and 
is perhaps the most notable instance among many others of the 
enormous influence which that work has exercised in the Ear East. 
Conformably to this, it teaches that all men can become Buddhas 
and urges them, to try to do so. Aspirants are exhorted in the 
often quoted words of the sacred text ^ to “ enter the abode of the 

’o, Japanese pronunciation Tendai. 

® Lotus, chap, s, shortly before verse 16 {S.B.E., xxi, p. 222). 

TENDAI 

OH. XIV] 

m 

Tathagata, put on the robe of the Tatbagata and sit in the seat 
of the Tathagata. And what is the abode of the Tathagata 1 
It is to abide in charity to aU beings. And what is his robe ? 
It is sublime forbearance. And what is his seat ? It is to enter 
into the emptiness of all things The Mahayanist Nirvana-sutra 
(Naniio, 113, 114), as containing the last and complete instructions 
of the Buddha, and the Prajhaparamita ^ are also much respected. 
But though it is based on the Lotus-sutra, the most remarkable 
characteristic of the Tendai is its comprehensive and encyclopaedic 
character. It finds a place for all scriptures, regarding them as 
a progressive revelation gradually disclosed by the Buddha during 
his life as he found that the intelligence of his auditors ripened, and 
though one may hesitate to accept the scheme as chronologically 
exact, one carmot but admire the wide Imowledge and liberal spirit 
which inspired it. If it is sometimes difficult to define what were 
the special doctrines which it taught in Japan, this is because it was 
always eclectic and disposed to adopt rather than to combat new 
views unless they seemed to threaten the organization of the Church. 
The later sects, whether they were Japanese creations or adaptations 
of Chinese originals, all arose within the Tendai. Honen, Shinran, 
Eisai, Dogen, Nichiren, and many lesser reformers were all students 
who had graduated in the same University, and their special doctrines 
mostly consisted in emphasizing some views which they had found 
in the spacious store. The religion taught in Hieizan was not 
a stagnant orthodoxy to which all must conform or be excommuni- 
cated. Its three thousand temples contained several schools which 
differed not indeed in essentials but in their method of presenting 
doctrines, and it was perfectly correct to study in more than one 
school. Thus Shoshien, who was considered a paragon of learning, 
was proficient in the doctrines of both the Eshin-in and the Danna-in 
and was also deeply read in esoteric works. The first two mentioned 
were the principal schools of Hieizan, founded by Eshin (942-1017) 
at the temple which bore his name in Yokaba and by Kaku-un 
(963-1007), abbot of the Danna-in temple in the Eastern section. 
There were also thirteen schools of the Yuga sammitsu, generally 
rendered as esoteric doctrine. 

if Hieizan was a school of arms it was none the less a school of 
thought and also of art, and the ideal which inspired its abbots, 

^ The Tendai philosophy seems to be chiefly based not on this work itself 
but on Nagtojuna’s Sastra or Commentary. Nanjio, 1169, called in Japanese 
Dai-Chi-Do-Ron ^ ^ 

324 THE SECTS AND THEIB DOCTRINES [ch. xiv 

ttougli perhaps dangerously ambitious, was not ignoble. They 
wished to found a national Church including all forms of religion, 
whether Buddhist or Shinto, and closely connected with the 
Emperor, who was regarded as the patron of all possible gods and 
sects. To further this end they for a long time identified themselves 
with the interests of the Eujiwara family, who were the Emperor’s 
guardians. Secondly, Hieiaan was a great school of art. From 
the tenth to the twelfth centuries, before the rise of the Zen sect, 
the religious painting and sculpture of Japan was inspired by the 
Tendai and Shingon. Perhaps the major |)art of the artistic 
impulse came from the latter and its cosmotheistic doctrines, its 
tendency to regard every natural phenomenon as a divine mani- 
festation which could be appropriately represented by the image of 
a deity. But the spaciousness, the power, and the wealth of 
Hieizan made it unrivalled as a museum in which the works of 
either sect could be displayed to the nation. 

The introduction of Shingon mysticism into the Tendai is generally 
attributed to Ennin, better known by his posthumous title of 
Jikaku Daishi,^ who lived from 794 to 864. When about forty 
he became seriously ill, but an angel appeared to him in a dream and 
gave him a miraculous drug which completely cured him. He then 
made a copy of the Lotus-sutra, and his rules for such transcription, 
which became a regular practice among the pious, were considered 
classical. In 838 he accompanied Eujiwara Tsunetsugu on an 
embassy to China, where he spent nine years. Like Saicho he studied 
the doctrines of the Tendai, Shingon, and Zen sects and also suffered 
much hardship during the persecution of Buddhism under the 
Emperor Wu-Tsung. On his return he wrote a voluminous account 
of his studies and was made head of the Tendai, The introduction 
of Shingon mysticism into the sect, which was continued by Annen 
(c. A.D. 890), was no doubt greatly facilitated by the fact that the 
Tendai already recognized Vairocana, the chief Buddha of the 
Shingon, as the Hharmakaya, ^akyamuni as represented in the 
Lotus being the Nirmapakaya, or Buddha as seen by human eyes. 
Also the temporal interests of the Shingon did not collide much with 
those of the Tendai, its headquarters being at Koyasan, some distance 
from the capital. For it is sad to confess that though the Tendai 
seemed so catholic and comprehensive, so ready to include in its 
large and liberal creed any doctrine which could be called Buddhist, 

CH.xiv] TENBAI 325 

it was, when matters of organization and temple property w'ere 
concerned, extremely apt to pick a quarrel, and that not only in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries but in the middle of the ninth. 
In 858 a priest called Enchiii (posthumous title Chisho Daishi) 
retiuned from China and began to preach certain novelties which 
were not to the taste of the disciples of Jikaku. He was appointed 
head of the celebrated temple called Onjoji or Miidcra ^ on the 
shores of Lake Biwa, and appears to have maintained a connection 
with Hieizan as long as he lived. But under his successors disputes 
became acute and resulted in the maintenance of troops and of 
literal warfare between the two establishments. In spite of many 
statements that the Sammon and Jimon, as the two parties were 
called, were divided by doctrinal diflerences, I have been unable to 
ascertain that any such distinctions are known at the present day.“ 

The Tendai was wide and comprehensive in another sense. 
It taught that all men ought to strive to become Buddhas and that 
it was in the power of all to succeed in so doing. This was contrary 
to the teaching of the Hosso, the ancient and then very powerful 
sect which possessed the great monasteries of Kofukuji and 
Horyfiji at Nara. The Hosso held that human nature is not one 
and the same in all, but that manldnd are divided into five classes. 

1. The Musho-ujo,^ or those who have no Buddha nature at all, 
who cannot attain nirvana but must wander for ever in the world 
of transmigration. 

2. The Shomonjd-josho, those who have the &avaka (Hinayana) 
natm'e. 

3. The Engakujo-josho, or those who have the Pratyeka-Buddha 
nature. Both of these classes are destined to attain nirvana by 
meditation but not to become Buddhas. 

4. The Bosatsujo-josho, or those who have the Bodhisattva 
nature and may become perfectly enlightened Buddhas. 

5. The Fujo-Shujo, or indeterminate natures, who still have the 
power of becoming Buddhas. 

^ ® ^ or H 3^ 

® The Bullelin cle la Maison I'ranco-JaponaisR, i, 1927, says that the Jimon 
recognizes aa one of its fundamental texts the Shikikocn-Holckegi Juketsushii 
is ^ ^ of Enshin, which is apparently not 

accepted by the Sammon. 

® The characters for the five classes are : (1) *1 (2) ® H » 

326 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cii. xiy 

It will be seen tbat not only tbe lowest natures but bigher ones, 
Sravakas and Pratyeka-Buddbas, for wbom rebgion consists 
chiefly in sobtary meditation, are excluded from the possibility 
of becoming Buddhas, but Saicbo would have none of this and gave 
practical expression to his views by establishing a Kaidan, or place 
of ordination, at Hieizan which somewhat modified the old 
ceremonial as practised at Nara. Candidates were supposed to 
take their vows not merely in the presence of their ecclesiastical 
superiors but before the Buddha himself, and thereby to awaken the 
lugher part of their nature, which would develop and bear fruit in 
a long series of future lives. This theory was apparently most 
distasteful to the prelates of the older school ; they protested against 
the establishment of the new Kaidan and it did not receive the 
imperial sanction until after Saicho’s death. 

But though the Tendai deserves all credit for introducing new, 
fruitful, and more spiritual ideas into Japanese Buddhism, I doubt 
if its disputes with Kara should be regarded as a contest between the 
democratic and aristocratic sides of religion. For the Hosso wa,s 
not the only sect in the old capital, and the Kegon, which owned 
the great temple of Todaiji, holds and apparently then held the thesis 
that all men can aspire to Buddhahood as strongly as the Tendai 
did. And, again, Honen was not satisfied with the Tendai’s view 
of human destinies any more than with the HossS’s. It is true that 
he wrote in. the latter part of the twelfth century and had many other 
complaints which made him separate from the Tendai. He says,^ 
“ According to the Tendai sect the ordinary man may be born 
into the so-called Pure Land, but that land is conceived of as a 
very inferior place. Although the Hosso conceived of it as a very 
superior place, they did not allow that the common man could 
be born there at all.” In Honen’s time, at any rate, the Tendai 
conceived that there were four lands of the blessed, the lowest of 
which, or the Bonjo-zogodo,^ corresponded to Honen’s Pure Land, 
while the Hosso reckoned three and made the Pure Land correspond 
to the middle one. 

The Tendai is both a religion and philosophy. One can imagine 
that the latter aspect—its ontology or theory of being—- though 
well worthy of attention, was somewhat in the background among 
the politicians and military men who formed so large a proportion 
of the sect during a long period of its history. But it is not easy 

Homn, the Buddhist, Saint, pj). 188 and 198 

/L 

g ±. 

OH. XIV] TENDAI 327 

to describe wbat are its doctrines as a popular religion, whicii 
it undoubtedly was. Even now its numbers are not inconsiderable, 
for it is reckoned to possess nearly 6,000 temples and a little under 
two million members. Owing to its comprebensive character 
already alluded to, the diflSiculty is to say what Buddhist beliefs 
it does not countenance. It had, for instance, no objection to the 
worship of Amida. Ghih-K'ai, the founder of the sect in China, 
died repeating his name, and in Japan Dengyo Daishi himself, 
Jikalru, Genshin, Ryonin, and other eminent names can be cited 
as his worshippers. If Hieizan persecuted Honen and Shinran, 
the only objection to the doctrine of these two was that it held 
that the invocation of Anaida’s name was all sufficient and that other 
observances were superfluous, which threw into confusion all 
ecclesiastical organization. 

The Tendai held the ordinary Mahayana doctrine that the 
Buddha nature is present in every human being and that it can and 
ought to be stimulated and developed until each one becomes 
a Bodhisattva and ultimately a Buddha. Theoretically fifty-two 
stages had to be passed through before perfect enlightenment 
could be obtained, namely, ten stages of faith, ten of knowledge, 
twenty of religious practice, and ten of understanding ultimate 
truth. The two further stages were called to-gaku and myo-kaku,^ 
meaning similar and wonderful enlightenment, that is to say, the 
last is the supreme conclusion and the proceeding stage almost 
equal to it. Persons of great eminence might be considered to have 
already merited the title of Bodhisattva or to be incarnate 
Bodhisattvas who have deigned to take flesh for the salvation 
of mankind. But as a rule such attainments were postponed 
indefinitely to future lives, though perhaps the poHteness of the 
Japanese made them somewhat free of speaking of the living 
as Bodhisattvas and the dead as Buddhas. It would seem that 
Dengyo Daishi gave up the 250 precepts of the Hinayana, and that 
the initiation performed at the Kaidan of Hieizan and the vows 
duly taken in the presence of the Buddha were regarded as 
constituting not merely ordination in the simple ecclesiastical 
sense but an awakening of the dormant Buddha nature, a bracing 
of the spirit to a nobler moral life, a planting of the feet on the first 
rung of the lofty ladder which leads to higher existences. 

With this ceremony and its object was perhaps conneoted another 

328 

THE SECTS AND THEIE DOCTRINES [ch. xiv 

called Kwancho ^ (or Kwanj5), a translation of tlie Sanskrit 
Abkiseklia, or sprinlding,^ sometimes rendered in Englisli by the 
most misleading expression baptism. It is true that part of the 
ceremony generally consists in the religious aspersion by water, 
but it is not at all a rite performed on children or others when they 
first become members of the sect, but a form of initiation into the 
higher mysteries granted only as an exceptional privilege. It 
might also be doubted whether Kwanjo should not be classed 
among the mysteries of the Shingon sect which were accepted by 
the Tendai soon after its introduction into Japan, but it is expressly 
stated that SaichS was instructed in it by Shun-Hsiao and 
administered it for the first time in Japan in the temple of Seiryuji 
at Takao in 806 to various distinguished priests selected by 
imperial order. Kobo Daishi, on the other hand, received it from 
Hui-Kuo, a disciple of the celebrated Pu-K'ung (Amogha), and 
administered it first in 822 to the ex-Emperor Heijo.® At present 
it is performed by both sects, more frequently perhaps by the 
Shingon, and also by the Kegon in the Todaiji temple at Nara. 
The original object of the rite is succinctly defined by Kobo Daishi,^ 
who says, ‘‘ By Kwanjo is meant the bestowal of the Buddha’s 
great mercy upon sentient beings to enable them to obtain the 
highest perfect enhghtenment.” As a matter of fact, the 
sprinkling with water does not appear to be thb most prominent 
part of the . ceremony as at present performed. The candidates 
are arranged in order and as a preliminary ceremony their heads 
are spriukled with water. They are then consecrated by the use 
of various formulse and, their faces being covered with red veils, 
are led blindfolded to a mmidara, or sacred picture containing 
representations of numerous Buddhas and Bodhisattvas which is 
set on a raised dais against a wall or spread on the fl.oor. Each 
candidate receives a flower which he throws or drops on the mandara 
in the presence of eight priests, who declare the name of the figure 

^ IM- A full account of ttis ceremony as it used to be performed will be 
found illustrated with plates in tke first volume of the Asoba-jo, composed by 
Shocbo, a contemporary of Nichiren, It is reprinted in the ]Dai Nippon Bukkyo 
Zensho. 

2 Bor the metaphorical xise of the word see Dig. Nik., xvi, 5, 30 : “ .Fortunate 
arc ye who have been sprinkled with the sprinkling of discipleship in the presence 
of the master.” 

® Exmym Short History of tM Twelve, Japanese Buddhist Sects, p. 75. 

Honen, the Buddhist Saint, p. 175. 

* Hizoki, cap. lix. 

TENDAI 

329 

CH. XIV] 

whicli he has struck, and a name corresponding to this figure is then 
bestowed on him. The most auspicious result is for the flower to 
strike the figure of the Buddha Vairocana. The fortunate candidate 
is congratulated by the priests and receives special honours, being 
made to sit on a Lotus seat, that is, a cushion on which a lotus 
is embroidered. This form of Kwanjo is sometimes required as a 
sort of initiation, for instance, at Miidera, before persons are allowed 
to see a specially sacred image, and I am informed that in such 
cases there is no sprinkling, though a person who had undergone 
the ceremony told me that as he was blindfolded he was not quite 
sure. Another form of initiation without sprinkling is called 
Hako-Kan and consists in receiving reverently by placing it on 
one’s head a box containmg a copy of the precepts. 

Since the Tendai is based on the Lotus-sutra, it naturally 
specially reverences i^akyamuni and m fact regards all other 
Buddhas as aspects of him. But since it also endeavoured to be an 
all-embracing State church, which included even Shinto deities, 
it is not surprising to find that it accorded full recognition to 
Vairocana,^ Amida, Yakushi, and in fact all Buddhas ^ and 
Bodhisattvas. No doubt the tendency towards a friendly 
amalgamation with the Shingon did much to make the worship 
of Vairocana popular, but independently of this he was recognized 
as the Dharmakaya. As the Dharmakaya is the highest form 
of Buddhahood, so is Vairocana, in so far as he is a personification 
of it, superior to Shaka, but it must be understood that he is not 
regarded as a separate being but merely as a higher aspect. 
Shaka, inasmuch as he is the Nirmanakflya, is a condescension 
and concession to the weakness of the human inteHect which is 
often unable to understand the Dharmakaya. Four paradises 
are recognized which are conditioned by the character of their 
inhabitants, that is to say, that where beings of a certain character 
are found, there is ipso facto the paradise of which they are worthy. 
These four paradises are 

^ I confess that Nanjio’s account in Ms Twelve Sects of the “ Action of Vairo- 
cana” is completely nnintelligible to me. 

® Besides the Buddhas ordinarily known, the Tendai has also sis pe-culiar 
to itself (called Roku Soku Eutsu BP ) who corre.spond to and preside 
over six stages of enlightenment. They are merely aspects of the one Bnddha 
and are called Risoku, Myujisoku, Kangyosoku, fSojisoku, Bunshinsoku, and 
Kugyosoku Buddhas. ^ ^ ^ M U Bfl. tS S&> tf" M 

flJ, * 111. 

330 THE SECTS AED THEIR DOCTMNBS [cH.xiv 

1 The Eoniozogodo,* or the land in which ordinary men and 
saite lire togethet The Pure Land of Amida .a such a paradise. 

2 The HSben-uyodo. a region of compromise inhabited by those 
who have become free from samsara and have attained nirvana 
in the sense of the Hinaylna but not in the higher senses of t e 

3 JippSdo. or paradise in which are the Sambhogakaya and 

Bodhisattvas who have become partly free from ignorance con- 
cerning tlie nature of Being. ^ -r ■ i n • -u j 

i. Jojakkodo, or the Land of Eternal Peace and 
by Vairocana and those Bodhisattvas who have entirely got nd 

of ignorance. 

Naturally so important and popular a deity as .^ida was not 
the arowtb of the Jodo and Jodo-Shmshn shows 
how™ whole series of doctors prepared the way for Honen and 
swan lie JogyodS hall on Mount Hiei. though there are 
S“eLs in the locount of its original constmction was used 
Xr Te time of Jikaku for services wHch he had mtroduced from 
China and in which the Nembutsu was sung with a musical 
intonation I have not found any explanation of the exact position 
to Wda among the Buddhas of the Tendai, but such 
problems appear to have offered no difficulties to the Japanese. 
For ffistanc^Kakuhan (1095-1U3), the fomffier of a new division 
ffi the Shingon, simply declared that Amida was the same as 

“nWeable, however, that the Tendai seem to have 
meditation on the mystery of existence which leads to 
ment as a necessary part of worship and to have t 

Nembutsu as a means of cleatmg the mmd and eiablmg 
concentrate itself in the presence of Amida. Four kmdsof such 
meditation are prescribed : (1) Joza Zammai," or lehigyo Zammai ; 
the devotee sits cross-legged, facing west for nmety ™ 

nights consecutively, conoeutiating his thoughts solely upon 
Wda and calling on his name. (2) JogyB-Zammai: he waJlis 

.Th. Japanese characters ^ 

TOe Japanese chaxaoters for the fom mmes are: ^ S' 

« ft = (3) ^ ^ « H «. Wl # 

CH. xiv] TENBAI 331 

round Amida’s image for the same period, invoking and meditating 
on him, in the same way. (3) Hangyohanza-Zammai : he alter- 
nately recites some sacred text, for instance, the Lotus, and sits 
down to meditate on it. If the practice is continued for three 
weeks, the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra will appear before him. 
(4) In the last form of meditation called HigyShiza more freedom 
is allowed. The devotee concentrates all his mental efforts on 
realizing the truth, but follows his inclinations as to sitting or 
walking. 

Little importance seems to have been attached to mortification 
of the flesh apart from meditation. Twenty-five kinds of austerities 
are catalogued which may be useful in the lower stages of spiritual 
progress to polish the heart ”, but they are not prescribed in the 
higher stages. I have already mentioned in treating of Buddhism 
in China ^ that the Chinese saw a connection — not much relished 
perhaps by the Then-t'ai itself — ^between that sect and the Zen 
and called some of the earlier TTen-t'ai teachers Ch'an-shih. 
The Japanese had no hesitation in admitting the connection. 
The Tendai authorities quoted by Ilanjio,^ who give the views 
of the modern sect, represent it as having received a special trans- 
mission of the Law of Bodhidharma. Saicho was commissioned 
to find out the best form of Buddhism. He studied Zen among 
other varieties and, true to the eclectic principles of Tendai, he 
accepted it in so far as he approved it. Tradition states that even 
before he went to China he studied Zen under Gyohyo, the pupil 
of Dosen, a Chinese priest of the northern school of Zen, and that 
subsequently after reaching China he received instruction from 
Shonen, who represented the line of Hui-JSTeng. On returning to 
Japan he imparted the instruction which he had received to 
Jikaku. Without criticizing these statements, which are probable 
enough, it seems clear that the study of Zen was never a popular 
or important part of the curriculum of Hieizan. It was not in the 
least like Shingon, which did exercise a continual influence on 
Tendai doctrine and ritual. So far as I know, there is no record of 
Zen even forming a subject of discussion, and when in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries Eisai and Dogen preached it to the 
Japanese public, they were to all intents and purposes introducing 
a new school. 

Though the Tendai attached much importance to meditation. 

1 p. 172. 

Nanjio, Twelve Buddhist Sects, pp, vi, 72, 77. 

332 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [oh. xiv 

it must not be supposed that it was an inactive or merely contem- 
plative sect. Indeed, tbe reader wbo lias followed however cursorily 
its political and military fortunes is not likely to fall into this mistake 
but rather to think of it as devoted to secular ambition. But this, 
at least in its early days, had a good side. Dengyo Daishi’s ideal 
was a Church which so far as the things of this world were concerned 
should be devoted to the public service and be the moral and 
religious agent of the Government. He himself wrote a book 
called The Defence of the Country} The careers of the monastic 
students were mapped out with this view. After studying for 
twelve years, they were divided into various categories according 
to their qualifications for service. Some were kept at Hieizan and 
took part in the general direction of affairs : others were appointed 
to act in the city temples or to serve for a fixed period in the Govern- 
ment provincial temples (Kokubunji) and were officially styled 
demp6.2 In 806 the Emperor Kwaromu ordered the priests of 
fifteen large temples at Nara, Kyoto, and of the Kokubunji to observe 
the ceremony of AngoA corresponding to the Indian vassa or retreat 
during the rainy season. In Japan it consisted originally in reciting 
such sutras as the Ninno and in offering prayers for the peace of the 
country and a good harvest and in preaching to the laity. The 
latter were expected to make offerings, but Dengyo Daishi left careful 
instructions that all contributions should be used for the public 
welfare.^ In the beginning of the Meiji period the Ango was 
abolished. It has since been revived in several large temples but 
I believe is now a purely spiritual ceremony. 

But the Tendai is a philosophy as well as a religion. When 
spealdng of the views prevalent in the Ear East about the date 
and authenticity of the Buddhist scriptures I have already discussed 
the Tendai theory of gradual revelation commonly known as the 
Five Periods.® Much more difficult to understand is the series 
known as the Eight Teachings described by eight Chinese expressions 
which are not easy to translate.® They may perhaps be rendered 
as sudden, gradual, secret, undetermined, collection, progress, 
distinction, completion. Though these are commonly regarded 

^ ^ ® ^ Shugo Kokkai-sho. 

transmitters of the Law. 

^ Abuses crept in, however, in this matter. See Honm, the Buddhist Saint, p, 717. 

® See above, Chap. I, pp. 6-7. 

• «, m, M m, a; s'l. m- 

TENDAI 

333 

CH. XIV] 

as one group of eight, they seem to he really two groups of four, 
of which the second is a consecutive and ascending series, though 
the first is not. Sudden means teaching without preparation and 
is useful only to the highest intelligences such as Bodhisattvas who 
can grasp the truth the moment they hear it, while gradual is the 
method suitable for ordinary men which leads them from the 
Agamas to the Vaipulya sutras, thence to the Prajnaparamita, and 
finally to the ultimate truth as set forth in the Lotus. The 
expressions secret and undetermined refer primarily to the 
narratives which represent the Buddha as preaching to mixed 
audiences. If he preaches to mortals and deities at the same time 
the teaching is said to be secret, for the hearers do not see one 
another and their impressions differ according to their capacities. 
Or again the hearers may be aware of one another’s presence but, 
as in the former case, understand the teaching in very different 
ways. This is the undetermined method. But since the Buddha 
is really a cosmic force, not limited by the span of human life or 
human geography, he is regarded as continually appealing to the 
spirit, for instance by the scriptures or by instructive incidents. 
Men are sure to interpret such an appeal in various ways and they 
may or may not know that it is addressed to others as well as 
themselves. The remaining four methods form an ascending 
series, Zo (Tsang), meaning collection or store, refers to the 
Agama or Hinayanist portion of the scriptures. Progress or 
transition is the gradual passage from this to Mahayaaist doctrine. 
Distinction is the teaching distinctive of Bodhisattvas. It is 
occupied with the idea of totahty. It sees that parts depend on 
one another and all depend on the whole. The complete or perfect 
teaching goes beyond this. It sees that the whole and the parts 
are identical. The whole cosmos and all the Buddhas are present 
in a grain of sand or on the point of a hair. A celebrated maxim 
says : One thought is the three thousand (that is, the whole universe) 
and the three thousand are one thought.^ That is to say, the 
relations involved in the simplest thought are so numerous that they 
imply the existence of the whole universe, our perceptions and 
thoughts being identical with absolute reality. This leads on to the 
doctrine of ontology. There are three forms of existence, the void, 
the temporary, and the middle. ^ The meaning of these somewhat 

^ The expression 3,000 is tlie result of an elaborate calculation of the attributes 
of the dharmas and the variations they may present in various forms of existonue. 

2 ^ K'ung ; ^ Ohia ; Chung. 

334: THE 8E0TS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [gh. xiv 

mysterious words is that all the elements of existence (dharmi-h), 
as we know them, depend on their relations. If you try to isolate 
them and to conceive of them as entering into no relations, they 
become unthinkable and in fact non-existent. But as temporary 
formative parts of the whole they do exist and the whole could 
not realize its true nature if it did not manifest itself in particulars. 
The term middle or middle path is borrowed from NagS-rjuna and 
is equivalent to Tathata or Dharmakaya in Sanskrit.^ The elements 
exist or do not exist according to our view of their relations to it, 
but the middle exists absolutely. The example given by Chih-I 
in his work called Chih-kuan ^ is a mirror. Its brightness is k'ung, 
for it has no existence apart from the mirror : the objects reflected 
are chia, and the mirror itself is chung. The brightness and the 
reflections both depend on it in various ways, but still it would not 
be a mirror if it was not bright and did not reflect. This view of 
the nature of Being is known in Japan as Isshin Sandai, One thought, 
three truths. It is interesting as being apparently a genuinely 
Chinese piece of philosophy. The Chinese have not much inclination 
to metaphysics, but Chih-I seems worthy to rank with Nagfl,rjuna ^ 
or even with Hegel, to whom he shows some resemblance. It may 
be noticed that whereas Indian metaphysics (in spite of quaUfying 
explanations) leave a disconcerting feeling that the Universe, 
as known to our senses, is non-existent or at best an illusion very 
different from the reaHty, the practical Chinese comes to the 
comfortable conclusion that phenomena and the one absolute truth 
are, if rightly regarded, synonymous. The greatest importance is 
attached to a form of meditation on the three truths which is 
called Isshin Sangwah^ and when the three are seen as perfectly 
amalgamated, that is enlightenment as obtained by the Buddha 
himself. Meditation is described in a well-known phrase which is 

1 Or ^ CMn-ju in Chinese and Shinnyo in Japanese. 

® Chih-Euan, vol. i, 2iid part, sheet 40 (Tokyo edition). “ A bright mirror 
may be taken as an illustration. The brightness is like k'ung : the reflections are 
like chia: the mirror is chxmg. Not joined, not separate: combination and 
separation just as they are.*' 

* Hui-Wen, the first Patriarch, is said to have been first inspired by reading 
a well-known verse of N%tojuna’s Chung tun (Nanjio, 1179), vol. iv, chap. 24. 

* His 4 

s se t 

“ Various causes and conditions produce the dharmas : I (Nagarjuna) state that 
they are void. But that (void) may also be regarded as Chia and this knowledge 
(to deny existence and non-existence) is the principle of the middle way.” 

CH.xiv] ' TENDAI 335 

almost the motto of the school, as Chih-Kuan,^ which seems to be the 
equivalent of the Sanskrit words Samatha and Vipassana, calm and 
insight. The truth does not come by sudden intuition as the Zen 
teaches. It needs preparation, training, and concentration. 
The Pali Pitaka, too, regards Samatha and Vipassan4 as a 
compendium of the higher life, as they are respectively the results 
of two sets of rehgious exercises called adhicitta and adhipanna.^ 

The above brief statement is all that I venture to write about 
the Tendai philosophy, for I must confess that I cannot understand 
the rest and I do not think that it has much influence on the 
majority of the members of the sect in Japan. Those who feel 
further curiosity about it can consult the works mentioned in the 
note® and I hope they will be more successful in grasping their 
meaning than I have been. 

^ jh Japanese Shi-kwan. 

® Ang. Nik., iii, 88. 

® (a) Maeda, An Outline of the Tendai Sect (Japanese) ; (/>) Armstrong, Doctrine 
of the Tendai Sect, Eastern Buddhist, iii, 1924, p. 32 IF. ; (c) Petzold, The Chinese 
Tendai Teaching, ib., iv, 1928, p. 299 ff. ; {d) McGovern, Introduction to Mahayana 
Buddhism. 

CHAPTEE XV 

SHINGON 

The Shingon and Tendai sects go naturally together and form a 
pair. They were introduced into Japan at the same time : they 
borrowed from one another : they both enjoyed the favour of the 
Court and combined to form the new religion of the new capital, 
with the establishment of which their introduction coincided. 
The Tendai from, the very beginning claimed to be the State religion, 
or rather the State in a religious form. Its political and military 
pretensions drew upon it later the vengeance of Nobunaga. 
Shingon was more modest but not wholly dissimilar in its aspirations. 
Its centre was fixed at Koyasan at some distance from Kyoto and 
removed from the tumults and intrigues of the capital. This was, 
no doubt, a wise precaution and a source of religious as opposed 
to political strength. Yet it did not avoid entirely the dangers 
-which brought ruin to Hieizan. Its great branch monastery of 
Negoro in the same region as Koyasan became so wealthy and 
powerful, and with the aid of its army of Sohei ^ was so successful 
in asserting its independent jurisdiction over the surrounding 
territory, that HideyosM thought it prudent to destroy it in 
1585. Yet this blow by no means destroyed the religious 
infiuence of the Shingon sect. It still is the third largest 
religious corporation in Japan, coming after the Shinshu and the 
Soto 2 and owning about twelve thousand temples. It possesses 
many qualities which are valuable to a religious sect and are not 
often found united. No one can accuse it of being wanting in 
mysticism, philosophy, or whatever name we give to the deeper 
side of religion, and these profundities are illustrated by a 
lavish and on the whole successful use of art. But it also 
appealed to the common man, especially in the Heian period. 
Its elaborate ritual was not only pleasing as a spectacle and 
added an attraction to pilgrimages but also provided magical 
methods of obtaining one’s desires. If any one wanted powder or 
fame, children or wealth, to help his friends or to injure his enemies, 

^ armed mercenaries. 

2 That is, coxmting the Soto as a sect by itself. 

336 

337 

GH. XV] SHINGON 

an appropriate ceremony could be found with special deities, 
gestures, ornaments, and formuise warranted to bring about tbe 
wished for results. The reformers of the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries naturally denounced such things as low superstitions 
and not true religion, but they appeal to a side of human nature 
and are also connected with a practice to which Shingon owes 
much of its influence, that is, that it takes under its protection the 
shrines of popular deities. A Shingon temple is very often not an 
edifice built for the performance of a particular kind of religious 
service lilre a Hongwanji or Nichiren temple (or for the matter of 
that churches or mosques), but a shrine dedicated to the worship 
of some special deity who has perhaps selected that spot to manifest 
himself or show his power, and the deity is often not well known 
except locally and from the point of view of strict Buddhism may 
be of doubtful antecedents. Another advantage enjoyed by the 
Shingon sect is the personahty of its founder Kukai, or to call 
him by the posthumous name by which he is best known, Kobo 
Daishi. In all the annals and legends of Japanese Buddhism there 
is no more celebrated name than this, and whether as saint, miracle- 
worker, writer, painter, or sculptor he is familiar alike to the most 
learned and the most ignorant of his countrymen. The equivalent 
of our phrase ‘‘ Homer sometimes nods ” is in Japanese “ Kobo mo 
fude no ayamari ; Even Kobo sometimes makes a slip of the 
pen His exploits are celebrated in a popular religious ballad 
called Namvdaishi which has been translated by Lloyd.^ 

It would appear that Shingon doctrine, or at least Shingon 
literature, was not unknown at Nara even before Kukai’s mission 
to China, The foundation of the Shingon-Ritsu sect, whose centre 
is the temple of Saidaiji near Nara, is sometimes attributed to 
Kanjin, but it is more probable that he was responsible only for the 
Ritsu doctrine and that the admixture of Shingon is a later 
addition. Tradition is undoubtedly correct in crediting Kukai 
with being the first to make Shingon well known in Japan. He 
spent two years (804-6) in studying it under Hui-Kuo, the 
celebrated abbot of the Ch'ing-Lung temple at Ch'ang-An. 
He is also said to have applied himself to Sanskrit under the guidance 
of an Indian monk called Prajna, and is believed to have introduced 
into Japan the slightly altered form of the Devanagari letters called 
Shittan which is written in vertical columns and much used in 

^ The Greed of Half Japan, chap. xxi. 

338 

TEE SECTS AND THEIE DOCTRINES [m. xY 

Shingon books. PrajSa is believed to bave co-operated with 
Nestorian priests in maldng translations. Kukai in this way may 
bave come into contact with Cbristians, and tbis and other facts 
bave been cited as arguments to show that many ideas in bis system 
were borrowed from. Nestorianism, Gnosticism, or Manicbseism, 
As there were many foreign rebgions in China in the ninth century, 
it is well not to be too dogmatic, but it may be observed that 
Gnosticism is not the same as Nestorianism or Manicbseism, that 
there is (so far as I am aware) no proof of Gnosticism having pene- 
trated to Central Asia or China, and that the attempts to identify 
certain mysterious terms used in Alexandrine Gnosticism, such as 
Abraxas and Kaulaukau,i with the terminology of Shingon, have 
not met with general acceptance. Also, although there is an 
evident similarity between the form of Manicheeism known in Central 
Asia and Buddhism, this similarity is due to Manicbseism having 
in those countries borrowed extensively from Buddhism and not 
vice versa. The origin of the doctrine learnt by Kukai in China 
and imported by him to Japan seems to be perfectly clear. It is, 
making due allowance for the alterations made by his own genius 
and the genius of his countrymen, the late Indian form of Buddhism 
known as Mantrayana, rendered in Chinese as Chen-yen (in Japanese 
pronunciation Shingon), meaning true word, that is, sacred spell 
or mantra. About the time of Kukai’a visit this doctrine was 
exceedingly popular in China* It was first introduced in 719 by 
Yajrabodhi, a Brahman of Soubhern India, and further popularized 
by his disciple Amoghavajra, whose Chinese name was Bu-K'ung. 
He revisited India in order to collect sacred books and before his 
death in 774- had translated no less than 108 of them (mostly, 
however, very short) into Chinese. It was his disciple Hui-Kuo 
who instructed Kukai during his stay at Ch'ang-An. In India the 
sect claimed Kagabodhi, Nagarjuna, and Yajrasattva as its principal 
authorities, the last named, who was apparently a supernatural 
personage, having received the doctrine from Vairocana himself. 
Its sacred books are the Mahavairocana-sutra or Dainichi-kyo, the 
Susiddhikara-sutra or Soshitsuji-ky6, and the Vajrasekhara-sutra 
or Kongocho-kyo.® All are quite late Tantric works and were not 
translated into Chinese until about a.d. 726. It is true that about 

1 e.g. by Lloyd m The Creed of Half Japan, 8Mnran and Ms Work, etc. 

2 NanjiOj Nos. 530, 633, and 634. The Chinese titles are : At Pit ^ ^ 

® ® JD # s. » « » #8 s «. ^ W5 H + 

8HING0N 

CH. XV] 

339 

A.D. 700 Indian Bnddliisni had become a very mixed creed and may 
have incorporated many Iranian and Central Asiatic elements, 
but no one can study Shingon without being impressed by its 
strongly marked Indian character. It worships incidentally many 
deities which are Hindu and not strictly spealdng Buddhist, such 
as Ka-Ten (Agni) and Sui-Ten (Varuna), and its temples and sacred 
pictures are profusely ornamented with the peculiar form of the 
Sanskrit alphabet mentioned above. 

Kobo Daishi, then known as Kiikai, returned to Japan in 806 and 
was well received by the Emperor. During the hfetime of Saicho, 
the founder of the Tendai, however, he evidently thought it well 
to avoid competition and busied himself with the construction 
of the great monastery at Koyasan in the province of Kii. 
Saicho died in 822 and the year after Kulcai was summoned to 
Kyoto and appointed abbot of the Toji monastery. He made 
it the head temple of the Shingon, which it still is, and the form of 
esoteric doctriue taught there was called Tomitsu,^ whereas another 
form which was in vogue among the Tendai at Hieizan was known 
as Taimitsu.^ He was subsequently named Presiding Priest of the 
Nai-dojo, or shrine within the Palace where the Emperor attended 
Buddhist ceremonies, and he died at Koyasan in 835. He left ten 
chief disciples, of whom the most celebrated was Shinga who stood 
high in the favour of the Emperor Seiwa, and in the second generation 
from him were the two eminent prelates Yakushin (827-906) and 
Shobo (832-909). Yalcushin was head of the Ninnaji temple to 
which the Emperor Uda reticed and received the sacrament of 
Kwanjo at his hands. He was also the founder of the Hirosawa 
school of Shingon, school meaning merely a branch which prescribes 
a special method of study, not which has new doctrines of its own 
on any important point. Similarly, Shobo founded the Ono school 
and sometimes seven of these schools are enumerated : Koya, 
Toji, Ono, Hirosawa or Omuro, which have been mentioned above, 
Daigo, Yamashina, and Senyuji, The last is said to have been 
a place of study for the four sects Shingon, Tendai, Ritsu, and Zen, 
but in 1872 was recognized as belonging to the Shingon. 

More important than these divisions is the branch called Shingi- 
shingon,^ founded in 1130 by Kakuhan at the new monastery of 

^ Tomit.su ; 'n Tairaitsu. 

2 It is usual to speak of the two branches of the Shingon, namely, the Kogi 
^ founded by Kukai and the Shingi ^ ^ founded by Kakuhan. It is 
said that Negoro was really built by Raiyu in 1280, but that as Kakuhan's tomb 
is there, he is considered the founder. 

340 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [oh. xv 

Neo-oro. He made meditation on Amida an important part of >is 
teatlimg. Amida being practically identified with the Sm-Buddha 
vLciSa. of whom he is a special manifestation oi faculty, Jodo, 
the Pure Land of Amida, is really everywhere, and he who meditates 
on Amida in the way agreeable to the rules of Shmgon is really 
ahe^ in the Pure Land and can become a Buddha here and now. 
Tlie Shingi brancli lias two subdivisions called Cbizan and Bi^an . 
the chief temple of the latter is the celebrated Hasedera near Nara. 

itt doubtful how far Shingon as we see it in Japan is the system 
which K6bo Daishi learnt in China and how far 
flue to bimself or to tbe well-known Japanese babit of borrowing 

but at the same time changing. 0 Wsly a cop Wnton ™d 

multitudinous rites can easily have degenerated mto a magical 

ritual whiohistheprincipalcontributionoftheCh'en-yentoChinese 

Buddhism. Later Buddhism in India also does not seem to have 
had many admirable sides, and even m the new forrm 
turned when imported into Tibet and Java * 

less in thought than in art, which u i th it does 

often grotesque. But the Shmgon of Kobo Daishi, though it does 

not altogethlr escape the danger of becoming mere ^ ^ 

merit of being a weU-thought-out system illustoted by an a 
wHch if it stetimes becomes conventional andAiresome, the 
ttai result of a symbolism which 

to represent ideas by iked devices, is capable of being “^etim® 
awe-inspiring and sometimes of evoking visions of peace, calm, and 

'’^^r'maln' idea of Shingon is cosmotheism, which is not qmte 
the same as pantheism. The whole Universe is regarded as the 
body of the Supreme Buddha Vadrooana, bemg composed of the 
six elemeuts eartb, water, fire, air, ether, and consciousness. 
These elements play a prominent part in Shmgon ° 
are represented not only by various letters and colours but by a 
pecuHar form of monument often found ““ 

Sotoba. It is, as the name indicates, a modified fo ^ ^ P 

and consists of a ball, crescent, pyramid sphme, and o^e, ptat 
one on the top of the other, standmg for ether, air, fire, water, 
a^d H wL the surrounding space typifies co— ness. 
M thougMs, words, and actions, called the three mysteries, ' ato 
The thoughts words, and actions of Tairocana : he is present m 

CH. xv] SHINGON S41 

a grain of dust or in a word, and the object of the elaborate mystic 
ritual is to make us feel that our thoughts, words, and actions derive 
all their meaning and force from the fact that they are his. It will 
be noted that thoughts, words, and actions are described as the three 
mysteries. Shingon has two doctrines, the apparent or Ken-gyo 
and the secret or Mitsu-kyo : the former can be studied in literature, 
the latter is taught only orally and to the initiated : the former is the 
teaching of Shaka (who counts for very little in the Shingon system), 
the latter is the hidden doctrine communicated secretly by the 
Dharmakaya or Hosshin. The former is compared to formal 
conversation with a guest, the latter to intimate family talk between 
relatives. Thus the hopes of the outsider who attempts to fathom 
the mystery of Shingon do not receive much encouragement. 
The position is not, however, quite so desperate as in Zen, where 
even the nature of enlightemnent is incommunicable and every one 
must find out for himself what it means. In Shingon there are 
definite secret doctrines which can be communicated orally, and 
though he who is uninitiated cannot claim to understand the 
explanations, he can guess on what points they throw light. 

Two of the most important doctrines of Shingon are the theory 
of the development of spiritual life, rising from blind animal 
instincts to the realization of complete enlightenment, and what 
may be succinctly described as the theory of the two Mandaras. 
As the former is much easier to understand, we will take it first. 
Shingon, like other sects of this period, taught that mankind has 
the Buddha nature and that by proper ritual processes we can come 
to feel that the Bnddha nature in ourselves is identical with the 
great cosmic Buddha Vairocana. The doctrine of the Ten Stages 
is expounded in a book written by Koho Daishi in 822 called the 
Jujushinron^ and is said to be founded on a chapter of the 
Bainichi-kyo which also hears the title of Ten Stages. 

(1) The first stage ^ is that of simple animal existence : the only 
desire is for the satisfaction of appetite and there is no consciousness 
of the distinction between good and evil. 

(2) The succeeduig states are not only described by epithets 
hut tlie meaning is made plainer by comparing them’ to the doctrines 

^ -f* 'fe 

l-slio-tei-yo-shin. Explained as meaning the heart of 
utterly ignorant people who are diiferent in birth from the wise and are like sheep. 

34:2 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. 

of certain sects. Thus the second ^ is called the heart of a foolish 
boy who practises fasting. It is the state of ordinary mankind in 
which sufficient moral precepts are observed to prevent society 
from falling into disorder. Among religious systems it corresponds 
to Confucianism, which sees the importance of morality and insists 
on respecting the five relationships and so on but has no spiritual 
motive power. 

(3) Somewhat better than this is the state of those who have 
religious aspirations but who merely desire to attain supernatural 
powers without having any true idea of why they are valuable 
or how they should be obtained.^ It is illustrated by Taoism. 
Shingon is not sceptical as to Taoist claims to grant long life and 
teach magic arts but simply thinks them useless. 

(4) and (5) are two stages of progress which are represented by 

the beliefs of the Hinayana leading up to the superior illumination 
of the greater vehicle. The first ^ realizes that there is no self and 
that what is called the ego is merely a collection of Skandhas but it 
falls into the error of nihilism. The second ^ consists in discovering 
and entirely uprooting the evil all passion and trouble 

ceases. This is the doctrine of Pratyeka-Buddhas who are 
enlightened but only for themselves and do not help others. 

(6) With the sixth ® stage we rise to the realm of the Mahayana 
as shown in the Hosso sect. Those who have reached this stage are 
convinced that nothing exists but thought and feel an infinite 
compassion for all beings and a desire to save them. 

(7) , (8), and (9) The next three stages correspond to various views 
taught by the Mahayana in its different phases. The seventh ® 
stage is that of the Sanron, which establishes the doctrine of the 
mean by eight denials of apparently obvious truths, such as there 
is no birth and no destruction, no identity and no diversity. The 

^ ® ja ^ ^ Gudojisaishin. 

“ 15 m m ® yodomuishin, the heart of a young boy without fear. 

Pi M lis n yuiunmugashin, only collection, no self heart. 

" ^ H 0 It Batsugoinshushin, the heart which extracts action 
caii-sing .seed. 

Taendaijoshin, the Mahayanist thought about relation 

to others. 

‘ ft * ^ it Kakushin fushoshin, enlightened thought without 
production. Fusho (short for “ there is no birth and no destruction ”) is cited as 
typical of the eight denials. 

OH. XV] 

SHINGON 

343 

eighth is the Tendai ^ defined by the phrase “ One way without 
action ”, a dark saying which means that ultimate reality is identical 
with our experience of the phenomenal world, and the ninth ^ 
is the Kegon or Avatamsaka sutra which is given the highest rank 
among exoteric doctrines.^ It is said to state that absolute truth 
transcends the nature of self but is realized in the ceaseless activity 
of the Universe. 

(10) But it is inferior to the tenth ^ and highest stage, which is 
naturally Shingon itself. The nine previous stages are really 
nothing but the elimination of passion and error. The doors of 
truth are now open and by the performance of the mystic rites of 
Shingon the adept learns to feel that Man and the Universe are 
Vairocana himself. 

Honen ® severely criticized Kobo Daishi for having arranged the 
various Buddhist sects in an ascending scale of truth. His 
periphrasis of the last five stages is appreciative, for he defines 
them as “ (6) the heart which makes the welfare of others its aim ; 
(7) the illuminated heart which has transcended all illusions such 
as birth and death ; (8) the heart which has entered on the middle 
way, having transcended the states of relative being and the 
absolute ; (9) the heart which realizes that nothing has an inde- 
pendent nature of its own but that everything exists in virtue of its 
relations to other things as well as to the absolute ; and (10) the heart 
which rising completely above exoteric doctrine, or what is taught 
by a Buddha in human form, enters into the very heart of the 
Absolute Buddha”. But he objects to the graded classification 
of sects and the sutras on which they are founded as likely to 
produce only ill-will. The Buddha revealed various doctrines, each 
amplifying one point, some hkely to appeal to one class of intellect 
and some to another, but to make them like the rungs of a ladder, 
each one higher than the last, is most objectionable.® Indeed, it is 
clear that the order of ascending merit laid down by Kobo Daishi 
is open to much argument. 

^ ^ ^ ijj* Ichidomuisliin. 

GokumujishosMti. Literally, extreme withotit self- 
nature thought. 

3 Keugyo 

* ^ ^ ilj* Himitsushogonshin, thought ornamented by mystery. 

^ Hone^ig the Buddhist Saint, -p. 158 

* Honen also accuses Kobo Daishi of mistmderstandihg his sources, -which are 
said to be the Gishaku, a collection of lectures by Subhakara, the Indian translator 
of the Daiuichi-Ky5, transcribed by the Chinese Ichigyo. 

344 TUB SECTS AND THEm DOCTRINES [gh, xv 

But the most remarkable feature in Kobo Daishi’s scheme of 
spiritual development, though Honen does not criticize it, is that 
whereas in the first nine stages we are concerned only with the 
evolution of thought which is assumed in most systems of philosophy, 
both Eastern and Western, to be the only means of discovering or 
attempting to discover the mystery of the Universe, in the tenth 
and highest stage this principle is suddenly supplemented or perhaps 
superseded by another which is called respectfully the esoteric 
or secret doctrine and disrespectfully magical ritual. It is closely 
connected with the use of the two Mandaras, of which it is exceed- 
ingly difficult to give any coherent explanation. A Mandara, the 
Sanskrit word Mapda^la,^ means a circle or assemblage of persons 
in a limited space and thence a picture, round or more often 
quadrangular, divided into several compartments in which are 
arranged a number, often very considerable, of deities for whom 
are sometimes substituted the Japanese forms of Sanskrit letters 
known as Shtiji ^ or seed, a translation of bija, the Sanskrit name 
given to letters which are mystically used to express the name of 
a deity. A Mandara in this restricted sense appears to be a Japanese 
invention and is usually formed of a silk kakemono with figures 
painted in colours, though apparently some of the oldest Mandaras 
are woven. But evidently it is only the technical details of construc- 
tion which are Japanese, the whole idea of the Mandara, the name 
itself, the use of Sanskrit letters, and the figures of deities which 
are simply Hindu and not specifically Buddhist, are all obvious 
indications of an Indian origin. In Benoytosh Bhattacaryya’s 
Indian Buddhist Iconography there are many descriptions of 
Mandalas,^ that name being used, and it is said ^ that in the 
Nishpannayogambara Tantra, Kriyasamuccaya, and Vajravali- 
nama-mapdaloplyik& there are descriptions of twenty mapdalas 
each containmg a number of deities. Most of the plates do not 
much resemble Far Eastern mandaras, but plate xliii, 1 from Nepal 
representing Hayagriva Lokesvara as the central figure enclosed 
in a circle with six figures similarly enclosed set round it, all the 
seven small circles being surrounded by a large circular border, 
is distinctly suggestive of Japanese designs. So, too, we hear that 

^ See on the subject of Mandalas or Mandaras Toga no O’s works (In Japanese) 
M<andara no Kenkyu, 1927, and Rishu Kyo no Kenkyfi, 1930. 

3 See 39, 40, 64 07, 71. 

^ p.194.: ;■ 

345 

CH.xv] SHINGON 

Lokanatlia sits on a lotus on the eiglit petals of which are Maitreya 
and other deities ; that Buddhakapala is surrounded by twenty- 
four goddesses arranged in eight circles, and we are given numerous 
details as to the mudras (positions of tlie hands) of these deities 
and the Vajras, lotus flowers, and other objects which they carry. 
Picture Mandaras are also forthcoming from Tibet, ^ whither they 
were introduced from Northern India. In China there is the Hokke 
Mandara ^ ascribed to the middle of the ninth century, and there are 
several instances of the interior of caves being decorated with designs 
strikingly similar to those found on Japanese mandaras. See, for 
example, Pelliot’s plates of the mural designs at Touen-houng 
(V. ccciii and V. cccxviii). 

There are two mandaras which are supposed to represent the 
two aspects of cosmic life. They are called respectively the Diamond 
element (in Sanskrit Vajradhatu and in Japanese Kongokai) and 
the Womb element (in Sanskrit garbha-dhatu and in Japanese 
Taizokai).*^ Diamond is explained as having the two qualities of 
hardness and utility. As being hard, it represents eternal and 
indestructible truth, which nothing can alter. Its usefulness is 
seen in the way which wisdom spreads light and destroys all the 
obstacles raised by the passions. It represents the eternal and 
fundamental ideas which have their seat in the soul of Vairocana 
and which are always active in every part of the Universe. The other 
Mandara is called the Womb because Shingon regards all the many 
deities and powers acting in the cosmos as being contained in it as 
children are contained in their mothers’ wombs and as ready to 
issue and take their part in eternally creating a universe, not of 
lifeless matter but perpetually living and growing. It is to be noted 
that with this statement of the two categories — KongSkai and 
Taizokai — of the Universe, the written or open teaching of Shingon 
ends. Further explanation, which is obviously necessary, is part 
of the secret teaching which is only communicated by word of mouth 
to the initiated. Such teaching is said to enable one to understand 
the origin of one’s own thought and the constituents of one’s 
own body. It does not appear to me that much light is thrown 
on the two mandaras by describing one as static and the other 
dynamic or by the orthodox conception that the Kongokai represents 
the action of wisdom and the Taizokai the action of reason. 

1 See, for instance, G. Roericli, Tibetan Paintings, No. 14. 

® It is reproduced in Aneaaki’s BvMMst Art, plate vi. 

3 The Japanese characters are ^ Pill Jf- and J'n ^ 

346 

THE SEGTS AND THEIE DOGTBINES [ch. xv 

The prevailing colour o£ the Kongokai is pure white. The field 
is divided into nine squares and the whole is surrounded by two 
borders. In the centre is Vairocana, white and absorbed in contem- 
plation. He is surrounded by the four Buddhas Ashuku, Hosho, 
Muryoju, and Fukujoju.^ The whole number of figures represented 
in this mandara is said to be 437, but it is often abbreviated to 37 
and generally letters are substituted for the numerous deities. 
The details of these figures, their attitudes, headdresses, and, above 
all, the position of their hands and what they carry in them are aU 
of the deepest symbolic importance. A lotus, for instance, is the 
emblem of mercy, a coloured ball, supposed to represent a Jewel, 
of wealth and generosity, while vigour and determination are shown 
by the divine thunderbolt or vajra.^ 

The prevailing colour of the other mandara, the Taizokai, is red. 
The middle portion consists of a red lotus flower and is surrounded by 
four enclosing borders. In the central capsule of the lotus flower 
is seated Vairooana and on each of the eight petals surrounding 
him is one of the four Buddhas already mentioned above or 
one of the great Bodhisattvas, and round these are set numerous 
other figures of which there are said to be 428 altogether. Apparently 
it is believed that by intense meditation on one’s own heart as 
being a lotus like the centre of the mandara, the petals will open 
and the five Buddhas and four Bodhisattvas will take up their 
abode within the happy being thus illuminated.® It is noticeable 
that this is exactly parallel to the procedure recommended in Indian 
Buddhist Tantras. The adept is bidden to meditate on himself 
as being such and such a Buddha, when the desired consequences 
will follow. 

It is most difficult to give an account of the doctrines and deities 
of the Shingon sect. To begin with, the most important teaching 
is admittedly secret, but even apart from this, the inquirer is 
bewildered by the number of deities, ceremonies, mandaras, and 
symbols which confront him. Some idea of the extent of the subject 
matter may be derived from perusing a list of only a few of the 
handbooks which have been published as guides to this complicated 

^ That is, Alcshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. The 
same Buddhas have a rather different appearance and bear different names in 
the Taizokai, viz. Hodo, Kaifuke 0, Amida, and Rai-in. 

® Called Go-ko (or Go-ko-sho) if it has five points, San-ko if three, and Tokkosho 
if only one. 

3 Nanjio, Twelve Japanese Buddhist pp. 97-9. 

347 

CH. XV] 8HING0N 

creed.^ One obviously cannot describe all the objects of worship, 
but yet one cannot dismiss them in a general phrase, for some, such 
as Fudo who has a great temple at Narita, are important for both 
religion and art, though they may be little known outside the 
Shingon and sects which have borrowed from it, I shall, therefore, 
say a few words about the more conspicuous members of this 
multitudinous heavenly host. 

The Myo-6 are a group of gods (the expression is hardly inaccurate) 
peculiar to Shingon, except in so far as the Tendai has imitated 
Shingon in practising their worship. M. Prxyluski ^ considers that 
the name is equivalent to the Sanskrit Vidyaraja and that the 
Myo-6 were originally personifications of magic formula. At any 
rate, they are a class of deities imported from late Indian Tantrio 
Buddhism in which the corresponding beings are called Bhairava 
or Krodharaja. Though of awful appearance, their terrors are really 
benevolent, for they are designed to protect their worshippers by 
frightening away evil spirits or to destroy passion and ignorance. 
They correspond to the manifestations of Siva in Brahmanism, 
as is indicated by the fact that they are represented as having 
a third eye in the centre of the forehead. They perhaps correspond 
even more closely to the emanations of Akshobhya as described 
in Benoytosh Bhattacaryya’s Buddhist Iconography, chattel v. 
He points out that more emanations are ascribed to this Buddha 
than to any other, that they are of a blue colour (as are often the 
My6-6) and of a terrible appearance, being sometimes surrounded 
with flames. They also have three eyes. As many as twenty-three 
My6-6 are sometimes reckoned, but a group of five is frequently 
found which consists of Fudo, who is placed in the centre, with 
Go Sansei to the east, Dai Itoku to the west, Gundari Yasha to 
the north, and Kongo Yasha to the south. Fudo is undoubtedly 
the most important and is represented as a terrible figure, livid 
blue in colour and of a ferocious expression. He is surrounded by 
flames and carries a sword and a rope to smite and bind evil. He is 
generally explained as typifying the fierce aspect assumed by 

^ (a) x\soba-j6, written by Slioeho, a contemporary of Nicbiren, and published 
in tho collection called Dai Nippon Bukkyo Zensho. 7 volumes. 

(h) Jikkanshd (also called Sonyo sho), by Eiju‘. Kamakura period. 10 volumes. 

(c) Shoson Zu-z6-sho. 11 volumes. 

(d) Kaku-Zen-sho. Ill volumes. Published in the Juei ora (H82-.S). 

(e) Butsu-zo-zukan. Prepared under the siipervision of Gronda Raifu, Pirst 
volume ai^peared in 1930. 

" See above, Chap. IV, p. 136. 

348 

the sects Am THEin DOGTBINES [ch. xv 

*T7<__ .1 -- 

Vairocana when resenting wrong^ tq’dvalent^to tC^nslmt 

however means Oandaroshana, an 

Acala, whicli is one of th _ ^o-nrpqpnted by a figure which 

of Akstobliya 1 THs . jj-ojuided by flames and 

closely lesembles those of Mm 

carries a sword and r^e important difference, 

historically identical Th represented as 

Acala, like most late Ind^ j 

holding bis ^akti, or fema e conn erp <, symbolism were alien 

ry^^a^d 

“”=-;rtSE£ffiS 

to Japan, having to make this forther voyage, 

having signifie m < temple of Takaozan where it remained 

It was deposited “ who established in his native 

mita the reto of Ta^fe^^^ 

province of Shnnosa a 1.0 ^ _ power as Budo to 

SrSl 1 acoordii^ly the abbot “ : 

rfmperial 

IS^tonyoflomawasp— 

weeks. Thanks to Judo’s puissant “Pf“rt him back to 

and kiUed, but when tbe ™tora^^^^^ 

Kyoto It proved impossib e to rem ^ remain in that 

appearing m a dream, The grateful Emperor 

district “'iy’. yy'*™.i^ 5 umptaous temple. Lots were oast as 
accordingly d^d^^ honour of bemg 

to wliicb of thnty-three Vii g T^osition of tbe temple was, 

tbe site and Narita won._ T _ x^/hnildings wbicb now stand 
however, altered several times ^ Probably tbe growth 

. Benoyto,hBhatteatyya. op.cit^pp.OW.^^^^^^^^ endcavourod to 

2 X have been informed that abont idc j i 

Raktist nraotices into Japan. 

349 

OH. XV] SHINGON 

toucli of wHcli cures insanity and all the evds that come from being 
possessed by foxes. Another celebrated Myo-o is Dai Itoku, who 
is also a personification of death in the sense of being the destroyer 
of evil. Typically he is represented with six faces and six arms, 
but the number varies. Like Fudo he is usually of a livid blue and 
no effort is spared to make his appearance horrible. He is closely 
connected with Monju (Manju&i) and hence has been identified 
with the Indian Yamantaka.^ That deity is generally represented 
as having a buffalo’s head, a form which, so far as I know, is not 
given to Dai Itoku, though he is represented as riding on a white 
OX.2 In this, as in many other cases, Japanese art shrinks from the 
violent combinations of human and animal anatomy so dear to 
India. 

Another well-known My6-6 is Aizen, who is often spoken of as 
the God of Love and whose name appears to correspond to the 
Sanskrit Raga Rfija. At first sight his appearance seems to be most 
unsuitable to such a title : he is represented as a terrific being, 
in a sitting posture, of a dark red colour, with one head but six 
arms which carry various weapons.® But the passion which he 
represents is not love in any ordinary sense. Like other deities of 
this class he is formidable in order to be benevolent : he is the 
destroyer of all the vulgar passions in order to replace them by 
a purer universal love which aims at nothing but the salvation of 
all beings. 

The My6-6 are almost peculiar to the Shingon, but it also adores 
many Bodhisattvas recognized by other sects. Bodhisattvas 
are among the most popular objects of worship in Japan and this 
may be a good place to mention some of the more important of 
them, if it be remembered that their various forms and the legends 
about them often repose on doubtful scriptural authority and do not 
form part of the serious doctrine of any sect, 

Kwannon is undoubtedly one of the deities most widely honoured 
in Japan, though not worshipped by the important Shinshii sect. 
I have endeavoured in a previous chapter^ to trace the early 
history of this Bodhisattva who has the singular peculiarity of 

1 Eor the. connection of Yamantaka and Manjn&i see Benoytosh Bhattacaryya, 
]oc. cit,, p. 69. ' 

^ In the Asobajo, vol. v. Anesaki’s Bvddhist Art, xvii, gives a good 

reproduction of a statue of Dai Itoku. 

® See Anesaki, loc. eit., plate xviii, and Hobogirin, illustrations to article 
Aizemmyo-6. 

* Vol. I, Book n, p. 120 ff. 

360 

TEE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES im. xy 

having changed his sex in his wanderings across Asia. In India 
he is invariably a male deity ; in the Far Bast he is generally female, 
though the older statues and pictures sometimes represent him as 
a young man.^ Some authors say that Kwannon is not so much 
female as sexless, and it is true that he or she has none of the attributes 
of Venus and is a deity not of love but of mercy and pity, but I fancy 
that the ordinary Japanese thinks of her as female just as we think 
of the angels as male without attributing to them any particular 
masculine qualities. Kwannon is also sometimes represented with 
a child, which has caused some foreigners to see a resemblance to 
the Madonna. But this is a mistake. The chUd is not her own but 
one which she is ready to give to women who pray to her for 
offspring, and it is remarkable that in India the male deity, 
Avalokitesvara, also grants children.^ 

The worship of Kwannon is probably coeval with the introduction 
of Buddhism into Japan, and the statue of her in the Yume-dono 
or Hall of Dreams at Horyuji where Shotoku Taishi used to meditate 
is said by tradition to have been made, or at least ordered to be made, 
by the Prince himself, who was later held to be an incarnation of 
the Bodhisattva. Even at the present day a pilgrimage to the 
thirty-three shrines of Kwannon in Kyoto and the neighbouring 
provinces ^ is still a most popular form of religion. They are some-- 
times called Fudasho, or ticket-places, because they each issue 
to every pilgrim a stamped ticket attesting his visit. The pilgrimage 
is said to have been first made by the Abbot Tolnido in the eighth 
century. He apparently died and was led before the judgment 
seat of Yama, who explained to him the merits of the thirty-three 
places, gave him a list and assured him that no one who completed 
the itinerary should ever fall into Hell. His attendants then conducted 
Tokudo back to the world of the living where he made the pilgrimage 
with his disciples. The practice, however, fell into disuse but was 
revived and the present order of stations was established by the 
Emperor Kwazan, who, overcome with grief at the death of his 
Empress, abdicated in 986 at the age of eighteen and devoted the 
remainder of his Hfe to religious observances. The list and order of 

1 See for a clear instance the Amida triad traditionally ascribed to Eshin and 
reproduced in pi. i of Anesaki’s 
See Lotus, chap. xxv. 

® These are the original shrines, but in imitation of them another set of thirty- 
three has been established in Eastern Japan and also in the district of Chichibu. 
Kwannon is said to hare assumed thirty- three forma, adapted to save the various 
types of beings. 

cH.xv] SHINGON 361 

the temples as fixed by him and still observed is as follows. The 
places marked with an asterisk are specially celebrated : — 

In ICishii : 

1 . Fndaraku-j i at Nachi which derives its name from Potalaka, 
the mythical Indian residence of Kwannon. 

2. Kimiidera, said to have been founded in 770 by a Chinese 

missionary. 

3. Kokawadera. 

In Izumi : 

4. Sefukuji. 

In Kawachi ; 

6. Fujiidera. 

In Yamato : 

6. Tsubasakadera. 

7. Okadera. 

*8. Hasedera. 

9. hTan-endo at Nara. 

At Uji in Yamashiro : 

10. Mimurotodera. 

11. Kami Daigo-dera. 

In Omi : 

12. Iwamadera. 

*13. Ishiyamadera. 

*14. Miidera. 

At Kyoto : 

16. Imagumano. 

*16. Kiyomizudera. 

17. Rokuharadera. 

18. Rokkaku-do. 

19. Kodo. 

20. Yoshiminedera. 

In Tamba : 

21. Anoji. 

In Settsu : 

22. Sojiji. 

23. Katsuodera. 

24. Nakayadera. 

In Harima : 

25. Shinkiyomizudera. 

26. Hokkeji. 

27. Shoshasan. 

In Tango : 

28. Nare-ai-ji. 

In Wakasa : 

29. Matsnodera. 

In Omi : 

30. Chikubu-shima. 

31. Chomeiji. 

32. Kwannonji. 

And in Mino : 

33. Tanigumi-dera, where the weary pilgrims at last deposit 
their pilgr im , shirts or oizuru. Each of the stations has 
a special hymn oi eika of thirty-one syllables which is 
chanted by the pilgrims many hundred times. 

One of the most marked characteristics of Kwannon is that, like 
Avalokitesvara, he or she is polymorphic. Besides the change of 

352 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES Icb. xy 

sex the merciful Bodhisattva is ready to adopt any form which may 
be useful to suffering humanity. Japanese iconography is inclined 
to restrain the exuberance of Indian art in creating monstrous 
shapesj but still it cannot wholly get rid of the tendency to represent 
Kwannon as a being with many heads and arms, many eyes looking 
in mercy on the unhappiness of the world, and many hands stretched 
out in help. The simplest form is that known as ShS-Kwannon, 
representing a seated female or, less frequently, male figure with the 
usual number of heads and arms, wearing a crown in which is set 
an image of Amida. The left hand holds a lotus while the right 
is raised in a gesture which is interpreted as encouraging the flower 
to bloom more fully, the whole meaning that she strives to help 
human souls struggling towards enlightenment. Another variety 
of the simple form is the white-robed (Byaku-e) Kwannon, a female 
figure of a pale gold colour holding a casket in which lie the scriptures 
and a cord to restrain the disasters which she is prayed to avert. 
It should be mentioned that Kwamion in all her forms is frequently 
accompanied by attendants. When there are only two they are 
the My6'6, Budo and Azen. But sometimes they are twenty-eight 
and then represent as many constellations. 

Figures with eleven faces (Ju-ichi-men) or a thousand hands 
(sen-ju) are also not infrequent and are found in India, China, and 
Tibet as well as in Japan. The monstrosity of such representations 
is generally softened by reducing the thousand hands to forty, which 
carry various emblems, and by making the extra faces appear like 
plates in the crown which the image wears. In Kyoto there is a 
singular temple called San-ju-san-gen-do,! founded by the ex- 
Emperor Toba but rebuilt by the Emperor Kameyama in 1266 
and subsequently restored by the Shogun letsuna in 1662. It is 
commonly called the temple of the 33,333 Kwannons and consists 
of a very long haU in which are arranged, tier above tier, rows of 
gilded images of the thousand-handed Kwannon, each 6 feet high. 
Two hundred of them are said to be the work of the celebrated 
sculptor Unkei. Though the general impression is that the number 
of these gilded statues is almost iacalculable, there arc only a 
thousand of them and the higher number, though not inaccurate, 
is formed by adding the numerous small images which arc set 
on the heads of the larger ones or elsewhere. A curious tradition 

^ The name has nothing to do with, the number of images, hut refers to the 
long building being cut into thirty- three divisions by the row of pillars which 
traverses its entire length. 

CH. xv] SHINGON 353 

attaclies to tlie large seated j&gure in this assemblage. TKe ex- 
Emperor Go-Shirakawa suifered from severe headaches and was 
informed by a celebrated Indian physician whom the oracles 
advised him to consult, that in a previous state of existence he had 
been a monk of Kumano and as a reward for his merits had been 
reborn as an Emperor. His skull as a monk, however, was lying 
at the bottom of a river and a willow tree had grown out of it, 
which trembled every time that the wind blew through its boughs 
and this caused the imperial headaches. On this the ex-Emperor 
caused a search to be made for the skull and when found had it 
enclosed in the head of the large Kwannon mentioned and, we 
will hope, suffered no more. 

The type known as Batokwannon,^ or Kwannon with the horse’s 
head, is also considerably modified, for the Japanese evidently 
felt that there was something barbarous in such mixtures of the 
human and animal form. A human body terminating in a horse’s 
head is the rarest way of representing Bat5kwannon. She is usually 
represented with one or more human faces (sometimes of terrible 
aspect, a device rarely employed in representing the goddess of 
mercy) surmounted by a small horse’s head, which has more the 
appearance of an ornament than of an integral part of the figure. 
The temple of Matsuodera (No. 29 of the thirty-three stations) 
is dedicated to this form, which has also its place in the Mandara 
and is chiefly invoked in such ceremonies as prayer for the destruction 
of enemies. Batokwannon is also a popular deity worshipped as the 
protectress of horses. There is a celebrated temple dedicated to 
her in this capacity at Entsuji near Gotemba which, strange to 
say, belongs to the Zen sect. Here prayers are offered for sick 
horses, thanl^:-offerings made if they recover, and should they die, 
funeral rites are performed near one of the many stones dedicated to 
Batokwannon in this part of the country. 

Another favourite form is the Nyoiiin Kwannon, which represents 
the goddess as holding a wheel which like the jewel called in Sanskrit 
Cintamani can grant all desires. Sometimes this form has six arms, 
in which case each hand holds some object, such as a rosary or 
lotus, emblematic of the goddess’s desire to save all the six classes 
of sentient beings. 

Other forms are : Jintei Kwannon with eighteen arms ; Fuku- 
Konsaku, or Amoghapa^a, Kwannon, represented by two celebrated 

^ See above, Chap. IV, and Hd’bogirin, s.v., where several figures are given. 

Aa 

354 

TEE SECTS AND THEIR WGTRINES Ic:e. XV 

statues at Kara; Koyasu I^.wamion, iLolding a cliild ; Gyoran 
Kwannon with a fishbasket. 

Often some local legend attaches to the temples of Kwannon 
(and of other deities, too, for that matter) which is given an air 
of sanctity by being made to inculcate some Buddhist virtue. 
For instance, the following story is told of Kanimanji, a small 
temple near Tanimura in the Kara district. A very pious farmer 
once rescued a frog which was being eaten by a snake, by 
promising his daughter in marriage to the snake on condition 
that he would desist. The ghl was horrified at the idea, spent her 
time in praying to Kwannon in the temple shrine, and when on 
the third day the snake appeared in the guise of a young man, 
refused to marry him. The snake was furious, turned into a dragon 
and began to destroy all around him. But an army of crabs appeared, 
drove him away, and the maiden was free. This was because she 
was very kind to animals and had once bought a basket of crabs 
from a fisherman and saved their lives. 

Kext to Kwannon the most popular Bodhisattva is undoubtedly 
Jizo,^ the Indian Kshitigarbha who, obscure in origin, has 
remained obscure in India, which is the furthest point to which 
we can trace him, but has become extremely popular in China and 
Japan, in the latter of which his stone images are frequently to be 
seen by the wayside. Like Kwannon, he is an essentially benevolent 
deity but, being connected with the earth (Kshiti), he is thought 
of as helping the suffering dead and by a pathetic turn of popular 
fancy is believed to take a special interest in the souls of dead 
children. Piles of pebbles are often found heaped round his images 
in allusion to a superstition that dead children are tormented by 
demons on the banks of the Sai-in, an imaginary river corresponding 
to the Styx, and forced to engage in the endless task of piling up 
stones. Jizo is generally represented as a shaven priest, with a large 
halo and often clad in rich vestments. He carries in his right hand 
the shakujo ^ or clerical staff and in his left a jewel, signifying that 
he is ready to give anything out of compassion. His counterpart, 
Kokuzo, is not much worshipped, though revered in the Shingon 
sect as having been the patron saint of Kobo Daishi. The name is 
equivalent to the Sanskrit Aklsagarbha, which is said to indicate 

1 See Chap. IV, pp. 127, 128. 

® Sanskrit Elhakkara, said to have been originally used to strike on the ground 
and frighten, away small animals who might otherwise be trodden on. There is a 
Japanese poem of nine verses called Shakujo gatha describing the duties of a priest. 

OH. XV] 8HING0N 355 

that his wisdom and benevolence are as wide and indestructible 
as the sky. 

Mirokn or Maitreya receives little attention in modern Japan, 
but Monju (Mahju&i), Fugen (Samantabhadra), and Seishi 
(Mahasthamaprapta) are all fairly popular. The first two are 
both deities of wisdom : Monju can generally be known hy his 
lion and sword and also by his youthful appearance.^ Dai Itoku 
is said to be a manifestation of him in a severe mood. Fugen rides 
on an elephant which is often white and often has three heads. 
Seishi is with Kwannon one of the two Bodhisattvas who attend 
on Amida and with him visit the deathbeds of the pious and welcome 
them to Paradise. 

But perhaps the most remarkable feature of the Shiogon pantheon 
and the clearest proof of its close connection with India is the 
presence in it of a number of deities many of whom have no con- 
nection originally with Buddhism but are simply Hindu gods. Such 
are Sh5ten Sama (Ganesa), Kishi-Mojin (Hariti), Bishamon (Kubera 
or Vaisravara), Marishi, Taishaku (Indra), Katen (Agni, Ten being 
equivalent toDeva), Emma-o (Yama) with his attendants, Benzaiten 
or Benten (Sarasvati), sometimes called Uga,^ Suiten (Varuna), 
Futen (Vayu), Ishana, Bonten (Brahmfi), Jiten (Prithvi, the Earth), 
Nitten and Gatten (Suvya and Candra), and many others. Though 
most of these deities are venerated only as forming part of a Mandara, 
some of them, such as Shoten Sama, Khshi-Mojin, Emma-o, Suiten, 
and Benten are popular objects of worship and have temples 
dedicated to them. In particular the worship of Ganesa® as the 
Lord and giver of wealth appears to have been popular both during 
the Heian period and later in Tokugawa times, and even now its 
prevalence is attested by several temples in Toky5 and in the 
districts near Kyoto. In the former they are said to exist and be 
well frequented in Mukojima, Asakusa (Matsuchiyama no Shoden), 
and on an island in the lake of Shinobazu near Ueno Park. In the 
latter district I have myself seen several, such as a chapel in the 
Samboin at Daigoji close to Kyoto, a temple near the XJguisu no 
Tald, about three miles from hfara,^ and the considerable fane of 

^ Blit sometimes these characteristics are wanting in his pictures. See, for 
instance, Anesaki, Buddhist Art, plates xxv and xxxv. 

2 Sec Hobogirin, s.v. Benzaiten, p, 63. 

® See for other details Chap. IV, pp. 138, 139. 

■* Strange to say, it is not under the superintendence of the Shingon but of the 
Kofukuji, the head temple of the Hosso sect. Shinto influence is also visible in 
most of these shrines. 

366 IBE sects AND TBBIS DOCTRINES [oh. xv 

wMmmiM 

title appears to be “ a, gMten Sama is usually 

obstacles but cau remove but Ms image is rarely 

wotsMpped in con3unotion remarkably like tbe 

seen,^ being enclosed in " f are ocoasionally 

trioun^rirdM a^d wMcb recei;ed a special worsMp in 

I have, bowever. seen one of tbe in „ generally double 

at Nara and also ^ 

tcrr efa JaTa-I art gLrally modifies tbe 
:rln Ma^^ . of reprinting a ^ne pers^ as ~d 
animal combined. Otherwise the two ; bes 

like tbe ordinary Indian imje ^ "J SdTuLta on each 

figures in similar drapery, but standm^ back 

*°iae shrines defetcd to^^^^^^^^^ 

"'.‘sfbS .ii 01 

■i tVZ"— bT = S* U;j 

TiEirit sr-iti; .-i ^ 

“’..“S' 

Cifd^rstick is planted in tbe ground. If a 

sticks are planted, it is bebeved that success is certain. Alon„ lb 

1 Tho reason why *'*“ »« ”»* may be troc of 

reprcsetted by a single 

See Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Indian Iconography, voi. i, P 
i*--. _ ~4.„v,s-iiTHT ficfiirfi ib.. 'Dlate xii* 

CH. XV] 8HING0N 357 

sides of ttie tramway leading up to tlie temple may be seen, many 
white patches which, are plantations of these prayer sticks. 

Bisliamon has also an independent cult. He is Vaisravana^ the 
Eegent of the north, and even in India was identified with Kuvera, 
the god of riches. In the Far Bast he became the god of war and in 
medieval Japan was regarded as the patron deity of warriors. 
Children whose parents desired for them a military career were 
sometimes consecrated to him. Near Oji in Yamato is the temple 
city of Shigi which is dedicated to him. Here Shotoku Taishi is 
said to have defeated Mononobe-no-Moriya, one of the enemies 
of Buddhism, in 687 and the victory was attributed to Bishamon’s 
assistance. In later times Shigi was the scene of other warlike 
exploits. 

Suiten or Varuna is said to be much worshipped in Tokyo as a 
god of luck, but it must be remembered that there is a tendency 
to confound Indian marine deities and native Shinto deities which 
have some connection with the sea. The gods of the temple of 
Suminoe (or Sumiyoshi) in Settsu, for instance, belong to this 
latter class. But Kobo Daishi and his sect after him had a strong 
inclination to see in such cases merely two forms of the same deity, 
one in Japanese and one in Indian dress. Anesaki {Buddhist Art, 
plate xxviii) gives a copy of a Mandara in which all the Shinto 
deities of Kasuga are represented in Buddhist form. 

It is only natural that a sect which recognizes such a multitude 
of deities as the Shingon should also have many ceremonies and 
ritual observances. Two of these are specially remarkable, Kwanjo 
and Goma. I. have spoken of Kwanjo already in treating of the 
Tendai, for it seems to have been first practised in Japan by that 
sect, although it has now come to be regarded as a special observance 
of the Shingon. Kwanjo is a translation of the Sanskrit a&AasAe/m, 
which is commonly used in ancient and modem times to describe 
the ceremony corresponding to coronation, which in India was 
performed by sprinkling the king with water. At an early period, 
in the Digha Nik&ya,^ for instance, it is used in Buddhist works 
in a metaphorical sense. Later, when the career of a Bodhisattva 
is divided into stages or bhumis, the last or supreme stage is often 
called abhisheka. The term occurs first in the Mahavastu and 
afterwards in the Satasahasrika, Lankavatara, Dasabhumika, 
and other works as a synonym of Dharmaraegha, the idea apparently 

^ Dig. Nik., xvi, 5-30. 

358 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xv 

being that the Bodhisattva, now at the end of his successful career, 
is sprinkled by the other Buddhas with their own hands and formally 
accepted by them. Kobo Daishi, it will be remembered, defined ’■ 
Kwanjo as “ the bestowal of the Buddha’s great mercy upon 
sentient beings in order to enable them to attain the highest perfect 
enlightenment 

In the Yung-Chia period a.d. 307-312 we hear that a monlr of 
the Western country named Srimitra came to China, administered 
this rite of Kwanjo, and translated the Mahabhishekarddhi-dharani.® 
It would thus be possible for the Tendai sect, which was founded 
about A.D. 550, to have learnt about the ceremony not from the 
Chen-yen (Shingon), which was founded about two centuries later, 
but from some earlier source. 

As mentioned already under the Tendai sect, the ritual for 
performing KwanjS varies greatly and so do the objects for which it 
is performed. It may be a species of ordination and serve as a 
certificate that one has reached the highest grade of esoteric lore 
and is competent to instruct others. It may, on the other hand, 
fulfil some quite trivial purpose, such as a necessary formality 
before some specially holy object can be seen, or it may be used 
simply as an adjunct to prayer for health and wealth and any other 
private end. 

Another remarkable ceremony is the Goma (Sanskrit Homa) 
or burnt offering, remarkable because one would as soon expect to 
find such oblations forming a part of Christian as of Buddhist 
worship. Nevertheless they were used by late Indian Buddhism 
and adopted by the Chinese, who passed them on to Japan, where 
they are used by most of the older sects, especially the Shingon, 
the Tendai, Kcgon, Hosso, and Risshu. The Goma is also said to 
form part of the ritual of the Nichiren. In all sects the ceremony 
is said to be performed for some special object, either private or 
public, such as peace or victory. I am told that in cases of illness 
offerings with this rite are frequently made to Yakushi, the healing 
Buddha. For its performance a stage or table is erected before an 
image or mandara and a metal basin is let into it to receive the 
burnt offerings. These consist of fragrant wood, poppy seeds, oil, 
incense, perfumes, - and similar substances. Cakes and flowers 
are placed upon the table and offered but are not burnt. The 

> See Chap. XIV, p. 328. : 

® Nanjio, Ifo. 167, wherein it is stated that the work is a collection of twelve 
Butras. See also Nanjio, ii, 36. 

OH. XV] SHINGON 369 

ofl&ciant sits in front of the table and all bis actions, especially the 
position of bis bands (tbe mudra), are of great moment. In all 
Sbingon ceremonies tbe greatest weight is attached to such gestures.^ 
Like tbe Indian Tantric mudras, from which they are borrowed, 
they are considered to be the essence and manifestation of the 
various deities, and it is most important that the officiant should 
imitate the gesture appropriate to the particular deity whom he is 
worshipping in order that he may be as like that deity as possible. 

1 The subject is treated fully with numerous diagrams in the work called Si-do- 
in-dzou, published in 1899 by the Musee Guimet, text by Horiou Toki, notes by 
L. de Milloue. 

CHAPTER XVI 

AMIDISM 

Though Amida, or Amitabha, is well known as a benevolent 
deity in China, Tibet, and other countries of the Tar East, it is 
above all in Japan that his worship has developed into distinct, 
well organized, popular, and progressive sects which claim attention 
if only for the numbers and wealth of their adherents. In the earlier 
sections of this work I have already spoken several times at length 
of the history of this worship which is summed up in the names 
of its seven Patriarchs : two Indian, Nagarjuna and Vasubandhu ; 
three Chinese, Donran, Doshaku, and Zendo ; and two Japanese, 
Genshin and HonenA 

The cult of Amida seems to have begun in India about the time 
of the Christian era, or possibly a little earlier, and perhaps was not 
originally Indian but introduced from the Iranian districts lying 
to the north, but in saying this it must be remembered that the 
earliest Amidist scriptures, the two Sukh^vati-vyuhas, are entirely 
Indian in tone and outlook. Though remarkable analogies, verbal 
and other, may be found with the Avesta, there are only two points 
which suggest that the worship is really not Buddhist in origin. 
They are, it must be confessed, sufficiently important. The first 
is that the chief figure, Amitabha or Amitayus, Measureless Light 
or Life, as he is indifferently called, is totally unknown in the 
oldest Buddhist hterature, whether Pali or Sanskrit, and when 
he first appears is far from having the same pre-eminent position 
which he acquired in later times. Although numerous works 
of respectable antiquity recommend his worship and represent 
it as prevalent in India, his adorers do not seem to have formed 
a corporation as they did later in Japan or as did the Bhagavatas 
at an early period in India itself. Secondly, the essential doctrine 
of the sect, the transfer of merit or of being saved by the exertions 
of another, is repudiated hy early Buddhism. The Buddha shows 
men how they can save themselves, but he is not a saviour except 
in the sense that a teacher is one. Our future is determined by our 

^ This is the list given In Shinran’s Shoshinge. Other versions give Honen 
and Shinran. 

360 

CH. XVI] AMIBISM 361 

own good or bad actions. Still, even in Indian religions tlie idea 
of a saviour, tbougb. less common tban in other countries, is not 
unknown. It is an easy and comfortable doctrine and appeals 
in all countries to both sinners and good men who shrink from the 
labour of elaborate ritual or arduous thought. The special form of 
saviour which appealed to the Far East was a Buddha who has 
obtained enlightenment by his exertions continued through long 
ages and on the express condition that he does not need Buddhahood 
unless he can admit to his paradise all who call on his name. It is 
to be noted that the Buddha to be is not praying to or making 
vows to any Supreme Being. By refusing Buddhahood except on 
conditions he is instituting a new Idnd of Karma which enables 
him to share with other men his marvellous merit, which is more 
than is needed to make one man a Buddha. According to the 
Mahayanist sutras, Amida is only one of many Buddhas who have 
performed this feat, though for practical purposes his name has 
eclipsed all others. 

The worship of Amitabha was introduced into China at an early 
date and seems to have been made a definite sect or school by 
Hui-Yiian (333-418). The school was most successful and produced 
several renowned doctors of whom Zend5 ^ was the most celebrated, 
being regarded in Japan as an incarnation of Amida himself. He is 
the author of the celebrated parable of the Wliite Path which is 
regarded as an epitome of religion. It tells how a traveller proceeding 
westwards across a vast plain found himself confronted by two rivers 
or rather sheets of water, for they were unfathomable and so wide 
that no one could see the further shore. The only way across them 
was a narrow white path a few inches wide, continually washed 
by the waves and flames which came upon it from the two sides. 
Wondering what he should do, he looked backwards and saw 
a band of brigands and a pack of wild beasts following his track. 
In desperation he decided to advance along the white path at any 
risk. As soon as he had taken this decision, he heard a voice calling 
to him, “With right thought and singleness of heart walk on without 
fear. I will protect thee.” It was the voice of Amida, and stepping 
resolutely along the narrow way, the traveller was soon welcomed 
by him in his paradise of the West. 

But after some centuries the popularity of Amida’s worship 
prevented it from being appropriated by any one sect. It became 

362 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [oh. xvi 

not the special tenet of a particular Ohnroh but an aspect of all, 
because none could afford to neglect so attractive a doctrine. 
This partly accounts for the manner of its introduction into Japan. 
It was not brought back like the Tendai, Shingon, and Zen by 
priests who had gone to study in China, but after Aniida had become 
a familiar figure, the idea that he was to be regarded not only as 
a saviour but as the only Saviour was preached by Honen, Shinran, 
and others and became a great religious movement which seemed 
thoroughly national and to owe nothing to China. 

It is recorded that the Suldiavati-vyuha was publicly recited 
at the Japanese Court as early as a.d. 640. In the Nara period 
G-yogi Bosatsu and other famous priests are said to have preached 
the doctrine of Jodo, the Pure Land, though I have not found any 
detailed account of their activities in this respect. When after the 
removal of the capital to Kyoto Dengyo Daishi and Kobo Daishi 
had established the Tendai and Shingon sects on a firm basis, the 
worship of Amida became increasingly popular, but it differed from 
the later teaching of Honen in two respects. In the first place, it 
nearly always involved meditation on Amida : mere invocation or 
the repetition of his name was not sufficient. Secondly, though 
concentration of the mind on a particular Buddha and especially 
on Amida (since tradition and literature rendered him eminently 
suitable for the purpose) was recognized as a method of attaining 
paradise, still it was only one method. The Tendai and Shingon 
had numerous other receipts for salvation and the chief recommenda- 
tion of this procedure was its easiness. There was no notion that it 
was the one and only form of religion practicable in the present 
decadent age. Still it was undoubtedly popular. Dengyo Daishi 
and his successor Jikaku (794-864:) are said to have repeated the 
Nembutsu : the ex-Emperors Uda (866-931) and Go-Shirakawa 
(1125-1192) died invoking Amida with their faces turned to the 
west: Kuya, the itinerant preacher and dancer, spread the use 
of the Nembutsu : Kakuhan, the founder of a new branch of the 
Shingon, accommodated it to the principles of his sect : Yokwan 
and Chingai also recommended its use with various slight modifica- 
tions of their own. More important for the history of dogma is 
Genshin ^ (942-1017), who is often recognized as the first Japanese 
patriarch of the Amidist school, because he came near to preaching 

^ Often called Eshin Sozu ^ He was Abbot of the Eshin-in 

in Yokawa on Mount Hiei. 

CH. xvi] AMIBISM 363 

tlie same doctrine as Honen in folding that tlie mere repetition 
of tlie Nembutsn without the practice of meditation is sufficient 
to cleanse from sin and to secure rebirth in paradise. He was also 
the spiritual ancestor of Honen in another sense, for he wrote 
a book called Ojoyoshu,^ in which he explained the views of Zendo, 
and it was the perusal of the Ojoyoshu which turned Honen’s 
attention to Zendo, whom he came to consider an infallible authority 
in matters of doctrine. The work of Genshin is remarkable for its 
vivid descriptions of paradise and also of the terrible destinies which 
await the wicked. He has been compared to Dante, but was a painter 
and sculptor as well as a writer. Perhaps he was really most remark- 
able and influential as a painter, for the pictures attributed to him, 
if genuine, show a freedom both in colour and outline which marks 
a change in the conventional Buddhist art of that date. He seems 
indeed to have been an artist rather than a preacher or philosopher 
and he left no sect behind him. The first to do this was By5iiin ^ 
(1072-1132), a younger contemporary of Genshin’s who founded 
a sect called the Yuzu ISTembutsu, which still exists though small 
in numbers.^ The formation of a sect, however, having as its 
cardinal principle the worship of Amida, was an event of some 
importance since he had hitherto been adored as one of the many 
Buddhas recognized by the older religious bodies. In this respect 
Eyonin paved the way for Honen’s teaching, but in others his 
doctrine shows considerable differences. Pirst, he did not appeal 
to the three Amidist sutras as Ms authorities but to the Lotus 
and the Kegon-sutra, thus maintaining a sort of connection with 
the Tendai. Secondly, he claimed to have received personal inspira- 
tion from Amida and the god Bishamon. Thirdly, he held, as 
a part of Amida’s special revelation, that the recitation of the 
Hembutsu, which he recognized as the principal act of devotion, 
should be made on behalf of others as well as for oneself, and that 
if made with this larger application it was a thousand million times 
more meritorious than if uttered as a merely selfish prayer. It is 
strange that this idea does not seem to have been taken up by any 
of the later Amidist schools. 

In 1133, a year after Kyonin’s death, was born Honen ^ (or 
Genku), the real founder of Japanese Amidism. It is true that his 
followers were not officially recognized as a sect until the time of 

® It has about 360 temples. ^ ^ 

364 

364 TBS SSGTS AND THEIR DOGTRINES [oh. xvi 

leyasu, thougt ia practice they formed a leUgions body from 
hLh’s Ufetime omrarde. and aleo that Shaman developed certam 
points of doctrine with greater preoWon. Yet Gensto, the only 
previous doctor who enunciated almost the same doctrme was 
L a teacher and had practically no followers, whale it B not c ear 
that apart from Honen. SHman’s convictions wou^d **en 

the form wHch they did. He always professed to Ho^n 
disciple and Honen is therefore rightly considered as the foundei 
of JBdo.i or religion of the Pure Land, in Japan. Tta name 
lhaps the desiliation most widely used and is simply^the Japanese 
OTonnmiation of Ch'ing-tn, the title given to Amda s Paradise 
by the Chinese. Shinshu, or more correctly Jodo Shmshu, means 
sLply the true form of Jodo, that is, the J5do faith as more clearly 
deW and, in the opinion of his follow^s, 

I have already given some accounts of Honen s life and it remam 
to examine hJdoctrines in more detail His 
influenced his teaching. His was a pecuharly amiable and gentle 
nature always anxious not to offend, to see things froni other s 
poLts of vie Jand to formulate his own so as to raise as fewobjections 
L possible. Indeed, some passages in Ins writmgs “ 

criticized by later JBdo doctors for their too great hberahty, for 
instance one = in which he seems to say that other forms of worship 
are as good as the Nembutsu provided that the thought and prayer 

be direLd towards Amida and the Pure Land, ^ ot oriV 

too he says that it is allowable to pray for worldly gooito, not on y 
by practising the Nembutsu but by invob^ the other 
glds by rea^ng or writing the sutras, or by malnng images of the 
Buddhas. It if dear that the school which he inaugurated was 
p«t of the larger rehgious movement wHch w^ -eiy^- " 
hi this period and which found expmssion m the “ ““ 

and in the polemics of Nichiren 

some intelligihle and easy form of religion which would e 

and comfort to souls wHoh had sought them in vmn m the r tua 
and philosophy of the older systems. HSnen says ™ 

his own wal and he once stated » that the reason why he founded 

.S+. 

» Ilonen, the BwMkist:Samt, -p.^^ ^ liv 'but iUmd become a system of 

•I Tt mav seem strange to speak of Zen as easy, but it ^ 
training which was in^gible to the military classes in a way m which cerem • 
and metaphysics were pot. : ^ 

® Honen, the Biiddhist Saint, 

CH. XVI] AMIJDmm 365 

the Jodo sect was to show ordinary roan how to be born into the 
Buddha’s own country. He was also under the influence of the idea 
that the world had entered on its last and worst phase, or the Age 
of Mappo, in which the true Law and virtue were decajdng. In spite 
of his profound learning, his teaching is emotional rather than 
reasoned and addressed to the ignorant and simple-minded. He 
defines it himself in the “One Sheet of Paper”, the last tiring 
which he wrote, as being “ nothing but the mere repetition of the 
Namu Amida Butsu without a doubt of his mercy whereby one 
may be born into Paradise ”, 

As an exponent of these views H5nen was perhaps at his best 
in conversation and in intimate letters, but he wrote several books, 
the best known of which is the Senchakushu.,^ consistiiig of sixteen 
chapters quoting many passages from the three Amidist-sutras 
as well as from the Chinese Patriarch Zendd, of whom he says that 
he was an incarnation of Amida and that though we have had 
many teachers of the Pure Land sect we should depend solely on 
Zends. ^ As Honen is said to have read the whole Tripitaka several 
times, he had probably perused the Agamas (equivalent to the 
Pali NdrS-yas), but so far as I know he never quotes them or attaches 
the smallest importance to the fact that though they are the most 
ancient and authoritative accounts of Shaka’s preaching they 
contain no mention of Amida. With his usual charity he says ® that 
no one should speak of the Lotus or of the Prajnap&ramita with 
the least disparagement, but evidently the three Amidist-sutras 
are for him the ultimate source of truth and Shaka’s mission was 
to make them known to the world. I have already given some 
account of these books ^ and of the little we know of the origin 
of the doctrines they contain. Honen seems to attach especial 
importance to the Amitayurdhyana-sutra, Shinran to the larger 
Sukhavati- vyuha . 

The Senchaku opens by dividing religious practices into the 
Shodo, or holy path, and the Jodo, or pure land, which are equivalent 
to the distinction (first drawn by the Chinese Patriarch Donran) 
between Jiriki, or reliance on one’s own strength, and Tariki, or 

^ Or iu full ^ ^ ^ ^ Senchaku Hongwan Nembutsushu, 

“ A collection of passages bearing on the Nembutsu of the original vow.” Other 
books of Honen also quoted are the Ojo Taiyoshu and a commentary on the 
larger Sukhavati-vyuha. See Emm, the Buddhist Saird, pp. 348, 351. 

^ Honen, the Buddhist Saint, p. 467. Of. pp. 347 and 87. 

'•* Ibid,, p. 404. ^ Chapter IV, p. 105 

366 THE SECTS ASD THEIR D0CTBINE8 [oh. XYi 

reliance on the strength of another. The Mahasannipata-stea ' 
irnnoted aa Shaka himself say that m these latter days 

f^he Taw the ShSdo or path which he himself preached, has 
of the Law , attempted 

become mipiaoticahle Not one o me y 

i «. r™ f“* “! r 

r.. b, - y “S™* sst 

» boft .< a. b.®-i 

c — »• ■“ £“ 

W ajes'ago t waTa Bhikshu caUed Dhannakara, rendered in 

tpirfse as Has5. in the time of the Buddha ^ 

(in Japanese SejiaaiS Butsu), and made a vow 

rather series of vows, to save the human race, the gist of them bei g 

that he would not accept Buddhahood, which was his due im virtue 

“mr:S^acquired Ij his unselfish e-tions c— 

innumerable births, except on certam conditions, 
innumerable o r , j austento 

"long is^Tto ? He was transferring the m^t of bs 

tecipline to all the sentient beings of all « IZ 

the reason for that transcendent vow which he ma . 

‘Led for our sakes who live in these latter 
conditions there are no less than forty-eight, 

imnortance The principal is number eighteen, which stipulate 
S'- L being who cL on my name at least ten times shaU 
be born So m/lsnd ”, that is, the Paradise -^oh he wih oim - 
n Buddlia^ Rebirtli in tbe Paradise is commonly called j . 

vowS that all the inhabitants of this wondrous laud 

b of a Buddha waking Buoh vows is a peculiarly frequent suhicct in 

the frescoes discovered in Central Asia. 

3 jiQnenrthe Buddhist 8amt,v- 581. _ the Sanskrit text, which makes 

See Nanjio’s note on p li, § 19, seems to require 

3 The Greater Sukhavati-vyuha, J;., ^ . deadly sins, whereas 

ten repetitions and to ° ]30 saved (Honen, the B-uddhist 

Honen seems to bold that even Jf X and the 

», p. 395). 
five deadly sins may he 

smallest sins.” Of. ib., pp- 402. 403. and p. 330. 

® ft ' 

CH.xvi] AMIDmU 367 

sliould be certain of obtaining nirvana (a stipulation wMcb is often 
forgotten by those who speak of it as a permanent heaven) and be 
eligible as a candidate for Buddhahood. Alt women who pray for 
rebirth in Paradise shall be changed into men. 

If we ask why we should put our trust in Amida rather than in 
any other Buddha, the answer must be that he vowed to become 
a Buddha and save mankind, that he succeeded in becoming a 
Buddha, that Shaka came into the world to explain this vow, and 
that innumerable Buddhas testified that there was no doubt as to 
the correctness of his explanation. Yet Honen’s belief and trust 
in Amida, though' deep and intense, was not in the least polemical. 
“ You should not say as some do that because you trust in Amida 
and the Nembutsu it is right to have nothing to do with the merciful 
vows of the many Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. ... Your faith 
is quite one sided if you despise the many Buddhas or doubt Shaka’s 
holy teachings.” Similarly, in the “ One Sheet of Paper ” he is 
careful to allude to “ the mercy of the two Holy Ones ”, that is, 
Shaka and Amida. Hence the Jodo sect is sometimes known as the 
Ni-son Ikkyo, or one religion with two deities. Similarly, various 
Bodhisattvas such as Kwannon and Seishi are adored in Jodo 
temples (which is only natural considering the position given to them 
in the Amitajoirdhyana-sutra), and Honen himself was believed to 
be an incarnation of Seishi. He speaks incidentally of the protection 
of Brahma and ^akra (Indra).^ 

The salvation offered by Amida consists of rebirth in his Paradise, 
which all ancient accounts agree is situated in the West and where 
all shall enjoy wonderful powers of body and mind. Later accounts 
tend to regard it as a permanent residence for all eternity, but the 
sutras speak of it as being rather a blissful and peaceful sojourn 
where one can obtain nirvana or even become a Buddha. The 
idea that one who has obtained 0 jo or birth in paradise can return 
to the world and work for the salvation of others is countenanced 
by Honen, ^ but he explains that such a one is not returning to the 
round of births and deaths but voluntarily and for the sake of 
helping others revisits temporarily this sinful world. In the Buddhist 
periodical called ike, Young will be found an interesting 

article by Professor Takakusu in which he relates the death in 1928 

^ Honen, the Buddhist Saint, p, 754. ® Ibid., p. 426. 

® Young iBW, 8th April, 1928. The title of the article is “ Oso Eko and 
Genso Eko which are technical terms, the first for receiving the blessing of being 
born in paradise and the second for returning to this world in the manner described. 

368 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

of Baroness Kuj 6, a lady of great piety, and describes bow at tbe 
entreaty of ber friends sbe promised to return to tbis eartb. There 
is also an annex to tbe Pure Land called Keman-Kai, literally tbe 
realm of laziness, in wbicb tbe spirits of doubters bave to spend 
a certain time. Honen does not appear to mention it, tbougb a 
similar idea is to be found in tbe Greater Sukbavati-vyuba,^ according 
to wbicb those who are filled with faith are born miraculously in tbe 
Pure Land sitting cross-legged on tbe petals of a lotus, while doubters 
bave to spend five hundred years in tbe interior of tbe flower without 
seeing tbe Buddha until they are freed of their doubts. In the 
works of Koa Sbonin (1269-1330), one of tbe early lights of tbe 
Cbinzei division of tbe Jodo, may be found clear descriptions of 
Keman-Kai as a place of probation outside Paradise and nearer 
to tbis eartb.^ 

Sbinran also in bis work Kyogyo Sbinsb5 ® cites passages from 
various sutras about Keman-Kai, and the Tannisbo mentions “ the 
outskirts flji henji) of tbe Pure Land ” as a sort of purgatory 
for doubters but condemning tbe view that its inmates can ultimately 
go to bell. 

To obtain admission to this paradise it is only necessary to recite 
tbe Kembutsu — that is, tbe formula Namu Amida Butsu, or reverence 
to Amida Butsu — and according to tbe eighteenth vow, ten repetitions 
of tbe sacred words are sufficient. It is important to observe that, 
according to Honen, nothing is required except repetition of tbe 
formula with faith. He is emphatic in declaring that meditation 
on Amida, wbicb was considered a necessary part of tbe Kembutsu 
according to tbe older sects and wbicb is certainly prescribed in the 
Amitayurdbyana-sutra, is superfluous. Tbe system is primarily 
one for tbe ordinary man : no one can complain that be does not 
understand it. But tbougb it is certainly no tax upon tbe intellect, 
the repetition of tbe Hembutsu as enjoined by Honen makes severe 
inroads on one’s time. “Even if you are doing something else, 
do it while you go on with tbe main work of life, which is the practice 
of tbe Kembutsu, and do not let tbe Kembutsu be a sort of side 
work to anything else.” ^ Honen and many other saints are said 

1 §§40 and 41. 

® In his Sai-yo-sho, translated by Haas in Amida BuidJia unsere Zufluclil, 
Haas also says that Honen’s predecessor Yokwan (1032-1111) gives a detailed 
account of Keman-Kai in his book Ojo-jU'in. 

® ^ fw vol. vi. Taimisho, xvii, and postscript. 

“ IlOnen, the Buddhist Saint, 'p, ZQ5. 

GH. xvi] AMIDI8M 369 

to iiave repeated it sixty tiioTisand times a day. Services were even 
lield for repeating it a million times. A number of men sat together 
with an immense rosary about 10 feet in diameter and repeated 
the Nembutsu about 150,000 times in twenty-four hours. 

It is even stated in Honen’s Life ^ that the Emperor Go Shirakawa 
during his last illness repeated it a million times two hundred times 
over, and was rewarded with a peaceful end. 

It is strange that a man of Honen’s intelligence and real piety 
should have approved and enjoined what seems a monstrous number 
of repetitions of one prayer. He did not deny that in certain cases 
to say the Nembutsu ten times, or even once, was enough to secure 
Ojo, but he held that when once the wish to be born in the Pure 
Land had arisen one should make that wish one’s chief occupation 
and, so far as possible, thinly of nothing else. In the “ One Sheet 
of Paper” he deprecates all technicalities and says that “the 
mere repetition with firm faith includes all details such as the three 
states of mind ”, but this is because he wants to emphasize the 
simplicity of his essential teaching. In another letter ^ he expounds 
the said states with great eloquence and makes it plain that the 
recitation of the Nembutsu, as he contemplated it, was not merely 
mechanical. The definition of the three states of mind originated 
with Zendo, who laid it down that prayer should be offered 
with a sincere heart, a deep-believing heart, and a longing heart. 
A sincere heart is one in which every thought is true and full of 
genuine devotion. A believing heart explains itself, “ If a man 
thinks there is any uncertainty about his birth in the Pure Land, 
it is uncertain, whereas if he thinks it certain, it is certain,” By 
a longing heart ® is meant one which wishes all the merits which 
it may have acquired in this or previous existences to be presented 
and dedicated to the Buddha with the one object of attaining birth 
in the Pure Land, This sounds like a contradiction of the fundamental 
principles of the Jodo creed, and to make one’s entry into Paradise 
depend on one’s own merits and exertions and not solely and entirely 
on Amida. Honen’s explanation is that the object is to avoid having 
any desires except for birth in the Pure Land. The believer 
presumably acquires some good karma by his actions and ho should 
not dream of making any use of it except to offer it humbly to 
Amida. 

Hanen, the Buddhist Saint, p. 235. 

® Ibid., p, 414. 

3 Ekohotsugwanjin [Sj jp] ^ literally a heart which turns and vows. 

370 THE 8EGTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

Tlie real importance of these psychological arguments respecting 
the proper state of mind in which to pray lies in their bearing on 
the forgiveness of sins. Amida is all-merciful. He will come to the 
deathbed of a criminal who calls on him and conduct him to Paradise. 
Then why not sin as much as one likes, say the Nembutsu when 
suitable with perfect faith and go in good time to heaven ? The 
Jodo and the Shinshu were continually accused of preaching this 
immoral doctrine, and throughout Honen’s active life we find him 
continually arguing against such a perversion of his teaching. 
Yet it is a mistake which it is very easy to make and even Honen 
himself wrote passages which he might have done well to word 
differently. “ If you have any time to spare after saying the 
Nembutsu,” he wrote to Eensei,^ “ then you may apply it to doing 
good works. ... If you say the Nembutsu thirty or fifty thousand 
times, even if you should break a few of the commandments, that 
cannot affect your attainment of Ojo at all.” But generally, as one 
might expect, he vigorously affirms the need of good conduct. 
“ While believing that even a man guilty of the ten evil deeds and 
the five deadly sins may be born into the Pure Land, let us for our 
part not be guilty of even the smallest sins.” ^ And again, “ If your 
faith is not right, it is not in harmony with the mind of Amida 
and it is certain that his merciful vow has nothing to do with you. , . . 
Some say that the effort to avoid sin and improve oneself is making 
hght of Amida’s vow. . . .Do not be for a moment misled by 
such false ideas. Is there any place in any of the sutras where 
Amida encourages men to sin ? Certainly not. Such things come 
from those who make no effort to get away from their own evil 
deeds and who go on in their former sinful life. . . . Such persons 
are nothing less than a company of devils, their work is heathenish 
and you should think of them as enemies to your attaining birth 
in the Pure Land.” In other words, the idea that it is possible to 
continue sinning deliberately and to do away with the sin by 
reciting the Nembutsu has the appearance of logic but it is an 
entire misunderstanding of the Nembutsu. Amida is full of com- 
passion for sinners, but he hates sin for he know^s it is the cause 
of misery, and any device to increase sin must be hateful to 
him. The recitation of the Nembutsu with faith implies repentance 
for sin in the past and the desire to avoid it in the future. Doubtless, 
too, the repetition of the Nembutsu was regarded as a preventative 

^ Honen, the Buddhist Saint, -p. 495. 

® Ibid., p. 395, and in almoat identical words, p. 403. 

CH. xvi] : AMIDI8M 371 

of sinful desires : according to Honen prayer is not merely a help 
to life, it should be the whole of life and the object of life. One 
should not have any desire except to be reborn in the Pure Land, 
and consequently there will not be room in one’s mind for passion 
or ambition. 

Nevertheless, the Pure Land sects were long troubled with the 
heresy that since Amida’s object is to save and help sinners who 
call on him, he may be said in a certain sense to love sinners and 
to enjoy sin, since it gives a larger scope for the display of his grace. 
The same theory is found among some Vishnuist schools in Southern 
India, where it is called Doshabhogya (enjoying sin), and, lest it 
should be supposed that Orientals have a monopoly of these queer 
ideas, it also crops up in the works of Oscar Wilde, who says in 
De Profundis : “ Christ through some divine instinct in Him seems 
to have always loved the sinner as being the nearest approach to 
perfection in man. ... In a manner not yet understood of the 
world He regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful 
holy things and modes of perfection. ... Christ, had He been 
asked, would have said — I feel quite certain about this — that the 
moment the Prodigal Son fell on his knees and wept, he made his 
having wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-herding and 
his hungering for the husks they ate beautiful and holy moments 
in his lifed’ 

Honen’s amiable and undogmatic temper led him to formulate 
his views in simple and untechnical language and so far as 
possible to avoid contradicting other sects. But after his death 
his successors were inclined to be more precise and to 
define and develop doctrines which he had perhaps purposely 
left somewhat vague. Six of his disciples, Shokobo, ZennebS (also 
called Shoku), Shinran, Eyukan, Chosai, and Kosai, founded sects 
or sub-sects of which the first three survive, while the others have 
become extinct. Shokobo’s school, which is called Chinzei,i is the 
ordinary Jodo sect as it exists at present and appears to represent 
correctly Honen’s views. It emphasizes the need of frequently 
reciting the Nembutsu with as deep earnestness as if ea,ch repetition 
was made with one’s last breath. But it also gives due importance 
to Amida’s twentieth vow, which is that those who acquire merit 
by practices other than the Nembutsu shall he horn in the Pure 
Land at the end of the third rebirth after: the present at the latest. 

372 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

Zennebo founded tbe Seizan ^ scbool, wMcb is still recognized as 
an. orthodox branch of the Jodo and has the Zeniinji temple at 
Kyoto as its headquarters. I find it exceedingly difficult to state 
what are its special views, although Honen’s Life contains a long 
chapter on the teachings of Zennebo (No. xxvii),^ The Japanese 
as a nation have perhaps not much talent for metaphysics and 
probably most of what they have to say on such questions is 
borrowed. But the religious public (like the Protestant denomina- 
tions of Europe) seems to have a taste for discussing such matters 
as' faith, freewill, grace, and the relations of the Buddha or God 
to the human soul. It is the last question — the intimate union 
existing between Anoida and his devotees— which seems to have 
preoccupied Zennebo. He is quoted as saying that “ rebirth is 
attained when Amida enters into our hearts and when this happens 
our works are his and his are ours : in the unity of Amida and ourselves 
Amida realizes his Buddhahood and on our side rebirth is attained ”. 
He also appears to have attached little importance to the twentieth 
vow and to have maintained that the Nembutsu was essential 
to salvation, which could not be obtained by merit arising from 
meditation or other good works. Chosai, on the other hand, considered 
that this vow definitely authorized such meritorious practices as 
means of salvation equivalent to the Nembutsu. He founded a 
school which is now extinct called Kuhonji, from a temple of the 
same name in the suburbs of Kyoto. 

Another point on which the opinion of Honen’s disciples was 
strongly divided was the question of “ one calling ” or “many 
callings that is, one or many recitations of the Nembutsu. HSneii’s 
practice was certainly in favour of “ many callings ”, and another 
strong advocate of the principle was his disciple Hyukan,^ who 
held that a devout man should continue calling on the Buddha’s 
name all his life until the day of his death. The partisans of “ one 
calling ” raised no objection to repeated invocations but insisted 
on the absolute sufficiency of one. This one invocation must be 
a solemn act of faith by which the devotee is made one with Amida 
in spiritual union, and without such faith mere recitation is of no 
avail. Kosai, one of PISnen’s disciples, is said to have held this 

’ m III.. ■" 

^ There is also a study of Shpku’s (Zennebo’s) teaching by Shizutoshi Sugihira 
in the Eastern BuMMst, vol. v. No. 1 of March, 1929. But I confe-ss that very 
little of it is intelligible to me. 

^ In Japanese ^ and ^ ^ • 

* For an account of huh see Ho7ie%, Saint, chap. xliv. 

AMIDIBM 

373 

CH. XVl] 

view.i Ue ]ia,d been brouglit up in tlie Tendai sect and bold that 
AmidaLad two personalities, tbe original (boinmon) and the incarnate 
(sliakumon).^ The latter is the Araida who ages ago appeared in 
the world as Hozo and ultimately attained Biiddhaliood, but the 
original personality is without beginning and is identical with the 
Buddha nature which is in all of us. It is sufficient for salvation 
to realize this truth and in its light to recite the Nenibutsu once 
only. Kosai ® also appears to have held that there was no objection 
to J5do priests marrjdng. 

Honen strongly objected to the “ one calling ” principle and 
contended that it was contrary to Zendo’s views, in which he was 
no doubt right. But Kosai insisted in maintaining his errors “ until 
Honen could no longer have him for his disciple ” and so expelled 
him from the sect. Honen also “ issued a written instruction ” 
denouncing the once-calling doctrine in strong language, which was 
very unusual to his gentle temper. He seems to have been particularly 
irritated by the statement that it was the doctrine which he really 
held and that the many thousand daily repetitions of the Kembutsu 
which he was said to make were an empty pretence. He also seems 
to connect the once-calling principle with the doctrine that 
immorality is permissible. 

Kosai and his sect have for all practical purposes been long 
forgotten, but his interest lies in the fact that the Life of Honen 
represents him as holding, and as being condemned by the master 
for holding, the same views — once-calling and the marriage of 
the clergy — as were undoubtedly approved by far the most 
important of Hbneii’s disciples, namely, Shinran. The sect founded 
by Shinran is known as the J odo Shinshu, or True sect of the Pure 
Land, that is, the correct doctrine about the Pure Land. It is the 
largest Buddhist denomination in Japan and numbers at the present 
day abo’ve thirteen million adherents against about three million 
belonging to the J5do of Honen. I have given above some account 
of the life of the founder and of the history of the sect, which differed 
considerably from that of Honen’s school, Shinran founded during 
his life many temples in provinces distant from Kyoto, such as 
Echizen and Shimotsuke, and these developed into a formidable 
military power like the old monasteries, though their manner of 
conducting operations was somewhat different. The permission 
given to the priests to marry made the hereditary Shinshu abbots 

^ Honen, the Buddhist Saint, chap. xxix. = * RandiS P?- 

® Ibid., p. 524:. 

374: THE SECTS AND THEIB DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

almost exact counterparts of secular nobles, and they transferred 
their temples, or fortified residences, from one place to another 
as pleased them. The Shinshu is divided into ten sub-sects, but 
they present no differences of doctrine and in constitution resemble 
bishoprics. 

According to the Shinshu Catechism ^ the name of the sect is 
taken from the Chinese Patriarch Zendo, who uses the expression 
“ Shinshu, or the true sect, is hard to find ”, It is most remarkable 
to find that Shinran himself uses it of the teaching of Honen, of 
whom he says in one of his hymns, “ Out of the might of the light of 
wisdom appeared the great founder Genku. He founded the Jodo 
Shinshu and preached the vows of Amida,” It is not quite clear 
when a distinction was first drawn between the J5do and the 
Jodo Shinshu and when Shinran’s followers separated themselves 
from those of Honen, particularly as for a long time the latter 
were not reckoned as a distinct and officially recognized sect. 
It is claimed by the Shinshu sect that Honen countenanced all 
Shinran’s innovations and merely tolerated the old monastic 
discipline for fear of doing more harm than good if he broke too 
violently with ancient usage. As I have mentioned elsewhere, the 
incidents of Shinran’s life are extremely doubtful. It seems, however, 
certain that he was not only a devoted follower of HSnen but his 
favourite disciple. The Tannisho records his emphatic assertion 
that he would not mind going to hell if he had been deceived by 
Honen. They appear to have lived together in perfect harmony 
until they were banished, Honen to Shikoku and Shinran to Bohigo. 
Shinran made use of his banishment for missionary propaganda, 
and on being pardoned prepared to return to Kyoto in 1226, but 
hearing on his way that Honen was dead, returned voluntarily 
to Bchigo to continue his missionary labours. He then spent several 
years in Hitachi, made a long tour in which he not only preached 
and made converts but also built temples, and finally settled down 
in Kyoto after an absence of twenty-eight years. These circumstances 

I shall often have occasion to quote this work, which seems to be a concise 
and authoritative statement of modern Shinshu doctrine, by R. Nishimoto. Its 
Japanese title is Shinshfi Hyakuwa and it was published in Tokyo about 1910. It 
is translated by A. K. Reiachauer in vol. xxsviii, part v, of the Trans, of the, As. 
Bog. of Japan, 1912, The passage here referred to is § 23. See also /Synopsis 
of the Jodo /Shinshu Oreed, compiled (in English) by the Educational Department 
of the West Hongwanji, Kyoto, 1920. This body has also published Hymns of 
the Pure Land (Japanese text and translation), which is one of the three volumes 
of Shinran’s hymns. 

CH. XVI] AMIDISM 376 

make tke SHnsliii account of the division seem highly probable. 
Honen was most conciliatory and anxious not to offend r he was 
even open to the charge of occasional inconsistency and we know 
that there were varieties of opinion among his disciples. He may 
have raised no objections to Shinran’s views while not thinking 
it wise to give them his public approval. Then comes the period 
of exile and Shinraii’s absence from Kyoto during twenty-eight years. 
One can well imagine that those of Honen’s disciples who remained 
in the capital would feel the pressure of ecclesiastical opinion and, 
though they were regarded as heretics, shrink from incurring the 
charge of being immoral antidisciplinarians. Shinran, on the contrary, 
moving as a missionary among rural populations who probably 
knew little of Buddhism, would not feel the same restraints or 
find any inconvenience in preaching new doctrines and practices. 
When he at last returned to Kyoto the breach between himself 
and those of Honen’s followers who remained in the capital had 
probably perceptibly widened, and we can imagine that the habit 
of instructing comparatively ignorant audiences had made him 
somewhat dogmatic, so it is not wonderful if he and his followers 
declined to unite with the others and claimed to be the “ True sect 
ofJodo”. 

It is noticeable that Honen’s biographer Shunjo, though he relates 
the anecdotes about Kosai mentioned above, says nothing about 
Shinran and passes him over in silence, though he devotes special 
chapters to the other eminent disciples. This is perhaps merely 
the result of sectarian disapproval, but it is also most remarkable 
that neither he nor Kakunyo, the earliest biographer of Shinran, 
mention Shinran’s marriage to Kaneaane’s daughter, whereas the 
accepted story is that Honen approved of and even arranged the 
said marriage. It may be taken as certain that Shinran approved 
of the marriage of the clergy and was married himself, but still 
it may be doubted if the above story is true. If it were, it is 
strange that we hear nothing about the matter in Shunjo’s life, for 
considering the high social position of the bride the scandal in 
Kyoto would have been considerable, and on the other hand no 
reason can be assigned for Kalmnyo’s silence, for the followers 
of the Shinshu evidently consider the marriage as a credit to their 
communion. But the course of events seems to me easier to under- 
stand if we suppose that Honen and Shinran discussed many 
subjects together, including the marriage of the clergy and the 
question of once-calling ”, but that Shinran did not actually 

376 TEE MOTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cm xyi 

mSirry and. malj'u.r© liis viaws on various doctrinal points until after 
Honen’s death. Byoku’s biography _ of Shinran states _ that 
Kanezane’s daughter died and that Shinran married again in the 
Kwanto and had five children, four boys (Zenxan, etc.) and one girl. 
But I do not venture to express any decided opinion on the question, 
for the documents have not been examined critically and religious 
prejudice may have affected the accuracy of the statements made 

by both sides. a ■ 

It is not easy to separate the doctrines of Honen and Shim'an. 
The Jodo does not differ conspicuously from the older sects in 
discipline, ritual, and the appearance of its temples ; it honours 
other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas besides Amida, but teaches that 
salvation is best and most easily obtained by invoking his name. 
The Shinshu, on the other hand, has abolished monasticism and 
its temples are easily distinguishable from others . worship is 
offered to Amida only ; salvation is obtained by faith, which is the 
gift of Amida, and it begins in this world as soon as faith begins in 
the believer. But most of these differences, though valid as a 
rough statement, are not absolute. Shaka and other Buddhas 
are invoked in the funeral ceremonies of the Shinshu. The doctrine 
of faith is old ; it is found in the Jodo as clearly as in the Shinshu, 
and the Shinshu is emphatic in extolling the efficacy of the Nembutsu, 
though not for quite the same reasons. The doctrine of immediate 
salvation, too, was not an invention of Shinran, for Honen said, 
‘‘ How happy the thought that though we are still here in the flesh 
we are numbered among the holy ones of Paradise. But though 
there is this community of doctrine, the distinctness and prominence 
of the Shinshu cannot be ignored. It has no endowments and 
relics or voluntary subscriptions, yet its temples^ arc the largest 
and most conspicuous in Japan and are built within cities so as to 
be immediately accessible to the ordinary population, whereas 
those of other sects were originally built outside cities or on their 
edges, though they may have become surrounded by the growth 
of suburbs. The magnificent temple called Higashi Hongwanji 
in Kyoto was rebuilt in 1895 entirely by popular enterprise. 
The inhabitants of the surrounding provinces, who were largely 
peasants, presented subscriptions amounting to a million yen, 
besides bnildmg materials offered in kind. Coils of gigantic 
hawsers made of human hair with which the pillars and timbers 
were hoisted into their places are still shown. Yet though the 
sect appeals so strongly to the people, its connection with the 

CH. XVI] AMIBmm 377 

aristocracy and even the Imperial Family is equally remarkable. 
Count Otani Kooho, the abbot of this temple, married the Princess 
Satoko, daughter of Prince Kuni, and sister of the present Empress 
of Japan. 

The teaching of Shinshu is frequently summed up in the phrase 
Shinzoku Nitai, or in full, Shintai and Zokutai.^ The phrase is in 
common use in other sects as well and describes the two great 
divisions of religion, faith and morality. Shintai refers mainly 
to the next world, the salvation offered by Amida and how to obtain 
it, Zokutai is a man’s duty as a member of society, but duty in the 
sense of conduct arising from faith. It is the peculiar merit of 
Shinshu, says the Catechism, that it alone of all Buddhist sects 
shows how the rehgious faith of a believer and his daily conduct 
as a citizen of the world may be made to harmonize. The Eybgemon 
of Eennyo, a sort of creed, is perhaps the simplest and most 
authoritative statement respecting Shintai and Zokutai, 

“ Kejecting all other religious practices and works and all idea 
that I can help myself, I pray wholeheartedly to Amida for my 
salvation in the life to come which is the most important 
of all things. I believe that the moment I have faith in him my 
entry into the life of paradise is certain and I exult in the thought 
that henceforth invocation of his name is an expression of thank- 
fulness. Moreover, I remember with thankfulness that I have 
learnt this doctrine by the grace of the founder and of the righteous 
and wise men who succeeded him. Further, I will observe all my 
life the commandments as appointed.” 

The Catechism states that the doctrines of Shinshu are based 
on the DaimuryoJukyS, or the Greater Sukh&vati-vyuha, the first 
portion of which teaches Shintai a.nd the second Zokutai. It is 
remarkable that the Lesser Sukhavati-vyuha and the Meditation- 
sutra are not mentioned here, though they are duly recognized 
as canonical in § 27 with the proviso that, the Greater sutra is the 
most important. Shinran’s own writings are also much studied and 
regarded as quasi-scripture. The best known of them is the poem 
or hymn called Shoshinge,® which is constantly used in religious 
services and forms part of the daily devotions of the devout. 
In a hundred and twenty verses it eomprkes a brief statement 
of the Shinshu belief and also a brief history of the faith and of the 

^ Mr af and m, literally spiritual truths and worldly truths. 

® IE M 'fif. 

378 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

seven patriarclis. He also wrote when about fifty-two years of age 
and while staying at the village of Inada in Hitachi a work in 
six volumes which is said to have laid the foundations of the Jodo 
Shinshild It is called the KyogyS Shmsho,2 that is, Doctrine, 
Practice, Faith, and Attainment, and the six volumes deal with Real 
Truth, Right Practice, True Faith, True Understanding, Real 
Paradise, and This World. These themes are illustrated by a 
collection of passages selected from twenty-three sutras, not merely 
the three Amidist books mentioned but such works as the 
Avatarnsaka and Nirvana Sutras. 

When well advanced in years Shinran also wrote a number of 
hymns which are now sung at morning and evening services. 
They are in three volumes, and it appears from references in the 
first two that he wrote them at the age of seventy-six, _ while the 
third was composed when he was ten years older. Considering his 
age, they show extraordinary vigour. The whole collection is 
called Sanjo Wasan and consists of the following sections : The Jodo 
Wasan or hymns of the Pure Land, the San-Amida-ge, based on the 
poems of the Chinese Patriarch Donran, the Koso-Wasan in praise 
of the seven Patriarchs, and the Sho-z6-matsu Wasan describing 
the changes which will come upon the True Law in the lapse of 
centuries. The Ofumi or Epistles of Rennyo ^ are also read at 
services. 

The doctrines expounded in these various works are not exactly 
those of the Jodo sect, which claims with apparent justice to represent 
the teachings of Honen, but it must not be supposed that he is the 
object of any criticism or polemic. The attitude of Shinran and 
the Shinshu is rather that they preserve the true meaning and 
intention of Honen, who is always spoken of with the utmost 
veneration as a Patriarch of the sect and is commemorated in a 
special festival held on 25th January. The most important 
differences are practical and concern the organization of the Church. 
The principal of them, of course, is the abolition of the monastic 
system and the permission given to the clergy to marry and eat meat, 
which in Shinran’ s time probably meant fish. Then, as now, it was 
the custom for many of the clergy in all sects to be privately 
married and no doubt the open recognition of wedlock did away 
with many abuses. The order of nuns was abolished and religiously 
disposed women were instructed to live as devout wives. Shinran s 

1 Catechism, § 19. ^ M M- 

3 See Troup, “ Gfami or Gobunsho of Beimyo Shonin,” T.A.8J xvu, part i. 

CH. XVI] AMIDISM 379 

object was avowedly to break down the division between tlie clergy 
and laity. There were to be no masters or disciples : all were 
to be friends and brothers before the Buddha. Yet thivS did not 
mean at all that he belittled the clerical calling. In no branch 
of Buddhist literature with which I am acquainted do we hear 
so much of patriarchs and saintly priests, even in the daily prayers, 
of the benevolence they have shown in enlightening and instructing 
the world and of the thanks that we owe them. In Shinshu temples 
Sliinran himself, the successive high priests of each sub-sect and the 
seven Patriarchs, including Honen, all receive worship, and the 
respect shown to living abbots extends to their sons.’- 

The Catechism enumerates five classes of venerable beings ^ 
who receive worship in Shinshu temples, namely, the three categories 
mentioned above, Shotoku Taishi as having introduced Buddhism 
into Japan, and Amida himself. Of course, the worship (matsuri) 
offered to these saints is of a lower degree than the adoration due 
to Amida (like the latreia and douleia of Catholic theology), but still 
the Catechism, while stating that Amida is the principal object 
of worship, also says that the Gosonsama (i.e. Amida and the four 
categories of saints) are worshipped in temples, although in private 
family shrines Amida only is adored. In Shinshu temples the main 
building is generally the founder’s hall and the image enclosed in a 
cabinet behind the high altar is that of Sliinran. The image of Amida 
is enshrined in a side building called Amida-do. These temples, 
which are often called Hongwanji, have a special style of architecture 
and ornament which is very effective. All the buildings are con- 
structed of black wood and the main edifice consists of a great 
hall supported by enormous pillars. The only colour is supplied 
by a few inscriptions in golden letters and by the decoration of the 
high altar, which is a blaze of gold in striking contrast with its 
sombre surroundings. There are no images of Buddhas except 
Amida or of Bodhisattvas, and Shaka is neither represented nor 
worshipped. In explanation of this remarkable omission, the 
Catechism offers the following explanations : “ In Shinshu there 
are two ways in which the relation between Amida and Shaka 
is conceived. One way regards the two as one and the same being ; 
the other as distinct. When the two are regarded as one and the 

^ Ttus at the Shinshu anniversary in 1922 at Kyoto certain solemn ceremonies 
were performed by the Abbot of the Hongwanji and others by his son, as if he 
were a prince imperial. 

2 Gosonsama. Catechism, § 29. 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

same being, tlie teacher Sliaka is looked upon as the incarnation 
of Amida Nyorai. He is regarded as coming temporarily into this 
•world. When the two are conceived of as distinct beings, Shaka 
is looked upon as the Teacher of the world and Amida as the Saviour 
of the world. The reason then why Shaka is not worshipped 
specially is because he and Amida are regarded as one and the 
same.” This is not very lucid, but the author evidently took the 
view that the two are the same. That indeed is the only explanation 
which can be offered of the strange way in which Shaka is ignored, 
for how comes it that Shotoku Taishi, who introduced Buddhism 
to Japan, and Zendo and Shinran, who are said to have been 
incarnations of Amida, receive honour in temples whereas none is 
rendered to Shaka who introduced it to the world ? Moreover, the 
three Amidist sutras contain no hint that Shaka was an incarnation 
of Amida. Shinran’s own poem, the Shoshinge, says (v. 21) : 
“ The reason why the Tathagata ^akyamuni was revealed to the 
world was solely that he might proclaim the boundless ocean 
of Amida’s original vow.” Apparently ^ it is only in funeral 
ceremonies that Shaka is invoked. In this service a fourfold 
invitation is solemnly addressed to the following to be present : 
(1) The Buddhas of the ten directions ; (2) Shaka; (3) Amida; 
(4) Ewannon Seishi (Mah^sthama-pr^pta) and the other Bodhi- 
sattvas. Otherwise no worship is offered to Bodhisattvas nor 
are their statues placed in temples, although the two mentioned 
are particularly prominent in the description of Amida’s paradise 
given in the Meditation-sutra and although tradition represents 
a vision of Kwannon as having been the turning point of Shinran s 
own career. Bodhisattvas are also praised in the Wasan. 

The Catechism says (§ 86) : “the gods, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
are numberless but since all these are branch bodies of Amida they 
are ultimately contained in the six characters Namu Amida Butsu. 
For this reason it is sufficient to worship the one Buddha Amida 
not necessary to worship these many deities separately.” 
liennyo says : “ As the body called Namu Amida Butsu includes 
all Gods, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and everything good and every 
work, what need is there to worry your mind about various 
and things good 1 The name Eamu Amida Butsu is itself 
the complete body of all good and of every good work.” It is 
remarkable that here; as often (see Catechism, § 53 ff.), Hamu 

lulojd, Shinran md Sis Work, pp. 156-7. 

GH. xvi] AMWISM 381 

Amida Butsu ^ is treated not as an ejaculation or invocation 
(Reverence to Amida Buddha) but as the name of the Buddha. 
It is stated still more definitely (§ 39 and § 40) : “ Amida Butsu is the 
Buddha whose name is Namu Amida Butsu. This is Sanskrit and 
when translated means The Glorious One who has boundless Life 
and Truth. . . . The Buddha essence and the Buddha name are 
one and the same thing.” 

It is not easy to imagine what can have been the cause or motive 
of this extreme simplification of religion. So far as I am aware, 
Buddhism in all its other branches has always shown a tendency 
to increase its pantheon not only by adding Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas but by according some status to non-Buddhist deities. 
And, if Shinto can be taken as showing the natural bent of the 
Japanese mind in religious matters, it certainly indicates no in- 
clination towards monotheism. Shinran presumably felt that the 
heavenly host whose statues adorn the temples of the Tendai and 
Shingon were part of the system of elaborate ritual and magic which 
the common man could not understand and from which he was 
anxious to deliver him. At any rate, he seems to have judged 
popular feeling correctly, for no tendency to restore the old pantheon 
is visible. But the Shinshuist is especially instructed to be 
respectful to the deities worshipped by others : “ Every God and 
Buddha worshipped by man deserves reverence and worship ... 
only as a matter of faith one cannot believe everything.” 

Moreover, the worship offered to Amida does not consist of prayers 
for health, temporal welfare, or any such petitions. After a man 
has once obtained faith in Amida he commits all to his power 
(mina Butsuriki ni makaseru), and his worship, though frequent, 
consists of nothing but thanksgiving. The Shinshu sect have more 
than once got into trouble by raising diffi.culties about offering 
definite supplications for some event connected with the Imperial 
Family, though all other sects have obeyed the order without 
hesitation. The form of prayer in use in temples and private 
houses varies considerably, but as a rule the Shoshinge is recited, 
together with verses of the Wasan or hymns interspersed with 
repetitions of the Nembutsu. 

This brings us to the question of ‘‘ one-calHiig” or “ many- 
callings ”, which was the subject of grave controversy in HSnen’s 

^ The Sanskrit word Namah, meaning bending or obeisance, is constantly used 
with the names of deities, the formula being very similar to the English “ Glory 
be to the Father,” etc. 

382 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

lifetime, as related above. Sliinran appears to bave taken the 
opposite point of view to that accepted by his master, according 
to Shunjo’s Life, which does not, however, indicate that there was 
any difference of opinion between them. The one all-important 
thing, according to Shinshu, is faith in Amida : “ When we hear what 
is the meaning of Namu Amida Butsu we recognize that we are 
deeply involved in sin and evil from which we cannot extricate 
ourselves through our own efforts. . . . But when we listen to the 
voice of salvation we are saved from our sinful condition, being 
taken into the eternal light of Buddha and so we are able to share 
his merit and receive his favour. Thus we feel as if we had escaped 
from the jaws of the tiger and entered the life boat. Relying on this 
Amida Nyorai ^ we utter the Nembutsu with gratitude and reverence, 
with exultation and devotion. Our heart is filled with a great 
peace and a great joy.” ^ This faith is not due to our own efforts. 
It is the gift of Amida. It enters into our depraved hearts, which 
cannot wash and cleanse themselves but are made pure when the 
heart of Amida enters into them and is united with them. Shinran 
says that faith is heart-union. Rennyo says : “ To rely on Amida 
is to appropriate Namu Amida Butsu.® To appropriate Namu 
Amida Butsu is to have faith.” When he has this faith the believer 
has obtained the Buddha nature and is certain to become a Buddha, 
though he cannot be said to be one yet. ‘ ‘ How happy the thought,’ ’ 
said Honen, “that though we are still here in the flesh we are 
numbered among the holy ones of paradise.” 

When faith has been obtained the believer should continue to 
utter the Nembutsu out of gratitude. “ It being the doctrine of 
Shinshu that faith is the true cause of salvation and that the 
Nembutsu is uttered out of gratitude, the believer should utter 
the Nembutsu in order to make his faith and election sure and thus 
give thanks for the grace of the Tathagata.” The author of the 
Catechism adds that the Nembutsu is regarded as an act of thanks- 
giving, because if heard by an unbeliever it may awaken faith in his 
heart or at least dispose him in the right direction and thus become the 
means of helping Amida’s work of grace. Further, in answer to the 
question how we can best nourish our faith, the answer is ; (1) The 
best way is to repeat the Nembutsu, and it is said elsewhere that not 
to utter the Nembutsu is to stray farthest from divine protection ; 

^ ISTyorai — Tathagata, ^ Catechism, § 59. 

® To understand this strange language one must remember that Namu Amida 
Butsu is regarded as a name. 

cH.xvi] AMIBISM ^ 383 

(2) Bead the scriptures; (3) Dwell in imagination on the joys 
of Paradise ; (4) Adore the images of Amida ; (6) Talk about 
religion with other believers. Though there is nothing in these 
passages in the least derogatory to the Nembutsu, which is assigned 
a very important position, one cannot help feeling that the tone 
is not exactly that of Honen, who said that the Nembutsii ought to be 
treated as the main occupation of life and not as a sort of side work, 
and wrote in the ‘‘ One Sheet of Paper ” that all that is needed to 
secure birth in Paradise is to repeat the words Namu Amida Butsu 
with the certainty that one will arrive there. In fact it would seem 
that for H5nen the essential part of religion is to repeat the 
Nembutsu, only it must be said with faith and conviction and not 
become a merely mechanical recitation : for Shinran faith is the 
essential : it finds expression in the Nembutsu, and subsequent 
utterances of the Nembutsu are signs of gratitude. 

The Catechism proceeds to explain that though to utter the 
Nembutsu is the chief work of gratitude, our whole life must be one 
long expression of gratitude : we must regard life as being a service 
which Amida demands of us. “ When the believer regards all his 
activities as expressions of gratitude, he is set free from the spirit 
of selfishness. He does not mind hardships nor is his heart filled 
with pride, but he thinks of his work as service rendered in return 
for great mercy. All his actions become true and straight and help 
Buddha’s Law.” “But,” inquires the Catechism with great 
candour, “ in worldly affairs lies and sharp practices seem inevitable. 
Are we to regard these things also as expressions of gratitude ? ” 
“Lies and sharp practices,” is the reply, ‘‘ are not in themselves 
expressions of gratitude. When we pursue our daily duties and 
work cheerfully and assiduously, even though we indulge in lies 
and sliarp practices, we help to spread the way of the Buddha and 
so even our lies and sharp practices become expressions of gratitude.” 
Though the Shinshu is, so far as I am aware, a most respectable 
sect in practice, it seems to have a dangerous tendency to excuse 
lapses from morality. 

The principle that all worship should consist of giving thanks 
rather than of making petitions is also applied to festivals, which 
thus have not the same meaning as in other sects. The Hizan, for 
instance, is a period of seven days at the spring and autumn equinox ^ 
devoted by most sects to making prayers and offerings on behalf 

The equinox is a sacred season in India, too. See Vishnu Purana, 2, 8. 

384 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

of tke dead. In Siiinslin the occasion is observed but is used for 
offering thanks to Amida on behalf of the dead, who are believed 
to be safe in his keeping and for whose welfare it would be wrong 
to pray. Sermons are also preached at this season, not in the temple 
but in an adjoining building. The usual method is for a succession 
of preachers to give short discourses, each lasting about a quarter 
of an hour, between ten and four o’clock. The congregation drop 
ill and leave as they like. The various anniversaries of deaths in 
a family, the ceremonies of saying masses for the departed and 
offering intercession for them are ail observed in a similar spirit, 
as is also the festival called Bon held in the seventh month, when 
the spirits of the dead are supposed to revisit their homes. It is 
known in the Shinshu as Kangi-e, or the festival of Joy, that is, 
rejoicing at the happy lot of the dead in paradise. The days 
dedicated to Shinran and Honen are natural occasions for thanks- 
giving. The commemoration of Shinran lasts a week, closing with 
the day of his death, 28th November. On the night of the middle 
day his biography as written by Kakunyo is read with great 
solemnity and is said to inspire the liveliest emotions in the 
congregation. 

I have spoken in earlier chapters ^ of the history of the two sects, 
Jodo and Shinshu. The former was relatively peaceful and obscure 
until Tokugawa times, while the latter during the same period has 
a political and military record which, though eventful, is hardly 
edifying from a religious point of view. After leyasu the positions 
become reversed and the Jodo, owing to its connection with the 
Shogun’s family, is accepted as almost the established Church, but 
remaining, as beseems such a body, placid and dignified and 
exercising its great influence through the recognized authorities. 
In the mass of political and military details which smothers the 
annals of the Amidists in Japan, two names stand out as important 
for doctrine, namely, Ryoyo Shogei (1341-1420) and Rennyo 
(1415-1499). 

The former was the seventh patriarch of the Jodo and indefati- 
gable as a writer and researcher. After a prolonged investigation 
of the doctrine of all schools, he demonstrated to his own satis- 
faction that the name of TongyS,^ or quick Enlightenment, used 
by the Tendai and other older sects is really more applicable to the 
teaching of the Jodo than to that of any other. Secondly, he taught 

1 X, XI and xn. 2 IJr. 

AMIBISM 

385 

OH. XVl] 

that the idea of the Western Paradise and of Amida welcoming 
the souls of the faithful there is purely metaphorical. Amida is 
omnipresent and his paradise is simply absolute reality. If we can 
change our point of view and see things as they really are, we can 
be in the Pure Land here and now. This doctrine seems due to 
Zen in f l uences and has become of considerable importance in the 
modern developments of Amidism. 

Rennyo Shonin was the eighth patriarch of the Shinshu and, 
after Sliinran, was certainly the most striking personality that it has 
produced. I have spoken elsewhere of his missionary efforts, his 
wanderings and struggles, his Ofumi or Epistles, and his Ryogemon 
or creed ; also of his views as to the relation of Buddhism to Shinto. 
But his most important service to Shinshu was his insistence on the 
necessity of observing moral precepts, whereas there was a tendency 
often appearing at various times and in various surroundings 
to maintain that faith or prayer were the only things necessary and 
to neglect conduct. But Rennyo insisted that one cannot leave 
oneself in Amida’s hands with complete faith and trust unless one 
has abandoned selfish desires and fleshly lusts. Therefore he held 
the observance of all the Confucian virtues and obedience to the 
law of the land and the will of the Sovereign to be necessary parts 
of the believer’s daily conduct. It is strange to find a devout 
Buddhist appealing to the works of Confucius when he wishes 
to cite a canon and standard of moral conduct. It shows how 
strong was the literary and philosophic influence of China in Japan 
at this period and also how completely Amidism had become 
a religion of the other world. It does not seem to have occurred 
to Rennyo or even to Shinran that Shaka had provided a code of 
every-day morality quite as good as that of Confucius, though 
perhaps according to Far Eastern standards he did not lay sufficient 
stress on political ethics. 

The names of Ippen (1239-1289) and Shinzei (1443-1495) also 
deserve mention, for though the bodies which they founded were 
not important, they are interesting as showing the strength of the 
Amidist movement, which found expression in sects which were 
unable to accept all the principles of the Jodo or Shinshu. I have 
described Ippen’s doctrines in the historical section above.^ They are 
somewhat extravagant but have vitality, for the sect which he 
founded still exists though its adherents are not numerous and are 

^ Chapter X, ad fin. 

■t’u.' ■ 

386 TH^ SECTS ANB THEIR mCTMNES [ch. xvi 

mostly members of the lower classes. The curious thing is that the 
special teaching of the sect is represented as a revelation made 
by the deity of Kumano who is boldly identified with Amida, the 
fusion of Buddhism with Shintd being thus complete. Shinzei 
represents a quite different tendency, namely, an attempt to combine 
the recitation of the Nembutsu, which he himself repeated 60,000 
times a day, with ordinary Buddhist observances and ritual. 
This was directly contrary to the principles of Honen and ShinraUj 
and it is not surprising if the religious body founded by Shinaei and 
called the Eitsu is counted as a sub-sect of the Tendai rather than 
of either of the Jodo schools. Nevertheless it may be doubted 
if Bhinzei does not represent the teaching of the three ancient 
sutras on which Amidism claims to be based more correctly than 
they do. There is no sign that the Sukhfivati-vyuha would have 
approved of ignoring the whole of the practical and theoretical 
instruction imparted by Gotama, together with many of the ideas 
and personalities added to it by the later Mahayana. 

During the Tokugawa regime the Shinshu, like most Buddhist 
sects, did not show much life or activity. The condition of the 
times favoured chiefly quiet studies ; the editing of texts, the 
making of commentaries, and the systematic exposition of doctrinal 
systems were considered safe and suitable occupations for the 
learned. Two erudite priests, Ekn (1644-1721) and Jinrei, did 
a good deal of work of this sort for the Shinshu and had a large 
following. There were elaborate discussions with the object of 
securing uniformity and extirpating heresy and also discussions 
as to the right of using the title of Shinshu or True Sect. 

But the attack on Buddhism which marked the beginning of the 
Meiji era and the attempt to replace it by Shinto as the national 
State religion awakened the old pugnacious instincts which had 
been so strong in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and the 
Shinshu were among those who fought most strenuously and 
successfully for Buddhism. In 1872 they sent abroad a commission 
to investigate how European States dealt with ecclesiastical 
problems, and the celebrated priest Mokurai (•j*1911) who accom- 
panied it visited not only India but also Palestine. The return 
of this mission in 1875 marked a reaction in the attitude of the 
Japanese Government. Shinran was given by Imperial decree 
the posthumous title of Kenshin Daishi 4 and finally the attempt 

1 

CH. xvi] ' AMIBISM 387 

at State control of religion was abandoned, the heads of the various 
Buddhist sects being charged with their administration. 

The original teaching of Shinran was the most complete trans- 
formation of Buddhism ever witnessed, and it is perhaps not 
surprising if in an age when Japan was imitating European insti- 
tutions wholesale, his spiritual descendants showed no hesitation 
in borrowing both from Christianity and from European philosophy. 
The former tendency is illustrated by Tada Kanai, a noted Shinshu 
preacher of Chiba who was alive in 1910. He published a volume 
of sermons called Shudo Kowa ^ which are deeply impregnated by 
foreign ideas. One, for instance, contains an analysis of Tolstoy’s 
Resurrection and another refers to an American novel and to 
Les Miserables. He is said to have held services on Sunday and 
many such imitations of European customs are common.^ Songs 
are composed (some, it is said, even in English) and are sung so as 
to resemble Christian hymns. Even organs are used. I have 
myself seen a Shinshu place of worship (a missionary chapel, it is 
true), the floor of which was covered with seats of a European 
pattern while at the end was an erection which superficially 
resembled a Christian altar. Yet though Western usages are 
copied in such a glaring and often most unpicturesque fashion, what 
is borrowed is nearly always external observances only. Even 
Lloyd, who was always on the look out for resemblances to 
Christianity, says of Tada’s doctrine that for him “ Amida is not the 
Father in the sense of being the creator And this, I fancy, is 
true generally. In English renderings of the Wasan, the phrase 
“ Eternal Father ” may be found, but I have been assured at the 
Otani University that the translation is illegitimate. In older 
works such as the Lotus, though the Buddha is often called a father, 
I think that the idea is always that he helps or protects like a father, 
not that he has created the world or its inhabitants. 

In this connection the last question and answer of the Catechism 
from which I have already made so many quotations are worth 
citing. Why, it is asked, do unbelievers and sinners abound and 

’ ^ fS- Three of them are translated by Haas {Amida Buddha 

U7mre ZuftucM) mid seven by Lloyd (Tfee Praj'sea Tokyo, 1907). The 

sermons referred to are Humbers 6 and 4 in Lloyd. 

Anesakl (IHstorp o/ Japanese p. 356) quotes the following opinion 

expressed by Toyama, who was apparently not a Christian •• ** In the following 
three respects the inflnence of Christianity on the improvement of society is very 
great ; (1) the gathering of men and women in a church once every vveek ; (2) the 
church music ; (3) the marriage and funeral service.” 

V. T.A.SJ., 1912, p. 394. 

^ See above, Chap. II, p. 38. 

even increase ? Cannot Ainida of Ms grace compel tliem to believe ? 
The significant answer is that even a Buddha cannot act with perfect 
freedom and thus defy Heaven’s laws.^ There are three things 
which a Buddha cannot do ; (1) He cannot change or stop the 
effect of works when once fixed ; (2) He cannot save beings who 
are not destined to be saved ; (3) He cannot exhaust the world 
of sentient beings. It will be seen that Amidism has not discarded 
the older ideas of Buddhahood so completely as might be supposed. 
The phrase “ Heaven’s laws ” may sound Chinese, but the thought 
is the same as that contained in the ancient words attributed to 
Gotama after his enlightenment, in which he resolves to honour and 
respect the Dhamma which he had come to know.^ 

The imitation of Christianity is apt to affect chiefly the externals 
of worship : it is widespread but somewhat superficial. The 
influence of European philosophy is just the opposite : it naturally 
appeals only to a select few, who are scholars and mostly recluses, 
but it affects not temples and the details of ritual but the funda- 
mental conceptions of religion. As an example may be cited 
Kiyozawa (1863-1903), who came of a Shinshu family and devoted 
himself to the study of Hegel under Eenellosa. Hegel has puzzled 
many Europeans and I am not prepared to say how much of Ms 
wocks Kiyozawa may have understood. The bent of his mind was 
apparently religious and pietistic rather than metaphysical and this 
imparts a Christian tone to much of what he wrote, but he dwells 
continually on such themes as the infinity of the Buddha nature, 
the elimination of the finite self, and absolute dependence on the 
grace of the Infinite Light (Amitabha). The important point is not 
his precise theories but the emphasis which he and those who tMnk 
like him lay on the infinite nature of the Buddha. Amitabha is no 
the Buddha of the Sukhavati-vyuha, that is to say, the monk 
Dharmakara, who by a surprising course of austerities has won for 
himself the position of a Buddha and a paradise in the west in which 
he can receive those who trust in him. He is for these writers 
being without beginning, end, or limits, and rebirth in his paradise 
may he attained anywhere in this world by the awakening of love 
faith in him. These ideas are not wholly alien to earlier 
Japanese thought, but their popularity in modern times seems to be 
largely due to the works of those who like Kiyozawa have come 
under the influence of Western philosophy. 

388 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

OH. xvi] AMIBISM. 389 

The sensitiveness of Shinshu to European influence is shown in 
yet another way, namely, the publication of plays and novels in the 
last two decades representing Shinran in very human moods and 
disinclined to deal severely with social errors which are generally 
reprobated by the religious. Such are the plays The Priest and 
Ms Disciple by Kurata Hyakuzo ^ and The Human Shinran by 
Ishimaru Baigwai. Though these works, especially The Priest 
and his Disciple, had a very good reception from the general 
public, they were strongly criticized by religious persons, who 
not unnaturally objected to what they correctly considered as 
misrepresentation of Shinran’s character and teaching. It is the 
old story of the tendency to condone immorality, Amida saves 
sinners in the midst of their sin: he demands an appeal 
for his help and faith that he will give it : he does not 
demand repentance or purification. It is easy to imagine how this 
doctrine is treated by ‘‘ naturalistic ” writers. The characters 
indulge in vice, and when it brings them unhappiness they are 
forgiven by the all-merciful Buddha. An account of this literature, 
giving the names of many authors and magazines, will be found in 
an article entitled The Shinran Revival of the Last Year ” 
contained in the Eastern Buddhist of 1923,® which gives an idea of 
the extent of the movement. The title refers to the impressive 
celebration at Ky5to of the seven hundredth anniversary of 
Shinran’s work, the Kyogyo Shinsho. A week was spent in 
gorgeous and impressive ceremonies in which it is said that 550,000 
laymen and about 1,500 priests took part. 

Another side of the varied activities of modern Shinshu is 
illustrated by the society called Itto-en, or the Confraternity of the 
Lantern.® The name is derived from a legend which tells how at 
a great festival thousands of costly lanterns were ofiered by rich 
devotees and dedicated to the Buddha, but that the light of one 
offered by a poor woman — a sort of widow’s mite — outshone all the 
others. The members of the Confraternity must give up all their 
wealth and possessions and be ready to serve humanity without 
demanding any return. 

The worshippers of Amida in Japan are numerous, prosperous, 
and progressive, but should this worship be called Buddhism ? 
It has grown out of Buddhism, no doubt : all the stages except the 

^ Translated, into English by G. W, Shaw, Tokyo, 1922. 

® Eastern Buddhist, voL ii. No. 5, 1923, p. 285 ff. 

® Some authorities are inclined to class the Itto-en as belonging rather to Zen. 

!«, lan sars asd rasii miTAma [c. i.. 

... 

ment resulted m such a ^ Gotama and the 

;"T :'r?s" srp— » 

teaching of Stmtan_ P enough to 

precise paraUel m the histo y 6 

alter w" -g- of -Poot 

makinn use of the designation generally to the 

flTiia ° Yet this is what Shinshu has done. There arc 
original [ H^.,wanii temples, with the rare exceptions 

::Sr;'^0l5:l“S\rsete^ I- of the coming of the 

S; 5ES.. »p.a’ »«!*•» —J2 r. bV™.!: 

■Whenever there has been ooii“0“ ^ defending Buddhism 
Buddhist ,^00?® the Jodo and Shinshu have played 

at the beginning although Sbaka is ignored, the word 

a prominent p • _ ffinipTitlv nrominent * the phrases Nembutsn 

Butsu or Buddha IS sufficierfy p—nt.^^^^ P^,^^ 

and is a religion which more than others 

frequency. And Buddhis ^ conduct of life, the best 

tolerates divergent victo salvation to be 

means of 0 '’^^™“? jcaweflndtwoc^ : 

obtained, intneve y v,, „r,rl 1q,vmen The former are the 

S’Zi 4 « 

=:B.r -IS"— 

'r^n^t oomiTacrtd^^ “ 

^tom fa not mlike its inhabitants. Bor it must be ”bemd 

that according to strict doctrine (though perhaps not aooordi g 

the Pure Land is not a place where one simply 

CH. XVI] AMIDI8M 391 

lives in bliss for ever, but a sojourn wkere one can obtain nirvana 
or become a Buddba and return to help the world. The difference 
between the old idea and the new lies in the methods prescribed for 
gaming entrance to paradise. According to all Amidist sects, 
permission to enter is granted solely by the grace of Amida and all 
that is necessary to obtain that grace is to invoke his name with 
faith. In the older Buddhism, on the other hand, paradise is won 
as the reward of special efforts, not the greatest efforts but those 
of which laymen are capable. The Brahmaviharas,^ for instance, 
consist in the cultivation of kind thoughts and corresponding deeds 
which results in rebirth in Brahm§,’s heaven. Brahmff himself 
being free from all anger and malice, it is natural that those who have 
made themselves like him should reside in his paradise, but it is 
never said that his benevolence will lead him to let in sinners who 
ask for admission. The motive which led the Buddha to devote 
his life to laborious teaching and preaching is generally described 
as compassion for mankind. He teaches them the only road to 
happiness. They must be their own light and refuge and not seek 
for another refuge, as the well-known precept says. Shinshu 
scholars ^ have attempted to show that there is no real gap between 
the teachings of Shaka and Shinran : that the former if interpreted 
in an emotional and not too intellectual a sense are equivalent to 
salvation by faith. I confess that I cannot follow their arguments 
nor can I see that the interview between the Buddha and King 
Ajatasatru, even as recorded in the Chinese Mahaparinirvana- 
sutra,^ is an instance of the simple faith in Amida which Shinran 
required, for the King’s faith is established by an elaborate 
metaphysical discourse of the dying master. I would rather say 
that three ideas grew up which tended to make men take a different 
view of the Buddha’s compassion, to think of him as actively 
helping men not as merely teaching them how to help themselves. 
The first is the idea of the benevolent Bodhisattva who vows to 
devote himself to helping all mankind. The germs of this idea 
may be found even in Hinayanist literature. Thus in the Nidana- 
kathd Sumedha’s resolution to become a Buddha has a resemblance 

^ See Ghap. II, pp. 68, 69. 

2 e.g. Sasaki in his book A Study of Shin Buddhism, Kyoto, 1925, and Shugaku 
Yamabe in his article “ The Buddha and Shinran in the Eastern Buddhist, vol. ii. 
No. 6, 1923. 

3 This work, which is nob the same as the Pali-suttanta of the same name 
(D.N., xvi), represents Ajatasatru, tortured by illness and remorse for his sins, 
as visiting the dying Buddha. 

m THE SECTS AND THEm DOCTRINES [oh. xvi 

to Amida’s vow. He resolved to attain tlie truth, to enable 
mankind to cross the sea of the world and only then to enter 
nirvana. There is, however, no hint that he will save those who 
call on his name, though this train of thought, too, appears to have 
its roots in India. In the Bhagavad Gita we have the deathbed 
prayer and a deity who will take his servants to himself. Secondly 
comes the idea of the transfer of merit. It is not to be found in the 
Pitakas but appears plainly in the works of ^antideva.^ He bids 
the neophyte who aspires to become a Bodhisattva make over 
to others whatever merit he may now have or may acquire in future 
and offer himself and all his possessions as a sacrifice for the 
salvation of all beings : further, he is to make a vow to acquire 
enlightenment for the good of all beings. Thirdly, we have the 
idea that the world is degenerating ; the weaklings of modern 
times are no longer capable of the efforts made by the heroic saints 
of old to obtain salvation. This idea is also Indian, It is 
constantly stated that the Vedic sacrifices cannot be performed 
at present and therefore an easier ritual is prescribed by merciful 
deities. 

The anaology between the Shinshu and modern Indian sects 
is close and is an interesting example of parallel development. 
The worshippers of Siva and Vishnu at the present day theoretically 
accept the authority of the Vedas, but in practice their sacred books 
are the Tiruva§agam or Nalayiram or some volume selected out 
of a whole library of comparatively recent literature. Modern 
Hinduism is mostly emotional ; the worshipper approaches the 
deity, who as a rule is only one, with bhakti (faith and love) and 
receives in return a promise of grace and of admission to paradise 
or even of union with the deity. The form of prayer is often the 
repetition of the divine name, for instance, Hari, Hari among the 
worshippers of Vishnu, and all that is necessary is devotion and 
absolute reliance on the deity. Even in the Bhagavad Gita it is 
declared to be too hard for flesh and blood to find their way by 
meditation or ritual to the Supreme Spirit, whereas Krishna comes 
straight to those who make him their sole desire. “ Set thy heart 
on me and worship thou me. Then shalt thou come to me. Leave 
all other deities and come to me alone for refuge. I will deliver thee 
from thy sins. Sorrow not.” ® 

The date of the Bhagavad Gita is uncertain, but it was probably 

^ Bod]iioaryS.yat^ra, iii, 10. 

® Bhag. Gita, xviii, 65, 66. 

393 

OH. XVl] 

AMIDISM 

composed shortly before or after the Christian era and represents 
the same current of thought which in other surroundings produced 
Amidism. In both systems we have a loving deity who offers 
salvation in return for faith and devotion : in both the deities, 
Krishna and Amida, are new and so is the form of worship which 
they demand. The chief difference is that Amida supersedes a well- 
known figure, Gotama the Buddha, whereas Krishpa does not appear 
to do this to the same extent, but this is simply because there is no 
deity in the ancient Vedic pantheon who was sufficiently prominent 
to make us feel that he is being ignored. In reality Krishna and 
fche religion of bhakti (loving faith) displace all the old gods and 
their worship. The transformation of Buddhism seems surprising, 
but it has only obeyed the same law as other Indian religions. 
Shinshu does not differ from the original faith more than does the 
later Tantric Buddhism found in India itself, and the changes 
which it has shown are due not merely to the lapse of centuries but 
to long travel and to transplantation among alien races, of whom one, 
the Japanese, are noted for borrowing but also for adapting what 
they borrow and leaving on it the mark of their own genius. 

Another question which has often been discussed is, does Amidism 
owe anything to Christianity ? I am not referring to recent 
imitations such as I have discussed above, but to the original ideas 
on which the sect is founded. They certamly contain an element 
additional and even contrary to the teaching of Gotama, namely, 
a saviour who offers to deliver from death and hell all who will 

but believe in him and call on his name. No such figure is to be 
found in the Pitakas or in Vedic mythology, and hence many have 
supposed that it is due to early Christian influence in India and 
perhaps was reinvigorated by later contact between Nestorians 
and Buddhists in China. But plausible as the hypothesis may seem 
at first sight, if examined more carefully it presents difficulties 
which are in my opinion insuperable. In the first place, though the 
precise dates of the Pure Land-sutras are uncertain, it is highly 
probable that they were composed in the first century of our era, 
at which time it is hardly possible that Christianity had reached 
India ; and a parallel development of ideas which are in many respects 
similar is to be found in the Bhagavad Gitff And secondly, though 

^ The Bhagavata setit is certamly pre-Christian, for there are allusions to it in 
Panini and the Besnagar inBcriptions which are ascribed to the earlier part of 
the second century B.c. The coins of Kanishka bear images of the Buddha and 
of Persian deities, but not Cliristian emblems. 

394 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvi 

tlie resemblances between Amidism and Christianity are obvious, 
the differences are profound. Both Amida and Christ are saviours, 
but Christ is the Second Person of the Trinity, and he saves mankind 
by his death, by offering himself as an atonement for the sins of the 
whole world. But the position of Amida is entirely different and 
his method of salvation is different too. In the oldest documents 
he is a man who becomes a Buddha in the traditional manner. 
The fundamental idea is not that God is Love but rather that Love 
is God : lovingldndness raised Amida to a place which may be 
called divine, though exception might be taken to the epithet if it is 
held to imply the attributes ascribed to God in Christianity, For 
Amida is not the creator of the world : the Universe is without 
beginning or end and the evil from which he saves is the interminable 
round of births and deaths. He seems Godlike because he is given 
the same quasi-divine attributes as ^akya in the Lotus and the other 
Buddhas of the Mahay^na. Like them he comes to be regarded 
as having three bodies and as being identical with the Bhutatathata. 
Further, Amida is not offered as an atoning sacrifice in the sense 
that Christ was offered according to Christian theology. It is true 
that he deserves gratitude because he has laboured and suffered for 
manldnd, but the reason is quite different. As the Synopsis says, 
“To be responsible for all our sins, AmitS,bha must acquire all 
virtues by which our sins are to be effaced. For this purpose he 
went through unutterable sufferings during numberless seons to 
find out the means of salvation.” ^ And, as we have seen, the modern 
exponents of Shmshu state that there are things which Amida 
cannot do, whereas all ordinary Christian conceptions make God 
omnipotent. 

I have already touched ^ on the contact between certain forms of 
Ciiristianity and Buddhism in China. Statements may be found 
in various writers as to the influence of Gnosticism on Shingon or on 
other Buddhist sects. But what evidence is there that Gnosticism 
ever penetrated to China, Central Asia, or even India t There is 
none whatever, so far as I know. The two religions which did have 
some influence in Central Asia and China and some relations with 
Buddhism are Manichasism and Nestorianism. The former was 
strangely composite and assimilative, always ready to borrow 
something from the other creeds professed in the various countries 
into which it found an entrance. As it travelled westwards it 

2 Chap. V, p. 140. 

^ Synopsis, p. 26. 

OH. XVI] AMIDim 396 

adopted so many Christian ideas that it achieved the distinction 
of being considered the worst of heresies. As it spread into Central 
Asia and China, it received a large admixture of Buddhism. We find 
Mani called Ju-lai or Tathagata and Manichsean deities represented 
as sitting in the attitude of Bodhisattvas cross-legged on lotus 
flowers.^ In such cases there can be no question of which side 
exerted and which received influence, and even if we hold that the 
influence was reciprocal there is no proof that Manichseism as knoivn 
in China and Central Asia contained any Christian elements which 
it could impart. It borrowed them itself in its western expansions. 

The most interesting information about the history of Nestori- 
anism in China is afforded by the monument discovered at Si-Ngan- 
fu, which dates from 781 and is commonly called the Nestorian 
Stone. It has often been cited as evidence of the debt of Buddhism 
to Christianity, for it bears a long inscription partly in Chinese and 
partly in Syriac composed by a foreign priest called Adam, or in 
Chinese King-Tsing, giving an account of the history and doctrines 
of the Christian Church as he understood them. It shows that 
Buddhist and Christian priests associated together on friendly 
terms and we also know that King-Tsing set about translating 
a sutra from the Hu language. But the inscription really proves 
that Nestorianism in China, like Manichseism, was strongly influenced 
by Buddhism and not vice versa. Not only does it contain many 
Buddhist words, such as Seng and Ssu for Christian priests and 
monasteries, but though it treats of Christ’s life in some detail, 
it omits all mention of the Crucifixion. The motive of the 
omission can hardly be anything but the feeling that redemption 
by his death was not an acceptable idea,^ and it is hardly likely 
that a form of Christianity which could make such an astounding 
concession would be strong enough to exert any powerful influence 
on Buddhism. 

See for Manicha3ism in China and Central Asia the series of three articles by 
Chavamies and Pelliot entitled “ Un traite manicheen retrouve en Chine ” in 
1911, 1913. A Chinese edict of a.». 739 accuses Manichaeisin of deceiving the 
people by falsely taking the name of Buddhism. 

2 See especially Havict, “ La St^le Chietienne de Si-ngan-fu ” in Varietes Sino- 
logiqms, pp. 7, 12, and 20. He has some interesting remarks about the unwilling- 
ness of the Nestorians and also of the Jesuits to give publicity to the Crucifixion. 
(See I.C., iii, p. 64.) 

CHAPTEE XVII 

ZEN 

In previous cliapters I have already touched on the history of 
Zen in both China and Japan, but perhaps it may not be amiss 
to point out once more how great a power it has been in the artistic, 
intellectual, and even the political life of the Far East. To a certain 
extent it has moulded the Japanese character, but it is also the 
expression of that character. No other form of Buddhism is so 
thoroughly Japanese. 

No clear Indian origin for Zen can be discovered. The scepticism 
which doubts the existence of Bodhidharma and his visit to China 
is perhaps excessive, but it must be confessed that though he has 
a considerable position in the popular imagination, his place in 
history, whether we look backwards or forwards, is very hard to 
define. His name is unknown to Sanskrit and Tibetan tradition : 
he is connected with no known sect, and the doctrine of an inward 
revelation apart from scripture, which is attributed to him, is very 
un-Indian. Somewhat in contradiction with this is the tradition, 
approved by Tao-Hsuan but discredited by Tao-Yiian, that he 
handed the Lanklvatara-sutra to his first disciple to be his guide. 
But the said sutra may be described as a miscellaneous collection 
of notes on philosophical subjects, and Suzuki,^ the most recent 
authority on the question, is no doubt right when he says, “ The 
teaching of Zen is not derived from the Lankavatara but only 
confirmed by it. Zen stands on its own footing, on its own facts, 
but as all religious experience requires its intellectual interpretation, 
Zen, too, must have its philosophical background which is found 
in the Lankavatara.’’ That is the most that can be said about the 
relationship of the Indian sutra to Zen, and it must be remembered 
that subsequently the Vajracchedik^ superseded it as being the 
best explanation of the Zen point of view to be found in Buddhist 
works written in Sanskrit. There is also some resemblance, especially 
in manner, between Zen and the more paradoxical parts of 
Nag^rjuna’s teaching. But no doubt the closest Indian analogy 
to Bodhidharma’s doctrine is offered, not by any variety of Indian 

^ D. Tl. Studies in the, Lankdvatdra 84tra, p. 50. 

ZEN 

397 

CH. XVIl] 

Buddliism, but by some utterances of tbe Upanisbads — “To see 
into one’s nature and become Buddba ” is really tbe same idea wbicb 
declares that Brabman tbe eternal and universal spirit is identical 
with tbe soul in every man. It is also true that there is a striking 
likeness between tbe thought of Zen and such passages (e.g. Kena 
Upan., § 5) as those which say “ You cannot think it with thought, 
hear it with the ear, see it with the sight, breathe it with the breath, 
etc.”, but here the resemblance to Lao-Tzu and Taoist mysticism 
is equally obvious. Nor is it easy to connect Bodhidharma with the 
later development of Zen in China. He was succeeded by five 
Chinese Patriarchs who appear to have been regarded as Buddhists 
of doubtful orthodoxy by other sects and whose teaching shows 
the strongest traces of Taoism. Subsequently, as the school became 
large and powerful, the need of discipline and hierarchy was felt. 
Zen assumed the respectable externals of other Buddhist sects 
and was even able strongly to influence Confucianism, but I fancy 
that its most important characteristics grew up in the century 
following Bodhidharma’s death and were derived from the mystic 
and romantic element in Chinese culture which is commonly called 
Taoism. How close was the connection, even in external mannerisms, 
may be seen in the conversations attributed to the Taoist philosopher 
Lieh-Tzu.i 

Zen became fashionable in China under the Sung dynasty of 
Hangchou and undoubtedly influenced the new form of Con- 
fucianism made popular by Chu-Hsi (1130-1200) ; about the same 
time it was successfully introduced into Japan by Eisai (1141-1215) 
and Dogen (1200-1253), both of whom studied in China. This was 
not the first time that it had been brought to the notice of the 
Japanese, but previous attempts to naturalize it had proved 
unsuccessful. It had not been in harmony with the genius of the age 
and now it was only by a rather surprising metamorphosis that it 
adapted itself to the vigorous but rough spirit prevailing under 
the H6j6s at Kamakura. It became, as I have described in the 
historical section, the religion of the military class. In China, 
where soldiers are not much respected and often not distinguished 
accurately from brigands, such a transformation was unthinkable, 
but in Japan, though strange, it is explicable, for Zen as a system 
demands above all things individual discipline. It makes light 
of learning (in spite of having produced an enormous literature) 

^ See Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism {lat series), pp. 330 and 351 ff. 

398 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES 

and of all attempts to found a spiritual life on scriptural knowledge, 
and bids those who would become adepts cultivate such virtues 
as courage, perseverance, and clear insight, all of which are as 
useful to a soldier as to a priest. Nor in spite of taking on this new 
character did it sever its connection with Chinese thought and 
literature. Its later progress in Japan was closely connected with 
Confucian studies. Under the Hojo Government Zen received 
definite, though not exclusive, patronage and favour. It had its 
fi-ve great temples at Kamakura and Ky5to and, what is perhaps 
more important still, popular education was in its hands, for the 
Terakoya or village temple schools had mostly Zen priests for 
masters. But it was in the immediately succeeding period, that 
of the Ashikagas, that the power and inhuenoe of Zen were most 
conspicuous. Ecclesiastical statesmen played a part in politics 
lilre the French Cardinals of the seventeenth century, and the 
lower branches of the civil services were largely recruited from the 
inmates of Zen monasteries. Even shipping and trade with China 
were in the hands of these versatile clerics. Nor did the practical 
things of life such as statesmanship and commerce blind them 
to the beauty and importance of art and literature. Their influence 
on painting is admitted by all critics of Far Eastern art. They 
hardly had time to show this side of their genius among the warriors 
of Kamakura, but the great Zen temples of Kyoto were all schools 
of painting and the long list of artists who were directly connected 
with them includes such names as Cho Bensu, Josetsu, Sesshu, 
and Kano Masanobu. And though Zen rejected scripture as a 
medium for communicatmg truth, it encouraged literature as a help 
and ornament of the rehgious life, and many secular works, such 
as the Tsure-Dzure Ousa and later the poems of Basho, came from 
the pen of Zen monks. Naturally more strictly religious forms of 
activity were not neglected. The eminent prelate Soseki (1271- 
1346) saw to it that a Zen monastery and temple were erected in 
every province and established the whole hierarchy in a most 
businesslike fashion on a sound financial basis. All this great 
system was inaugurated and maintained by comparatively peaceful 
methods. Zen taught soldiers and perhaps its priests occasionally 
showed that they could- practise the military virtues as well as 
preach about them. But they did not build fortified monasteries 
or wage campaigns. Judged by ecclesiastical standards their 
annals will compare very favourably with those of the Shinshu 
or of Hieizan. 

399 

CH. XVIl] 

ZEN 

In the time of tlie Sung Zen may have been the full flower and ex- 
pression of Chinese culture, but in later periods it is characteristically 
Japanese and challenges us to define what this characteristic 
but elusive teaching is. When a sect boldly states that its doctrine 
must be felt and not read and that every attempt to state it in 
speech or writing must be ipso facto a failure, the expositor need 
say no more. Yet the rash pen longs to formulate the ineffable 
and is apt to suggest that the mysteries which cannot be expressed 
in words are really non-existent and that the literary history of 
Zen, though copious, is not a heap of philosophic jewels buried in 
a little dust but a farrago of anecdotes reporting grotesque and 
irrelevant sajdngs and still more grotesque and often brutal actions. 
I confess that I am not quite in sympathy with the Zen view of 
things, and that is why I wish to emphasise the great practical 
achievements of the sect and to point out that a creed which has 
produced such remarkable results must be based on something 
more than eccentricity. 

Also, though the importance of the mystical, paradoxical, and 
eccentric element in Zen is not to be minimized, there are other 
elements. An ordinary visitor would notice nothing remarkable 
in the arrangements of a Zen temple except perhaps that it is 
exceptionally neat and clean. Shaka and the Bodhisattvas 
such as Kwannon and Jizo are represented by images which are 
honoured with the usual marks of respect, although Amida is absent. 
Nor is there anything unusual about the teaching given to the 
laity. I have at present a little manual called The Buddhist Way 
of Bractice according to the Soto Sectf which sums up its doctrine 
by saying that the most important things are to understand the 
nature of life and death and to realize that our own hearts are the 
Buddha himself. This is not the language of the Pali Pitakas, 
it is true, but it is commonly used by most Mahayanist sects. 
The Manual is an extract of a much larger work called Shob5 Genzo 
written by Dogen,® who founded the Soto in Japan and built 
the magnificent monastery of Eiheiji near Pukui in Echizen. 

Before going further I may remind the reader that Zen in Japan 
has three divisions often reckoned as separate sects, the Einzai, 
Sots, and Obaku. The Soto is the largest Buddhist denomination 
in the country except the Shinshu and is remarkable for not having 

^ Soto Kyokwai Shushogi W Wi m M 
2 Often called Joyodaishi or Shoyodaishi 
conferred on him in 1880 . 

> a posthninous title 

400 

THE SEOT8 AND THEIR DOCTRINES [oBi. xm 

any subdivisions. It was introduced from China immediately after 
the Rinzai at the beginning of the thirteenth century, and clearly 
the two schools form part of the same movement. The Obaku ^ 
is much later, having been founded in 1669, and has preserved 
a great number of Chinese usages. All three sects are similar in 
their doctrines, though they have each their own hierarchy and line 
of patriarchs. There is, however, a slight difference of method 
and teaching between the Soto and Rinzai. The former emphasizes 
the importance of moral training and gradual development for 
obtaining enlightenment ; the latter insists that enlightenment 
is rather a sudden revelation which cannot be caused or accelerated by 
study : the former hold that a good life is alike the cause and result 
of enlightenment ; the latter are accused by their opponents (though 
I am far from even hinting that the charge is true) of believing 
in secret something very like the Indian doctrine that the acts 
of a Yogi are neither white nor black ”, 

The use of this word Enlightenment brings us to the main con- 
ception and theme of Zen, all the other activities described being 
merely preparatory and external. It must not be supposed that 
other sects do not claim to show the way to enlightenment. 
A common saying among Buddhists compares enlightenment 
to a mountain peak approached from all sides by paths and each 
sect maintains that its own road is the best and shortest. Also 
enhghtenment is only for the few : the little S6t5 manual already 
quoted only alludes to it as a counsel of perfection. But there is 
no doubt that all Zen literature deals with it, though in a special 
manner not readily intelligible to outsiders. No one can aspire 
to be a serious student of Zen unless he at least strives to obtain 
Enlightenment, and the great difficulty of treating the whole subject 
is that no one who has not obtained Enlightenment can know 
what it is and not even those who have obtained it can tell others 
what it is. “ This incommunicableness of the transport is the 
keynote of all mysticism,” as William James observes.^ The 
word Enlightenment is a rendering of satori in Japanese, which 
in its turn is a translation of the Chinese Wu,^ and the rendering 

^ See above, Chapter Xni. 

® Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 405. 

® Giles’s Dictionary gives ^ as meaning to become conscious of the truth of a 
doctrine. Japanese dictionaries give satori and its derivatives as meaning under- 
standing or apprehension and quote idiomatic phrases in which, they are used 
like : to open a person’s eyes ; he will not take a hint ; when I perceived it, it 
was too late. 

ZEN 

401 

OH. XVII] ZEN 401 

seems suitable, for enlightenment is the word commonly used to 
describe tlie Buddha’s own experience under the Bo-tree which 
(I believe) Zen adepts consider to have been similar to their own 
satori. One gathers that sa,tori is not a mystery or secret or anything 
intellectual which can be imparted. It is a new view of life and of the 
Universe which must be felt. It will prove satisfying and be “ the 
purifier and liberator of life ”, breaking down the prison walls 
in which the intellect is said to confine us. But no definition of it 
is intelligible, coherent, or consistent with other explanations. 
When Unmon ^ was asked what is Zen, his answer on one occasion 
was “not a word can be predicated”. On another he was more 
hopeful and replied simply “ that’s it Probably the personality 
of the two questioners had something to do with the difference 
in the answers which they received. 

Out of a mass of utterances about Zen and satori, two seem to me 
to offer some light to the uninitiated. The one is that sauisara 
and nirvana are the same,^ which is equivalent to the statement 
which I have already quoted from the Soto manual. I presume 
it means that they are not locally different as states or abodes, 
but depend on feeling : he who has satori is already in nirvana, 
although to others he is apparently immersed in the troubles of 
this world. The other is a statement that enlightenment is somehow 
a unification of the inner man (I deliberately use this popular 
phrase because I do not know what in the present instance is the 
scientific equivalent) which has somehow become divided. I will 
quote from the works of that distinguished Japanese writer on 
Zen, Dr. D. T. Suzuki.'^ “ In the beginning which is really no 
beginning and which has no spiritual meaning except in our finite 
life, the will wants to know itself and consciousness is awakened ; 
and with the awakening of consciousness the will is split into 
two. The one will, whole and complete in itself, is now at once 
actor and observer. Conflict is inevitable : for the actor now wants 
to be free from the limitations under which he has been obliged 

^ Or Yun-Men, a well-known Chinese monk who lived at the end of the T'ang 
dynasty and was reckoned as twelfth in spiritual descent from Bodhidharma and 
as the founder of the Unmon school. He is celebrated on account of the painful 
means by which he obtained Enlightenment. He went to seek instruction of his 
master Bokujo, who seized hold of him, vociferating “ Speak, speak ”. Unmon 
hesitated, on which the master abused him, turned him out and shut the gate .so 
violently that he broke his unfortunate scholar’s leg. But in the same moment 
Unmon was enlightened and coxinted the pain as nothing in comparison with 
the reward. 

® ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ “ Essays in Zen Buddhism, p. 119. 

D''d.'.' ' 

m THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES {cn. xyu 

to put iiimself in Ms desire for consciousness. . . . Ignorance prevails 
as long as tlie will remains clieated by its own offspring or its own 
image, consciousness, in whieb tlie knower always stands dis- 
tinguisbed from tbe known. Tbe cbeating, however, cannot last : 
tbe will wishes to be enlightened, to be free, to be by itself. 
Ignorance always presupposes the existence of something outside 
and unknown. The unknown, outsider is generally termed ego or 
soul, wMch is in reality the will in the state of ignorance. Therefore 
when the Buddha experienced enlightenment he at once realized 
that there was no Atman, no soul entity as an unknown or 
unknowable quantity.” I do not quote this passage as pretending 
to understand its dark sayings but because it seems to me to give 
some indication of the ideas and aspirations of a Zen adept. But 
the author would no doubt remind us that all attempts to describe 
satori in words are predestined to failure. They are, in Zen 
phraseology, pointing at the moon with the finger and mistaking 
the finger for the moon. 

Satori is obtained by gradual training but culminates in sudden 
illumination. The relative importance of the two parts of the 
process are, as I have mentioned, a subject of dispute between 
the Rinzai and Soto sects, but normally both take place. After 
a long period of anxious and even despairing search, illumination 
comes suddenly, generally as the result of some trivial, often 
grotesque act or remark, difficulties vanish, everything becomes 
clear, and the happy illuminatus wonders why he has so long been 
making such a fuss about what is so obvious. Novices are generally 
trained by asking them to solve problems called Ko-an,^ and a 
selection of a hundred such problems is contained in the celebrated 
collection called Hekiganshu, which was introduced into Japan 
in the thirteenth century and has ever siiice been excessively popular, 
especially in the Rinzai sect. 

Hakuin has left an interesting account of Ms experiences as a 
novice in dealing with one of these formidable Ko-an. He lived 
from 1683 to 1768 and may be called the second founder of the 
Rinzai sect, since all the Rinzai masters of the present day are proud 
to trace back their spiritual lineage to him. He was master of 
a vigorous colloquial style and did not disdain to quote popular 
songs. He also wrote a celebrated poem on meditation which is 

^ ^ Chinese Kung»an, literally a public document but used since the 
early days of Zen in the sense of a theme or question given to a student to solve 
as a test of whether he has really obtained enlightenment. 

CH. xvn] ZEN 403 

still sung in temples. When he was stopping in a monastery of 
Bohizen at the age of twenty-four a celebrated problem was given 
him to solve called J oshu’s Mu.^ Joshu was an early Chinese master 
of Zen under the T'ang dynasty, and the problem which the novice 
has to explain relates how when he was asked by a monk whether 
the Buddha nature was in a dog, he replied Mu, the Japanese 
pronunciation of the word Wu, meaning “Not”. I can only tell 
the reader that if he took this simple dialogue in its obvious sense, 
a Zen master would call him a fool and probably box his ears. 
Mu must be understood as meaning that neither affirmation nor 
negation is possible and that the true answer, which touches on the 
nature of the Absolute, must be felt, not expressed in words.^ 
Bukko, the founder of the Bngakuji monastery near Kamakura, 
tells us that this Mu obsessed him for more than six years before 
he understood its meaning. In Hakuin’s case the period of waiting 
was not so long and this is how he describes his experiences.® 
“ Joslm’s Mu being the theme given to me I assiduously applied 
myself to it, I did not sleep for days and nights and forgot to eat 
or lie down, when suddenly a great concentration took place in my 
mind. I felt as if I were freezing in an icefield extending thousands 
of miles and in myself there was a sense of complete transparency. 
There was no going forward or backwards. I felt like an idiot and 
there was nothing in the world but Joshu’s Mu. I attended lectures 
but they sounded lilce a discussion in some distant hall and some- 
times I felt as if I were flying in the air. Several days passed in this 
way when one evening the sound of a temple bell upset everything. 
It was like smashing an ice basin, or pulling down a house made of 
jade. When I suddenly awoke I found I was Ganto the old master 
and that through all the changes of time nothing of my personality 
had been lost. My doubts and indecisions were dissolved like 
melting ice. I called out loudly ‘ Wonderful, wonderful I ’ 

1 It is contained in the collection of problems compiled by Mu-mon (or Wu- 
Wen, a Chinese Zen master) in 1228 and called Mumon Kwan, or The Barrier 
that has No Gate. 

® Joshu is said on another occasion to have given an affirmative answer to the 
same question because the Buddha nature is present in all beings. 

3 In his book called Orategama and also other writings. I am indebted to 
Professor Suzuki’s translation in Essays in Zen, pp. 238-9. The strange word 
Orategama is imintelligible to modern Japanese and is explained as an ancient 
colloquialism meaning “ My own kettle ”, and compounded of Ora, the first 
personal pronoun, te, hand, and kama, kettle or brew. Though this explanation 
offers difficulties it appears to be accepted in the sect. The book called Orategama 
is a collection of letters. 

m THE SECTS AND THEIM DOCTRINES [ch. xvii 

There is no birth and death from which one has to escape ! There 
is no supreme knowledge after which one has to strive. All the 
thousand and seven hundred problems ^ are not worth the trouble 
of describing them.” 

Ganto was a Zen master in the T'ang period (828-887) who was 
murdered. His untimely end had much troubled Hakuin, who 
could not understand how if Zen was a religion of salvation, one 
of its great exponents should perish in this way. Satori is commonly 
described as a convulsion which upsets and destroys all one’s old 
ideas, but the comparison of the antecedent state to a frozen expanse 
is, so far as my very limited knowledge of Zen literature goes, 
unusual. Hakuin was fond of metaphors from ice. His celebrated 
hymn on meditation begins : — 

All living beings are in their original nature Buddhas : 

It is like ice and water : 

Without water there can be no ice.” 

and perhaps the last lines of the same poem give a hint as to his 
interpretation of the “ Mu ” : — 

“ This very earth is the Lotus Land 
And this body is the Buddha.” 

But Hakuin’s troubles did not end with the solution of the Mu 
question. In Zen monasteries there is an institution called Sanzen,® 
which means that the pupils have an interview with their master 
and submit for. his criticism their views on some of the many 
Ko-ans or problems. Hakuin, who by this time was well satisfied 
with the progress he was making, came to call on his old master 
Shoju one day and submitted his view, probably with some self- 
complacency. Sh5ju, who was sitting in the verandah cooling 
himself, simply observed “ Eubbish ”. "Rubbish, is it ? ” said 
Hakuin, rather angrily. Shoju’s only reply was to seize his pupil, 
give him several sound slaps and push him off the verandah whence 
he fell into the mud, for it was rainy weather. When he came to 
himself he reflected that he had behaved indecorously to his master, 
so he returned to the balcony and bowed respectfully, but was 
rewarded by being called a devil out of the black pit, Hakuin 
determined to have it out with Shoju, and after due preparation paid 
him another visit in which he vehemently pressed his own point 

* There are said to be 1,700 K6-an or prubleins. 

* ^ 1^' Literally the study of Zen. 

ZEN 

CH. XVIl] 

of -view against liis master, witli tlie result that Shoju again slapped 
Mm, pushed him off the verandah, and laughed heartilj at his 
struggles as he lay wriggling on his back. Hakuin was furious and 
thought of leaving the monastery, when suddenly a perfectly 
irrelevant incident brought him complete enlightenment. One day 
when begging, according to custom, in the village he stopped in 
front of the house of an old woman who refused to give him any 
rice. Hakuin, however, being immersed in meditation, remained 
immovable while the old woman continued sweeping the front of the 
house. Irritated at his apparent importunity she at last gave him 
a severe blow with her broom, which knocked him down, the sort 
of treatment to wMch he must have been accustomed by now. 
But this time it had a magical effect. He picked himself up fully 
enlightened as to the whole truth of Zen and his first act was to run 
to the house of his old master to whom he now felt most grateful. 
Shoju saw him coming and called out “ What is the good news that 
you are bringing ? Come in quick ”. When he heard the story 
he said “ There, you have it now ”, patted him on the back and 
treated him with the utmost affection ever afterwards. This 
behaviour is characteristic of Zen teachers. They abuse and even 
illtreat their pupils when an outsider would expect them to help 
and encourage, but when once the pupil obtains enlightenment, 
the master immediately knows it and the two become fast friends. 
It is also to be noticed that in this, as I think in most cases, the 
immediate occasion of enlightenment is some trivial circumstance 
totally unconnected with philosophy or mental discipline but 
which startles and upsets the brooding mind and thus serves to 
bring to an end an uncomfortable state of tension. In the Bitakas 
enlightenment is rarely represented as coming suddenly in this 
fashion. The nearest parallel is Inanda, who according to the 
Cullavagga, xi, 1, 6, became an Arhat in the act of lying down to 
sleep : “ before his head had touched the pillow and his feet were 
still far from the ground,” in the interval he became emancipated. 
But as a rule Enlightenment is represented as the result of instruction 
and is quick or slow according to the learner’s capacity. 

It must not be supposed, however, that the training of Zen 
nionks is left to chance. The Chinese teacher Hyakujp (720-814) 

( first drew up the rules of the order, which are unusually strict. He 
became celebrated on account of his maxim “ No work, no food 

1 

406 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cn. xva 

It is not the onstom of Buddhist monastic societies to dweh on fte 
duty or sanctity of manual labour, but Zen is an exception in insisting 
monks rising early and doing their share of f-- ^ “ 
such-like active work, as a counterpoise, no doubt, to excess in so 
called meditation which is apt to degenerate into stupor Zen is 
abo the only sect in which monks beg for food regularly m the ear y 
morning I believe that in all other sects the observance ^ only 
occasional. The marriage of Zen priests is discouraged thong 

“monlSctn^ts a rule of seven buildings, u gateway with 
a sort of tower, the Buddha hall or temple, the lecture hall, the 
meditation hall, the abbot’s quarters, the dining-room, and the 
bath house. The meditation hall, which also serves as a 

with a series of raised floors on either ^ 

down the middle -tending f ^ rf 

for devout promenades^ iiiacn mouK is , „ j f « 
onf matt JapLese measurement, that is about 3 feet ^by 6 
for meditation by day and sleep by night and one qm^” ^^ 8 
or sleening It is here that monks practise Zazen, that is, sittm 
oross-legg!d and meditating while regulating the i^*^^**® “ 
exnulsion of the breath. Lectures are delivered in the lecture 
hall especially in the periods called Sesshm,= ^ 

nlTsioliitelv necessary manual labour is performe _ 

time^f tL monks b devoted so far as possible to meditation and 
study. The Sesshin are said to be an institution peculiar 
Zen and the exact period differs in various 

nrrnnffement is to have one week m every month m the summer 

sessions from April to August and the same in the winter session 

from October to February. The lecture, though not given m ^ 

monastery temple, is almost as formal as 

dally performed there. Its commencement is 

nn Jnff of a bell. The master or lecturer enters and while Ae burns 

incLso in honour of the Buddha and of his own master the monks 

chant a dhtoiil,^ the rhythm being m^ked 
audibly on a wooden feh (mokugyo). It is also usual to i 

ch^f at this point of the proceedings some wefl-kno™ short 
sermon or the hymn by Hakuin called Zazen. Then follows e 
lecture. I believe that it is not usual to employ either explanation 

Many of them are found in Nanpo’s catalogue of the hatui na i 

ZEN 

407 

OH. XVIl] 

or arguments, for wliicli, as we liave seen, Zen has a singular dislike. 
The lecturer is not expected to do more than paraphrase in his 
own language some well-known textbook. When the lecture is 
over what arc known as the Four Great Vows are chanted three 
times : 

Sentient beings are innumerable : I vow to save them all. 

Our evil passions are inexhaustible : I vow to extinguish them all. 
The holy doctrines cannot be measured : I vow to study them. 
The path of the Buddhas is hard to reach : I vow to attain it. 

In modern days I fancy that the lectures are conventional, 
stereotyped gatherings, but in older times the unconventional, 
eccentric spirit was visible there as well as in more intimate conversa- 
tions between masters and pupils. One day, for instance, Obaku 
mounted the platform as if he were going to lecture, waited till 
all the monks had collected, and when all were assembled took up 
his staif and drove them out. When he had cleared the room, he 
called them back and observed that “ the moon, looks like a bow : 
less rain and more wind ”. The reader must draw what instruction 
he can from this dark saying. At any rate, it seems to be accepted 
that the master had the best of his pupils, which apparently was 
not the case in the following instance. Baso ^ was one day walking 
with his pupil Hyakujo -when a flock of wild geese flew over their 
heads. He asked, “ Whither are they flying ? ” and Hyakujo 
replied, “ They have flown, away, sir.’’ Baso on this abruptly 
seized his pupil’s nose and gave it such a violent twist as to make 
him cry with pain. “ You say they have flown away,” he said, 

but all the same they have been here since the very beginning.” 
Strange to say, Hyakujo received sudden and complete enlighten- 
ment. The next day Baso was about to deliver a lecture when 
Hyakujo stepped forward in front of the congregation and began 
to roll up the matting, which was equivalent to declaring that 
the ceremony was over. Baso did not protest but came down from 
his seat and retired to his own apartments. He sent, however, 
for Hyakujo and asked him to explain his extraordinary conduct. 
“ Yesterday,” said Hyakujo, “ you pulled my nose and it hurt 
very much.” “ And where was your thought wandering then ? ” 
said Baso, “ It does not hurt any more ” was the reply, and that 
is the end of the story. 

^ ffl ox Ma-Tsu. A Chinese Zen master who died in A.». 788. 

408 

TUB SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvii 

Anotlier peculiarity of Zen masters is tiie use of loud exclamations 
sucli as Kwan or Kwats whicli convey nothing to the ordinary 
hearer. The Kwan of XJnmon and the Kwats of Rinzai are 
specially celebrated. Sometimes these ejaculations were used in 
the lecture hall : sometimes an unfortunate student who thought 
he had asked a particularly pointed question received no reply 
but a thunderous shout of Kwats, which, according to the narrator, 
left him deaf for three days. 

All these apparently meaningless anecdotes merely show what 
has already been often stated that the enlightenment which Zen can 
give is nothing that can be reasoned about, explained, or described in 
words. It is rather a new adjustment of oneself to the Universe, 
a new feeling of one’s place and use in the order of things. When 
Unmon was asked to explain what is the Tao, that is, the way or 
the truth, his reply was simply “ Walk on I do not pretend to 
understand Zen, Wt I would again point out how distinguished 
has been the part which its adherents have played in the history 
of Japan. It certainly does not claim that any secret is to be learnt 
by mere meditation, by becoming absorbed in contemplation and 
forgetting the affairs of ordinary life, as the following anecdote 
about the youth of Baso, mentioned above, will show. He used to 
sit cross-legged all day meditating. His master once found him 
thus engaged and asked what he was trying to do. “ I wish to become 
a Buddha.” The master said nothing but picked up a piece of 
brick and began to polish it with a stone. Baso asked him what he 
was doing. “ I am trying to polish this brick into a mirror.” ” But 
no amount of polishing will ever make a mirror of the brick.” 
“ And no amount of sitting cross-legged will ever make a Buddha 
of you.” ” What am I to do then ? ” “ It is like driving a cart. 
When it won’t move, will you whip up the cart or the ox ? Are 
you sitting cross-legged in order to practise meditation ^ or to 
become a Buddha ? If it is meditation, that does not consist of 
sitting or lying down. If it is to become a Buddha, the Buddha 
has no fixed form. You cannot take hold of him or let him go. 
To think you can obtain Buddhahood by sitting is simply to kill 
the Buddha and until you give up the idea that you can so obtain it, 
you won’t come near the truth.” 

A Zen priest once informed me that in Zen schools the manual 
used for teaching children is the anthology of easy passages from 
Dogen’s works already alluded to.® They are taught that it is 

== m, m m (m ^ m- 

Zen in the original. 

CH. xvii] ZEN 409 

most important to confess tlieir sins to tlie Buddhas (not of course 
to priests), wMch is called Zange sum, to strive for emancipation 
(Kailio wo ukeru), and to practise good conduct, which has five 
branches. (1) Fuse or almsgiving, (2) Ai-go or kind language, 
(3) Bi-gyo or benevolent conduct, (4) Doji or putting oneself in other 
people’s places, (6) Ho-on or gratitude. The title Buddha refers to 
^akyamuni ^ and not to Vairocana or Amida, but the expression 
“all Buddhas ” is often used and at the end of the Shushogi we 
are told that they are all the same as ^akyamuni, though it is not 
plain how far he is regarded as a historical person or how far as 
a spirit universally present. The priest was emphatic on the necessity 
of teaching that the Buddha’s Enlightenment consisted in seeing 
that all beings “ men, animals, plants and trees ” can become 
Buddhas (Jo-Butsu). He said that the four truths are known in 
the sect but only to well-educated persons. He was himself a student 
of the Agamas, but admittedly as a branch of learning introduced 
by foreign scholars. 

Japanese Zen refuses to base itself on any sutras. Such works 
as the Lankavatara and Vajracchedika are studied by a few of the 
learned as oompendiums of philosophy, but have not a position 
in any way comparable to that accorded to the three Amida-sutras 
by the Jodo and Shinshu sects. Tokusan ^ was a profound student 
of the Vajracchedilia, but when he obtained enhghtenment in Zen 
he burned all his precious notes and commentaries, exclaiming 
that all philosophy was only like a hair floating in measureless 
space. It would seem that the attitude of many Zen masters was 
not only antiscriptural but what the uninitiated can only call 
antireligious. The anecdote of Tanka ® warming himself when he 
felt chilly by burning a wooden statue of the Buddha is well 
known, and there is not much respect in the saying attributed to 
Kinzai, “ The Buddha is just like other bald-headed monks. Woe 
unto those who seek enlightenment through him. Seek for your 
Buddha and he is lost to you : seek for your way and it is lost to 
you : seek for your Patriarch and he is lost to you.” Still more 
extraordinary is a sermon by Einzai which I do not quote fully 
because 1 do not understand it. The curious will, however, find 
a longer extraqt in the Zen Essays of Suzuki,^ who cites in illustration 

^ Shakamiinibutsu in the original. 

2 Te-vShasfi ^ jll, also called Hsiian Chien ^ 779-865. 

3 See above, Chap. V, p. 158. 

* Essays in Zm Buddhism (first series), D. T. Suzuki, pp. 331-3. 

410 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ ch . xvii 

the saying of an unnamed Zen master, I hate even to hear the 
name of the Buddha.” Kinzai’s object is apparently to insist that 
the mind of the seeker after truth must be absolutely free and 
untramnieled, and he expresses himself thus; “If you meet the 
Buddha, slay him : if you meet the Patriarch, slay him ^ for 
this is the only way to deliverance. Do not get entangled with 
anything, but stand above, pass on and be free. ... I tell you 
no Buddhas, no holy teachings, no discipline, no testifying.” ChSkei 
is said to have uttered the following verses on attaining enlightenment : 
“ What a fool I was ! What a fool I was ! Lift up the screen and 
come and see the world. If you ask ‘ What religion do you believe 1 ’ 
I raise my whisk ^ and hit you in the mouth.” This is perhaps too 
mysterious to admit of any comment, but it does not sound very 
reverent. 

The perverse paradoxical humour and the rough horse-play at- 
tributed to so many Zen masters are not to the taste of European 
saints, but parallels can be found in the West to a revelation which 
is perfectly satisfying to those who experience it but which cannot 
be communicated to those who have not had the same experience 
themselves. It is unfortunate that the great American authority 
on such abnormal religious phases of mind, William James, apparently 
never had his attention called to the phenomena presented by Zen, 
but he cites certain European instances which seem similar. For 
instance, he quotes a letter from the poet Tennyson wliich speaks 
of “ A kind of waking trance. . . . This has come upon me through 
repeating my own name to myself silently till . . . individuality 
seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundless being and this not 
a confused state, but the clearest, the surest of the surest, utterly 
beyond words — where death was an almost laughable impossibility— 
the loss of personality (if so it were) seeming no extinction but the 
one true life. I am ashamed of my feeble description. Have I not 
said that the state is utterly beyond words ?” ^ One may also 

^ Compare the crazy precepts of decadent Tantric Biiddhism in India, though 
the motive does not seem quite the same. For references see Eliot, Hinduism 
and Biiddhism, vol. ii, p. 123, 

® Hossu. It Avas originally a whisk to drive off flies, hut has come to he regarded 
as a symbol of authority. It consists of a long whisk of hair, such as a horse’s 
tail, set on the end of a stick about a foot long. 

® Tennyson to Mr. P. B. Blood quoted in W. James’ Variaties of Rdigious 
Experience, p. 388 ff. Compare the cases of Trine, Amiel, Mahvida von Meysenberg, 
and Trevor, all quoted by James. The curious states of consciousness under 
ansestheties called “ the an®sthetio Bevelation ” by Mr. Blood cei'tainly sound 
like the paradoxes of Zen (“ You could kiss yoAir own lips ”), but Zen does not 
countenance the use of any intoxicants. 

411 

CH.xvii] ZEN 

compare tke utterances of St. John of the Cross, a Spanish mystic 
of the sixteenth century, who said : “When you stop at one thing, 
you cease to open yourself to the All. For to come to the All, you 
must give up the All. And if you should attain to owning the All, 
you must own it desiring nothing.” ^ Dionysius the ijeopagite 
describes the absolute truth exclusively by negatives. “ The cause 
of all things is neither soul nor intellect . . . nor number, nor 
essence, nor eternity, nor time . . . not unity, not diversity, nor 
goodness, nor even spirit, as we Imow it,” ^ and so on ad libitum. 

In spite of Zen’s refusing to be bound by scripture like other sects, 
it has not only had a considerable influence on secular literatine 
but has also produced a number of treatises which are practically 
sacred books, though they bear such modest titles as sermons or 
collections of problems. To realize how vast is the collection of 
material one has only to look at the mass of anecdotes about Zen 
masters of all dates, including those of considerable antiquity, to be 
found in the pages of every essay on any subject connected with 
Zen. Many, of course, are open to considerable doubt, but, as sacred 
books go, the standard of authenticity does not seem to be particularly 
low. The treatises attributed to Bodhidharma ® appear to be spurious, 
though they may possibly contain some genuine sayings, but there 
seems to be no reason to suspect the poem called Shin-jin-mei,^ 
ascribed to Sosan, the third Patriarch (fbOG). The work in the Chinese 
Tripitaka ® entitled the Platform-sutra on the Treasure of the Law 
contains portions of the sermons of Yen5, the sixth Patriarch, which 
appear to be in part at least genuine. One of the best Imown disciples 
of Yeno was Yoka, who is said to have obtained enlightenment after 
reading the Yuima-kyo (Vimalakirti-sutra) and then to have composed 
a celebrated poem called Shodoka.® Most influential and widely 
read is the Hekiganshu, a composite production consisting of one 
hundred cases or problems, each accompanied by an introduction 
and commentary followed by a hymn. These hymns are composed 
by Setoho (Hsueh-Tou, 980-1052) and the commentary consists of 

^ W. .James, l.c., p. .306. Of. Yesei’s saying (Suzuki, op. cit., p. 20) : “ When 
you have a staff, I will give you one. When you have none, I will take it away 
from you.’’ 

® W. James, l.c., p. 416. ' ® See Chap. V, p. 163. 

See Suzuki, Essays in Zen, p. 381 S. for text and p. 182 If. for translation. 

Nanjio, 1526. Liu tsu ta shih fa pao t'an king. Sec above, Chap. V, p. 167. 
The platform means the place on which ordinations were performed. 

® It is translated into German in the book called Zen : Der lebendige Buddhismus 
in Japan, by Ohasama and Faust. 

412 

THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cm xvii 

the notes of Yengo’s ^ lectures taken by his disciples. An authorized 
edition of these notes was brought out in 1125 and this was apparently 
the book introduced into Japan by Dogen in 1227, but meanwhile 
it was suppressed and burnt by Yengo’s most brilliant disciple 
Daiye who for some reason disapproved of it. In 1302, however, 
a reprint was issued and came into general circulation in China. 
Meanwhile the original edition was much appreciated by the newly 
formed school of Zen at Kamakura and new editions were 
subsequently published in Japan.^ 

Somewhat later (1228) was compiled another collection of forty- 
eight problems called the Mumon Kwan.^ But besides such manuals 
compiled with a special educational object there are also numerous 
works, many of them contained in the Chinese Tripitaka, which 
record the sayings generally known as Yii-lu, in Japanese Goroku, 
of the various Zen masters. Thus about a.d. 1004 Tao-Yiian wrote 
the work called Records of the Transmission of the Lamp,^ giving 
in thirty volumes the sermons and obiter dicta of Patriarchs and 
other eminent ecclesiastics, while under the Yiian dynasty a continua- 
tion of the same was published.® In its thirty-six volumes 3,118 
priests of the Zen school are said to be mentioned, which will give 
the reader a notion of the exuberant biographical material contained 
in these notices, while the collection of the works of Daiye (Ta-Hui) ® 
shows the amount of care and space which could be consecrated to 
the utterances of a single teacher. One of the chief authorities of 
the Rinzai school in Japan is a collection of the discourses and 
sermons of the founder called Rinzai-roku. It would be useless to 
give a further catalogue of such literature, but it is necessary to 
remember its existence. The books mentioned are all Chinese, but 
a considerable number were also produced in Japan. Hakuin, of 
whom I have already spoken, is the best known of these writers 
and Anesald’' says that his incisive and entertaining pamphlets 
are even now enjoyed by many people. The Sh5bo Genzo, or The 
Bye of the Good Law, by Dogen, who introduced the Soto school 
into Japan, and the Shumon mujin-to ron, or The Unfailing Lamp 

1 Yuan-Wu, 1063-1152. 

® Those who are sufficiently interested are recommended to study a literal 
translation of one case (No. 55) in this curious work given in the Eastern Buddhist, 
vol. iii, 1924, in an article entitled “ Zen Buddhism and Immortality ”, by D. T. 
Suzuld. 

® See above, p. 143. ■* Nanjio, 1524. 

e Nanjio, 165a « Nanjio, 1532. 

’ Anesaki, History of Japanese Eeligion, p. 305. 

GH.XVII] 413 

of the Zen sect, by Torei, a disciple of Hakuin, are also considered 
important. 

Zen has also a curious possession which may be called either 
literature or art in the set of Ox-tending pictures,! each supplied 
with an explanation in prose and a quatrain of verses. The 
pictures now current are said to have been drawn by Kakuan, 
a Chinese monk of the Rinzai school who lived about a.d. 1100 
under the Sung dynasty and who states in his preface that 
he revised the work of a somewhat earlier artist called Seikyo. 
The first picture is called Looking for the Ox, that is to say, for 
one’s own soul.® It represents a man exhausted and in despair, 
following an imending path and vainly searching while he hears 
nothing but the song of the evening cicadas. In the second 
picture he is still searching but has discovered the tracks of 
the Ox. This is explained as meaning that he has begun to 
study philosophy and various doctrines. He cannot yet distinguish 
truth and falsehood or good and evil : still he has found some traces 
of what he seeks. The third picture represents a great stride. The 
man sees the Ox : he begins to understand the uselessness of mere 
book-learning and to realize that the road to Enlightenment really 
lies in trifles of everyday life. Something new is working harmoniously 
in all his senses and all his activities, unseen and unseparable, like 
the salt in sea water. At last he catches the Ox, which in picture four 
is seen attached by a cord but not being led. The wild nature of the 
beast is still too unruly and refuses to be broken in ; it is “the 
overwhelming pressure of the objective world The Ox rushes up 
to a plateau and sometimes seems lost in the mountain mists. Never- 
theless he is gradually broken in. In the next picture he is seen 
following the man, who leads him by a nose cord. “ Things oppress 
us not because of an objective world but because of a self-deceiving 
mind, , . , Never let yourself be separated from the whip and 
tether.’ ’ In No. six the struggle is over. The man is leisurely 
proceeding home riding on the Ox, playing as he goes simple ditties 
on a rustic flute. “ What need to tell that he is now one of those 
that know ? ” The Ox now disappears and the man is left alone. 

I follow the arrangements of the pictures and text given hy Suzuki in his 
Essays on Ze-n, pp. 340-367 and 409-411. A slightly version has been 

published by Ponsonby Fane in a pamphlet called Satori-kata-no-Zu, 

The metaphor seems to be an old one in Zen. Hyakujo (Pai-Chang, 720-814) 
is reported to have said that to seek for the Buddha is like seeking for an Ox 
while one is riding on it. 

414 TEE SECTS AND THEIR DOQmiNES icn.XYii 

In picture seven we see him sitting outside his house with his whip 
and cord lying beside him as if he were asleep and the comment is 
“ When you know that what you need is not the snare or net, but 
the hare or fish that they were meant to catch, it is like gold separated 
from the dross or like the moon rising out of the clouds The eighth 
picture is something new, not only ui this series of drawings but in 
Buddhist art. It is merely a blank : a circular frame enclosing 
nothing at all. The title is simply “ the Ox and the man both gone 
out of sight ” and the following are extracts from the comments : 
“ All confusion is set aside and serenity alone prevails ; even the 
idea of holiness does not obtain. He does not linger where the Buddha 
is, and where there is no Buddha he passes on. . . . 

Who has ever surveyed the vastness of heaven ? 

Over the blazing furnace not a flake of snow can fall.” 

The ninth picture, though not an absolute blank, shows only a few 
flowers and leaves of grass or some suggestion of a landscape. I will 
let the comment speak for itself. “ Pure from the very beginning, he 
receives no defilement. He watches the growth and decay of things 
with form and abides himself secure in Wu-wei.^ He does not identify 
himself with transformations : what has he to do with self-discipline ? 
Water is blue and mountains green. He sits and watches how things 
change,” But this fife of lonely contemplation is by no means held 
up as the last word. The tenth picture is called “ Enterhig the 
city with bliss-bestowing hands ”, and represents a rotund, smiling 
personage carrying bags full of what are no doubt good things. 
The comment informs us that none know his inner life but that he 
goes into the market place and consorts with winebibbers and 
butchers : he and they all become Buddhas. 

These last remarks remind one of the stories told of Myocho 
(also known as Daitokokushi) who in 1323 founded the Daitokuji 
in Kyoto. He is said to have spent a great part of his life under the 
Go jo bridge in, the company of the meanest and most despised out- 
casts and begging his bread. The text does not give any general 
summary of the meaning of the whole series of pictures, but it is 
usually briefly explained by saying that the Ox is the Buddha 
nature in every one : you must find it but must not make too much 
of it. This last point is illustrated by an anecdote told of Goso 

^ The use of this well-known Taoist phrase, meaning something like ab.sence of 
self-assertion, is remarkable. 

415 

CH. XVII] ZEN 

(or Hoyen), a famous Cbinese teaclier of Zen wlto died in 1104 and 
was the master of Yengo, the compiler of the Hekiganshu already 
mentioned. He often indicated to his pupil that he had a slight 
fault but for some time could not be induced to give it a name. 
At last he said ‘ ‘ Well, the fact is you have too much Zen about you ’ ’ , 
and added, when pressed to explain what was the harm of that, 
“ It turns one’s stomach.” 

CHAPTEK XVIII 

NICHIEENi 
By G. B. Sansom 

Many details of Nicliiren’s life have been given above in the historical 
section ; but his doctrine was so much an expression of his unique 
personality that to recapitulate his biography is to summarize the 
development of the sect. 

His life fails into tlnee parts. In the first, after long study he 
reached the conviction that the true and only doctrine, the quintessence 
of Buddhism, was the teaching of the Lotus, and that this teaching 
must be followed in practice in the national as well as the individual 
life. When about thirty years old he publicly proclaimed his religion 
and attacked all other forms of Buddhism as well as hotly censuring 
the Government. He thus aroused such animosity that he was 
mobbed, possibly with the connivance of the authorities, and had to 
escape by night from Kamakura. Keturning after some months 
of missionary work in the adjacent provinces, he renewed his warnings 
to the Government, who, inconvenienced by his criticism in a difficult 
period and doubtless under pressure from his ecclesiastical opponents, 
banished him to Izii in 1261. 

Here began the second phase of his career. Alone and exiled he 
spent his time in intensive study of the Lotus. In a letter ^ written 
at this period he says that for many months he has kept at his holy 
task, “day and night, walking, standing, sitting, lying.” Such 
austerities served only to deepen his conviction and to heighten 
his ardour. As he pored over the text, he became overwhelmingly 
certain that passages ^ which describe the antagonism and persecution 

^ For authorities in English sec especially Anesraki, N'icMrcv, the. Buddhist 
Prophet, Harvard, 1916 ,; and Lloyd, The. Greed of Half Japan, 1911, chaps. 24 
and 25. 

References in this chapter to the -works of Nichiren give the page numbers in 
the Tokyo edition of 1904 known as Jffiij 

2 Kno-wn as IS HI?. Works, p. 417. 

® Particularly in Chapters XII and XIII. He was fond of quoting such passages 
as “ they wiU deride and abuse us, they will belabour us with sticks and stones ”, 
and pointing out that these predictions were confirmed by his own experience, 

416 

CH.xviii] NICHIREN: .. , / 417 

to be endured in a future evil age by those proclaiming tbe supreme 
Scripture were prophetic references to himself. He reached the 
unshakable belief that he and he alone was the predestined teacher, 
that his strife and suffering and the very enmity of other sects were 
necessary and foreordained ; so that when he was released in 1263 
he carried on his missionary labours with even more uncompromising 
zeal than before. The arrival of a Mongol envoy demanding tribute 
from Japan brought back to the public mind his prophecy of an 
invasion and increased his confidence that now at last the Government 
must listen to him and adopt his remedy for the evils of the day. 
He showered violent memorials upon officials and prelates, reminding 
them of his prophetic words, Finally, after many struggles and much 
persecution at the hands of his enemies, especially the Amidists, 
the stormy prophet conld be tolerated no longer. He was tried for 
high treason, but somehow — ^by a miracle as he and his followers 
believed — escaped death at the very place of execution and 
was instead exiled to the inhospitable island of Sado. This was at 
the end of 1271. 

The first two phases were militant. The third, though not lacking 
in activity, partook rather of a mystic character. He spent three 
years on Sado, where he employed his time in further developing 
his system. It was here that he :first matured the conviction that 
he was the Bodhisattva Jogyo, that he devised the graphic representa- 
tion of the chief object of worship, and that he wrote some of his 
most important essays, including the “ Eye-opener ” ^ and the 
“ Heritage of the Sole Great Thing concerning Life and Death 
He was released in 1274 and was recalled to Kamakura on the eve 
of the Mongol invasion. But though the Government endeavoured 
to come to terms vuth him he would admit no compromise. He held 
out for the imion of Japan under his Church and the suppression 
of all heresies. Agreement was impossible and ISTichiren retired to 
a mountain heritage, where he taught and studied and dreamed of 
a Universal Church with its Holy See in Japan. He died in 1282. 

Nichiren was perhaps the most remarkable figure, as his sect 
was the most exceptional development, in the religious history of 
Japan. His life is an example of a militant reforming spirit which 
is hardly in keeping with the Japanese tradition of tolerance in 

1 Kaimokueho ^ written in 1272. Worlcs, p. 747. 

« Shoji Icliidaiji Kechimyaku Sho ^ ^ ^ i§L completed 

just before the Kaimoku-sho. Works, p. 742. 

E e 

418 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cm xvm 

doctiinal and even in ecclesiastical matters. Throngli it there runs 
a strain of aggressive individuality and stubborn belief which would 
brook no kind of contradiction. He said himself that he was probably 
“ the most intractable man in Japan”, and there is no doubt that the 
clash between his school and others is due far less to differences of 
creed than to incompatibiHty of temper. He was a master of invective, 
born to arouse opposition, enmity, and persecution. We have seen 
how he offended the Government by the violence of his language. 
But so addicted was he to the use of terms of abuse like devil ”, 
“ fiend ”, and “ liar ” that we find him using them in most surprising 
contexts, even in his less polemical writings. Thus in a letter ^ 
to his disciples in 1279 he says : “If Nichiren had not appeared in 
the period of the destruction of the Law, then Sakyamuni would 
have been a great liar and all the Buddhas would have been great 
cheats. For in the 2,220 years since His death it is Nichiren alone 
who has made good His prophecy.” 

No single sentence could better illustrate at the same time his 
apocalyptic conviction and his challenging tone. 

It is at first sight surprising that so exacting and quarrelsome 
a leader should have gained such a following as in fact he did. But 
he was tender to his adherents, as many warm-hearted letters show ; 
and as to his powers of conversion the truth is that the time was 
ripe for the appearance of a teacher prescribing new and drastic 
remedies for the disorders, poHtioal and economic, from which Japan 
was then suffering. Moreover, by the beginning of the thirteenth 
century the admiaistrative and to some extent the cultural centre 
of Japan had shifted from Kyoto to the eastern provinces^ where 
men were of a bolder, rougher stamp than their gentle compatriots 
in the western provinces. Not only among officials and soldiers, 
but among all people of a vigorous habit of mind, there was a 
reaction against the softness of Amidist doctrine, a demand for 
a robuster creed. Some, as we have seen, turned to the discipline 
of Zen, hut many were touched by the crusading spirit of Nichiren 
and no doubt were especially attracted by that part of his teaching 
which insisted that religion must not be separated from Government. 
Accordingly he made converts in all classes, even among men of such 

^ Known as ^ J\^ ^ ^ Works, p. 18'76. Similar laiignage is to be 

found in the Eye-opener. Quoting a stanza from the chapter on Perseverance in 
the Lotus, N'ichiren says : “ If Nichiren had not been born in this country the 
World-Honoured One would be a great liar and the eighty million myriads of 
Bodhiaattvas would fail into the sin of hypocrisy.” 

419 

CH. XVIII] NIGHIREN 

importance as Hojo Tokimori/ a member of tkc ruling family. 
And since bis teaching naturally attracted adherents who partook 
of bis own bold and aggressive nature, it is not surprising that the 
history of the Lotus Sect, both during and after his lifetime, is a 
record of clashes with authority and strife with other denominations.^ 
In the first stage of his career Nicluren developed and preached 
his interpretations of the Lotus, and the emphasis of his teacliing 
at this time was laid principally upon the vital need for both the 
Government and the people to conform to his religion. The most 
important of his tracts in this period have a certain political intention 
and an admonitory flavour, as is evident from such titles as “An 
Essay on the Protection of the State ” ® and “ A Memorial on the 
Eemedy for Calamities and the celebrated treatise on “ The 
E.stablishment of Righteousness and the Safety of the Country ’ 
The object of these writings was to demonstrate that the dangers 
threatening the State could be overcome only by the adoption of 
Nichiren’s own tenets ; and they are largely devoted to an exposure 
of the errors of other sects, particularly the Nembutsu and Zen. 
Later the Shingon and Ritsu sects also became objects of his animad- 
version. It may thus be said that, as he developed his system, 
“ adverse criticism of these four branches of Buddhism became an 
integral part of Nichirenite dogmatics.”® 

Yet the doctrine of Nichiren is remarkable not so much for its 
essence as for the manner in which it is set forth. In substance it is 
little more than a variation of the Tendai teaching, not indeed the 
Tendai of Nichiren’s own day but as he imagined it to have been in 
the days of Saicho. But it was preached to the astonished Government 
and public with a vehemence and insistence which seemed hire 
arrogance and were without parallel in Japan, Of course, all sects 
believe that they have a monopoly of truth, but the old sects of the 
Nara period claimed little more than to present the best and clearest 

^ He had also many women among his disciples, some of whom appear to have 
been of strong personality. His correspondence shows that Nichiren took special 
pains in the instruction of his women converts. It is interesting to observe that 
the closing passages of his Hokke Daimoku-sho are addressed to women. He 
warns them against the teachers of Hembutsu, who are “ the enemies of all the 
women of Japan, more dangerous than tigers aiid wolves or brigands or pirates 
2 The Tokyo papers of 27th April, 1934, record a visit to a newspaper office by 
a member of the Nichiren sect, who, aggrieved by some disparaging reference to 
his religion, attacked members of the editorial staff with a sword. 

=* wT ft n ^ Ir. Works, p. 220. 

^ H 35c. Works, p. 299. 

^ Anesaki, op, cit., p. 36, note. 

420 THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [cu. xvm 

version of what was admitted by alt to be truth and to point out 
a few errors. The Tendai and Shingon were less disposed to contradict 
and condemn than to find room for all reformers who were not too 
refractory. But the new sects of the Kamakura period did not 
hesitate to upset established doctrine and to maintain their own 
theses in the face of it. Thus the attitude of Shinshu towards the 
older sects is very like that of Protestantism towards Catholicism. 
Nichiren took another and even more aggressive line : for him 
religion was something national and not merely individual. He 
summoned the Government to accept forthwith and enforce the 
truth which he taught and to suppress by force all heresy and 
error — that is to say, everything he himself did not teach. 

Such a method of procedure was most unusual, in fact probably 
without parallel in any Buddhist country. To the majority of 
Japanese it must have seemed simply bad manners. We may admire 
Nichiren, the courage with which he fought for his convictions and 
faced martyrdom. No one can help being interested by the intensely 
personal note which sounds in all his sayings and writmgs. He is 
the most striking example of religious enthusiasm that Japan has 
to offer, yet the results that he achieved, while considerable, are not 
so great as might have been expected. The history of the sect 
makes one feel that it has suffered because it has not been able to 
preach the truth as a whole and to fight for it, but has been perpetually 
diverted into internecine squabbles about details and vituperative 
condemnation of other people’s errors. At the present day the 
Mchirenites are one of the most conspicuous denominations in Japan 
but are only moderately numerous, being far behind the Shmshu, 
Zen, and Shingon in numbem. Their prominence is due partly to 
self-assertion and advertisement. Their services are accompanied 
by a clamour of drums and bells ; spells and charms are freely used. 
But together with this there is intellectual life and a belief in a national 
and even universal Church.^ If much of their history consists of 
petty turbulence and scandals, yet a protest such as they made in 
1614 against the Government’s order that every one should accept 
the Buddhas and the Gods of his native place, has a noble side, being 
in fact a violent effort to assert the sovereignty of truth. But it is 

^ The sect maintains a flourishing college, the Rissho Daigaku. In recent 
years there has been a revival of interest in the doctrines of Nichiren among the 
educated classes. It arose in the first place probably from appreciation of his 
literary style, but to-day his teaching seems to have a special appeal among 
certain exponents of nationalism in politics. 

OH. xvm] NICHIREN 421 

interesting to note that the Japanese Governin.ent has done tardy 
justice to the memory of Nichiren. On 12th October, 1922, the 
posthumous title of Kissho Daishi ^ was conferred upon him by 
Imperial Edict, exactly as that of Kenshin Daishi had been given 
to Shinran in 1876. According to the Tokyo press ^ the honour 
was bestowed at the request of “ a large number of devoted followers 
of the Saint”, including Admiral Togo, several Ministers of State, 
and many other distinguished persons. Further, an informal celebra- 
tion of the event was at once held at the Navy Club, which must 
surely have dehghted the spirit of one who had always insisted that 
the State ought to approve the truth which he preached. 

The Nichiren sect, Idee Christianity and Islam, is the religion 
of a book. Few varieties of Buddhism present this feature. They have 
a superabundance of scriptures, mines of information which the 
learned can spend their lives in exploring, but which have not 
the same influence on the lives or beliefs of the community as the 
Bible or the Koran. But the scripture which Nichiren selected — 
the Saddhariiiapundarika, often abbreviated to “ the Lotus ” in 
European translation — ^is such a book. It is relatively short and 
compact and is accepted as a guide to faith and practice. It is a book 
to be “ read by the body ”, as Nichiren said : to be worked out in 
the life of every true Buddhist. More than that, it has obtained 
a higher position than the sacred books of other creeds. The words 
Namu Myo-ho-renge-kyo, Reverence to the Scripture of the Lotus 
of tlie Good Law,'* arc not only a rallying cry but a prayer. The name 
of this book has become a synonym for all that is most holy and most 
divine, and it is used as an invocation precisely as the Jodo and 
Jodo-Sliinshfi use the name of Amida. 

The uurk thus honoured is the Chinese translation of the Saddharma 
pundarilra-sutra made by Kumarajiva,^ commonly known in Japan 
as the Ilokke-kyo. Chapters xi and xv {'Upaya Kausalya and 

“ {Sen Japan, Adccrtim', ISfcli October, 1922. 

IM U kP fP 0 M. 

Naiijio, 134. It is notictiable that the Ohmese version makes 28 chapters 
instead of 27, as in Sansirrit, by si:)littmg chapter xi into two. Chapter xii begins 
with verse 4.1 of the Sanskrit xi. It sometimes appears to have a different reading 
from the Sanskrit text as we have it. For instance, in chapter xx (xix) Sada- 
paribhuta is rendcretl “ always revering instead of ‘‘ always abased Nichiren 
attached great importance to this chapter. There are two other translations in 
the Chinese Tripit-aka (Nanjio, Nos. 128 and 139), but Nichiren decidedly preferred 
Kumarajiva’s version, w'hich is excellent as literary Chinese. 

m THE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [oh. xvm 

TathS-gatayiis) are considered especially sacred. With the HoKke- 
ky5' are usually combined the Mury5gi-kyo or Amitartha-sutrad 
the sutra on the immeasurable meanings, and the Fugen-kyo,® 
or meditation on the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, which are 
regarded as an introduction and conclusion to it. Mchiren’s com- 
mentary on the Hokke-kyo and a work called Kuketsu,® or Oral 
Decisions, being an account of his teaching as taken down by 
his disciple Nichiko, are also held in great respect. 

The Hokke-kyo or Lotus has often been compared to the Oospel 
according to St, John, and so far as both works make it their task 
to show the supernatural side of an apparently human teacher the 
comparison is just, but the setting of the scene recalls rather than 
the Gospel the Apocalypse, which indeed it far exceeds in exuberance, 
particularly in numbers and the computation of space and time. 
The European reader is simply bewildered when he reads how 
^akyamuni, the same who had been preaching on the Vulture 
Peak in human form, stretches forth his tongue until it reaches the 
distant Brahma world and continues doing so during a thousand 
or a hundred thousand years ; or, again, how Bodhisattvas sang 
hymns during fifty aeons though to the audience it seemed but an 
afternoon. Yet in matters of literary chronology ^ Mchiren follows 
the Tendai theory of “ the five periods ” and he accepts the Chinese 
reckoning which places the Buddha’s death at 947 b.o. During the 
first forty years of the Buddha’s life he gave instruction, as Nichiren 
held, by numerous sutras which assumed that his auditors were of 
three classes and that there were three vehicles, or methods of 
instruction, differing so as to suit then different capacities. These 
three classes were the ^ravakas or simple hearers ; the Pratyeka- 

1 Nanjio, 133 and ii, 93. M ^ 

“ Nanjic, 394 and ii, 75. Its full Chinese title is 

n 

ff 

Lloyd, however, in his Creed of Balf Japan {p. 299) has some interesting 
observations about this literal acceptation of Tendai chronology. He quotes from 
the Seigoroku, a collection of extracts from Nichiren, a passage in Which Nichiren 

says that in the time of the early Hinayana patriarchs there wa-s not a single 
Mahaydna sutra, and another which describes the astonishment of the Hinayanist 
doctors when they first heard the doctrines propounded by A^vaghoaha and 
Nagarjuna. Both statements seem to imply that he cannot have thought that 
the Buddha preached the Lotus publicly in his old age. He believed that “it 
being a kind of Apocalypse was far too advanced for the immediate disciples of 
Aakyamuni and that for this reason it lay fallow for several centuries, gradually 
winning recognition for itself as the spiritual intelligence of the Buddhist com- 
munities increased 

CH.xvm] NIGHIREN ^423 

Buddlias or those who aspire to enlightenment but for themselves 
alone ; and the Bodhisattvas, who vow to save all beings and aspire 
to become Buddhas ultimately. The first two classes form the 
Hinayana and the third the Mah^yana, but it is noticeable that the 
vehicles are always reckoned as three not two, and each vehicle 
has its own course of instruction suitable for attaining its own ends 
but not for any other. A ^ravaka, for instance, cannot become a 
Bodhisattva and a Buddha. 

But when we come to the last stage of the Buddha’s career as 
a teacher, that in which the Lotus is said to have been pronounced, 
all this is changed. He declares that when he spoke of three classes 
and three vehicles it was merely an expedient— not untruth, of course, 
but adapted truth suited to the strong and weak points of different 
hearers. In reality there is but one vehicle which will lead all to one 
glorious destination, “ Gods and men, I am the Tathagata, the Arhat, 
the Perfectly Enlightened One. Having reached the shore I carry 
others to it ; being free, I make free ; being comforted, I comfort ; 
being at rest, I lead to rest. ... I knowing the Law which has but 
one essence, the essence of deliverance, do not suddenly reveal to 
all the knowledge of the All-Knowing, for I pay regard to the 
dispositions of all beings. ... All my disciples attain to nirvana : 
all my disciples shall become Buddhas. . . . It is as if a potter 
made different pots out of the same clay. Some are pots to hold 
sugar, some ghee, some curds and milk. Some are for baser purposes. 
There is no difference in the clay used ; the difference in the pots 
is entirely due to what is put into them. Just so there is but one 
vehicle, the Buddha vehicle. There is no second, no third.” Maha- 
and Hinayana alike vanish and there remains only the one Ekay^na, 
the veliicle of the Buddhas. 

This change in the manner and substance of the instruction 
given is paralleled by a change in the personality of the Buddha 
himself. Before the Lotus was revealed ^^yamuni was a man who 
had achieved Buddhahood : who had been born and who would die. 
But with the new revelation we have a different view of him. The 
Tathagata is not born and does not die ; his birth and death are 
only expedients, like the three vehicles, lest men should fancy that 
they have always with them a master and a consoler to whom 
they can turn. In reality his Buddhahood is without heginuing 
and end, and since he has prophesied that all his disciples should 
become Buddhas, their life, too, is not confined within the Innits of 
birth and death, for the Buddha nature is innate in every one of them. 

m THE SECTS ANH THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xviii 

This emphasis on the relationship between mankind and the 
eternal Buddhahood is the distmgmshing feature of Nichiren’s 
religion in its metaphysical aspect. He does not deny merit to other 
systems, but he considers that they give only a partial or imperfect 
vision of the truth. It is this attitude which explains the title and 
the reasoning of his treatise called the Eye-opener. He argues that 
unless their eyes are wide open men cannot see the whole truth. 
Ethical systems like Confticianism are well enough but limited to 
practical affairs. The worship of Brahma or Vishnu has its merits 
but it does not carry the minds of men as far as the ultimate reality. 
Buddhism opens men’s eyes to the existence of Buddha, but many 
Buddhists fail to perceive his true nature and cannot fathom their 
relationship to eternal Buddhahood. Their failure is greater than that 
of those whose sight is dim, for as teachers they have wilfully distorted 
the image of truth. 

It was for such reasons that Nicheren reserved his strongest 
condemnation for what he considered the heretical sects of Buddhism. 
At the same time he regarded the very existence of these sects 
as a proof that in fulfilment of the prediction of the scripture the 
degenerate days of the Law had come. In chapter xiii of the 
Lotus there occur several times expressions like “the true Law 
which meets with opposition and unbelief in all the world’’ and 
“ the last 600 years when the true Law shall be in a state of decay ” . 
Various Mahayana sutras reckon the three periods of the Law 
differently, one of the commonest estimates being 600 years for 
the first period, 1,000 for the second, and 10,000 for the third. 
Mchiren seems to have divided the history of Buddhism into 
three millenniums, though it is not plain what will happen when the 
third will finish. The first period consists of the first thousand 
years following the Buddha’s death, which after the Chinese fashion 
is dated 947 b.c. For historical purposes it covers the Hinayana 
period and is called in Japanese Shobo ^ or the True Law. The 
second is the period of Zobo ^ or Image Law, beginning about 
the time of the Christian era and corresponding historically to the 
beginning of the Mah&yaha. The third period is called Mappo,'* 

® ^ The idea that a degenerate age was at hand seems to have gained 

ground more particularly in the eleventh century, but it had already struck the 
imagination of the Japanese in the days of Pengyo Daishi, wdio wrote a work 
called Mappo Tomyoki (The Light of the Latter Pays), in wliich he says ; “ There 
will be none to keep the Buddha’s commandments in the Latter Days of the Law . 
If there should be such, they 'will be as rare as a tiger in a market place.” 

NIGHIREN 

425 

CH. XVIIT] 

or De,struction of the La.w, and iDegaii according to Nichiren about 
1050. In this dark age there is trouble in both the political and 
religious world, but also hope. Nichiren was far too active and 
energetic a man to be a pessimist. 

He had no doubt that the doctrine which was to be the light 
and guide of the Mappo period and to give the nations peace and 
prosperity was the teaching of the Lotus. Pie formulates this 
principle in simple language in the Eissho Ankoku Ron, by 
replying to an inquirer who deplores the evils of the day and asks 
what is the remedy ; “ If those who preach false doctrine are 

suppressed and those who hold the true faith are respected, then 
there will be tranquillity throughout the land and the country will 
be at peace.” Here at once we see the connection between Church 
and State which runs through all Nichiren’s wnitings : to believe 
in the only truth and to bring prosperity to one’s country, which 
must of course be made to believe the truth. 

In 1261, while suffering exile in Izu because of these political 
elements in his propaganda, Nichiren thought out the five funda- 
mental principles of his teaching. The first is that the Lotus is the 
perfect and, as it says itself, ^ the final exposition of the truth ; 
and the second that in a degenerate age man requires a sunple, 
definite creed. This is also the thesis of the Amidist sects, and it may 
be doubted if their efforts to obtain simplicity have not been more 
successful than those of Nichiren, for simple is not the most obvious 
epithet to apply to the creed taught by the Lotus. Thirdly, this 
age of MappO is the time to proclaim the doctrine, and, fourthly, 
Japan is the country where it should be preached and whence it 
should spread over the entire world. Fifthly, all other Buddhist 
systems have done their work and should yield to the Lotus as the 
one and only authority and thus unify religion. 

Implicit in his statement of these five principles ^ was the corollary 
that he was the predestined instrument of their realization. Having 
enunciated them, he added : “ One who would propagate the 

truth of Buddhism by convincing himself of the five principles 

^ Lotus, xiii, 54. 

2 Tho five principles, 5fL 3 l were summarized by Nichiren as Kijo 

tho doctrine ; Ki the method ; Ji B#, the time ; Kohu j^, the country ; 
md rufunuzengo ^ ^ 'Itl the order of spread. See his Kyoldjikokusho 
^ ^ ^ W both written in 1262. W^or^-s, pp. 424 

and 430. For rufu m zengo is sometimes substituted ^*o meaniiig sequence, 
i.e. the sequence of Buddhist systems — leading up to that of Nichiren. 

426 TEE SECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvin 

is entitled to become tbe leader of the Japanese nation. One who 
knows that the Lotus of Truth is the King of all Scriptures knows 
the truth of religion. If there were nobody who read the Lotus of 
Truth there could be no leader of the nation. Without a leader 
the nation would simply be bewildered . . . and fall into the 
lowest hells in consequence of degrading the truth.” ^ 

This passage does not manifest the deep personal conviction, 
apparent in his later writings, that he himself was the chosen and 
predestined leader. The feeling grew as in the second phase of his 
career he proclaimed his gospel in the face of hardship and danger ; 
and as he developed his system it played an increasingly important 
part. But it was not until the end of his second and most active 
phase that he began to marshal his beliefs in a schematic form. 
While he was on Sado he had plenty of time to think, and here 
he gave final shape to the main doctrine of his school. 

They are generally described as the three great secret laws ^ 
or mysteries, which are stated to be the Honaon, the chief or 
original object of worship ; the Daimoku, or title of the sutra 
(i.e. Myoho-renge-kyo) ; and the Kaidan, or place for receiving 
moral instruction.® The Nichiren sect emphasizes the somewhat 
startling doctrine that the original Buddha without beginning and 
without end — of whose body all the ten worlds, from hell up to 
the abode of Buddhas, are transformations — ^is not a mysterious 
nameless essence but the Buddha ^akyamuni ; and also, since 
we all have the Buddha nature, we ourselves are this original 
Buddha. Evidently this conception is too profound to be represented 
by any image, but when Nichiren was in exile in Sado he devised 
a Mandara which should symbolize these mysterious truths, and 
such Mandaras can still be seen in Japan in any Nichiren temple. 
Something has already been said about Mandaras in speaking of 
the Shingon sect. The Nichiren Mandara differs somewhat in 
appearance from others, since it contains neither figures nor Sanskrit 
letters. Down the middle are written vertically in bold Japanese 
characters the words Namu My 6h6-renge~ky6 and at the sides 
are the names of the four Kings who rule the four quarters. Bight 

^ Quoted by Anesald, op. oit., p. 43. PForis, p. 427. 

^ San Dai Hiho m ^ The treatise known as The Perpetuation of 

the Three Great Mysteries, said to have been written by Nitsluren in 1281, is 
perhaps not his work, but it may be taken as representing the doctrine of the 
sect. Wor^s, p. 2051. 

^ ^ honzon ; § daimoku ; d® ^ kaidan. 

CH. xvin] NIGHIREN 427 

and left above tlie vertical inscription are tbe names of ^akyamnni 
and Tako (PrabMtaratna)/ tke .mysterious ‘‘extinct” JBuddlia 
who makes his appearance in chapter xi of the Lotus ; and the 
remaining space is filled with the names, all in Japanese characters, 
of the notable beings who are mentioned in the sutra. This Mandara 
is considered to represent the universal power of the Buddha as 
all-pervading Truth. All the ten worlds, good and bad, exist in 
so far as they participate in his nature. The ideas which other 
schools strive to awaken by profound meditation and trances 
can, Niohiren held, be obtained by simply gazing at this Mandara, 
which is thus rightly considered the Honzon, the principle and 
primary object of worship. 

The second mystery is called Daimoku, that is the title of the 
sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo, the Lotus of the good or wonderful law,^ 
to which are generally prefixed the syllables Na-mu, that is the 
Sanskrit Namah, “ Reverence be to.” It is remarkable that Nichiren, 
who had a special hatred of the worshippers of Amida and summed 
up his opinion about them in the brief phrase “the Nembutsu 
is hell ”, should have recognized the utility of such a formula and 
should have made one so like it play the same part in his religion. 
And as far as the two formulas are concerned it may be doubted 
if the Amidists have not the best of it, for Reverence to Amida 
Buddha is an intelligible invocation and appeal if one believes 
that Amida is the source of all good, whereas Reverence to the Lotus 
of the Good Law, an appeal to a sacred book, is less convincing. 
Nichiren, however, understood it as meaning an expression of firm 
belief and faith in all the doctrines and mysteries taught by the 
sutra. The modern explanation is that it is beyond the reach of 
reasoning and “is simply to be believed in and not understood 
at ail It must be admitted that this is the conclusion one reaches 
upon studying Nichiren’s Hokke Daimoku-sho,^ a work which 
sets out to answer the question : “ How ls it that without knowledge 
of the meaning of the Lotus, without understanding of morality, 

3 ^ myo “wonderful” is used to translate the Sanskrit “ sad ” in “ sad- 
dharma Nichiren himself, in his Hofcke Daiinpku-sho, explains that ^ is the 
equivalent of -Hr or d) both of which represent the idea of perfection. 

3 This is the explanation, if it may be so called, of the Bev. Zejuiv Kobayashi 
of the Nichiren sect, quoted by both Nanjio and Ryauon Bujishima in their works 
on Japanese Buddhism. 

" ^ ^ M 0 Works, p. 683. 

428 

THE 8ECTS AND THEIR DOCTRINES [ch. xvm 

a man can avoid sins, escape tlie Four Evil Destinations and a,ttain 
perfection by the mere ntterance once a day, once a month, once 
a, year, or even once in a lifetime of the seven syllables Na-^mu-^ 
myo-ho ren-ge-kyo ? If a man cries Fire ! Fire ! he is not burned 
unless h.e touches it. If he cries Water ! Water ! his thirst is not 
quenched unless he drinks. How then can the utterance of a mere 
name . . . save him from perdition ? ” 

Anesaki (Mchiren, pp. 66, 67) quotes a remarkable passage 
from the epistle entitled ''The Sole Great Thing concerning Life 
and Deafh ”, written at Sado in 1272, in which Nichiren says : 
“ To utter the sacred Title with the conviction that the three are 
one — ^the three being the Buddha Sakyamuni who from eternity 
has realized Buddhahood ; the Lotus of Truth which leads all 
beings without exception to Buddhahood ; and we beings in all 
realms of existence — to utter the sacred title is the Heritage of 
the Sole Great Thing concerning Life and Death. ... This is 
the essence of what is promulgated by Mchiren. If it should be 
fulfilled, the great vow of propagating the Truth over all the world 
wnuld be fulfilled.”^ 

The third mystery is the Kaidan, or the place for receiving the 
moral precepts and also the place where ordination is conferred. 
Observance of the moral law is the most important part of Buddhism, 
The law itself is comprised in the formula Namu-myo-ho-ienge-^kyo, 
and the place where we receive it, the Kaidan, is our own bodies, 
which partake of the Buddha nature and are further especially 
provided for in the Kaidan or Holy See established by Mchiren 
himself. 

We are here of course endeavouring to make clear what Nichiren 
and his followers found in the Lotus and are not speculating on 
the real doctrine taught in that perplexing work. Should it for 
instance be regarded as theistio or not ? The Buddha is an existence 
without beginning or end and is called Devatideva,^ god above 
all gods, father of the world,® and is said to create Tathagatas.^ 
But, on the other hand, it may be reasonably maintained that the 
word Father as applied to the Buddha always means one who cares 
for and protects, not one who is a parent, producer, or creator. 
Indeed, the passage in chapter xv, beginning ^ The Tathagata 
sees the triple world as it really is ; it is not born ; it does not die. 
It is not conceived ; it does not come into exivstcne.e . . seems 

^ Tt'orAw, p. 742. 

“ Lotus, XV, 31, and of. iii, 97. 

- Lotus, vii, 31, and of. i, 89. 
^ Lotus, chaptor xi, first part. 

NICHIREN 

m 

cn. xviii] 

to deny all theories of creation. And what are we to understand 
by the expression “ extinct Buddhas ” ? Nichiren does not appear 
to discuss these difficult questions. But he is penetrated by the 
conviction that the Buddha Sakyainuni is an active, benevolent, 
governing Power, “ Disposer supreme and judge of the Earth,” 
who has a fixed plan for the improvement and enlightenment of 
the world, the execution of which he has entrusted to certain 
instruments. 

It was during his exile on Sado that Nichiren, revolving in his 
mind these conceptions, became persuaded that he himself was 
Visishtacaritra, rendered as Jogyo ^ in Japanese. Visishtacaritra 
is the chief of the countless host of Bodhisattvas who in the Lotus 
issue from the clefts of the bursting earth and are described by 
Sakyamuni as having all been brought to maturity by him. To them 
in preference to the Bodhisattvas already present, who are somewhat 
curtly dismissed and put aside, is entrusted the task of promul- 
gating this wmnderful sutra to the world. Though Visishtacaritra 
is mentioned as leader of the host and his name appears in the last 
sentence of the sutra as one of the principal beings who applauded 
the words of the Lord, yet he is a somewhat shadowy figure for 
a new Messiah. Nichiren seems to have grown more and more 
convinced that he was this Bodhisattva come to earth again incarnate. 
In a letter ^ which he is said to have written towards the end of 
his life he boldly proclaims as follows : “ These three mysteries 
I, Nichiren, as leader of the host that issued from the earth, did 
more than two thousand years ago certainly receive from the 
mouth of the Lord of Doctrine, the Great Enlightened One, the 
Kevered of all the World.” But he did not in any way pose as 
a supernatural personage or make capital out of being the Lord’s 
special envoy predicted in the Lotus itself. 

Other religious teachers have arrived at a similar conviction 
as their life and thought progressed ; but there is no doubt that 
the most remarkable features of the sect are not the sacred “ Title ” 
or any other special doctrines, but firstly the apocalyptic tone 
which pervades all Nichiren’s exposition of scripture and secondly 
the equally persistent manner in which he thinks of Church and 
State as two entities which are inseparably united. These two 
features are all the more remarkable because the Nichiren sect 
is the only Buddhist body in which they are found at all fully 

^ Jb n- 

H , Works, p. 2051. 

developed. It is trae that the germs of Mchiren’s apocalyptic 
theories are to be foimd in the Lotus itself, especially in the verses 
at the end of chapter xii, which describe the sniferings of the 
religious and virtuous in the last epoch of the world. The Buddhist 
visions of the future rarely look forward to a “ second coming ”, 
and though the advent of Maitreya seems to have been a living 
vision to some of the Chinese pilgrims, yet it has long ago ceased 
to have any influence in Japan, and is thought of, if thought of 
at all, as something immeasurably distant. Nichiren’s whole life 
seems to have been built on a more sanguine prospect, though 
the ideas of hope and triumph do not appear to have been really 
strong among his disciples. 

He himself, as he says in the last sentences of his treatise On 
Seizing the Essence of the Lotus regarded all the disorders and 
tribulations of his own times as preparing the way for the appearance 
of VisishtacS,ritra and his holy company, who were to spread 
and establish the truth “ throughout the four quarters of the 
world”. Here he foreshadows his ideal of a universal church; 
and the remainder of his life in his mountain retreat at Minobu 
was occupied chiefly with the development of this theme. Towards 
the end we find him prophesying : “ When the Law of Kings shall 
merge with the Law of Buddha, when ruler and people alike shall 
hold to the Three Great Mysteries, then the Holy See shall be 
established in a place as excellent as the Vulture Peak. Thus the 
moral law will be established in actual life. In this sanctuary men 
of ail countries in the world will receive the precepts of repentance 
and expiation, and thither also great gods like Brahmfl and Indra 
will descend.” ® 

In other writiags he niade clear his opinion that “ the place as 
excellent as the Vulture Peak”, where the Holy Bee would be 
established, was Minobti itself. In a crowning outburst of apocalyptic 
fervour he says: “I live in a lonely mountain retreat. But in 
Nichdren’s bosom, in his body of the flesh, is secretly enshrined the 
great mystery which the Lord Bakyamuni transmitted to me on the 
Vulture Peak. Therefore it is that in my breast all Buddhas are 
immersed in contemplation^ on my tongue they turn the wheel 
of the Law, in my throat they are born, and in my mouth they 
attam enlightenment. Thk place bein^ of such a man 

^ Hokke Shuyo-sho ^ ^ IIX ^ written Just after his arrival at 
Minobu in 1274. Works, p. 1035. 

- Abridged in translation, from H 1281. 

CH. xvin] NICHIBEN 431 

mysteriously realizing tlie Lotus of Truth, how can it be less noble 
than the Vulture Peak.” ^ 

The foregoing account of Nichiren’s teaching has perhaps 
emphasized its mystic elements at the expense of its practical 
features. It should be understood that, although he arrived at his 
conclusions by arduous roads of philosophy and revelation, he 
presented them to his adherents in a very easy form. Himself 
erudite and profound, what he recommended to ordinary believers 
was by no means abstract and difficult but concrete, plain, and even 
matter of fact ; a practical moral life, supported by the utterance 
of a formula, the worship of a symbol and combined with an active 
protest against tenets of other schools. It is these simple features 
rather than the deep speculations of the founder which have given 
to the sect its special character of sturdiness and self-assertion. 

The resemblances of Amidism to Christianity have often been 
noticed, but the religion of Hichiren offers in other ways a parallel 
quite as curious and seemingly independent. His appeal to the 
prophetic and apocalyptic passages of scripture, Ms msistence 
on such ideas as the union of Church and State, the Kingdom 
of the Buddha and the love of the Buddha for mankind, which is 
like the love of a father ® to be repaid by performing the tasks 
entrusted to us — these are among the many points which strike 
a European and which are rarely emphasized in Buddhism. But 
though he often seems to be expressing the ideaa of the Catholic 
Church in alien language, he laid little emphasis upon hierarchy, 
sacerdotalism, or sacramenfal religion and was of the same stuff 
as the Protestant reformers. 

1 From a letter to Nanjo HyoslueliirS, 1281, For a fuller translation v, Anesald 
op. oit., p. 129. IforA:,?, pp. 2009-2070. 

® But it is to be noticed that neither the Lotus nor Nichiren speaks of the 
B\;ddha bcins; a father in the sense of a maker or creator. He is a father because 
he protects, iiifitruets, and brmgs to maturity, ; 

INDEX 

A 

Abbots, hereditary, 291, 373 
Abhidbamma, 11, 13, 15, 69, 73, 

78 sq. 

Abludharma, 15 
Abhidharmakosa, 51, 93, 173 
Abhisheka, 236 
Acala, 136, 348 
Adam, priest, 395 
Adi-Bxuldha, 107, 109, 126 
Afghanistan, 102 
Agamas, 7, 15 sqq., 28, 333 
Agiii, 355 
Agon period, 7 
Ahurainazda, 104 
Aizen, 136, 349 
Ajdtasatru, King, 391 
Ajivakas, 53, 69, 77 
Akahito, 229 

Akanuma, Professor, 17, 18 
Akalagarbha (Bodhisattva), 122, 127, 
354 

•sfltra, 95 

Aksliobbya, 35 n,, 100 sq., Ill, 348 
Akshararaati'Sutra, 205 
Akunin Slioki, 291, 297 
AlagaddOpaina-sutta, 21 
Alafa Kalama, 31 n. 

Alaya-vijfiana, 84, 85 
Alexander the Great, 63, 64 
Ahi Vihara eonixcil, 14 
Amaterasu, goddess, 244 
Amida {Amitabha, q.v.), 57 n., 103 n., 

157 sqq., 171, 186, 243, 299, 394 
images of, 209, 215 
an<i sinners, 264, 370 sq., 389 
and Tendfii sect, 327, 330 
Amida Nyorai, 380 

Amidism, 103 sqq., IGO, 184, 261 sqq., 
300 sqq. 

in the Ileiau period, 251 sqq. 
introducticni into China, 361 
founded in Japan, 363 sq. 
contrasted with Buddhism, 389 sqq. 
and Christianity, 398 sq. 
opposition to, 427 

433 

Amidist sects, 39, 93, 252 
scriptures, 105 sqq., 263 
Amitabha (Measureless Light), 35 n,, 
63, 86, 95, 100, 129, 156, 160, 172, 
360, 388 

Paradise of, 6, 123 n. 
sutras of, 88, 117 
history of, 101-7 
see also Amida 
Amitartha-sutra, 422 
Amitayus (Measureless Life), 106, 107, 
122, 360 

Amitayurdhyana-sutra, 6 n., 102, 122, 
157 sq., 171, 365 
commentary on, 261 
Amogha, 328 

Amoghapasa Kwannon, 353 
Amoghasiddhi, 35 n., 100 
Amogbavajra (Pu-K‘ung, q.v.), 67, 97, 
110, 135, 175, 216, 236, 338 
AnagSmin, 132 
Ananda, 5, 10, 19, 25, 49, 405 
Anatta, 24, 47-51, 133 
Anattalakkhanasutta, 46 n. 
Ancestor-worship, 180 sqq., 204, 310 
Anesaki, Professor, works cited, 17, 18, 
29, 238, 412, 428 
Ango, ceremony of, 332 
Anguttara Wikaya, 17, 18, 20, 34, 61 
Animals, 191 sq., 209, 226, 309 
Ankokujl monasteries, 296 
Annam, 123 
Annen, 324 
Anoji temple, 351 
Anraku, 265 

An Shih-Kao, 101, 143, 156 
j Araha, 36 

j Arhats, 38, 48, 51 n., 60, 130, 132, 406 
Arita-kyo, 22 
Ariftha, 21-4 
Arjiin, 19 
Arjuna, 116 

Art and Buddhist influencej 191, 
228 sq., 293, 324, 398 
Aryadeva, 82, 91, 166 
AryaMra, 88 
Asakura, 207 

Ff 

INDEX 

434 

Asanga, 84, 9X sq., 98, 112, 132 
Ashikaga period, 190, 290, 398 
Ashuku, 100 
Asoka, 6, 12 sq., 17, 65 sq„ 64, 69-72, 189 
AsokS.vadana, 89 n. 

Aston, W. G., 181 

Asvagkoslia, 62, 83 sq., 88-91, 162, 
422 n. 

Atanatiya-sutta, 17 n. 

Atiia, 127 
Atman, 15, 47 
Atta, 47 sqq., 82 
Avadanas, 89 
AvadanaSataka, 89 n. 

Avalokite^vara (Kwannon, q.v.), 56, 
63, 90, 105, 107, 117-124, 278, 
360 sq. 

Avatamsaka-sutra, 16, 28, 86, 88, 108, 
159, 173 

see also Kegon-sutra 
Awakening of Faith, 112, 160 

B 

Bakin, 182 
Bakufu, 258 sq. 

Bankan Shimada, 316 
Basho, 311, 398 
Basiasita, 162 

Baso (Ma-Tsu), 167, 407 sq. 
Batokwannon, 140, 353 
Batsugoinshushin, 342 n. 

Benares, Sermon at, 38 
Bengal, 174 
Benoytosh Battacaryya, Ms Indian 
Buddhist Iconography, 344, 347 
Benten (Benzaiten), 139, sq., 355 
Bhabra (Bhabru), edict of, 12 sq. 
Bhagava, 35 n. 

Bhagavad Gita, 3, 29, 54, 87, 104, 115, 
392 sq. 

Bhagavata sect, 87, 360, 393 n. 

Purana, 3 

Bhaishajyaguru, 138 
Bhaishajya-raja, 110 sq. 

Bhakti, 74, 87 
Bhavaviveka, 82, 91 
Bhikkhus, 12, 37, 48, 51 sqq., 60 
Bhutatathata, 113, 394 
Bidatsu, Emperor, 200 
Binayaka, 139 
Binzuru (Pindola), 137 
■Bishamon, 136, 140, 355, 357, 363 
Bodhi, 113, 130, 166 
Bodhiearyavatara, 83, 96, 133 

Bodhidharma, 82, 89, 145, 150, 160-5, 
169, 172, 282, 396 sq. 

Bodhiruchi, 157 
Bodisattvabhumi, 92 
Bodhisattvas, 47, 50, 86 sq., 105, 113, 
125-9, 183, 186, 392, 423 
career, 56 sq., 88, 92, 95, 130-4, 357 
contrasted with Buddha, 117, 118 
nature, 325 
and Shingon, 349 
Bodhisena, 225 
Bommo-sutra, 235 
Bon, festival of, 384 
Bonjozogodo, 330 
Bonten, 140, 355 
Borobudur, 27 
Bosatsuj6-josh6, 325 
Bo tree, 7, 401 

Brahma, 23, 38, 57 sq., 102, 140, 355, 391 
Brahmakayo, 46 

Brahman (universal spirit), 45 sq., 397 
caste and system, 14 sq., 32, 47, 66, 
68, 103 

Brahmanic philosophy, 163 
Brahma-sutras, 3 
Brahmavihara, 68, 59 
Buddha, the, 81, 115, 360 sq., 388 
life and teaching of, 6-9, 31-6, 21, 
40,423 

Buddhacarita, 84 n. 

Buddhagosha, 76 
Buddha Kakusandha, 68 n, 

Buddha Padmottara, 111 
Buddhapalita, 82 

Buddhas, multiplication of, 99, 117 
contrasted with Bodhisattva, 117 sq. 
name given to the dead, 132, 185 
of Tendai sect, 329 
Buddhism, 389 sq. 
and Taoism, 145 sqq., 164, 236 
and Confucianism, 145 sqq., 210, 236 
and Shintoism, 182 sq., 223, 240 sqq., 
386 

— see Mso Ryobu-Shinto 
and trade guilds, 310 
attacked by Government, 316 
Buddhist canon, 209 
Patriotic Union, 316 
Bukko, 403 

Bukkoji temple, 273, 291 
Burden, the, 51 
Burma, 14, 74, 182 
Butsudan, 208 
Butsudo, 211 
' Byaku-e Itwannon, 3.52 

imBx 

0 

Caitanya, 36, 54 

Cambodja, 14, 54, 74, 139, 140 n., 356 
Candarosbana, 34S 
Candra, 355 
Candragupta, 63 aq. 

Candraldrti, 83 
Cariyapitaka, 131 

Ceylon, 6, 12, 14 sq., 23, 71, 74, 105, 119 

Chain of Causation, 33 sq., 90 

Ohaitya cave, 72 

Chalmers, Lord, 58 

Champa, 51 

Ch‘an (Zen, q.v.), 283 

Ch.‘ang-An, 158 sq. 

Chan- Jan, 171 sq. 

Chao, Prince of, 143 
Oheng-shih-tsung, 155 
Oh'eng-Tsu, Emperor, 154 
Chen-jii, 334 n. 

Ch5n-yen, .sea Shingon 
Chi Ohia-ye’.s HiMory of the Patriarchs, 
163 

Ch‘ien-Lung, Emperor, 155 
Ch‘ie-Sung, 162 
Ch'ih Chien, 102 

Chih-I (Chih-K‘ai), 170 sqq., 327, 334 
Chih-kuan, 334 sq. 

Chih Lou Chia Ch'an, 101 
Chikafusa, 193 
Chikubu-shima temple, 351 
Child-Emperors, 24,9 sq. 

China, 142 sqq., 394 
Shingon sect in, 239 
Chinese, and Pali literature, 17-18 
culture, in Japan, 312, 385 
Piiddhism and Zen, 397 
Chinese Tripitaka, works included in, 
5 sq., 27, 72 n., 76, 119, 139, 159, 
164, 167, 170-5, 411 sq. 
collections made, 145-165 passim 
sec also Triphtaka 
Chingai, priest, 253 
Ch‘ing-Lung temple, 337 
Ching-t‘u ses Oodo sect 
Chinaei (Jodo) .'^ect, 268, 371 
Chiun-in temple, 306 
Chi.sho Datshi, 245 sq., 325 
Chitatsu, priest, 212 
Chitsu, priest, 212 
Oho Donsu, 293, 398 
Chokei, 410 
Chomeiji temple, 351 
Chosai, 371 sq. 

436 

Christ, 9, 371, 394 

Christianity, 191, 194 sqq., 282, 

300 sqq., 308, 316 
imitation of, 387 sq. 
compared with Amidism, 393 sq. 
see also Nestorian 
Chuang-Tzu, 156, 164 
Chuguji nunnerv, 229 
Chu-Hsi, 151, 397 
Citta, 104 n. 

Coates, 261 

Coimcils (Buddhist), 10-14 
see also Rajagaha and Vesali 
Code in Pour Sections, 174 
Confucianism, 151, 210, 309, 342 
Buddhism, and Taoism, 143-8, 153, 
164, 180, 236 

influence in Japan, 385, 312 sq. 
and Zen, 397 sq. 

Cremation, 209 
Cullavagga, 10 sqq., 76 

D 

Daianji, temple, 218 n. 

Daihatsu, 220, 222, 225 
Dai Itoku, 347, 349, 355 
Daijinno, 201 n. 

Daikoku, 140 
Daimoku, 426 sq, 

Daimuryojukyo, 377 
Dainichi (Vairocana q.v.), 100, 186 
-kyo, 28, 110, 338 
Daiseshi, 209 
Daitokokushi, 414 
Daitokuji, 414 
Daiye, 412 

j Danna-in doctrine, 323 
j Dansen tax, 296 
Daruma, 161 
Dead, the, 192, 207 
ceremonies for, 175, 185 sq. 
sj)irits of, 384 
see also Funeral rites 
Deccan, the, 67 
Denchoro, priest, 307 
Dengyo Daishi (Saicho), 172, 232 sqq. 
240, 242, 252, 322-332 joassm 
339,362 
Devadatta, 116 
Dovas, 57, 91, 211 
Devatkleva 27 n., 428 
Dhamma, 11, 32, 34, 38, 45, 70 sq. 
Dhammaguttikas, 72 n. 
Dhammakayo, 46 
Dhammapada, 41, 70 

436 INDEX 

Dhammapariyaya, 19 n. 

Dharanl, 406 
Dharma, 108 
Dliarmadhatu, 113 
Dliarmagupta Vinaya, 174 
Dharmah, 334 

Dharmakara, 105, 126, 366, 388 
Dharmakaya, 45, 47, 81, 107 sq., 239, 
278, 329, 334, 341 
nature of, 113 sqq., 172 
Dharmakirti, 85, 91 
Dharmalaksliana, 173 
Dharmanandin, 18 n. 

Dharmapala, 91, 93 
Dharma-sangraha, 118, 127 sq. 
Dhyana sect, 159, 282 
Dhyani Buddlia, 100 
Diamond Cutter (Vajracchedika q.v.), 
80, 83, 137 

Digha Nikaya, 11, 17, 25, 33, 97, 106, 
138 

Dignaga, 85 
Dipavaitisa, 12 
Divyavadana, 17, 89 n. 

Dogen, 169, 284, 323, 331, 397, 399, 
412 

Dokyo, priest, 189, 213, 226 sq. 

Donran (Tan-Luan), 157, 272, 360, 
378 

Doryu, 284 

Dosen, priest, 225, 230, 331 
Doshaku (Tao-CIi‘o), 157 sq., 272, 360 
Dosho, priest, 209 n., 211, 212 
Dvadasanikaya Mstra, 156 n. 

E 

Ebisu, 140 

Echizen, monastery of, 403 
Education (Buddhist), 192 
Eightfold Path, 31, 39, 42, 48 .sq., 59 sq., 
90, 133 n. 

Eight Teachings, 332 sq. 

Eight Tigers, 154 

Eiheiji monastery, 284, 399 

Eisai, 169, 283, 323, 331, 397 

Eji, 202 

Ekan, 158 

Ekay&ra, 423 

Ekottara, 18 

Eku, priest, 386 

Ekwan, priest, 212 

Emma-c), 140, 355 

Empei'ors, system of government by, 
249 sq., 289, 295 

Enchin, 245 sq., 325 
Enkakuji temple, 287, 403 
Engakujo-josho, 325 
Enlightenment (Satori), 7 sq., 31-7, 
116, 164, 168, 327, 384, 400-9 
Ennin, see Jikaku Baishi 
En-no-Gy6ja, 213 
Eno (Hui-Neng), 166 sqq. 

Enryakuji (Hieizan q.v.), 233, 245, 
321 

Enshin Sozu, 362 n. 

Eon, priest, 212 
Ephthalites, see Huns 
Eshin, see Genshin 
Eshin-in, doctrine, 252, 323 
European philosophy, 387 sqq. 
religion, and Japanese Buddhism, 
180 

Eye-opener, the, 280, 417, 424 
E 

Fa-Chao, 159 
Fa-Hsiang, 173 
Fa-Hsien, 12, 15, 94, 144 
Fan-Wang-Ching, 109 
Five Patriarchs, 156 sq. 

Five Periods, 332 
Five Small Works, 171 
Fo-t*ieh, 225 
Four Great Vows, 407 
Four Beva Kings, 135, 176, 201 
Four Truths, 31, 39, 49, 60, 90 
Friendly Letter, the, 160 
Fudaraku-ji temple, 351 
Fudasho, 350 sq. 

Fudo, 136, 347 sq. , 

Fudoki, 218 

Fugen, see Samantabhadra 
-kyo, 422 
Fuhito, 218 
Fujiidera temple, 351 
Fujishima Ryauon, 179 
Fujiwara epoch, 189 sq., 195, 206, 249, 
254 

Fujo-Shujo, 325 
Fuju-fuze, 282, 309 
Fukeshu sect, 285 
Fukuj6|u, 100 

Fuku-Kensaku Kwannon, 353 
Fukurokuju, 140 

Funeral rites, 203, 207, 310, 376, 380 
see aZso Bead, the 
Furubito, Prince, 206 
Furuna, 137 
Futen, 355 

INDEX 

m 

G 

Gadgadasvara, 121 
Gakko, 140 
Ganesa, 138 sq., 355 
Ganda-vyuha, 108 
Gandharan sculptxires, 119 
Gangoji, temple, 218 
Ganto, 403 sq. 

Gatten, 355 

Gautama Sanghadeva, IS ii., 23 
Gemmyo, Empress, 218 
Genbo, priest, 213, 218, 220, 225 
Genko Sbakusho, 221 
Genku, see lionen 
Genshin (Eshin), 160, 252, 272, 327, 
360, 362 sq. 

Gensho, Empress, 197, 218 
Gnosticism, 338 
Go-chi-nyorai, 100 
Go-Daigo, Emperor, 290 
Goddesses, 96, 100 n., 108, 122, 125, 128 
Gomo ceremony, 357 sq. 

Goroku, 412 
Go Sansei, 347 

Go-Sbiraka\va, Emperor, 353, 362, 369 
Goso, 414 
Gosonsama, 379 

Gotama (the Buddha q.v.), 19, 22, 25, 
69, no, 112 
life of, 31-6 

Go Toba, Emperor, 258 sq., 265 
Govinda-siittanta, 59 
Govind Singh, 19 
Go«zan, 287 
Gudojisaisliin, 342 n. 

Giindari ya.sha, 347 
Gungiron, 159 
Gupta era, 65, 66 
Gyocn, priest, 240 sq, 

Gyogi Bosatsu, 211, 212 n., 218-225 
passim 
Gydhyo, 331 
Gyoran Kwannon, 354 

H 

Hachi-bu-shu, 136 

Hachiman, 183, 223 ,sq., 242, 244, 274 
temple of, 259 
Hakata, temple of, 283 
Hako-Kan, 329 
Hakuin, 402-6, 412 
Han (Korea), 198 
dynasty, 14.3 
Hannya, 7 

Han-Yu, 148 

Happy Land, see Sukhavati 
Harima, 351 
Hariti, 123, 138, 355 
HariYarman, 79 n., 156 
Harsha, 66, 67 
Hasedera temple, 340, 351 
Hayagriva, 140 

Healing Buddha, the, 110 sq., 136, 358 
sutra (Yakushi-kyo), 209 n. 

Hearn, Lafeadio, 179 
Heaven, see Tusita, Paradise, 
Sukhavati 

Heian (Kyoto), capital at, 233 sqq. 
Heian period, 255 
Heiji era, wars of, 255, 261 
Heike Monogatari, 255 sq., 260 
Hekiganshu, 402, 411 
Henge-hosshin, 114 
Hiden sect, 309 n. 

Hideyori, 307 

Hideyoshi, 190, 193, 195, 245, 248, 282, 
300 sqq., 336 

Hieizan monastery, 159, 190, 233, 235, 
256, 290 

destruction of, 191, 301 sq. 
hostilities of, 220, 240, 246 sq., 255 
religion taught in, 323 sqq. 

Higashi Hongwanji temple, 376 
Hiji Monto, 299 

Hmayana, 6, 39, 75, 131, 277, 325, 342 
-sutras, 15 

and Mahayana, 56 n., 92, 95, 422 n., 

- 423. ■ 

precepts of, 327 

Hindu gods in Shingon pantheon, 355 
sects, 61j, : 54 

Hinduism, 64 sqq., 87, 100, 115, 134, 
174s 392 
Hirata, 314 
Hirose, 208 
Hirotsugu, 213, 220 
Hitomaroy229 
Hizan, 383 
Hoben-uyodo, 330 
Hodo, monk, 213 n. 

H6-d6-sutra, 7 

Hogen era, wars of, 255, 261 
H6j5 Regents, 195, 258, 289 sq., 397 sq. 
Hoklse Baimokxt-sho, 419 n., 427 
Holdreji temple, 221, 351 
Hokke-kyo (Lotus sutra, q.v.), 7, 27, 
421 sq. 

Hokoji, temple of, 201, 208 
Holy Path, see Shodo 

INDEX 

m 

Honen (Genku), 129, 160, 183, 231, 244, 
323, 360 

cited, 6, 104, 158, 326, 343 
life and doctrines of, 260-273, 363 sqq. 
and Mchiren, 277 
and Shinran, 373-384 passim 
Hongwanji temples, 273, 291, 297, 305, 
308, 376, 390 
Honji Snijaku, 242 
Honzon, 426 sq. 

Hd-0, 249 

Horyuji, monastery of, 202, 218 n., 
325, 350 
Hosho, 100 
HossMn, 114, 341 
Hossho, 159 - 

Hosso sect, 173, 212 sq., 218, 325 sq., 342 
Northern, 220 
Hotel, 120, 140 
Hoyen, 415 
Hozanji temple, 356 
Hozo, 366 

Hsien-Tsung, Emperor, 148 
Hsin-Hsing, 146 n. 

Hsin-hsin-mei, 165, 169 
Hshan-Tsang, pilgrim, 12, 46 n,, 51, 
66, 93 sq., 102, 121, 146, 173, 175 
Hsiian-Tsung, Emperor, 147, 149 
Hsiieh-Tou, 411 
Huai-Kan, 158 
Huang-Lung, 168 
Huang-Po, 167 
Hua-Yen (Kegon q.v.), 173 
Hu, Empress, 145 
Hui-K‘o, 165, 169 
Hui-Kuo, 337 
Hui-Neng (Eno), 166 sqq. 

Hui-Sheng, 94, 145 
Hjii-Ssii, 170, 172 
Hui-Wen, 170, 172 
Hui-Yiian, 166, 361 
Hung-Jen, 165 sq. 

Huns (Ephthalites, Hunas), 65 eq., 
73, 94 

Hyakujo (Pai-Ghang), 168, 405, 407, 
413 

Hyakuwa, see Shinshu Catechism 
Hye-cha, 202 
Hye-chhong, 202 

..I'' 

Tchiinai Kishomon, 267 
i-Ching (pilgrim), 61, 66, 79, 80 n., 95, 
119,125,134,146 

lemitsu, 282, 306 sqq. 
lenobu, 307 

leyasu, 183, 195, 300, 305 sqq., 312 
his Legacy quoted, 193, 308 
I-Hsuan, 167 
Ikegami temple, 281 
Ikkenji temple, 288 
Ikkyu, priest, 297 
Ikko sect, wars of, 298 
Imagumano temple, 351 
Imna, 197 sqq. 

Indian Buddhism, 54 sq., 62 sqq. 
and Zen, 396 

deities known in Japan, 135-141, 
187, 355 

religious rites, 216 
sects and Shinshu, 392 
Indra, 23, 109, 140, 355 
Ingen, priest, 311 
Insei, 249 

Ippen (Yugyo Shonin), 273 sq., 385 
Ise, 181 sq. 

Ishana, 23, 355 
Ishikawa, temple, 200 
Ishiyamadera temple, 351 
Ishizuka, 261 

Issai-kyo (Buddhist canon), 209 
Isshin Sandai, 241, 334 
Isshin Sangwan, 334 
Itivuttaka, 18 
I-Tsing, 56 n. 

Itto-en, 389 
Iwamadera temple, 361 
Izumi, 351 
Izumo, 182 

J 

Jain (Jainism), 35, 47, 53 sqq., 66, 60, 94 
Jaliya-sutta, 17 n. 

James, William, 400, 410 
Japan, Buddhism in, founder of, aee 
Shotoku Taishi 
religions of, 180 

Northern Court of, 290, 293, 295 
Southern Court of, 290, 295 
Jataka, 17, 33, 56, 105, 129, 131, 191 
Jatakamala, 88 

Java, 27, 54, 100 sq., 107, 109, 237, 239 
Jen-Tsung, Emperor, 150 
Jhanas, 68 
Jibusho, 220 
Ji-juyo-hosshin, 114 
Jikaku Daishi (Ennin), 159, 240, 252, 
324 sq., 327, 362 

INDEX 

4S9 

Jimon, 325 
Jina, 35 sq., 100 
Jingikwan, 207, 219 
Jinrei, priest, 386 
Jintei Kwannon, 353 
Jippodo, 330 
Ji sect, 274 
Jisho-hosshin, 114 
Jiten, 355 

.Tito, Empress, 209, 214 sq. 

Jizo, see Kshitigarbha 
J6-Butsu, 409 
Jochiji, temple, 288 
Jodo {CIiing-t‘u ; Pure Land) sect, 6, 
93, 100, 156 sqq., 184, 258 sqq., 
292, 364 sq., 367 sqq. 
temples of, 306 
number of adherents, 373 
and Shinshu, 373 sqq., 384 
foiinder of, see Honen 
Jodo-Seizan, 268 

Jodo Shinshu sect, 270, 272 sq., 364 
number of adherents, 373 
see also Shinshu 

Jddo-Shinsku Creed, Synopsis of, 40 

Jodo Wasan, 378 

Jclgu go Seisho, 205 

.Togyo, 281, 417, 429 

Jogyodo hall, 330 

Jojakkodo, 330 

.Tojitsu sect, 156, 212 

.{osetsu, 293, 398 

.Jo.shu, 403 

.Toyuishikiron, 93 

.Tufukuji temple, 284, 287 

.Lxgi, 292 

.Tu-iohi-men, 352 

jLiJfi.shinrori, 341 

Ju-lai, 35 n. 

Junuin, Emperor, 226 
Jurin, 265 
Jurojin, 140 

.Tii-shichijo no kempo, 203 
Juyo-hosshiu, 114 

K 

Kaccayana, 140 n. 

Kada Azumamaru, 314 
Kaga, 298 

Kaidan, 231 sq., 326, 428 
Shiki, 232 
Kaknan, 413 

Kakuhan (Kokyo Daishi), 245, 263, 330, 
339, 362 

Kakunyo, 376 
Kakushin, priest, 285 
Kakushin fushoshin, 342 
Kaku-un, abbot, 323 
Kalacakra system, 109 
Kamakura, 260, 398, 412 
Shogunate, 180, 190 
Kamatari, 206, 218 
Kami Daigo-dera temple, 351 
Kamo Mabucbi, 314 
Kanazawa, temple, 303 
Kanezane, 262-5, 269 sq., 375 
K‘ang-Hsi, 147, 155 
Kanimanji temple, 354 
Kaniabka, 66, 76, 78, 393 n. 

Kanjin, 174, 231, 337 
Kanjur, 155 

Kano Masanobu, 293, 398 
Kano school, 293 
Karma, 104, 110 n., 192 
Kashmir, 76 
Kassapa, 20 
Kasuga shrine, 218 
KaSyapa, 28, 162, 164 
Katen, 139, 356 

Kathavatthu, 13, 26, 41, 51, 56, 72 sq. 
Katsuodera temple, 351 
Kawachi, 351 

Kegonsect, 173, 220, 226, 230, 261, 326, 
328 

I -sutra, 7, 108-114 passim, 205, 221, 
253, 343 

see also Avatamsaka-sutra 
Keimyo, priest, 241 
Keman-Kai, 368 
Kenchoji temple, 287 
Ken-gyo, 341 

Kenninji, monastery of, 284, 287 
Keimyo Shonin, 303 
Kenshin Daishi, see Shinran 
Keshub Chunder Sen, 25 
Kha-garbha, 127 
Khanda Samyutfca, 22 n. 

Khotan, 127 
Khuddaka Nikaya, 20 
Khubilai Khan, 152, 194, 248, 259, 278 
Kibe, 292 

Kibi-no-Makibi, 225 
Kichijo-ten, 139 
Kii, province of, 302 
Kimmei, Emperor, 198 
Kimiidera temple, 351 
King-Tsing, priest, 395 
Kinkaku {Golden Pavilion), 293 
! Kmshokuji temple, 273, 292 

440 

INjDEX 

Kishi-Mojin, 138, 355 
Kishil, 351 
Kitfigiri-sutta, 4 
Kiyomizudera temple, 351 
Kiyomaro, 227 
Kiyomori, 255 sqq. 

Kiyozawa, 388 
Koa Shonin, 368 
K6-an, 132, 402, 404 
Koben, priest, 231 

Kobo Daishi (Kukai), 114, 175, 183sq., 
211, 212 n., 248, 279, 283, 328, 357 
Kobo Daishi (Kukai), life and doctrine 
of, 234-242, 337-344 
Kodo temple, 351 

Kofukuji, monastery of, 190, 218, 256, 
325 

Kogyoku (Saimei), Empress, 206 sq., 216 
Kojiki, the, 181, 218, 314 
Kojin, 139 

Kokan Shiren, 221 n. 

Kokawadera temple, 351 
K5ken, Empress, 224, 226 sq. 
Kokuryo (Kokuli), 197 sq. 

Kokuzo, 354 

Kokyo Daishi, see Kaknhan 
Kompira, 137 sq., 187 
Komuso sect, 285 
Komyo, Empress, 219 
Kondgamana (Buddha), 70 
Kondafiha, 51 
Kongo, 98 
Kong6ch6-ky6, 338 
KongSkai 345 sq. 

Kongo-Bikishi, 135 
Kongo Yasha, 347 
Konin (Hung-Jen), 165 sq. 

Emperor, 227 
Konkobo, 273 
Kon-kwo-myo, 209 n. 

Korea, 123, 142, 144, 173, 195, 197 sqq. 

states of, 197 sq. 

Kdsai, 371 sqq. 

Kosala, 20 
Koso-Wasan, 378 
Kotofai, Emperor, 204, 206 
Koyasan, monastery, 190, 237, 240, 
324, .336, 339 
Koyasu Kwannon, .354 
Kriahpa, 87, 115 sq„ 392 sq. 
Kshitigarbha (Jizo), 56, 105, 118, 120, 
127 sqq., 187, 354 
Kuan-Shih-Yin, 121 
Kuan-Yin (Kwannon q.v.), 121, 123 
sq„ 149, 172 

Kubera, 355 
I Kuhonji school, 372 
Kukai, see K6b6 Daishi 
Kuketsu, 422 
Kumano, 386 

Knmarajiva, 102, 108, 144, 156, 164 n., 
421 

Kuni, Prince, 377 
Kurata Hyakuzo, 389 
Kuroda, 179 
Kusha sect, 173, 212 
Kuvera, 136, 357 
Kuya, priest, 160, 252 
Kwammu, Emperor, 227, 233 sq. 
Kwan, 408 

Kwancho, see Kwanjo 
Kwang-Ting, 170 

Kwanjo (Kwancho) ceremony, 236, 
328 sq., 339, 357 sq. 

Kwannon, 29, 31, 129, 186, 269, 349- 
355 

images of, 139 sq., 209, 215, 352 sq. 
shrines of (list), 360-2 
see also Avalokitesvara and Kuan Yin 
Kwannonji temple, 351 
Kwannon-kyo, 209 n. 

Kwanto, 268 sq. 

Kwats, 408 
Kyoto, 321, 389, 898 
Kwannon shrines in, 351 sq. 
see also Heian 

Kyogyo Shinsho, 271 sq„ 368, 378, 389 
L 

Lakkhana-sutta, 17 n. 

Lalita-vistara, 27, 99 
Lalitpur, 71 

Lamaism, 1.52, 179, 321 
Lankavatara-shtra, 15, 28, 86, 88, 113 
commentary on, 153 
and Zen, 165, 285, 396, 409 
Lao-Tzu, 169, 397 
Liang-chih, 153 
Lieh-TzQ, 397 

Lin-chi (Rinzai, q.r.) sect., 167 sqq., 284 
Lingayats, 54 
Lin Ling-Su, 160 

Literature, and Buddhist influence, 248 
sq., 294, 398 
Liu-Sung dynasty, 144 
Liu Tsung-Yiian, 160 
Locana, 108 sqq., 172 
Lbka-dhatu, 17 

Lokanatha (Loke^vara), 120, 121 

INDEX 441 

lioke^vara-raja, 105 
Lotus sect, see Nichiren sect 
Lotus-sMra, 6 sqq., 15, 63, 87 sq., 97, 
119 sqq., 170 sqq., 205, 217, 253, 
324 

cited, 28 sq., 37, 99 sq., 122, 125 
conception of Buddha in, 115 
on forms of worship, 134 
and Tendai sect, 237, 239, 322, 333 
and Nichiren sect, 278, 416, 421-431 
see also Saddharmapundarika 
Lo-Yang, 161 
Lu Chiu-Yuan, 151 
Lu-Feng, 156 

Lii-tsung sect (Ritsu, q.v.), 174, 231 
M 

Madhyania Agaraa, 22 
Madhyamakas (Madhyamikas), 35, 43, 
80-90 passim, 98 
Madhyainaka sastra, 156 n. 

Madhva, 36 
Magadha, 63, 64:, 68 
Magic, 213, 239, 336 sq. 

see also Tantric Buddhism 
Mahabhishekarddhi-dharani, 358 
Mahakala, 140, 201 n. 

Mahakaruna, 120 
Mahali-sutta, 17 n. 

Mahanama, 41 

M aha parin i rvana-sutra (Mahapari nib- 
bliana-Mutta), 7 n., 17 n., 25, 28, 391 
Mahasaniaya-sutta, 17 n, 

Maha.sangha, 12 

Mahasnnghika sect, 12, 18, 08, 72 sq„ 
87, 112 

Mahasangiti council, 12 
Mahasannipiita-sutr:).,, 157, 205, 366 
M'ahasatipattliana-.sutta, 17 n. 
hlahasthama, 107 

MahasthainaprapLa, 118, 122, 128, 355 
Mahasudassana-sutta, 17 n. 
Malnitanlnx-.sankliaya-sutta, 21 n. 
Mahavagga, 33, 39 n. 

Maha vai r ocai\a - autr a, 338 
Mahavastu, 27, 99, 105 
Mahavihara, 14 
Maharira, 36 

Mahayana {Mahayanisin, etc.), 10, 12, 
26, 34-61 passim, 72, 74, 77 sqq., 
86 sq., 130, 133, 277, 342 
-sutras (works, literature), 5 sq., 8, 
15, 18, 27 sq., 36 sq., 87, 107, 112, 
118, 424 

definition of, 30 sq. 
and Hinayana, 56 n., 92, 95, 422 n., 
423 

philosophy, 183 
and Tendai, 327 
Mahayanasutralahkara, 92 
Mahimsaka sect, 72 n. 

Mahisasaka Vinaya, 15 
Maitreya (Miroku), 28, 118 sq., 125, 200, 
355, 430 

Majjhima Nikaya, 13, 17-22, 32 sq., 42, 
81 

Mallik, 104 

Malunkyaputta-sutra, 8, 44 n. 
Manchus, 154 sq., 165 
Mandaras (Mandalas), 238, 281, 344 
sqq., 353, 355, 357, 426 sq. 
Manichajisin, 100, 148 sq., 338, 394 sq. 
Manjti, 126 
Manjuji temple, 288 
Manjuirl (Monju), 28, 118-129, 159, 
187, 349, 355 

Mantrayana, 97, 110, 174, 237, 338 
Manyoshu, 221, 229 
Mappo, 184, 278, 424 sq. 

Marishi, 140, 356 
Matikds, 11 
Matriceta, 88 
Ma-Tsii, see Baso 
Matsuodera temple, 351, 353 
Meditation, 330 sq., 334, 408 
-sutra, 377 
Megasthenes, 36 
Meiji era, 386 
Menander, see Milinda 
Mi-chiao, 174 
Mihirakula, 163 

Miidera, monastery of, 247, 256, 321, 
325,351 
Mikado, 195 

Milinda (Menander), Questions of, 64, 
74 sqq. 

Mimana, 197 sq. 

Mimurotodei'a temple, 361 
Minamoto family, 190, 195, 255 
Yoriie, 287 

Yoritomo, 195, 255, 260 passim 
Ming dynasty, 152 sqq., 194 
Mino, 351 

Minobu temple, 281, 430 
Mirakutsu, 163 
Miroku, see Maitreya 
-ye, 120 

Misshaku-Bikishi, 135 
Missionizing, 54 sq., 71, 94, 143, 316, 374 

INDEX 

442 

Mitsuchika, 265 sq. 

Mitsukuni, 314 
Mitsu-kyo, 341 
Miwa, oracle of, 203 
Miyake (Korea), 198 
Miyako-Fuji, 235 
Mohammed, 9 
Mokurai, priest, 386 
Monasteries, 245, 290 

powers of, 190 sq. 
establishment of, 221 
prosperity of, 228 

hostilities of, 246 sq., 254, 256, 
301 

Zen, 296, 406 
destruction of, 302 
students at, careers of, 332 
Monastic system, abolition of, 378 
Mongols, 151 sq. 

Mongol Tripitaka, 155 
Monju, me Mahju.4ri 
Monks, 154, 296 sq. 

Mononobe family, 199 sqq. 

Montoku Jitsuroku, 249 n. 

Morality, 60 

Mori, M. G., 188 

Motoori, 314 

Mount Hei, 322, 330 

Mou-Tzu, 143 

Mukwan, priest, 288 

Miilamadhyamaka Karikas, 80 

Mulasarvastivadin, 79 

Mu (Mumon Kwan), 403 sq., 412 

Murida, 20 n. 

Munciaka Upanishad, 44 
Murasaki Shikibu, her Genji Monogatari, 
250 

Murdoch, his History of Japan, 207 
Muromachi, 293 n. 

Muj^mgi-kyo, 422 
Muryoju-kyo, 212 
Musho-ujo, 325 
Muso Kokushi, sec Soseki 
Mutsu, 273 

Mu-Tsung, Emperor, 174 
Myoeho, 414 

Myoho-renge-kyo, 426 sq. 

My6-6, 136, 347 sqq. 

Myoshinji temple, 295 

Nagabodhi, 338 

N%4rjuna, 75, 80 sq., 89, 91, 116, 156, 
162, 179, 272, 334, 338, 422 n. 

commentary on, 83 
doctrine and works ascribed to, 90, 
108, 160 

Patriarch of Amidist sect, 93, 360 
date of, 162 
and Zen, 396 

Naka-no-Oye (Tenchi), Prince, 207 sq. 

Nakatomi, 199, 201 

Nakayadera temple, 351 

Nalayiram, 392 

Namu Amida Bntsu, 380 sqq. 

Namudaishi, 337 

Nanak, 18 sq. 

Nan-endo temple, 351 
Nanjio Catalogue, 87, 159, 163 
Nanzenji temple, 288 
Naokata, 255 
Nara, 209, 218 sqq., 326 
temples of, 218 n. 

Nare-ai-ji temple, 351 
Narita temple, 136 
Nats, 182 

Negoro, monastery of, 191, 245, 253, 
302, 336, 340 

Nembutsu, recitation of, 251 sqq., 
262-276 passim, 330, 362-386 
passim 

opposition to, 419, 427 
Nepal, 97, 100 sq., 107, 109, 

126 sq. 

Nestorian Christianity, 148 sq., 338, 
394 sq. 
stone, 395 
Nichiji, 281 
Nichiko, 422 

Nichiren (Rissho Daishi), 183, 259, 278 
sq., 323 

life of, 275 sqq., 416 sqq. 
his three vows, 281 
attitude to Church and State, 417 
sqq., 429 

writings of, 417, 4X9, 422 
Nichiren sect (Lotus sect), 100, 184, 
186 sq., 190, 254, 258, 275-282, 
416 sqq. 
quarrels of, 282 
five principles of, 425 
Three Great Mysteries, 426, 430 
Nid&nakatha, isi, 391 
Nien-Chang’s History of Buddhism, 162, 
172 

Nihongi (Nihon-shoki), 136, 181, 197, 
198 n., 200-217 passim, 229, 249 
Nihon-Koki, 249 n. 

Ni-jG-go Bosatsu, 118 

INDEX 

443 

NikS.yas, 5-60 passim, 74, 102, 116 
see also Anguttara Nikaya Digka 
Nikaya ; Khuddaka Nikaya 5 

Majjhinia Nikaya; Samyutta 

Nikaya 
Nikko, 140 
Ninnaji temple, 339 
Niimo kyo, 213, 214, 217 
Nirmanakaya, 45, 112 sq., 

Nirvana, 35, 42-6, 59, 77, 81, 113, 116 
sqq., 325, 367, 401 
-sutra, 157, 323 
Ni-son Ikkyo, 367 
Nitten, 355 

Nobunaga, 190, 196, 245, 300 sqq. 

N5 drama, 294 1 

Nyoirin Kwannon, 353 | 

Nyorai-sliin, 114 I 

Nyoshin, 273 I 

0 

Obaku, priest, 167, 407 
sect (Zen), 154, 311, 315, 399 aq. 
Ox-tending pictures, 413 sq. 

Ofumi, 298 

Ojin, Emperor, 183 n., 197 
0j6, 366 sq. 

Ojoron, 93, 102 

Oio Taiyosho, 263, 365 n. 

Ojoyosliu, 252, 261, 363 
Okadera temple, 351 
Omi, 351 s 

Omxiro branch (Shingon), 24o 

“ One Sheet of Paper, 365, 367, 369 
383 

Onjoji temple, 325 
Oryu, 168 
Osiiikatau, 226 
Oatrom, Conrad, 87 n. 

Osumi, 209 n. 

Otani Kocho, Count, 377 
0 Y5 Mei, 153, 312 1 

Pancar atra, 100 n. 

Paradise, 106, 329 sq., 385, 390 sq. 
treatise on, 157 
S6& also Sukhavati and lusita 
Paramartha, 145 
Paramitas, 131 
Parivara, 10 

Path, see Eightfold Path 
Patriarchs (Zen), 162 sq., 169 sq., 172 
Pekche (ICorea), 197 sqq. 

king of, see Syong-Mybng 
Persian influence 63 
Pingiya, 37 

Pitakas, Chap. I passim, 69, 77, 102, 
335, 405 

sand nirvana, 42 sqq., 59 sq. 
and doctrine of anatta, 47, 82 
Politics, influence of Buddhism on, 
189 sq. 

Portuguese, the, 300 
Potala (Potalaka), 124 
Prabhutaratna (Buddha), 28, 99 sq., 
427 

Prajila, 337 sq. 

Prainaparamita, 1 sq., 80, 83, 87, JU, 
101 n., 117, 125, 213, 221, 323 sq. 

1 Prajnaparamitahridaya-sutra, com- 

i mentary on, 163 
1 Prajnatara, 162 

i Prakrit, 16 ^00 

Pratyeka-Buddhas, 325 sq., 34-., 422 

I Prem Sagar, 3 
j Prithvi, 355 

1 Przyluski, M., 347 ^ oir 

1 Public Worship, Ministry oi, 31b 
1 Pu-ICung, 175, 328 

j see also Amoghavajra 
I Pu-Ming, 123 ^ 

j Punna, 52 n., 55 
I Punyamitra, 162 
j Purana, 11» 104 
i Pure Land, see Jodo 
! Pushyamitra, 76 

1 Pu-Tai, 140 

Padmadhatn, 111 
Padraapani, 120 
Pai-Chang, see Hyakup 
Piii-lien-chiao, 156 
Palas, the, 67 

Pali Canon, 10, 14, 36, 73, 81, 8.j 
Pali and Chinese, 17-18 
and Sanskrit, 15-17 
Pali Pitakas, see Pitakas 

t .B . 

j 

j Raga Baja, 349 
I Rahula, 12 sq., 137 
I Rajagaha Council, 10, 13, 13» 
j Rakan, 137 
i Rakora, 137 
! Ramakyishiia, 25 
j Ramayana, 3 
1 Basiya, 60 n. 

444 

INDEX 

Ratnakaranda -s fitra, 130 
Ratnamegha, 134 
Ratnasambhava, 35 n., 100, 101 n. 
Rennyo Shonin, 6 n., 297 sqq., 377 sq., 
380, 384 sq. 

Ricci, 154 

Rigen Daisbi, see Shobo 
Rinzai, priest, 409 sq. 

-roku, 412 

sect, 167, 284, 399 sq., 402, 408, 412 
Risslio Aiikoku Ron, 277 sq., 425 
Daigaku, 420 n. 

Daishi, see Nickiren 

Ritsu (RLssbu) sect, 174, 230-2, 386, 419 
Roben, 220, 221, 230 
Rokkalai-do temple, 351 
Eokuharadera temple, 351 
Roman Catholics, 301 
Roshana, Buddha, 221 n., 230 
ROshiyoku, 164 n. 

Ryobu-Shinto (twofold Shinto), 182, 
19.3, 211, 219, 236, 241, 243, 274, 
315 

By6ch5, 273 
Ryogemon, 298, 377 
Ryogen, 246, 291 sq. 

Ryoku, 269, 376 

R,y6nin, priest, 160, 252, 327, 363 
Ryoyo Shogei, 292, 384 
Ryu'kan, 273, 371 sq. 

S 

Sacred Edict, 147 
Saddharmapupflarika-sutra (Lotns- 
sutra, q.w.), 6 n., 27 sq., 276, 421 
SMhana, 97 

Saga, Emperor, 233, 241, 248 
Baieho, sec Dongyo Daishi 
Saidaiji, temple, 218 n., 337 
Saiinei, see- Kogyoku 
Saivite sect, 66 
Sakadagamin, 132 
Sakka, 57 
Sakra, 28 

Sakti (Saktism), 96 sq., 123, 348 
S^kyannmi, 63, 70, 86, 99-122 passim, 
129, 409, 426 sqq. 
legends about, 73, 106, 164 
in Lotus-sutra, 37, 100, 172, 278, 324, 
423 

and Tcndai, 239, 329 
Balayatana Saipyutta, 22 n. 

Samadhi, 42 

SamaSnaphala-sutta, 17 n. 

j Samantahhadra (Pugen), 118, 187, 355, 
422 

I Sainantamuklia, 122 
I Samatha, 335 

! Sambhogakaya, 45, 108 n., 112 sq., 115, 
172 

; Sammitiya sect, 15, 51, 72 n. 
i Sammon, 325 

! Sainsara, 33, 38, 43, SI, 118, 4.01 
j Samurai, 310, 314 
Satnyukta-Agama, 18, 77 
! Sainyutta Rikaya, 18, 20, 22, 24, 33, 
I ’ 35, 39 n., 45, 50, 103 
i San-Amida-ge, 378 
i Sanchi, 14, 41, 71 
I San-Ohieli sect, 146 n. 

Sandai Jitsuroku, 249 n. 
Sandaka-sutta, 5 
Sanghabhadra, 91 
Sanghadeva, 18 n., 23 
I Sanjo Wa.san, 6, 272, 378, 387 
! San-ju-san-gen-do temple, 352 
j Sankara, 163 
i Saukyo-shiki, 236 
I San-lun-tsung (Sanron q.w.), 155 
I Saiinapenti, 103 n. 

I Sam’on sect, 155, 158, 212, 342 
I Sanskrit, 102, 144 sq., 150 
! and Pali, 15^17 
' see- also Mahayjinist Literature 
I Santideva, 83, 95, 100 n., 130, 132 sq., 
i 179, 392 

j Sanzen, 404 
I Sarasvati, 139, 355 
’ Sariputra (Sariputta), 19, 28, 33, 36, 
i 101 a., 137 

I Sarvastivadin sect, 15, 72 n., 75-9, 87, 
j 119 

i Sasald Ga.ssho, 269 
] Sata felstra, 156 n. 
i Satei-kyo, 22 
I Sati, 22 

Satoko, Princess, 377 

Satori (Enlightenment, q.v.), 164, 400-9 

Satsuma, 209 n. 

Satyasiddhi, 156 

Sautrantika (Sankrantika) sect, 15, 77, 
79, 156 
Saw, the, 52 
Sefukuji temple, 351 
i Seigorokn, 422 n. 

Seikwa, 312 
Soikyo, 413 
Seirenji, temple, 23.5 
Seiryuji temple, ,328 

INDEX 

445 

Seishi, 129, 355, 367 
Sei Shonagon, lier Makiira no SosM, 250 
Seizan sect, 268, 372 
Seleucua Nicator, 64 
Sencliakushu, 158, 292, 365 
Seng-Ts‘an (Sosan), 165, 169, 411 
Sen-ju, 351 
Sesshin, 406 
Sessliu, 293, 398 
Setcho, 411 
Settsu, 351 

Seven Gods of Luck, 140 
Skaka (Buddha, q.v.), 100, 180* 

241, 267, 275, 341, 366 sq., 379 sq. 

390’ 

Shakamunibutsu, see Sakyammu 
Shansi province (China), 157 
Shan-Tao, see Zendo 
Shao-K‘ang, sec Slioko 
Shcn-Hsiu, 166 
Shenshuji temple, 292 
Shensi province (China), 157 
vShigeno Sadanuahi, 249 
Shigi, teni])lo city of, 3i)/ 

Shih-chi, 17 
Shin sect, 89, 104, 258 I 

Shinga, juiest, 339 | 

Shingakn, 180 ^ _ i 

Shingi-Shingon sect, 245, 339 j 

Shingon sect (Chen-yen), 160, 230, 233 , 
sqq., 261, 322, 328, 336 sqq. } 
deities of, 97 n., 100, 107, 114, 186, j 
346 sqq. 1 

scriptures, 110 I 

in China, 174-6 

introduced in Japan, 236, 337 sqq. 
and Tendai, 237 sqq., 321, 324 
temples, 237, 337 
opposition to, 302, 419 
headquarters of, 324 
schools of, 339 
and Hindu gods, 355 _ _ 

founder of, see Kobo Daishi 
Shingon-Ritsu sect, 337 
Shingon-in, temple, 237 
Bhin-iin-niei, 411 
Shinkiyomizudera temple, 351 

Bhinnyo, 334 n. ,4.0 lao 

Shinran (Kenshin Baislu), 104 160, , 

254, 267 sq., 291 sq., 323, 360-390 
passim, 421 
life of, 267-273 

teaching of, interpretation of, -38 
and Honen, 373 sqq- 
writings of, 377 sq. 

Shinsho, 264 

Shinshoji temple, 348 

Shinshu sect, 6 n., 100 sq., 184 sqq., 

270 sqq., 291, 297 sqq., 307 sq., 
307-393,420 

funeral ceremonies of, 273, 376 
temples and possessions of, 292, 
302 sq, 

and Jodo, 373 sqq., 384 

see also Jodo Shinshu 

Catechism (Hyakuwa), cited, 374- 
387 passim 
Shintai, 377 

Shinto (Shintoism), 108, 135, 138, 180- 
196 passim, 207, 211, 218, 224 
described, 180 sqq. 
and Buddhism, 182 sq., 223, 240 sqq., 
386 ; see also Ryohu Shinto 
rites, 208 sq., 214 
festivals, 309 
revival of, 313 sqq. 
deities, 357 
Shinzei, 299, 385 
Shinzoku Nitai, 377 
Shirakawa, Emperor, 246, 250 
Shitennoji temple, 136 

Shittan, 337 ooe /toi 

Shobo (Rigen Daisbi), 242, 27 .139, 4-4 

Shobo Genzo, 399, 412 

Shodo (holy path), 157, 263, 365 sq. 

I Shodoka, 411 

1 Shodomon, 104 ^ . 

i Shoguns (Shogunate), 194, 196, -89, 
I 293, 296, 299 
i Shojo, 274 
i Shoju, 404 sq. 

ShOkO, 159, 164 n. 

ShokohO, 371 , 0Q7 

Shokokuji (Sokokuji q.v.) temple, 287 

Shoku, 371 

Shoku Nihongi, 229, 249 
Shoku-Nihon-Koki, 249 n. 
Sho-Kwannon, 352 
Sh6man-ky6, 205 

Shomonjo-josho, 325 _ 

Shomu, Emperor, 215, 219 sqq., —4 
Shonen, 331 
Shoshasan temple, 351 
Shoshien, 323 , 

Shoshinge, 6, 271 sq., 377, 380 sq. 
Shosho Shonin, 232 
Shoso, 292 
ShOten Sama, 356 sq. 

Shotoku Taishi, 

217, 229 11., 350, .3o7, 379 

446 

INDEX 

Shoyo Daishi (Dogen, q.v.), 284 

Sh6-z6-niatsu Wasan, 378 

Shubun, 293 

Shudo Kowa, 387 

Shugendo, 242 

Shulcusatsu Zokyo, 316 

Shumon mujin-to ron, 412 

Sliunjo’s Life of Honen, 261, 270, 376 

SIhun-Hsiao, 322 

Shu«liogi, 409 

Siam, 14, 74 

Siberia, 281 

Sigala, 60 

Sigalovada-sutra, 189 
Sikkb sect, 18, 19 

Sikshasamuccaya, 96, 111, 118, 121 sq,, 
126, 134 
Slla, 60 

Silabhadra, 173 
Silla, 197 sqq. 

Simha, 162 sq. 

Siva, 66, 87, 100, 123, 136 sq., 392 
Sodo, see SSto 

Sega family, 199 sqq., 205 sq. 

Soga no Umako, 200, 205 
Sojiji temple, 351 

Sokoknji, monastery of, 287, 293 sq. 
Sosan (Seng-Ts’an), 165, 169, 411 
Soseki, abbot, 287, 290, 295, 398 
Soshilsuji-kyo, 338 

Soto (Ts‘ao-T‘ung) sect, 167 sqq., 284, 
399 sq., 402, 412 , 

Sotoba, 340 

Soycm Shaku, 188 

Sprinkling ceremony, see KwanjS 

Sravaka (Hinayana), 325 sq., 422 

Srimitra, monk, 358 

Srinagar, 71 

Stiiaviras, 72, 73 

Sthirainati, 91 

Stupas, 28, 70 sq., 76, 340 

Subhadda, 42 n, 

Subha-sutta, 17 n, 

Subhuti, 137 

Sngiwara Miebizane, 183 n. 

Suhrillekha, 90 
Suicide, religious, 134 
>Sui dynasty, 145 

Suiko, Empress, 200 n., 202 sq., 226 
Suiteri (Varuna), 139, 356, 357 
Sujun, Emperor, 201 ■ 

Su-kao-seng-ebuan, 163 
Srikbavati (Happy Land), 105 sqq. 
SukhAvati-vyulia, 93, 104, 156, 209 n., 
360, 362, 388 

Greater, 6 n., 101 sq., 105, 121, 212, 
217, 365, 377 

Lesser, 6 n., 101 sq., 106, 158, 377 
Sumatra, 51 
Sumedha, 391 

Suminoe (Sumiyoshi), temple of, 357 
Sunaparanta, 55 
Sung dynasty, 160, 151 
Sun Goddess, 108, 124 n., 181 sqq., 208, 
221 

Sung-Yiin, 94, 145 
Sunya, 60, 81 
Sunyata, 40 
SOrya, 28 
Susano-o, 138 
Susiddbikara-sutra, 338 
Sxitra Pitaka, 15, 78 
Su-Tsung, Emperor, 148 
Sutta, 4 

Sutta Nipata, 8, 20, 37, 43 sq. 
Suttantas, 14, 20 

Suvarnaprabhasa-sutra, 28, 88, 113, 
171, 205, 209 n., 217 
Suvya, 365 

Suzuki, D. T., 396, 401, 409 
Svayambhu Purapa, 126 
Sveta^vatara Upanisbad, 44 
Syong-Myong (King of Pekche), 198 
sq., 210 

T 

Tacbibana Hayanari, 248 
Tachibana no Moroe, 221 sq. 
Tao-Cb‘o, see Eoshaku 
Tada Kanai, 387 
Taendaijoshin, 842 n. 

Tabs, 100, 427 

Ta-Hui, 412 

Taiheiki, 294 

Talbo, code of, 206 

Taikwa, reforms of, 206, 218 

Taimitsu doctrine, 339 

Taira, house of, 190, 195, 255 sqq. 

Taisbaku, 356 

T'ai-Tsu, 150 

Tai-Tsnng, 148 

Taizokai Mandara, 97 n., 34.7 sq. 
Ta-juy6-hos.shirt, 114 
Takakusu, Profe.ssor, 367 
Takaozan, temple of, 348 
Takatoki, 289 

INDEX 

Takauji, 290, 293, 296 
Taku-an, 306 
Tamba, 351 

T'ang dynasty, 146, 148, 160 
Tango, 351 
Tan-Hsia, 168 
Tanigumi-dera, 351 
Tanka, 409 

Tan-Luan, see Donran 
Tannisho, 271 sq., 374 
Tantric Buddhism, 67, 96 sqq., 123 sq., 
136, 174, 347, 393, 410 n. 
mudras, 359 
works, 338 

Tao-Ch‘o, see Doshaku 
Tao-Hsiian, 163, 172, 174, 396 
Taoism, 148, 169, 285, 342, 397 

Buddhism and Confucianism, 143, 
146 sqq., 153, 164, 236 
pantheon, 150 
Tao-te-ching, 164 n. 

Tao-Yuan, 162 sq., 396, 412 
Tara, 123, 126 
Taran&tha, 78 sq. 

Tartar states, 143 sq. 

Tathfigata, 23, 35, 37, 43 sq., 60, 323, 
423, 428 

TathSgatagarbha, 113 
Tathdgatakaya, 114 
Tathata (Tathatta : sucbness), 45, 84, 
113, 334 
Tatsuta, 208 
Taxila University, 63 
Tea ceremonies, 283 
Teg Bahadur, 19 
Tei-shu (Oonfucianism), 312 
Teishu-gaku-ha, 312 
Tembun period, war of, 282 
Temmu, Emperor, 191, 208, 214 aq. 
Temples (Japanese), Indian images in, 
135-141 

Teinpyo era, 174 
Tenehi, 208 

Tendai (T‘ien-t‘ai) sect, 6, 159 sq., 
184, 230, 233 sqq., 261, 321 sqq., 
386 

doctrine, 170 sqq., 276, 327, 419 sq. 
Buddhas of, 172, 329 
and Zen, 172, 831 
and Shingdn, 237 sqq., 321, 324, 336 
introducjtion of, 321 
four paradises of, 329 sq. 
fountler, see Dengyo Baishi 
Tcnjin, 183 

Tenkai, priest, 306 sq., 313, 315 

447 

Tennoji, temple of, 201 
Tenryuji temple, 287, 295 
Ten stages, doctrine of, 341 sqq. 
Terakoya, 288, 398 
Theras, 11 

Theravada (Theravadins), 12, 15, 18, 72 
sqq., 103, 119 
Three Bodies, 112-115 
Three Great Works, 170 
Three Treasures, 60, 201, 203, 222 
sqq. 

Tibet, 66, 97, 123, 127, 137, 152, 237, 
239 

Buddhas of, 100, 107, 109 
Tibetan scriptures, 156 
T‘ien-t‘ai, see Tendai 
Ti-kuan, 173 
Tiruvacagam, 392 
Tissa Moggaliputta, 13 
Ti-Tsang, 127 
Toba, Emperor, 228, 250 
Todaiji, monastery of, 218 n,, 220 sqq., 
266, 326, 328 
T6-ei-zan, 806 
Tofukuji temple, 287 
Togashi family, 298 
Masachika, 298 
Togo, Admiral, 421 
Tokimori, 419 
Tokudo, abbot, 360 
Tokugawa period, 180, 186 sq., 195 sq., 
305 sqq. 

Tokusan, 409 
Tokyo, 355 
Tomitsu doctrine, 339 
Tongyo, 384 
Torei, 413 
Toryu-hosshin, 114 
Trade Guilds, 310 
Tri-Kaya, 112-116 
Trimsika, 93, 173 

Tripitaka, collections and new editions, 
209 n., 229, 307, 316 sq. 

Ming edition of, 311 
see also Chinese Tripi'taka 
Tsa, 18 

Ts‘ao-T‘ung, see Soto 

Tseng'i, 18 

Tsin dynasty, 144 
Tsubasakadera temple, 351 
Tsunayoshi, 309, 313 
Tsunetsugu, 324 
Tsung-Pao, 167 

Tsure-Dzure Gusa, 294, 297, 398 
Tu Pa-Shun, 173 

INDEX 

448 

Tulsi Das, 3 
Tiisita, 112, 119 
Twelve Generals, 136 
Two Kings, 135 
T‘zu-Min, 159 

U 

Uda, Emperor, 362 
Udana, 25, 44 
Uddaka-Ramaputta, 31 n. 

Uga, 355 
Uji, 351 

Umako, see Soga no Umako 
Uniayado (Sliotoku Taishi, 

202 

Unkei, sculptor, 352 
Unmon (Yun-men), 401, 408 

XJpanishads, 11, 24, 46, 55, 58, 163, 
397 

Upaya-Kau^alya-sutra, 133 
XJprosatha ceremony, 71 
Urabon, 216 

V 

Vaocliagotta, 49 
•sutra, 44 n. 

Vaibhashikas, 79 
Vaipulya sutras, 7, 107, 333 
Vairocana (Dainiclu q.v.)» 35 n., 100, 
107 sqq., 127, 172, 182, 238 sq., 
263, 324, 329, 340 
Vaishnava Religion, Philosophy of, 
VaiSravana (Bisbamon q.v.), 136, 355, 
357 

Vaijiputtaka sect, 51, 72 n. 
Vajrabodbi, 97, 110, 175, 338 
Yairacchedika-sutra (Diamond Cutter, 

q.v.), 28, 60, 166, 396, 409 
commentary on, 153 
Vajrapani, 135 
Vajrasattva, 338 
Vajra^ekhara-sutra, 175, 338 
Vajrayana, 97, 98 
Varuna, see Suiten 

Vasubandhn, 102, 144, 157, 173, 179, 
272, 360 

Vatsiputriya, see Vajjiputtaka 

Vattagamani, 14 
\’'ayu, 36, 355 

Vedanta (Vedantism), 163 sq., 169 

Vedas, 3, 104, 392 

Vesali council, 10, 26, 72 sq., 76 

I Vetulyakas, 14, 112 
Vibbajjavadin sect, 15, 72 sq., 75 

Vibbasba, 79 

Vijfianavada (Yogacara), 77-93 passim, 
98 

Vimalaku’ti, 137 

-sutra (Yuima-kyo), 28, 205, 411 
Vim'satika, 93 
Vinaya, 4-27 passim, 32 
I Pitaka, 10 

I School, 174 

Vipassana, 335 
Vipassi, 26, 33 
Vishnu, 100, 392 
Vishnuism, 104 
Vishnuite sect, 67 
Visishtacaritra, 281, 429 sq. 

Visser’s Ancient Buddhism in Japan, 
213 n. 

1 W 

Wakasa, 351 
I Wang An-shih 150 
j Wang-In, 197 
j Wang Yang-ming, 153 
Wasan, see Sanjo Wasan 
Wei, 143 sqq. 

Weji, 202n. 

Wilde, Oscar, 371 
Women, status of, 9 n., 123 
of Nichiren sect, 419 n 
Worship, forms of, 74 sq., 96, 134 
Wu, Empress, 148 sq. 

Wu-K‘ung, 146 
Wu-T‘ai-Shan, 126, 159 
Wu Tao-Tzu, 150 
Wu-Ti, Emperor (Han), 143 
(Liang), 145, 160 sq., 216 
Wu-Tsung, Emperor, 148, 154, 324 
Wu-wei, 414 

, ''Y 

Yahata, 223 
Yakkhas, 57 

Yakushi (Buddha), 100, 358 

-kyo, 209 n. 

Yakushiji, temple, 218 n. 
Yakushin, prelate, 339 
Yama, 355 
Yama-bushi, 242 
Yamashiro, 205, 351 
1 Yamato, 242, 351 

mmx 449 

Yang^chi, 168 
Yaaas, S6 n. 

Yengo, 4lS 
Yeno, 411 

Yodomuishin, 342 n. 

Yogacara, see Vijnanavada 
Yogi, 168 
Yoka, 167, 411 
Ydkwan, priest, 253 
Yomei, Emperor, 200 n., 201 
Yonas, 20 ' 

Yoro-ryoritsu, 218 
Yoaliida Kenko, 294 
Yofc'himinedera temple, 351 
Yosbimitsu, 290, 293 
Yoshitsime, 255, 257 
Yiian dynasty, 151 sq. 
Yuaii-Wii, 412 
Yiian-jen-lun, 164 n. 

Yuga sammitsu, 323 
Yugyo Sbonin, see Ippen 
Yui-itsu (Unitarian Shinto), 193 
Yuima, 137 

Yuima-kyo, 28, 205, 411 
Yuishiki, 86, 93, 173 
Yniunmugashin, 342 n. 

Yti-ln, 412 

Yume-dono, 350 

Yhn-Kang, 145 

Yun-Men, see Unmon 

Ynyo Shonin, 292 

Yuku Nembutsu sect, 252, 363 

Z 

Zazen, 406 

Zen (Ch‘an) sect, 43, 82 sq., 132, 146 n., 
150 sqq., 160-172 passim, 184, 
258 sq., 282 sqq., 322, 396 sqq. 
as military religion, 31, 286 sq., 397 sq. 
and Enlightenment, 34, 37, 164, 
400-9 

literature, 164, 411 
Northern School of, 166 
Southern School of, 167 
monasteries, 168 

influence and possessions of, 294 sqq, 
and Tendai, 331 
temples of, 398 sq. 
rules of order, 405 sqq. 
apparent antiscriptnral attitude, 409 
sqq. 

opposition to, 419 
founder of, see Eisai 
Zendo (Shan-Tao), 6, 158 sqq., 261, 
272, 360 sqq., 369 
Zennebd, 237, 268, 371 sq. 

Zenrinji temple, 372 
Zo, 18 n. 

Zobo, 277, 424 
Zo-ichi, 18 n. 

Zojoji temple, 293, 306 
Zoroastrian religion, 103, 120 
Zoyo, 242 
Zokutai, 377 

Printed in Great Britain by Stephen Austin <& Sons, Lid., Hertford.