Review: Pilgrim of the Cle ar Light: the Biography 

of Dr. Walter Y. Evans-Wentz 

Reviewed by M Alyson Prude (Georgia Southern University) 

Ken Winkler. 2013. Pilgrim of the Clear Light: The 
Biography of Dr. Walter Y. Evans-Wentz. Bangkok: 
BooksMango. 190pp. Nine photos, foreword, 
acknowledgements, introduction, notes, about the author. 
ISBN 978-1633231160 (paper 14.99USD; eBook 4.99USD). 

As various English-language translations have collectively sold more 
than half a million copies, much has been written about the collection 
of texts known as the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Little attention, 
however, has been focused on its creator, Walter Y Evans-Wentz 
(1878-1965), a man "no one really knew" (15). Originally published in 
1982 and reprinted in a second edition in 2013, Pilgrim of the Clear 
Light seeks to shed light on the person of Evans-Wentz. Since its first 
printing, Pilgrim of the Clear Light is the source on which all 
subsequent scholarship related to Evans-Wentz has relied. 

Winkler bases his narrative of Evans-Wentz's life on personal 
diaries, letters, and interviews that he consulted and conducted over 
a period of years of travel between California, Oxford, and India. His 
account provides anecdotes about Evans-Wentz that allow the reader 
to catch a glimpse, albeit tenuous, into the motivations and psyche of 
"a driven and compulsive individual" who "lived solely within his own 
mind" (15). In the account of Evans-Wentz's time at Stanford, for 
example, we read of his experience of the 1906 San Francisco 
earthquake. Evans-Wentz was in his fourth-floor dorm room when 
the earthquake struck early in the morning of 4 April. Deciding that 
the only safe place to be was on top of the building, Evans-Wentz 
climbed out his window and clung to the rain gutter in an attempt to 
pull himself up onto the roof. Luckily for him, before he had been 
hanging for too long, some friends burst into his room and pulled 
him back inside. In his diary entry about the event and the 
earthquake's aftermath, Evans-Wentz recorded, "Measured by man's 

Prude, M. Alyson. 2016. Review: Pilgrim of the Clear Light: The Biography 
of Dr. Walter Y. Evans-Wentz. Asian Highlands Perspectives 40:425-430. 

Reviews 

evolution the disaster is a greater good than an evil" (41). This 
sentiment regarding the miserable state of humanity in the Western 
world remained a theme throughout Evans-Wentz's life. 

After finishing a master's degree at Stanford, completing a 
study of fairy lore at Oxford, and sitting out two years of WWI in 
Egypt, Evans-Wentz made his way to Sri Lanka in 1917. He spent the 
next twenty-four years moving back and forth between Oxford and 
India with brief visits to the United States. Winkler depicts him as a 
habitual traveler who rarely stayed in one location for more than a 
few weeks and who was always on the lookout for religious texts. 
Based on letters and journal entries written during this time, Winkler 
argues that Evans-Wentz's aim in interpreting and writing 
commentaries on the manuscripts he collected was to demonstrate 
that Asian philosophical and religious ideas (and later Native 
American ones as well) were neither primitive nor unsophisticated, 
but superior to those held by his English-speaking audience. Of all 
the ideas he championed, the doctrine of rebirth, a teaching he first 
encountered via Theosophy, seems to have been closest to Evans- 
Wentz's heart. His insistence on the subject led to conflict with 
Christian groups worldwide, especially in Sri Lanka where Catholics 
tried twice to have him deported. Evans-Wentz was undeterred, 
however, and continued writing articles in which he "bombarded the 
public" with his views on the "thoroughly scientific" theory of rebirth 
that he was sure scientists were on the verge of proving (93). 

Winkler makes clear that Theosophy provided the context for 
Evans-Wentz's interpretations of Asian practices and philosophies. 
Much has been made of the fact that Evans-Wentz appears to have 
never practiced Tibetan teachings or enjoyed a close disciple-teacher 
relationship with Kazi Dawa Samdup (1868-1923), the Sikkim-born 
schoolteacher who Evans-Wentz hired to translate the Tibetan Book 
of the Dead (see Lopez (2011) and his forewords to the 2000 printing 
of Evans-Wentz's tetralogy). This "contemporary carping" (80), as 
Winkler calls it, about Evans-Wentz's research seems to be the 
impetus behind the second edition of Pilgrim of the Clear Light. In 
its new version, Winkler has added quotes to the beginning of each 
chapter, replaced the index with an "About the Author," and 
incorporated a minor amount of additional information about Evans- 
Wentz's travels and conversations with other spiritual seekers of his 

426 

Asian Highlands Perspectives 

day. The significant alteration, however, is a sustained rebuttal to 
demonizations of Evans-Wentz. Winkler reminds the reader that 
Evans-Wentz was a "meticulous scholar" hampered by a dearth of 
resources available to students of Tibetan Buddhism in the early 
twentieth century, resources that could have offered more accurate 
understandings of the texts that he painstakingly collected and 
studied. 

Readers unfamiliar with the scholarship of Donald Lopez may 
be surprised by the defensiveness with which Winkler writes. For 
one, Winkler begins his introduction: "Seldom is another's life as we 
would like it to be" (15), thus setting the stage for an expose and 
establishing a tone for later criticisms of Evans-Wentz. One can 
surmise, however, that it is statements such as these that put Winkler 
on the defensive: 

Evans-Wentz knew what he would find in the Tibetan text before 
a single word was translated for him. It almost seems that Evans- 
Wentz's spiritual vacation could have taken him to any Asian 
country and that he could have randomly chosen any Asian text, 
and he would have produced some version of the book published 
in 1927 (118, in Lopez 2011). 

In the same work, Lopez (2011) accuses Evans-Wentz of "[doing] 
something wrong. His crime was to pretend that his text originated 
from a time and place, where in fact it did not" (150). Those 
acquainted with Lopez's writings might conclude that the overblown 
strength of his remarks is intended for dramatic effect, especially 
since Lopez's (2011) next paragraph compares Evans-Wentz's 
"fabrication" to what "Tibetans had done for centuries" in their 
tradition of revealing terma (150). Nevertheless, for someone who 
admires Evans-Wentz as a "highly principled man, a... pioneer" (15) 
Lopez's words are sure to rankle. 1 

Lopez (2000b) critiques Evans-Wentz as a translator and 
scholar of Tibetan Buddhism who engaged in "egregious and willful 
misreading" of the texts (L). Yet in the context of his life as portrayed 
in Pilgrim of the Clear Light, the source of Lopez's information about 

1 See also Thurman's 2001 review of Prisoners of Shangri-La. 

427 

Reviews 

Evans-Wentz, Evans-Wentz appears not as a fraud or criminal but as 
an overly zealous advocate. Winkler makes clear that Evans-Wentz's 
goals were not fame and fortune; Evans-Wentz sought to garner 
interest, among Western audiences, in Asian religious thought. He 
considered himself an interpreter and translator in the broadest 
senses of the terms, introducing Asian philosophies and charging 
succeeding generations with correcting and amending his work. 
When one keeps in mind, as Winkler continually reminds us to do, 
that Evans-Wentz's intention was not to dupe but to inspire his 
readers, his mistakes look much less sinister. 

Throughout Pilgrim of the Clear Light, Winkler provides 
historical and geographical context for the events of Evans-Wentz's 
life mixed with Winkler's own views of Theosophy, the positive and 
negative aspects of various Indian cities, and the value of Evans- 
Wentz's efforts. The background information about time and place is 
helpful, but the quantity of parenthetical notes and digressions 
interrupt the flow of the story. References to past and future events 
confuse the chronology and, for this reason, summaries of Evans- 
Wentz's life by Lopez (2000 and 2011) and Reynolds (2010) are 
easier reading. In effect, Pilgrim of the Clear Light is not so much an 
academic work (the book lacks a bibliography and all but cursory 
reference to scholarly sources) as a personal reflection on Evans- 
Wentz. In this respect, my critique of Pilgrim of the Clear Light 
shares similarities with Lopez's criticisms of Evans-Wentz's works: it 
is not sufficiently scholarly and it is suffused by the author's personal 
views. Although Winkler's points are valid, arguments about the 
genuineness of Evans-Wentz's motivations are out of place in the 
body of the text and would be more appropriately located in an 
expanded introduction. A more robust introduction would have the 
added benefit of allowing Winkler a place to record his travel notes 
and personal observations. Towards the end of the book, Winkler 
mentions that his aunt was a librarian at the San Diego library that 
Evans-Wentz patronized. More information about Winkler's 
relationship to Evans-Wentz would be both interesting and useful for 
assessing Winkler's presentation of Evans-Wentz's life. 

That being said, the importance of Pilgrim of the Clear Light 
parallels that of Evans-Wentz's books. Even Lopez commends Evans- 
Wentz for his anthropological bent, specifically, his fieldwork and 

428 

Asian Highlands Perspectives 

efforts to work with native scholars. Winkler can be commended for 
the same: on-the-ground legwork collecting documents, interviews, 
and first-hand impressions. Photographs, including one of the stupa 
in Almora, India, where Evans-Wentz's ashes are interred, add 
fullness and immediacy to biography. Additional photos, both of and 
by Evans-Wentz and copies of some of the diary entries and letters 
that Winkler examined would be welcome, as well as maps of India 
and California to orient a reader unfamiliar with their geographies. 
Winkler informs us that later in his life, Evans-Wentz preferred a 
simple diet, formal but often thread-bare clothes, and became known 
as a "notorious penny-pincher" despite the fact that his dealings in 
real estate afforded him a modest degree of wealth. Details such as 
these, and that Evans-Wentz would sniff out the "psychic currents" 
and "spiritual structure" of locations (163, see also 40), make Pilgrim 
of the Clear Light a worthwhile read. 

Regrettably, in its second edition Pilgrim of the Clear Light 
suffers from a lack of editing. The reader must persevere patiently 
through typographical errors, dangling modifiers, unclosed 
quotations, and other mistakes that hinder the flow of the narrative. 
This significant downfall of the work presents itself to the reader 
immediately. The second paragraph of the first chapter begins: 
"Though he never came to call it chance his being there, it was indeed 
a casual whim of finding a translator that propelled him to this 
outpost of Buddhism on the edge of Tibet" (18). A few pages later, one 
reads: 

Though Evans-Wentz mentioned his family seemed filled with 
solid farmers and quiet, pious folk (on his mother's side), it was 
the black sheep which took the imagination (and the innocent 
avarice) of he and his brothers and sisters (21). 

The first edition published by Dawnfire does not contain these errors. 
That the new edition is self-published is unfortunate. It would have 
benefited immensely from professional editing. 

Criticisms aside, Pilgrim of the Clear Light remains our most 
comprehensive source of information about Walter Y Evans-Wentz. 
Contemporary scholars may have dismissed his books for not being 
true to the traditions they purportedly translate, but succeeding 

429 

Reviews 

generations of undergraduate and lay readers continue to turn to the 
"timeless wisdom" as presented (or, one could argue, created) by the 
restless and introverted spiritual seeker whose life mission was to 
bring lost or as yet "undiscovered" spiritual traditions to American 
and European societies. Whereas Evans-Wentz's study of bardo 
literature has been repeated numerous times and much corrected in 
the process, Winkler's research has not been repeated. Even thirty- 
three years since it first appeared in print, we owe our current 
knowledge of Evans-Wentz to Winkler's presentation in Pilgrim of 
the Clear Light. 

References 

Lopez, Donald S, Jr. 2000 (a). Foreword in WY Evans-Wentz The 
Tibetan Book of the Dead. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
A-Q. 

_. 2000 (b). Foreword in WY Evans-Wentz The Tibetan Book of the 

Great Liberation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, A-R. 

_. 2011. The Tibetan Book of the Dead: A Biography. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press. 

Reynolds, John Myrdhin. 2010. Self-Liberation through Seeing with 
Naked Awareness. Ithaca: Snow Lion. 

Thurman, Robert. 2001. Critical Reflections on Donald S. Lopez Jr.'s 
Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. 
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 69 (i):i9i-20i. 
Winkler, Ken. 1982. Pilgrim of the Clear Light: The Biography of Dr. 
Walter Y. Evans-Wentz. Berkeley: Dawnfire Books. 

430