ХРОМ 
рг 

@ 
2 

D 

UAR 
NM 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ете жата заітетчя, AEN 

e / 

igitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri a 

THE 
TEMPLE 
CLASSICS 

Edited by 
ISRAEL 
GOLLANCZ 
M.A. 

| Initial <—~e> 

^ 

D Фф 6с. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ENS Ac 
53 

de 

DU 
'an 

enna 

tion Ch 

=. 
© 
п. 
= 
3 
o 
iL 

igitized by Arya.Samaj 

b 

5 

e 

ar 

idw 

ion, На 

‘angri Collect 

ол S 
: o 
SOT 
ё 4 D 
SOE A 
Tui 
= —< 
«TM 
! eek 
8 м 
БОЕ $ 
| ees 
SY 
ЧЕ ас 
Ss 
ecu 
: ER 
` & . Я ; 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

: CC-0. In Public Domain: Gurükul Kangri Collectio 

‘Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

H i ix 
| 
| . 
| ; ; 

1 

' - CC0. In-Public Domain: Gürükul Kangri Collection, Haridwa 
à ^ CNN ON EP CAMPI ELS S1 

e h A. 

dx Digitized by Arya Samai.Eoundati 
у, “a 

4 

p Я : Жел Me ewe" Ait ai ny i.c 
ds ee FORE е лс roc 

х ` UP ia 

^ i ле. time ge 

д , mptuous,¢} 
; œ i it tempter 

D 
„ EY 
ЫП 
pA 
ё | 
` ! 
i К 
f М 
А | dou 
Ur 
t| 
Е 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation hennai and eGangotri 

v3 
= 1€. терот, | . ST Es "N 
mptuou&thy 7 = ариг, $32 29 
it temptecg p? / Ed ef E Ds 
y dreadfulhe ‘class’. "ea oe 
-thaps, of: [&oppat)? И oe N E. 13. S X 
-~l 'nW’simple affect S А X SN е 2 \ 
1 807 Y [eos epo. Ў 
TAN INTRODUCTIO 2 
Ё Ni I M ; 
BN 4 + — . A 

Гик Stoic sect was founded Lehi? orek Lu 
) hundred years before the CEST serai > 
jourished in great reputation till the declension 
a Roman Empire. A complete history of - 
philosophy would be the. work оЁ.а Ё 
кое; and nothing further is intended here, 
hecha summary view of itas may ‘be of use 
"8 clearer notion of those: passages in 
us, a strict professor of it, which allude to 
(A its peculiar doctrines. Khai "a 
Chat the end of man is to live conformab] 
€ was universally agreed on amongst all 
Jlosopheri ; but in what that conformity to 
W consists was the point in dispute. The 
eans. maintained that it consisted їп pleasure, 
jeh they constituted sense the. Judge.!' The 
jS on the contrary, placed, it in an absolute 
tion of the soul, Neither of them. seem to’ 
Sunderstood: man^in his mixed capacity; bur 7 
Bre first debased, him ‘to a’ mere animal, the 
“айе him tora pure intelligence, and. both 
M\yéered him ‘as independent, uncorrupted, and 
рь, either: by height of virtue or by well- ы 
iy ted indulgence,-to his ‘own’ happiness. esu due С 
excess was more uscfüf to the publics ст 
; produced gréat àhd^ióble efforts towardé'tliat-* 
saes tion to which it was supposed possible for 
Ст. г b 
N 

< 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Sir- 

E vas E = & 
: A 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri mas өй 27. 
elei sa kat D лего Cus uae Mis on SAW ean tig vo^: дайынын ды —À TUE 

i { Ж: . E 
vi DISCOURSES OF ЕР1СТЕТ( INTRÓDUGTION E 

х ег, pity, etc.; and ; ; " 
human nature to arrive. Yet, at the sans Pity, ; In short, that universal 

4 A athy which they ever w i 
by flattering man with false and presu'g A he m Gi m те гопду inculcate. 
З 2 н 2 - 1 1Са1 perfection was 
ideas of his own power and excellence 5 АША АШЕР ] 8, 
P › the class of Pursuits (ppai) and Avoidances 

even the best to pride; a vice not on] +> 5 ‹ 
iachievous i5 ы society, but pe афорра!),2 Ав the Desires and Aversions are 
T ; : "imple affections, the Pursuits and Avoidances are 

others, the most insuperable bar to rém “ons of t} i 
Е 16 active powers towa ` 
improvement, | rds the pro. 

. 3 Or declining anything. Unde i 
vs : A r this head 
8 3. Epictetus often mentions three ‘opiClomprehended the whole system of moral 
classes, under which the whole of moral philo. according to their incomplet id n 
cla : Y ce е ideas o 
is NOD dg A There EU Desires and a due Tegard to it wag supposed to 
decet the Pursuits 198 е тоа proper behaviour in al] the social relations 
е o а active powers, and the , 5C constant performance of what these point out 
the un гат ns D en ду ШУ followed from a regulation of the 
$ 4., The. Desi .Mpfeeis) and , Ave, and Aversions in the first topic; f, h 
(ёккАісєц) were considered as simple aff, 5,200, DoD Ma nne 
x 8 I - AClinations аге exerted and restrained 
of the mind arising from the apprehensio: : : strained oue 
e ; | арр ought, there will be nothing to mislead у Y! 
anything was conducive to happiness, oi S 
А The ви ES eed i The last topic, and the completion of t. 
phuosophy was, to ы ае ТЕСЕ character, wag that of the Assents.3 Ag th 
manner as never to be wea ppointeds of t i was to produce a Security from failure in 
or incur the other; a point no otherwise 26, this was to secure an infallibilit 
. = l 
е рап by CEA UE ndi re absent, and to guard the mind from ever cither 
indifferent. ood must always be the о Jing a falsehood or dissenting from truth 
Desire, and Evil of Aversion. The persone man in t Sto; : 
à MERI AN RD L. 4n in the Stoic scheme was never to be 
wao considers life, health, ease, friends, TePULD, or to fi ini Д i 
| Г ens orm any opinion. Where evidence 
etc. as Good, and their contraries as Evil, ; - : 
( : 10t be Obtained, he was tO continue i 
necessarily desire the one, and be averse t m understanding was is 
: eH never to 
other ; and, consequently, must often fir €ven in sleep, or under the influence of 
Desire disappointed, and his Aversion Dor in a delirium. In this | i 
The Stoics, therefore, restrained Good апа, à күрше 

I 1 T, there is not a perfect а 
Virtue and Vice alone; and excluded all е5» рот ест agrcement, and 

а ы ./authors are so ver reason; i 

oe acy share in human happiness, ъё ЗЫ f .Very reasonable as to admit 
{ , sible for a philosopher to be mistaken їп 
made entirely dependent on a right e ; 

У д 2 ment after he hat] i 4 
From this regulation of the Desires and А» 5 O qe f d hia senses, 
follows that freedom from perturbatic^" v jects of these severa] classes of 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Dig zed by Aryd Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

INTRODUCTION 

personal existence. Yet some of the later Stoics ! 
departed from this doctrine of the conflagration, ' 
and supposed the world to be immortal.!6 Indeed, 

there 18 often so much obscurity and appearance 
of contradiction in their expressions, that it is very 
difficult, if not impossible, to form any precise idea 

Gf their meaning. They who with impartiality 

read what the ancient philosophers of all sects 

have written on the nature of God, will often find 

cause to think, with the utmost veneration and 

gratitude, on the only book in which this important 

article is explained, so far as is necessary to be 

known, in a manner perfectly agrecable to the 

principles of simple, unperverted reason. For 

what it graciously teaches more than reason could, 

it confirms by such evidences of its authority as 

reason must admit, or contradict itself. 

§ 14. The Stoics sometimes define God to be 
an intelligent, fiery spirit, without form, but passing 
into whatever things it pleases, and assimilating 
Jtself to all;!7 sometimes an active, operative 
бге.18 It might be hoped that these were only 
metaphorical phrases, if they did not expressly 
speak of God as corporeal, which is objected to 
them by Plutarch.!9 Indeed, they defined all 

..essence to be body.9 An error of which, 
“probably, they did not discover the ill tendency 
„апу more than Tertulhan; who inconsiderately 
followed them in this very unphilosophical notion, 
that what is not body is nothing at all?! His 
Christian faith secures him from the imputation of 
impiety; and the just and becoming manner in 
which the Stoics, in many instances, speak of God, 
should incline one to form the same favourable 
judgment of them ; and those authors seem guilty 

; ns, Dgltized.by.Anva-Samaj-Foundation GhennaiandeGangottirceuest s iii, у a 
„7 № | 
ө A 

' xi — DISCOURSES QF/EPICTETUS 

о 

of great.injustice who represent them аз little | 
: better than atheists.: " i аач, УД 
| “4.8515, They held: Һе eternity of matter as a ' 3 
e passiye principle; : but that it was reduced into | sul 

orm by. God, and that the: world was made and i 
is ;continually .governed by him.??: They some- | 
times. represent him :as modelling the constitution | 

1 

E 

~ of the world with supreme authority ; 28 at others, = \ be: 
B s as limited by the materials, which he һай. not. the thi 
power to change.?5.. Epictetus may be thought .* ca 
| to. incline to this latter opinion; yet his words all 
, are capable of a different turn. And there are, 
perhaps, more arguments in the writings of the pe 
Stoics, to prove their belief of the uncontrollable j ot] 
power of the Deity in the formation of things, than | ап 
those:which some unguarded expressions appear to | an 
furnish against ite .; ..,.. +. 4 ate | as 
© 4:8 16,, Of allthe philosophers the.Stoics were the ` | th 
clearest and most zealous assertors. of a particular | 
Providence ; 2° a belief which was treated with the i int 
utmost contempt by the Epicureans.27 As this j of 
principle is, of all others, the most conducive to^ — 5 “th 
the interests of virtue, and; lays the, foundation of Sc 
all true piety, the Stoics are entitled to the highest sul 
honour. for their steady. defence of it, and their otl 
utter rejection of the idle and contemptible notion ` : СІ 
~ of chance.28 | dl tin 
a 8.17.. By fate they seem to have. understood | 5е 
а, series of events appointed by the immutable ^..| inj 
icounsels of Соё ;, or that law of his, providence ^ | pe 
by which he governs the world. It is evident, | по 
; by their writings, that they meant it in no sense | се 
I which interferes with the liberty of human actions. | thi 
Cicero allows that Chrysippus endeavoured to 
reconcile fate with free will; and that it was i be 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

MP 

ы b» d$» 607 "e uS PP R9 woo да: 

А 
C 

po a3 ({ э ,"^ wawue у $T 

eg ua c pe 

зе е. 

o AMBAE 

Digitized by Агуа'Затај Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

J 

INTRODUCTION : i 

contrary to his intention that, by a perplexed 
way of arguing, he confirmed the doctrine of 
necessity." Whenever they speak of God as 
subject to fate, which it must be owned they 
sometimes do in a very strong and unguarded 
manner, their meaning seems to be, that his own 
sternal will is his law; that he cannot change, 
because he, always ordains what is best; 80 and 
that, as fate is no morc than a connected series of 
causes, God is the first original cause, оп which 
all the rest depend.?! 
58 18..They imagined the whole universe to be 
peopled with gods, genii, and demons; and among 
other inferior divinities. reckoned the sun, moon, 
and stars, which they conceived to be animated 
and intelligent, or inhabited by particular deities, 
as the body is by the soul, who presided over 
them and directed their motions.?? 7 

5 19. The Stoics held both the above-mentioned 
intelligences.and the souls of men to be portions 
of the essence of God,®5 or parts of the soul of 
the world,?! and to be corporeal,35 and. perishable.96 
Some of them indeed maintained that human souls 
subsisted after death ; but that they were, like all 
other beings, to be consumed at the conflagration. 
Cleanthes taught that all souls lasted till that 
time; Chrysippus, only those of the good.% 
Seneca is perpetually wavering, sometimes speak- 
ing .of the soul as immortal; and, at others, as 
perishing with the body. And indeed there is | 
nothing but confusion, and a melancholy | un- 
certainty, to be met with among the Stoic on 
this subject. | 

§ 20. There is, I think, very little evidence to 
be found that they believed future rewards or 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

€— € 7 DI EJ DPA м 
UL usas tics Digilized by Arve Samaf-Fodnddtióh: 

ысмы 

иаа то 

ол qwe 

ae 

* É ё 
хіх DISCOURSES OF ÉPICTETUS 

punishments, compared with that which appears to 
the contrary ; 28 at least the reader will observe 
that Epictetus never asserts either. He strongly 
insists that a bad man hath no other punishment 
ап being such; ‘and a good man no other 
reward ;?? and he tells his disciple that, when 
want of necessaries obliges him to go out of life? 
he returns to the four elements of which he was 
made; that there is no Hades nor Acheron nor 
Pyriphlegethon; 4° and he clearly affirms: that 
personal existence is lost іп death.® Had 
Epictetus believed future rewards, he must, of 
course, have made frequent mention of them.$? 
M. Antoninus, upon a supposition that souls 
continue after death, makes them to remain for 
some time in the air, and then to be- changed, 
diffused, kindled, and resumed into the productive 
intelligence of the universe. In another place 
he vindicates the conduct of Providence, on the 
hypothesis that the souls of the good are ex- 
tinguished by death.*4 ; 

821. The Stoics thought that every single" 

person had a tutelary genius assigned him by God, 

as a guardian of his soul and a superintendent of 

his conduct,* and that all virtue and happiness 
consist in acting in concert with this genius, with 
reference to the will of the supreme director of 
the whole.í0 Sometimes, however, they make 
the genius to be only the ruling faculty of every 
one's own mind.47 aite 

"8 22. A very slight examination of their 
writings is eufficient to convince any impartial 
reader how little the doctrines of this sect were 
fitted to influence the generality of mankind. 
But indeed about the generality of mankind’ the 

INTRODUCTION xv 

Stoics do not appear to have given themselves 
any kind of trouble. They seemed to consider 
all (except the few who were students in the 
intricacies of a philosophic system) as very little 
superior to beasts; and, with great tranquillity; 
left them to follow the devices of their own -un- 
‘governed appetites and passions. How unlike was 
this to the diffusive benevolence of the divine author 
of the Christian religion, who adapted his discourses 
to the comprehension, and extended the means of 
happiness to the attainment, of all mankind ! 

§ 23. There зеет to be only two methods by 
which the present appearances of things are capable 
of being reconciled to our ideas of the justice, 
wisdom, and goodness of God: the one is the 
doctrine of a future state; the other, the position 
that virtue alone is sufficient to human happiness 
in this.f$ The first, which was the method 
chosen by Socrates, solves cvery difficulty, without 
contradicting either sense or reason; the latter, 

v Which was unfortunately maintained by the Stoics, 
is repugnant to both. — 

§ 24. That there ів (ап intrinsic beauty and 
excellency in moral gcodness; that it is the 
ornament and perfection of all rational beings; and 
that, till conscience is stified by repeated guilt, we 
feel an obligation to prefer and follow, so far as we 
perceive it, in all cases; and find an inward satis- 
faction, and generally receive outward advantages, 
from so doing,—are positions which no thinking 
person can contradict: but it doth not follow from 
hence, that in such a mixture as mankind it 1s its 
own sufficient reward. God alone, infinitely perfect, 
is happy in and from himself. The virtue of finite 
beings must be defective: snd the happiness’ of 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
A i 

xvi DISCOURSES: OF &PICTETUS 

created beings must be dependent. It is undeniable 
fact that the natural consequences of virtue in some 
may be interrupted by the vices of others. How 
much are the best persons liable to suffer from ti:e 
follies of. the unthinking ; ‘from. the ill-nature, the 
rage, the scorn of the malevolent; from the cold and . 
the penurious hardheartedness of the unfeeling ;9 ` 
from persecutions, for the sake both of religion and 
honesty ; from ill returns to conjugal, to parental, 
to. friendly affection; ‚and from. an innumerable 
train of ‘other evils, to which the most amiable 
dispositions are usually the most sensible!” It 
ie no less undeniable that the natural consequences 
of yirtue are interrupted by the struggles of our 
own passions (which we may overcome rewardably, 
though very: imperfectly, or, if we live to overcome 
more; perfectly, ‘we may not live to enjoy the 
victory) ; by sickness, pain, languor, want; .and 
by what we feel from the death or the sufferings 
of, those with whom. ме -are most nearly con- 
nected, We are often, indeed, afflicted by many of - 
these things more than we ought to be. . „Ви 
concern, for some,-at least our own. failings, for 
instance, is directly a duty; for others, it is visibly 
the instrument of moral improvement; for more 
still, it is the unavoidable result of our frame; and 
they who carry it too. far may, on the whole, be 
good. characters; and even they who do not, in 
any considerable degree, may however be extremely 
wretched. How, then, can virtue be its own reward 
to mankind in general, ог indeed a proportionable 
reward to almost any man? Or. how, unless the 
view be extended beyond such a scene of things, the 
certain means of happiness? „Тһе originally ap- 
pointed means of. happiness , it undoubtedly is; but 

SRI MUR UE ul eh 

pe 

E ЛЕР 

that it 
to сте: 
disorde 
future 
us full 
8 25 
in ano 
extrav. 
circum 
good 1 
of rosi 
which 
experi 
their | 
the pc 
> 8 2! 
and tk 
are nc 
ar 
be: fal 
amonj 
“remar 
dogm: 
suicid 
pains 
this a 
dence 
practi 
resigr 
evide 
indee 
was а 
suffer 
from 
empl: 

` 

xvii 

INTRODUCTION 

that it should be an effectual and infallible means 
to creatures во imperfect, passing through such a 
disordered world, is impossible, without a state of 
future reward; and of this the gospel alone gives 
us full assurance. 2 

§ 25. By rejecting the doctrine of recompenses 
in another life, the Stoics were reduced to the 
extravagance of supporing felicity to be enjoyed in 
circumstances which sare incapable of it. That a 
good man stretched,on a rack, or reposing on a bed 
of roses, should enjoy himself equally, was a notion 
which could gain but few proselytes; and a sad 
experience that pain was an evil, sometimes drove 
their own disciples from the thorny asperities of 
the portico to the flowery gardens of Epicurus. 

8 26. The absolute indifference of all externals, 
and the position, that things independent on choice 
are nothing to us, the grand point on which their 
arguments turned, every one who feels knows to 
be: false: and the practice of the wisest and best 
among them proved it in fact to be so. It is 

“remarkable that no sect of philosophers ever so 
dogmatically prescribed, or so frequently committed, 
suicide as those very Stoics, who taught that the 
pains and sufferings, which they strove to end by 
this act of rebellion against the decrees of Provi- 
dence, were no evils. How absolutely this horrid 
practice contradicted all their noble precepts of 
resignation and submission to the divine will 18 too 
evident to need any enlargement. ‘They professed, 
indeed, in suicide to follow the divine will; but this 
was a lamentably weak pretence. Even supposing 
sufferings to be evils, they are no proof of a signal 
from God to abandon life; but to show an ex- 
emplary patience, which he will reward: but, 

xviii DISCOURSES OE EPICTETUS 
e 

supposing them, as the Stoics did, nqt to be evils, 
they afford not so much as the shadow of a proof. 
6 27. As the Stoics, by the permission of suicide, 
plainly implied that external inconveniences were 
not indifferent in the extremity, it follows that they 
must proportionably be allowed not to be indifferent 
in the inferior degrees; of which Zeno seemed to 
be perfectly well convinced, by hanging himself 
when his finger ached. And where was the 

“use of taking so much pains to say and believe 

what they knew to be false? It might, perhaps, 
be thought to be of some benefit, in the time of the 
later Stoica, to the great men of Rome, whom the 
emperors frequently butchered at their pleasure: 
and this is the use to which Epictetus is perpetually 
applying it. Yet, even in this case, the Stoic 
doctrine, where men could bring themselves to act 
upon it, made them absurdly rough, as appears by 
the history of Helvidius: Priscus, and hindered the 
good they might otherwise have done. And ifa 
man, taught thus to despise tortures and death, 
should happen at the same time to be wrong-headed, 
for. which he had no small chance, he would in 
one respect be a more terrible wild beast than an 
enthusiast of any other sect, as he would not 
think his sufferings evils; though in another he 
would be less so, as he would not hope to be 
rewarded for them hereafter. 

828. The Stoics are frequently, and justly, 
charged with great arrogance in their discourses, 
and even in their addresses to God. They assert, 
however, the doctrine of grace, and the duty of 
praise and. thanksgiving for the divine assistance in 
moral improvements. But there doth not, I think, 
appear any inetance of a Stoic, or perhaps any other 

e 

INTRODUCTION xix 

heathen philosopher, addressing his repentance to 
God, and begging pardon for his failings, or 
directing his disciples to do it. Inused nothing 
can excuse their idolatry of human nature, which 
they proudly and inconsistently supposed perfect 
and self-suflicient. Seneca carried the matter so 
for as by an impious antithesis to give his wise 
man the superiority to Сой. Epictetus indeed 
was attentive enough to the voice of conscience to 
own himself not perfect : 5? and he sometimes tells ~ 
his hearers that they cannot be perfect yet.o5 But 
even he at other times informs them that they are 
not inferior to the gods.5 The Stoical boasting 
will, however, imply less of personal arrogance, if we 
can suppose that those speeches, which so ill become 
human imperfection, were always uttered, as perhaps 
in' part they often were, in the character of their 
idol, the perfectly wise and good man, which they 
owned to be merely an ideal being.55 — At least, it 
may be affirmed with truth that they frequently 
mention themselves with decency and humility, and 
“with an express confession of their deviation from 
this faultless exemplar. x 

& 29. But then, where was the use of their 
favourite doctrine, that a wise man must always be 
happy? Might not a person, determined to follow 
his own inclinations, very reasonably object, ‘What 
is that to me if I am not, or to anybody clse if 
no one ever was, a wise man? But suppose I 
were one ; which is the better grounded argument? 
You must always be happy, and therefore externals 
are no evils; or, These things are evils, and there- 
fore I am not happy. But Epictetus will say, 
You have aremedy: the door is open; go, with 
great good humour and thankfulness, and hang 

илге килат кте мере абд др OE en SD АДЫРНА ДАНИРА АЫ, 
A = р s 

MÀ M ÀÁÀÁ—— e 

e 

t- 

i 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri COIIGGROH, анана: 

NIC Id MS TUS 

xii DISCOURSES OF'EPICTETUS 

own hearts. They reasoned many times admirably 
well, but from false principles; and the noblest of 
their practical precepts, being built on a sandy 
basis, lay at the mercy of every strong temptation. 

§ 33. Stoicism is, indeed, in many points inferior 
to the doctrine of Socrates, which did not teach 
that all externals were indifferent; which did teach 
a future state of recompense; and, agreeably to 
that, forbade suicide. It doth not belong to the 
present subject to show how much even this bes 
system is excelled by Christianity. Хе is suficien 
just to observe that the author of it died in . 
profession, which he had always made, of hi 
belief in the popular deities, whose superstitions and 
impure worship was the great source of corruption 
in the heathen world; and the last words he 
uttered were a direction to his friend for the 
performance of an idolatrous ceremony. This 
melancholy instance of ignorance and error, in the 
most illustrious character for wisdom and virtue 
in all heathen antiquity, is not mentioned as a 
reflection on his memory, but as a proof of humat 
weakness in general. Whether reason could have 
discovered the great truths which in these days 
are ascribed to it, because now scen so clearly by 
the light of the gospel, may be a question; but 
that it never did is an undeniab'e fact; and that 
is enough to teach us thankfulness for the blessing 
of a better information. Socrates, who had, of all 
mankind, the fairest pretensions to set up for an 
instructor and reformer of the world, confessed 
that he knew nothing, referred to tradition, and 
acknowledged the want of a superior guide; and 
there is a remarkable passage in Epictetus, in 
which he represents it as the office of his supreme 

INTRÓDUCTION xxiii 

god, or of one deputed by him, to appear among 
mankind as a teacher and example.57 

834. Upon the whole, the several sects of 
heathen philosophy serve as 50 many striking 
instances of the imperfection of human wisdom, 
and of the extreme need of a divine assistance to 
réctify the mistakes of depraved rcason, and to 
replace natural religion on its true foundation. 
The Stoics everywhere testify the noblest zeal for 
virtue, and the honour of God; but they attempted 
to establish them on principles inconsistent with 
the nature of man, and contradictory to truth and 
experience. Ву a direct consequence of these 
principles they were liable to be seduced, and in 
fact often were seduced, into pride, hard-hearted- 
ness, and the last dreadful extremity of human 
guilt, self-murder. 

§ 35. But however indefensible the philosophy 
of the Stoics in several instances may be, it appears 
to have been of very important use in the heathen 
world; and they are, од many accounts, to be 
considered in a very respectable light. Their 
doctrine of evidence and fixed principles was an 
excellent preservative from the mischiefs that might 
| have arisen from the scepticism of the Academics 
and Pyrrhonists, if unopposed ; and their zealous 
defence of a particular providence a valuable 
antidote to the atheistical scheme of Epicurus. 
To this may be added, that their strict notions of 
virtue in most points (for they sadly failed in 
some), and the lives of scveral among them, must 
contribute a good deal to preserve luxurious states 
from an absolutely universal dissoluteness, and the 
subjects of arbitrary government from a wretched 
and contemptible pusillanimity. 

xiv DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 
: о 4 Я 

§ 36. Even now their compositions тау be Л the | 
read with great advantage, as containing excellent | mult 
rules of self-government and of social behaviour, i life 

© of a noble reliance on the aid and protection of thei 
© Heaven, and of a perfect resignation and submission mist 
to the divine will; points which are treated with witl 
great clearness, and with admirable врїїїї, in the ntist 
lessons of the Stoics; and though their directions ^ Bos 
are seldom practicable on their principles, in trying & доц 
cases, may be rendered highly useful in subordina- | erro 
tion to Christian reflections. 5 

. 837. If, among those who are so unhappy as fron 

to remain unconvinced of the truth of Christianity, they 
any are prejudiced against it by the influence of i able 

* unwarrantable inclinations, such persons will find ii wi 
very little advantage in rejecting the doctrines of fror 
the New Testament for those of the portico, unless lear 
they think it an advantage to be laid under moral | to ( 
restraints almost equal to those of the gospel, while wit 
they are deprived of its encouragements and | їп! 
supports. Deviations from the rules of sobriety, | obs 
justice, and piety meet with small indulgence in equ 
the Stoic writings; and. they who profess to { rea: 
admire Epictetus, unless they pursue that severely | do» 
virtuous conduct which he everywhere prescribes, | not 
will find themselves treated by him with the utmost | we 
degree of scorn and contempt. An immoral | pos 
character is indeed, more or less, the outcast of | dis 

all sects of philosophy ; and Seneca quotes even | ven 
Epicurus to prove the universal obligation of a | dut 
virtuous life.68 Of this great truth, God never | wis 
left himself without witness. Persons of dis- § 
tinguished talents and opportunities seem to have ticu 

е been raised, from time to time, by Providence to Hi 
^x. check the torren’, of corruption, and to. preserve is t 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri-Collection; Harig 

"4 

мч UA 1 VAAn)i——À et 

н м и 

Aam 

to 
be 

Ё 
Ў 

INTRÓDU£TION xxv 

the sense of moral obligations on the minds of the 
multitude, to whom the various occupations of 
life left but little leisure to form deductions of 
their own. But then, they wanted a proper com- 

mission to enforce their precepts; they intermixed Е 
with them, through false reasoning, many gross 
nfistakes; and their unavoidable ignorance, in 
several important points, entangled them with 
doubts, which easily degenerated into pernicious 
errors. 

§ 38. If there are others who reject Christianity 
from motives of dislike to its peculiar doctrines, 
they will scarcely fail of entertaining more favour- 
able impressions of it if they can be prevailed on, 
with impartiality, to compare the holy Scriptures, 
from whence alone the Christian religion is to be 
learned, with the Stoic writings; and then fairly 
to consider whether there is anything to be met 
with in the discourses of our blessed Saviour, 
in the writings of his Apostles, or even in the 
Qbscurest parts of the prophetic books, by which, 
equitably interpreted, either their senses or their 
reason are contradicted, as they are by the para- 
doxes of these philosophers; and if not, whether 
notices ‘from above, of things in which, though 
we comprehend them but imperfectly, we are 
possibly much more interested than at present we 
discern, ought not to be received with implicit 
veneration, as useful exercises and trials of that 
duty which finite understandings owe to infinite 
wisdom. 

§ 39. Antiquity furnishes but very few par- 
ticulars of the life of Epictetus. He was born at 
Hierapolis, a city of Phrygia; but of what parents 
is unknown, as well as by what means he came to 

CC-0. 

xxi DISCOURSES ОЁ EPICTETUS 
Оэ: . T " 

Rome, where he was the slave of Epaphroditus, 
one of -Nero’s courtiers.59 It is reported that 
when his master once put his leg to the torture, 
Epictetus, with great composure, and even smiling, 
observed to him, *You will certainly break my 
leg’; which accordingly happened, and he con- 
tinued, in the same tone of voice, * Did not I tell 
you that you would break it??? This accident 
might perhaps be the occasion of his lameness, 
which, however, some authors say he had from 
his early years,9! and others attribute to the 
rheumatism.“ At what time he obtained his 
liberty doth not appear. When the philosophers, 
by a decree of Domitian, were banished from 
Rome, Epictetus retired to Nicopolis,9? a city of 
Epirus, where he taught philosophy ; from which 
he doth not seem to have derived any external 
advantages, as he is universally said to have been 
extremely poor. - At least he was so when he 
lived at Rome, where his whole furniture con- 
sisted of a bed,9* a pipkin, and an earthen lamp ; $5 
which last was purchased for about a hundred 
pounds, after his death, by a person whom Lucian 
ridicules for it, as hoping to acquire the wisdom 
of Epictetus by studying over it. His only 
attendant was a woman, whom he took in his 
advanced years to nurse a child whom, other- 
wise, one of his friends would have exposed to 
perish ; 9 an amiable proof of the poor old man's 
good-nature, and disapprobation, it is to be hoped, 
of that shocking, yet common, instance of heathen 
blindness and barbarity. 

In this extreme poverty, a cripple, unattended, 
and destitute of almost every convenience of life, 
Epictetus was not only obliged by the rules of his 

«^. 

8. 
expr 
stron 

acqu: 
suppc 

INTRODUCTION | м 
е 

philosophy to think himself happy, but actually 
did so, according to the distich of which Aulus 
Gellius affirms him to have been the author ; 67 

A slave, in body maimed, as Irus poor ; 
Yet to the gods was Epictetus dear, 

* He is said to have returned to Rome in the 
reign of Hadrian, and to have been treated by him 
with a high degree of familiarity.68 — If this be 
true, he lived to a great age. But that he should 
continue alive to the time of M. Antoninus, as 
Themistius ? and Suidas? affirm, is utterly im- 
probable,” as the learned Fabricius observes; to 
whose life of Epictetus?? I am greatly indebted. 
When or where he died is, I think, nowhere 
"mentioned. All authors agree in bearing testimony 
to the unblemished conduct of his life, and the 
usefulness of his instructions. The last-named 
emperor expresses much obligation to a friend 
Who had communicated his works to him 373 and 

ain another place he ranks him, not only with 
Chrysippus, but with Socrates./4 - A. Gellius 
calls him the greatest of the Stoics.75 Origen 
affirms that,his writings had done more good than 
Plato's ; 76 and Simplicius says, perhaps by way 
of indirect opposition to an infinitely better book, 
that he who 1s not influenced by them is reclaim- 
able by nothing but the chastisemeats of another 
world. In what manner he instructed his pupils 
will be seen in the following treatise. 

§ 40. There are so many of the sentiments and 
expressions of Christianity in it, that one should be 
strongly tempted to think that Epictetus was 
acquainted with the New Testament, if such a 
supposition was not highly injurious to his character. 

TUE RR RARUS CAE 
ic/Dofnain; Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar’ `. 

igitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
9 0 

‘xxvii DISCOURSE§ OF EPICTETUS 

To have known the contents of that book, and not 
to have been led by them into an inquiry which 
must-have convinced him -of their truth, would 
argue such an obstinacy of prejudice as one would 
* not willingly impute to a mind which appears so 
well disposed. And, even passing over this 
„consideration, to haye.-borrowed so much frdin 
Christianity ав he seems to have: done, without 
making ‘the least acknowledgment from whence 
she received it, would be an instance of disingenuity 
“utterly unworthy of an honest man, and inconsistent 
with his practice in other respects; for he often 
quotes, with great applause, the sentences of many 
‘writers not of his own sect. Possibly indeed he 
might, like the other heathens in general, have a 
peculiar contempt of, and aversion to, Christian 
authors, as akin to the Jews, and opposers of the 
„ jestablished worship; notwithstanding those parts 
of. them which he must approve. But still, I 
‘hope, his conformity with the sacred writings may 
be accounted for without supposing him acquainted. 
with Christianity as such. The great number of 
its professors, dispersed through the Roman 
empire, had probably introduced several of the 
New Testament phrases into the popular language; 
and the Christian religion might by that time have 
diffused some degree of general illumination, of 
which many might receive the benefit who were 
ignorant of the source from whence it proceeded ; 
and Epictetus I apprehend to have been of this 
number. Several striking instances of this re- 
semblance between him and the New ‘Testament 
have been observed in the notes; and the attentive 
reader will find many which are not mentioned, 

INTRODUCTION xxix 

and may perceive from them, either that the Stoics 
admired the Christian language, however they 
came to the knowledge of it, or that treating a 
subject practically, and with a fecling of its force, 
leads men to such strong expressions as we find” 
in Scripture, and should find oftener in the 
Philosophers if they had been more in earnest ; 
but, however, they occur frequently enough, to 
vindicate those, in which the Scriptures abound, 
from the contempt and ridicule of light minds. 

§ 41. Arrian, the disciple of Epictetus, to 
whom we are obliged for these-discourses, was a 
Greek by birth, but a senator and consul of 
Rome, and an able commander in war.78 He 
imitated Xenophon, both in his life and writings; 
and particularly in delivering to posterity the 
conversations of his master. ‘There were origin- 
ally twenty books of them, besides the Enchiridion, 
which seems to be taken out of them, and an 
account of his life and death. Very little order 

„ог method is to be found in them, or was from 

the nature of them to be expected. The con- 
nection is often scarcely discoverable; a reference 
to particular incidents, long since forgotten, at the 
same time that it evidences their genuineness, often 
renders them obscure in some places, and the 
great corruption of the text in others. Yet, under 
all these: disadvantages, this immethodical collec- 
tion is perhaps one of the most valuable remains 
of antiquity ; and they who consult it with any 
degree of attention can scarcely fail of receiving 
improvement. Indeed, it is hardly possible to be 
inattentive to so awakening a speaker as Epictetus. 
There is such a warmth and spirit in his exhorta- 

Domain. Gurukul Kangri Colle: ion, Haridwar N 

^ 

; Digitized by Arya Samaj'Foundation Chennai and eG 

*. CC. In Public Domain. Gürukü 

anggtr 

БУНА 

ххх DISCOURSES ОЁ EPICTETUS 

tions; and his good sense is enlivened by such a 
keenness of wit, and gaiety of humour, as render 
the study of him a most delightful as well as 
profitable entertainment. S 

§ 42. For this reason it was judged proper that 
a translation of him should be undertaken; there 
being none, I believe, but of the Enchiridion in aßy 
modern language, excepting a pretty good French 
one, published about a hundred and fifty years 
ago, and s0 extremely scarce that I was- unable 
to procure it, till Mr. Harris obligingly lent it to 
me after I had published the proposals for printing 
this, which, notwithstanding the assistance given 
me in the prosecution of it, hath still, I am 
sensible, great faults. But they who will see 
them the most clearly will be the readiest to 
excuse, as they will know best the difficulty of 
avoiding them. There is one circumstance 
which, I am apprehensive, must be particularly 
striking, and possibly shocking to many, the 
frequent use of some words in an unpopular sense ; 
an inconvenience which, however, I flatter myself, 
the introduction and notes will, in some degree, 
remove. In the translation of technical terms, if 
the same Greek word had not always been 
rendered in the same manner, at least when the 
propriety of our language will at all permit it, 
every new expression would have been apt to raise 
а new idea. ‘The reader, I hope, will pardon, if 
not approve, the uncouthness, in many places, of 
a translation pretty strictly literal; as it seemed 
necessary, upon the whole, to preserve the 
original spirit, the peculiar turn and characteristic 
roughness of the author. For else, taking greater 
liberties would have spared me no small pains. 

D 

———— 

=> 

ст» о 2 

— аз 

d 
e 
c 
r 

INTRODUCTION xxxi 

I have been much indebted to Mr. Upton’s 
edition, by which many passages, unintelligible 
before, are cleared up. is emendations have 
often assisted me in the text, and his references 
furnished me with materials for the historical 

notes, 
e 

“PANE TEST Ore teret 
CC-0. In Public Een. ШИЙ Kangri сав ЙОД H 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION. By the Translator : б 
TABLE OF CONTENTS . 5 o . 
INDEX 

"ARRIAN TO Lucius GELLIUS . 

CHAP. 
I. 

: IH. 

IH. 

IV. 

Wo 

VI. 

Vil. 

У. 

ІХ. 

-— 

BOOK I 

Of the things which are, and of those 
which are not, in our own power . 
In what manner upon every occasion to 
preserve our character. : : 

How, from the doctrine that God is the 
Father of mankind, we may proceed 
to its consequences . i ; S 

Of improvement . : 5 - ; 

Concerning the Academics . А А 

Of Providence. Zo 6 : 

Of the use of convertible and hypotheti- 
cal propositions, and the like . : 

That faculties are not safe to the un- 
instructed : : c о а 

How from the doctrine of our kindred 
to God we are to procced to its con- 
sequences 5 : 2 : : 

ххх 

РАСА 
у 

xxxiii 
xxxix 

xlvii 

21 

2$ 

26 

Digitized By Jue Samaj Foundation Chennai d ou de 
. 2 ? 
xxxiv DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAP. PAGE { 
x. Concerning those who strove for prefer- } ( 
: ments at Rome О . с "NET Г 
-° xı, Of natural affection . . . s FY 
* хи. Of contentment . é © "ES 
xix. How everything may be performed 
acceptably to the god’. wr d f 
xiv. That all things are under the divine 
Š inspection : О . . «44 
н xv. What it is that philosophy promises . 46 
б Xvi. Of Providence . : о ; «47 
хуп. That the art of reasoning is necessary . 49 
a хуш. That we are not to be angry with the 
i errors of others o . : s %3 
Xix. Of the behaviour to be observed towards 
tyrants . . . . . e 86 
XX. In what manner reason contemplates 
| itself . 5 : : : - 60 
xx1. Of the desire of admiration . e o CA 
| ххи. Of pre-conceptions , 6 „4163 | 
| xxul. Against Epicurus о : é 2 бс P `4 
| xxiv. How we are to struggle with difficulties 67 
| xxv. On the same subject , © : - 69 
XXVI. What the law of life is М " - 73 
ххуп. Of the several appearances of things to 
the mind; and what remedies are to 
be provided for them А й . 95 | ` 
{ xxvii. That we are not to be angry with man- | 
| 9 kind. What things are little, what $ 
| great among men , " . - 78 1 
xxix, Of intrepidity . 0 . : с 199 
ххх. What we ought to have ready in difficult { 
| circumstances , g Е 7 К 91 ! 

Nts 

ee 

4 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

\ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai апа eGangotri 
р 

* 
LJ 
|j CONTENTS | xxxv 
1505 i BOOK II 
і CHAP. TACH 
31 T 1. That courage is not inconsistent with 
53 | caution . : о 5 . . 93 ч 
38 { u. Of tranquillity . о б . о oe | 
ii. Concerning such as recommend persons 5 
23 ! е to the philosophers . А 2 . 101 [x 
1v. Concerning a person who had been guilty” f ^ 
44 { of adultery А : о b . 103 [v 
46 v. How magnanimity may be consistent 
47 with care о . о . . 104 
49 vi. Of indifference . . . . . 108 
vii. Of divination . с . . о 112 
53 ; viu. Wherein consists the essence of good . 114 
iX. That when we are unable to fulhl what 
56 the character of a man promises, we 
assume that of a philosopher . o RW 
6o x. How we may investigate the duties of 
62 life from the names which we bear . 121 
23 а x1. What the beginning of philosophy is . 124 
65e е xu, Of disputation . бо. . . 128 
67 хш. Of solicitude с . . . о 0131 
69 Г xiv. Concerning Naso > . . o RIE 
73 г xv. Concerning those who, obstinately per- 
severe in what they have determined. 140 b 
i xvi. That we do not study to make usc of ү 
75 b the principles concerning good and i 
| evil. А o o c о . 141 4 
хуп. How to adapt pre-conceptions to par- 
78 n ticular cases . . o o . 148 | 
83 | хуш. How the appearances of things are to bc ч i 
1 combated о ; 8 5 o ngón E 
9! | xix. Concerning those who embrace philo- EX 

sophy only in words . . о . 158 

llection, Haridwar 

xxxvi DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAT. р p PAGE 
xx. Concerning the Epicureans and Academics 163 

xxl. Of inconsistency . . : . 169 

xxi Offrendship . o о : „1:72 

e ххш. Of the faculty of speaking . о . 178 
xxiv. Concerning a person whom he treated 

with disregard . . . о o. WE 

xxv. 'That logic is necessary o : e 189 

xxvi. What is the property of errors in life , 189 

Nores . , . Й е ° e o» 191 
GLOSSARY г ' e ° E . “© 223 
BOOK III 

VOLUME И 
. Of finery in dress 5 : : ^ X 

u. In what a proficient ought to be exer- 
cised, and that we neglect the prin- 
cipal things . о о с . 8 
ш. What is the subject-matter о. a good 

- 

man; and in what we chiefly ought 
to be practitioners . о о S BH 
iv. Concerning one who exerted himself, 
with indecent eagerness, in the theatre 

v. Concerning those who pretend sickness 
as an excuse to return home , o 16 
vi. Miscellaneous. Ra a . 5 0 

уп. Concerning a governor of the Free States 
who was an Epicurean . о NO 

vur. How we are to exercise ourselves against 
the appearances of things . о c аб 

1X. Concerning a certain orator who was 
going to Rome on a law-suit . o PG 
X. In what manner we ought to bear sickness 30 

T Da 5 
ri Collection; Haridwar =: 

мейл ж» 

CONTENTS 

CHAP. 
xi. Miscellaneous . ч 
1 хи. Of ascetic exercise o ; : : 
i хіп. What solitude is, and what a solitary 
И person. 2 . 5 о : 
xiv. Miscellaneous. о о : 9 
xv. That everything is to be undertaken 
with circumspection . - c : 
Í хуз. That caution is necessary in condescen- 
sion and complaisance . o 
хуп. Of Providenco . 5 S 
хуш. That we ought not to be alarmed by 
any news that is brought us — . c 
xix. What is the condition of the vulgar, and 
what of a philosopher o о 3 
xx, That some advantage may be gained 
from every external circumstance — . 
xxi. Conceming those who readily set up for 
sophists . А o : 
_ ххи. Of the Cynic АПОУ : З 
| сухі. Concerning such as read and dispute 
| ostentatiously . o с c 6 
| xxiv. That we ought not to be allected by 
i things not in our own power. 5 
i XXV. Concerning those who desist from their 
| purpose + . . . . 
| xxvi. Concerning those who are in dread a 
| want о 5 : . o o 
ў 
Н 
j| 
A з BOOK IV : 
1. Of freedom . о : 5 о o 
п. Of complaisance с . . о : 
VOL. I. d 

94 

95 

103 
129 

PTET 

"aterert 

DISCOURQES OF EPICTETUS 

What things are to be exchanged for 
others . . c З 2 2 
Concerning those who eamestly desire 
a life of repose 5 : z о 

Concerning the quarrelsome and ferocious 
Concerning those who grieve at being 

pitied 6 ; : 2 а 
Of fearlessness . А 5 2 3 
Concerning such as hastily run into the 
philosophic dress ? 2 ; 

Concerning a person who was grown 
immodest 

. What things we are to despise, and on 

what to place a distinguished value 

xı. Of purity and cleanliness . : : 
хи. Of attention : з : З : 
хи. Concerning such as readily discover their 
own affairs, : 2 : 

THE ENCHIRIDION 2 

FRAGMENTS , 

NOTES 

GLOSSARY 5 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Colléctidi 

ү 

PAGE. 

Б>. 

Clea 
Соп 

Соп 
Соп 

PAGE 

or 
. 131 
re 
6. ge 
us 140 
о 
[32 
- 146 
2 HSB 
с 
. 159 
п 
. 165 
n 
. 168 
«173 
25128 
г 
„181 
20187 
e 245 
. 253 
. 283 

INDEX 

Acapemics deny the evidence of the senses, 11, xx. $ 6. 
Adultery reproved, 11. iv. §§ 1, 2. 

| Affection not inconsistent with reason, І. xi. 8 2 ; how to be 

regulated, т. xxiv. $ 4 5 when miscalled, ibid. 

,Agrippinus. His behaviour about his trial, 1, i. 8 8; his 

й. 

— 

vec 

mA 

; Company a festival, 1. xii, 8 2 ; 1v. iv. 8 3. 

answer to Florus, 1. ii. § 3. 
Anger reproved, и. xviii. $ 3. 
Appearances to the mind, а right use of them in our own 
power, 1. і. 8 2. 
the standard of action, 1. xxviii. 8 2 
Archedemus, 11. iv. § 2 ; xvii. § 45 xix. 8 I5 11. ii. § 5. 
Attention recommended, 1v. xii. 

Braury, human, consists in human excellence, 111. 1. 8 1 ; in 
the rational part, ibid. § 3. 

Body, dependent on externals. 1. i. § 2 5 111. xxii. 8 5 5 1v. i. 

$8 11, 12, 145 clay, 1.1.8. 3 5 111. xxii» 8.555 11:65125 

our last garment, 1. xxv. 8 3 ; compared to an ass, 1v. 

i. § 11. 

«y 

Caution consistent with courage, и. i. 8 І, ctc. ; necessary 
in things decadent on choice, 11. i. § 4. 

Character to be preserved, 1. ii. §§ 3, 7 3 11. ii. § 3. 

Choice uncontrollable by Jupiter himself, 1. i. 8 65 incapable 
of restraint, І. xvii. $ 2 ; xxii. § 2 ; 111. xix. 8 1; in our 
own power, 1I. v. 8 I 5 із virtue and vice, happinces and 
unhappiness, и. xxiii. §§ 1, 2. 

Chrysippus, 1. iv. note 23 п. vi. 8 2; xvii. 8 3 ; xix. 81, 
ш. ii. § 5 5 xxi. § 15 why useful, 1. iv. 8 55 xvii. § 2. 

Cleanthes, 111. xxvi. note 3 ; 1v. i. 8 19. 

Complaisance to bc conducted with caution, ш. xvi. 8 15 

1v. li. 
Common sense what, 111. vi. § 3. 

xxxlx 

фу Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

xlii . DISCOURSRS OF EPICTETUS 

Good to Ье sought from ourselves, т. xxix. 8 1 3 un. xxii. $55 
the universal motive of action, 111. iii. $ 2; in our own 

: 
power, 1. xxix. § 6; 111. iii. 8 2 ; consists in choice, i. | 
8 xxx. ; П. xvi. § 1 5 xxiii. § 25 ш. x. § 25 not in ex- | 
ә ternals, 111. xx. 8 І; xxii. $ 4. j 
© Grief, rebellion against God, ш. xxiv. 8 № | 
| 
|! 
| 
б + m © н 
Helvidius Priscus, 1. ii. 98 4, 5. ! 
s Hermes (rod of), т. xx. $ 1. li 
+ Hippocrates, 1. viii. 8 1. i 

Humility recommended, Ench. xxxiii. ; Frag. iii. 

IwrrATION of God, п. xiv. § 23 xvi. § 43 
xviii, 88 4, 55 xix. 8 35 ш. xxiv. 8 1 ; E 

Improvement, in what to be sought, т. iv. 88 3, 4 5 tn. vi. 
8r e m i 
Industry, wherein it consists, Iv. iv. $ 5, | 
| 

E 
P 
| 
| 
| 
| 
ү, | Hyxattn, not a good, п. x. 8 2; xx. $ 1. 

Italicus, п. viii. 8 3. 
| Jurrrzn, x. i. 88 3, 4, 65 xii. 8 25 see God. 

Lateranus, Plautius, 1. i. 8 5. 

Laughter reproved, Ench. xxxiii. 

Law (divine) what, п. xvi. 8.5 5 ш. xi. S 1 
Lesbius, ти. xx. 

Life a thing indifferent, 11. vi. 8 x. 

^ 

2 

í 
| 
1 
| дү De 
«d Logic, ite use, r. vii. ; xvii. 8 1. 
| Love, consistent only with prudence, и. xxii. $ 1, 

8 2; part of a commonwealth, n. v. 8 4; x. 8 15 

xxv. § 15; is possessed of free will, 1. xvi. 8 2 ; xix. | 
SS ту. vii. 8 2 ; how preserved and how destroyed, 11. ix. 

of man, iv. i. 8 12. 
Marriage inconsistent with the Cynic profession, n1. xxii. 
§ 8; recommended, vii. 83; xxi. S 1. 
Master, who, т, xxix. 8 95 11. i. $8 45 Ench. xiv. 

QE 

cit. $ 53 
ur own 
loice, 1. 

in ex- 

niypter 

xxii 

1 Digitized by Arya Samaj ounc 

INDEX xliil 

Maximus, ni. vii. § 1. 
Moncy not a good, 31. xvi. 8 т. 

NrATNrss recommended, ш. i. § 7 5 1v. xi. 65 1513: 
J i ce ij E 
Nero, 1.1.8 55 ii. 8 3. 

OSTENTATION reproved, и. xii. SS 1, $5 xiv. 8 2 ; xxiii, 
e §§ 1,25 xxiv, 87 ; Ench. xlvi, xlvii, 

Patirnce the gift of God, 1. vi. § 55 п. xvi. 82 ; 1и. viii, 
2 
Philosophers, what they ought to study, 1.1.86 ; xx.§1; 
n. xiv. § 2 : ш. x. 82 ; how treated, п. xii. 8 2 ; in, 
viii, 8 3 ; Ench. xxii. 
Plato, 1. viii. 8 15 11. xvii. 88 1, 2 ; directs prayer, 11. xviii, 
$4 ; his notion of a community of wives, Frag. xlviii, 
Pleasure not a good, п. xi. $ 3 ; an attendant on virtuc, ші, 
vii. S 3. 
Polemo, 111. i. note 3. 
Poverty not an evil, п. xvii. 8 1; 1v. vi. 8 І. 
Prayer recommended, п. xviii, 88 4, 5 ; ш. xxi. 8 1. 
Principles not dependent on externals, т. xi. 8 3 ; the supreme 
rule of action, 1. xviii. $ 1 ; ш. ix. § І. 
Procrastination reproved, Ench. 1. 
Providence, instances of its wisdom and goodness, 1. vi. 
= 881,2,3 ; those instances proofs of a God, ikid. ; gives 
the best things to the best men, ш. xvii. 8 1, 
Pseudomenos, 11. xvii. note 4. 
Pyrrho, 1. xxvii. note 1. 
Pyrrhonists ridiculed, 1. xxvii. $ 2. 

QUARRELLING reproved, 1v. v. $$ 1, 2. 

x Ц 
itsclf, xx. $ 1; appointed to a proper usc of the аррсаг- 

ances of things, xx. § 1. 
Resignation recommended, 1. i. 8 55 п. xvi. 8 35 1v. i 
8 12. 
Revenge reproved, 11. x. § 5. 
Riches not a good, Frag. xvi. xxiii. 
Rufus, т. ix. 8 8 ; ш. vi. 84 ў xvii. į xxiii. 815; his answer 
to Thrasca, 1, i. 8 7 ; to Epictetus, т. vii. § 4. 

Reason equal in gods and men, 1. xii. 8 2; contemplates 

аастын EE 

кто а ЕРЕЕН 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurakul Kangri- свей 

xliv DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

SELF-INTEREST the universal motive of action, 1. xix. 8 2; 
natural, xxii. 8 35 11. xxii. § 1 ; the ground of picty, 
1. xxvii. 8 1 ; m. xxii. 8 2; Ench. xxxi. 

Sceptics ridiculed, 1. xxvii. 8 2. 

Servants. Humanity to them, Frag. xxx. 

Shame (false), reproved, 111. xxiv. 8 7 ; xxvi. $ 1. 

Sickness not an evil, m1, xx. S r; Аз use, xx. § 15 no 
impediment to the mind, Ench. ix. 

Socrates, his resignation to the divine will, 1. iv. 8 
citizen of the world, ix. § t ; his speech to his j 
ix. § 5; 11,1, 8 45 xxiii. S 15 began by the ex 
tion of words, 1. xvii. § 1; always preserved the 
countenance, xxv. 8 43 forbids an unexami 
xxvi. 8 3 ; rr. xii, $ 45 his excuse of the jz 
8 10; whether he writ anything, s. i. 
pleasantry at his trial, v. note 3 
prison, vi. 8 2; made his opponen 

never provoked in a dispute, xii. $ 2; neve 

nor suffered others to quarrel, 1v. v. $ І; 2 

Confutation, т. xiv. $ 4; his modesty, xxiii. 
Iv. viii. 8 5; his neatness, xi. $ 3 ; his courage 
in what manner he loved his children, rir. xxi : 
ту. i. 8 18; disobeyed the thirty tyrants, i. 8 18; hi 
answer about his burial, т. xxix. note 2; when ad- 
vised to prepare for his trial, п. ii. $ 1 3 to Crito, iv. 
i. 8 18. : 

Solicitude the effect of ignorance, 11. xiii. § 1; xvi. § 1. 

Solitude, a state of repose and freedom, r. xii. $ 2; 1v. iv. 
§ 3; to be rendered agreeable by contemplation, and 
dependence on God, rir. xiii, § 1. 

Soul, a portion of the divine essence, 1. xiv. 8 1 ; xvii. 8/275 
п. viii. § 2 ; never willingly deprived of truth, 1. xxviii. 
8 1 5 rr. xxii. § 5. 

Spartans, 1. ii. § т. 

Superfluities to be avoided, Ench. xxxiii. xxxix. ; Frag. xxi. 
xxv. xxix. 

Sura, ш, xvii, note 4. 

„ч 

THANKSGIVING recommended, Li § 33 iv. § 53% 
xvi. 8 35 ш. xxiii, § 1; ш. v. § I; Iv. iv. $ 
82. 

"Thrasca, 1. i. 8 2. 

. xxi, 

i 
H 

INDEX xlv 

Vanity reproved, Ench. vi. xliv. xlix. ; Frag. xiii. 

Vespasian, 1. ii. 8 4. 

Vulgar to be avoided, mi. xvi. 8 2; Ench. xxxiii. ; ; Differ- 
ence between them anda РИП Ench. Xie 

Women, for what to be esteemed, Ench. xl. 
World, a system composed of men and God, г, ix. 8 1; 
one great city, 1. xxiv. S8 1, 3 ; hath a governor, и, 

xiv. § 4. 
Worship (divine) recommended, п. vii. 8 35 1v. iv. 8 63 
Ench. xxxi. 

ZENO, 1. xx. note 1 ; п. xiii. 8 2 ; 1v. viii. § a. 

MEET 
2, 

CERTUM 

4: ha » D 3 M 
ol in ym 
Collect ‘Haridwar : 

J 
1. 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri H 
q 
о $ 
< $ 
5. 92 | 
| 
LJ 
> 1 
> 
© e 
ү 
| | 
0 j . 
H І NE 
| in s 
í comr 
i them 
b them 
4 . 
| his ¢ 
И set d 
eo @ -«and 
his n 
T 
natur 
to al 
read 
this, 
© 
or k 
| ia 
DM if I« 
H 5 
i Epic 
E 1р 
n 
tb them 
p. 
d 
H 
; moyens -—- LI P 
p d TUTUP анан жаы ы тоны ee a ш ынал mL, MÀ 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

aS se ee a 

| * о 

i 

1 

е 

| d 
| à ARRIAN 
1 TO s 
j LUCIUS GELLIUS 

t 

ii WISHETH ALL HAPPINESS 

j 

i, ; : В 
H I wErrHER composed the Discourses of Epictetus Ipsius 
i in such a manner as things of this nature arc cpu wd 
F Е 

| commonly composed, nor did I myself produce 

| them to public view any more than I composed 

b „Чеш. But whatever sentiments I heard from 
: his own mouth, the very same I endeavoured to 
р. set down in the very same words, as far as possible, 
@ -«"and preserve as memorials, for my own use, of 
ү his manner of thinking and freedom of specch. 
These discourses are such as one person would 
naturally deliver from his own thoughts, extempore, 
to another; not such as he would prepare to be 
read by numbers afterwards. Yet, notwithstanding 
this, I cannot tell how, without either my consent 
or knowledge, they have fallen into the hands of 
the public. But it is of little consequence to me 
if I do not appear an able writer; and of none to 
Epictetus if any one treats his discourses! with 

1 He means the composition, not the subject matter of 

them. 
xlvii 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| LLL — ERN 

Шур» PI . yen АЫ 

n Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

. ож í 
ДЕ 
ide : 
{ | xlvii DISCOURSES: OF EPICTETUS 
IIT: : à 
i | * 
RE Aim of contempt; since it was very evident, even when he 
| | ше. uttered them, that he aimed at nothing more than 

to excite his hearers to virtue. If they produce 
that one effect, they have in them what, I think, 

philosophical discourses ought to have. And should \ a] 
they fail of it, let the readers, however, be assured, Ў б 2 
that when Epictetus himself pronounced them, his | 2 
audience could not help being affected in the very d 
manner he intended they should. If by them- Я 
selves they have less efficacy, perhaps it is my Be 
fault, or perhaps it is unavoidable.— Farewell. {| 
2 
in 

4 - 

-< 
| i 
| А 
" 
| I I 
| { I 
| | 
| \ 3 
| 
1 
ІЯ 
| Ж 
ү 

52255 -CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar , «. 

rr, 

“+ "Digitized by'Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Scar yei 

n -— DAS — іа me — 
i : 
] "S 
he | | 
ап | 
се 
КУ Eos 
ald THE 
x DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 
ne BOOK I 
i CHAPTER I 

2 Of the things which are, and of those which are 
: nol, їп our отоп power 

§ 1. OF other faculties, you will find no one that Limits of 
contemplates, or consequently approves or dis- human 
approves, itself. How far does the contemplative faculty 
power of grammar extend ? 

As far as the judging of language. 
` =æ Of music? 

As far as judging of melody. 

Does either of them contemplate itself, then? 

By no means. 

Thus, for instance, when you are to write to your 
friend, grammar will tell you what to write: but 
whether you are to write to your friend at all, or 
no, grammar will not tell you. Thus music, with 
regard to tunes; but whether it be proper or Fa 
improper at any particular time to sing or play, 
music will not tell you. 

What will tell, then? 

That which contemplates both itself and all other 
things. 

And what is that ? 

YOL. IL. , ; А 

~- CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 
d 
tt 

( y, 

| 

| Reason | a 
j гарогіоп to consider both itself, its powers, 145 value, and 

EE LUE HOME, LN EUR 

ennai and eGangotri 
2 THE DISCOURSES OF 

The reasoning faculty ; for that alone is found 

02607 likewise all the rest. For what is'it else that says 
himself oq ів beautiful? (for the gold itself does not 

© speak). Evidently that faculty which judges of the 
appearances of things! What else distinguishes 
music, grammar, the other ‘faculties, proves their 
uses, and shows their proper occasions ? 
Nothing but this. — . 

2. As it was fit, then, this most excellent and 
$ superior faculty alone, a right use of the appearances 
* of things, the gods have placed in our own powers 

but all other matters not in our power. Was it 
because they would not? I rather think, that if 
they could, they had'gránted us these too: but 
; ı еу certainly could not. For, placed upon Earth, 
1 and confined to such a body, and to such com- 
=) panions, how was it possible that in these respects 
we should not be hindered by things without us? 
/ 53. But what says Jupiter? О Epictetus, 

if it were possible, I had made this little body and _ 

property of thine free, and not liable:to hindrance. 
But now:do not mistake: it is not thine own, but 
only a finer mixture of clay. Since, then, I 
could not? give. thee this, Í have given thee а 
certain portion of myself: this faculty of exerting 
the :powers of pursuit and ayoidance,* of desire 
and aversion ; and, in a word, the use of the 
appearances of things. Taking care of this point, 
and. making what is thy own to consist in this, 
thou wilt never be restrained, never be hindered ; 
thou wilt not groan, wilt not complain, wilt not 
flatter any one. · Ном then! Do all these 
advantages seem small to thee?’ Heaven forbid ! 
« Let them suffice thee then, and thank the gods.’ 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ds 

С 
Í ri 
1 
P. st 
| é 
{ c 
t 
bf 
E 
hy 
i о 
па 
[on 
е 
f 
| Ь 
poau 
p.t 
ү? 
| 4 а 
B 
"n a 
үй 
ЖО; 
Ш.Х 
| с 
| é 
| ў 08 
T 
EP i а 
beg 
| t 
| 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

T PEE CL EEE SES EEA E E S — 

mana WA y n EE + 
Pp Semi CS ооа gr nte nnn P » 

2, 
gt 

EPICTETJJS 3 
5:84. But now, when it is in our power to take Do your 
care of one thing, and to apply to one, we choose best and 
rather-to take care of many, and to encumber our- endure 
selves with many ; ‘body, property, brother, friend, the rest 
child, and. slave:; and Ьу this multiplicity of en- * 
cumbrances'we are burdened and weighed down: 

"Tus, when the. weather doth not happen to be 
{ап}. for. sailing,’ we sit: screwing ourselves, and 
perpetually looking out.— Which way is the wind? 
—ANorth.—What have we to do with that?— 
When will: the. west blow?+-When itself, friend, 
or. JEolus;pleases ; for Jupiter has not made you 
dispenser of the winds, but Æolus. 

u1§ 15.) What, tlien, is to be done? 
weTo.make.the best of what is in our power, and < 
аке: Һе rest as it naturally happens. 

11 And.how is that? 

zil A's it:pleases God. 

+ What, then, must I:be the only one to lose my 
head? 

no Why, would you ‘have all the world, then, lose 

“their: heads for your consolation? Why are not 
you willing to stretch out your neck, like Later- 
anüs, when he was commanded by Nero to be 
beheaded? For, shrinking a little after receiving 
a weak ‘blow, he stretched it out again. And, 
before «this, when Epaphroditus,® the freedman 
of:Nero, interrogated him about the conspiracy ; 

*If I have'a :nvind to say any’ thing,’ replied he, 
€I- will tell it'to your. master.’ 

§ 6. What then should we have at hand upon 
such occasions? © Why what else but—what is 
mine, and. what not mine; what is permitted me, 
and; what not.— I must die; and must I die 
groaning too ?— De fettered. Must it be lamenting 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

——————————_ hhh CS 

— 

LJ 
- 

E. 
| 
| 
| 

i 
i 
{ 
i 
i 
i 
ў 
1 

Rcgum Vence BE E e RE RE SO 

7T 

[as гше лАЙ ОШ 525 

Doom ERN Ro сай 

аас 

—€—— 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Feundation Chennai and eGangotri 
4 THE DIGCOURSES OF 

How too ?— Exiled. Ара what hinders me, then, but 
to face that I may go smiling, and cheerful, and serene? 
death e Betray a secret’—I will not betray it; for 

this is in my own power.—‘ Then I will fetter 
ou.'— What do you say, man? Fetter me? 
ou will fetter my leg; but not Jupiter himself 
can get the better of my choice. ¢1 will 
throw you into prison: I will behead that paltry 
body of yours.’ Did I ever tell you, that I alore 
had a head not liable to be cut off?—These 
things ought philosophers to study; these ought 
they daily to write; and in these to exeicise 
themselves. 

§ 7. Thrasea® used to вау, *I had rather be 
killed to-day than banished to-morrow.’ But how 
did Rufus? answer him? ‘If you prefer it as 
a heavier misfortune, how foolish a preference! If 
as a lighter, who has put it in your power? Why 
do not you study to be contented with what is 
allotted you?’ 

§ 8. Well, and what said Agrippinus? upon 

this account? ‘I will not be a hindrance to my- į 

self? Word was brought him, ‘Your cause is 
trying in the Senate. —* Good luck attend it. — But 
it is eleven o'clock" (the hour when he used to 
exercise before bathing): ‘Let us go to our 
exercise.” When it was over a messenger telis 
him, ‘You are condemned. To banishment, 
says he, or death? ‘To banishment.'— What of 
my estate ?— It is not taken away.'— Well then, 
let us go as far as Aricia, and dine there. 

§ 9. This it is to have studied what ought to be 
studied ; to have rendered our desires and aversions 
incapable of being restrained, or incurred. I must 
die: if instantly, I will die instantly; if іп a short 

CC-0. In Public omen Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

time, ` 
then ] 
restore 

In whi 

§1..T 
support 
reasona 
natural. 
the S 
learned 
not inst 
it into 
hangs 2 
observa 

bad, ad: 
persons. 
need of 
the prec 
to partic 
judge o 
use not 
us, but « 
characte 
to subn 

EPICTETUS > 5 

time, I will dine first; and when the hour comes, Reason 

then I will di. How? As becomes one who and 
unreason 

restores what is not his own. 

ө ‚ CHAPTER II 

In what manner upon every occasion to preserve our 
character 

$ 1..To a reasonable creature, that alone is in- 
supportable which is unreasonable: but everything 
reasonable may be supported. Stripes are not 
naturally insupportable.—‘ How во? —See how 
the Spartans! bear whipping, after they have 
learned that it is a reasonable thing. Hanging is 
not insupportable: for, as soon as a man has taken 
it into his head that it is reasonable, he goes and 
hangs? himself. In short, we shall find by 
observation, that no creature is Oppressed so much 

=®у any thing as by what is unreasonable; nor, on 
the other hand, attracted to anything so strongly 
as to what is reasonable. 

§ 2. But it happens that different things are 
reasonable and unreasonable, as well as good and 
bad, advantageous and disadvantageous, to different 
persons. On this account, chiefly, we stand in 
need of a liberal education, to teach us to adapt 
the preconceptions of reasonable and unreasonable 
to particular cases, conformably to nature. But to 
judge of reasonable and unreasonable, we make 
use not only of a due estimation of things without 
us, but of what relates to each person’s particular 
character. Thus, it is reasonable for one man 
to submit to a dirty? disgraceful office, who 

е 
~“. 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

252—5 
v — 

{ 
vod 
ta 
Ld 

{ 

| He. 
| ] 
Ж 
| 

| 
i 
H 

уен SS 

= 

Digitized by Агуа Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

^ 

act a part, I shall lose my head.’ 

vmm 

6, THE DISCOURSES OF 

” 

A, man's; considers this only, that if he does not submit to it, 
РС: е} shall be whipt, and loge bis; dinner ; ‘but if. he 
~ "does, that he has nothing hard or disagrecable to 

suffer : whereas to another it appears insupportable, 
not only to submit to such an office himself, but to 
bear with any one else who does, | If you ask me, 
then, whether you shall do this dirty office or rfot, 
I will tell you, it is a more valuable thing to get a 
dinner, than not; and a greater disgrace to be 
whipt than not to be whipt: so that, if you 
measure yourself by these things, go and do, your 
office. 

o Ay, but this is not suitable to my character." 
,lt is you who аге ќо, consider that, not 1: for 
it is’ you who know yourself, what value. you set 
upon yourself, and at what rate you sell yourself >: 
for ‘different people sell themselves at different 
prices, i : 
-§ 3. Hence Agrippinus,* when Florus was cons 
sidering whether he.should go to. Nero's, shows, 

во, ав to perform some part in them himself, bid. 

him go.—‘ But why do not you go then?” says. 
Florus. * Because,’ replied Agrippinus, * I do not 
deliberate about it.’ For.he who once sets him- 
self about such considerations, and goes to calculat- 
ing the worth of external things, approaches very 
near to those who forget their own .character. 
Eor, why do you ask me whether death or life 
Бе. the more eligible? L answer, life. Pain or 
pleasure? I answer, pleasure.—* But if I do not 
Go and, act it 
then, but I will not.‘ Why? '— Because you 
esteem yourself only as one thread of many that 
make .up the piece.—* What then??—Y ou bave 
nothing to care for, but how to be like the rest 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

hors E 

Digit ed-by Arya ‘Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

ҒЕРІСТЕТАЈЅ ү у 
it, | of mankind, as one thread desires not to be dis- Intrepid 
he 4 tinguished from the others. But I would be the courage 
- tO purple,> «that small and shining thing, which 
ble, : gives a lustre and beauty to the rest. Why do ы 
tto |] you: bid: me resemble the multitude then? At ^ 
me, i that rate, how shall I be the purple ? 
fot. d 1%: 4. This. Priscus Helvidius? too saw, and 
aa: 3 acted accordingly: For when Vespasian had sent 
be toiforbid ‘his’ going to the senate, he answered, Е 
you 0:161 ini. your power to prevent my continuing 
our alisenator; but while I am one, I must 'go. 

6— Well then, at least be silent there.—* Do not 
ask ,my.opinion, and I will be silent.’ But I must 
ask it.^—*.And I must speak what appears to me 
to be right.'—* But if-you do, I will put you to 
death.” — Did I .ever tell you that I was im- 
mortal? .You will do your part, and I mine: It 
ig:yours.to: kill, and imine to die intrepid ; yours 

on- - , to.banish me, mine to depart untroubled.” ' 7 
ws, ||, o§o5..What: good, then, did: Priscus do, who - 
bid. 1: | Was but a single person? Why what good does 
ays, the i purple do’ to the garment? What but 
not the: being, a shining character in himself, and 
m- | setting» a good example to other? Another, 
at- perhaps, if in such circumstances Cæsar had for- 
"ry: № bidden “his going to the senate, would ‘have 
er. | X answered, ‘I am obliged to you for excusing me.’ 
ife Butisuch a one he would not have forbidden to 
ог go,-well knowing that he would either sit like ә 
10t | a-statue, or, if he spoke, he would say what he 
cit |f knewito be:agreeable to Cæsar, and would overdo 
ou ! it by adding still morc. 

uat d 58 6,."Dhus, acted even a wrestler, who was -- 
ve of in;danger oftideath, unless he consented to an 
est Ý — ignominious amputation. His brother, who was 

RE ЫИ 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ыыы 

= ERIS M iem mds 

i tri 
Digitized By Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGango 
igiti 

8 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ | 

52. Use а philosopher, coming to him and saying, * Well, 

h 1А ОНГ brother, what do you design to do? Let us cut | 
N ] епз away this morbid part, and return apain to the | 
Mas Resi 2 field? He refused, and courageously died, | 
ary G ~ I WaR was asked whether he acted thus 
bim as a wrestler or a philosopher? I answer, as а 
e man, said Epictetus ; but as a man who hed 
| een proclaimed д champion at the О] mpic | 

games; who had been used to such places, and H 

not exercised merely in the school of Bato.8 {| 
nother would have had his very head сш off, 
E 63. if he could have lived without it. This is that 
abe regard to character, so powerful with those who 

аге accustomed to introduce it, from their own } 

breasts, into their deliberations, І 

N -58. ‘Come now, Epictetus, take of you 

beard.'9. Tf I am a philosopher, I answer | 

will not take it ofr. « Then I will take off your || 

head.—If that will do you any good, take it of, | 

$ 9. It was asked, How shall each of us perceive ij >. 

oe 

ЫЫЫ Тг aS 

'16 

S 
pb 
e 
E 
e 
et 
с 
a 
E 
A. 
o 
oO 
a 
w 
(ег 
E 
= 
s 
E 
о 
B 
oO 
= 
= 
o 
D 
© 
Е 
о 
[x] 
o 
[me 
8 
Yv 

perceive his own qualifications,10 and expose him- 
self alone for the whole herd? Itis evident, 

FECE I 
c 
[3] 
с 
5 
5 
et 
2р 
о 
„© 
E 
B 
En 
[e] 
рз 
= 
o 
[=] 
a 
E 
o 
Q 
[2] 
Iz] 
n 
a 
t 
e 
D 
g 
~ 

а. 
me 
5 
c 
= 
о 
a 
m 

me manner, whoever of ив had such 
qualifications will not be ignorant of them. But 
neither is a bul] nor a gallant-spirited man formed 
all at once. We are to exercise and qualify our- 

— 

AT aang КЫЫ 
0 

v1. 

4 sU RG Only consider at What price you sell | 
your own will and choice, man: jf for nothing | 
else, that you may not sell it for a trifle. Great- : 

i i idwar 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridw 

С-г bu a I S ыты ee 

"orn 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

i EPICTEDUS 9 
Well, ness indeed, and excellence, perhaps belong to Neglect 
з cut | - others, to such as Socrates. not the 
the | hy then, as we are born with a like nature, Опе 

|. do not all, or the greater number, become such | aS 
thus | as he? а 
аз а - Why, аге all horses swift? Are all dogs ' 
hz | Safacious? What then, because nature hath not 
оріс |' befriended me, shall I neglect all care of my- 
and j- self? -Heaven forbid ! Epictetus is inferior to E 
to. | 

. . Socrates; 12 but if superior to — this is enough 
for me. І shall never be Milo, and yet I do 

hat not neglect my body; nor Creesus, and yet I 
vho do not neglect ту property : nor, in general, do 
We" omit the care of any thing belonging to us, 

| froma despair of arriving at the highest degree of 
| perfection. 

Й 

. || : CHAPTER III 
od li How, Jrom the doctrine that God is the Father of 

8, — i mankind, we may proceed to its consequences 
$1. Ir a person could be persuaded of this ` 
5 | principle as he ought, that we are all originally 
€ ` descended from God, and that he is the Father 
| of gods and men, I conceive he never would 
think meanly or degenerately concerning himself. 
Suppose Casar were to adopt you, there would be 
no bearing your haughty looks: and will you not 
be elated on knowing yourself to be the son of 
Jupiter ? Yet, in fact, we are not elated; but 
| having two things in our composition, intimately 
| united, а body їп common With the brutes, and 
| reason and sentiment in common with the pods, 
: many incline to this unhappy and mortal kindred, 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

and tiger 

———MB Ls 

? ia cortos (t P tme! tes 
КИЕЛОКЛИЕКДАНЕ К, 

келке т 

: ae — 
PORUM add 6 

1 Sp етте alien eect Sec mE: 

| 

——— n! 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

IO THE DISCOURSES OF 

Let and only some few to the divine and happy one, 
Ше ape And, as of necessity every.one must treat each 
die Particular thing, according to the notions he forms 
about it; so those few, who think they are made 
for fidelity, decency, and a well-grounded use of 
the appearances of things, never think meanly or 
degenerately concerning themselves. But with: 
the multitude the case is contrary,: .* For- what 

Е E I? А poor contemptible man, with this 
miserable flesh of mine!’ | Miserable: indeed. 

But you have likewise something better than: this 
paltry flesh. Why then, overlooking that, do 
you pine away in attention to this? \ 1 

^ . $2. By means of this [animal] kindred, some: 
of us, deviating towards it, become like wolves 
faithless and insidious and mischievous: others, 
like lions, wild and savage and untamed: but 
most of us foxes, and wretches even among brutes. 
For what else is a slanderous and ill-natured man, 
than a fox, or something yet more wretched and 

mean? See then, and take heed, that you do not... 
. become such wretches. : 

CHAPTER IV 

ОГ improvement 

§.1.'He who is entering on а state of improve- 
ment, having learnt from the philosophers, that the 
- Object of desire is good, of aversion, evil; and 
having learnt too, that prosperity and ease are no 
otherwise attainable by man, than in not being 
disappointed of his desire, nor incurring his 
aversion: such an one removes totally from him- 
self. and‘ postpones desire,! and applies aversion 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

t5 fF O 3 "Tft =" о) 

A 

j-Foundation-Chennat and e&Gangotri — ~~ a 

EPICTEDUS 

| з ІІ 
пе, i only to things dependent on choice. For if he What 
ich |. should be averse to things independent on choice, i5 the 
ms te he. knows that he must sometimes incur his DUSiness 
ide 1 aversion, and be unhappy. Now if virtue promises 9 ше 
оЁ i happiness, prosperity, and ease, then an improve- 
or i ment in virtue is certainly an improvement in each 
rh- i oP these. For to whatever point the perfection 
hat ‘}+ of anything absolutely brings us, improvement ів 
bis і always an approach towards it. 
od. ‚$ 2. How happens it then, that when we 
his confess. virtue to be such, yet we seck, and make 
áo an` ostentatious show of improvement in other 
things:? >. What is the business of virtue? 
r, A, prosperous life. 

Who is in a state of improvement then? He 
who: hath read the many treatises of Chry- 
sippus?? Why, doth virtue consist in having 

es. : read Chrysippus through? If it doth, improve- 
in, ment is confessedly nothing else than understanding 
nd a great deal of Chrysippus: otherwise we confess 
ОЇ j съ Virtue to produce one thing ; and declare improve- 

ment, which is an approach to it, to be quite 
another thing. 

-§ 3. This person, says one, is already able 
to read Chrysippus, by himself.—* Certainly, sir, 

Я you have made a vast improvement!’ What 
improvement? Why do you ridicule him? 

'e- i Why do you withdraw him from a sense of 
he 1 his misfortunes? Why do not you show him 
nd 1 the business of virtue, that he тау know 
no | where to: всек improvement ?—Scck it there, 
ng i wretch, where your business lies. And where 
118 { doth your business lie? In desire and aversion; 
n- i that: you: may neither be disappointed of the one, 
on Н nor'incur the other: in exerting the pewers of 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul us à à 

oundation Chennai and eGangotri,.. E 
в Lt азоња Dia e ER a Ed даба 
Meets desean: : 

2 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

ы | Where is pursuit and avoidance, that you may not be liable 
|. Improve: to fail; in assent and suspense, that you may not 
ment be Jiable to be deceived. The first and most 
4. . necessary is the first topic. But if you seek to 
” avoid incurring your aversion, trembling and 
lamenting all the while, at this rate how do you 
improve? 2 
. 84. Show me then your improvement in this 
point. As if I should вау to a wrestler, Show me 
your shoulders; and he should answer me, ‘See 
my poisers.'—]D o you and your poisers look to 

that: I desire to see the effect of them. 
{ ut). ‘Take the treatise on the subject of the active 
1 aro va ds - 200] 
powers, апа see how thoroughly I have perused 

i? 

I do not inquire into this, wretch: but how 
you exert those powers; how you manage your 
in desires and aversions, how your intentions and 
y purposes; how you are prepared for events, 
1 whether conformably or contrary to nature. If 

1 вау you improve: if contrary, go your way, and 
і not only comment on these treatises, but write such 
yourself; and what service will it do you? Do 
not you know that the whole volume 18 sold for 
half-a-crown? Doth he who comments upon it, 
then, value himself at more than half-a-crown ? 
Never look for your business in; one thing, and for 
Sele ~ improvement in another. 

Where is improvement, then? 

If any of you, withdrawing himself from ex- 
ternals, turns to his own faculty of choice, to 
exercise, and finish, and render it conformable to 

d nature; elevated, free, unrestrained, unhindered, 
faithful, decent: if he hath learnt too, that who- 

30) 

карри 

Күк ссызор ссср шанс ie n ы сы кыы E EET EIE 

CC-0. In Public Тйл. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` ` 

S sedie Sexe Ne 

Í ; conformably, give me evidence of that, and I will у, 

3 
{ 
I 

—————| 

ае. 

"иза Se 

in эмд 

124 

S Cw ww ҸӘ 

a — 

— tenn ta pee — ————— 

EPICTETUS . 13 

ever desires, or is averse to, things out of his own He who 
power, can neither be faithful nor free, but must truly 
necessarily be changed and tossed up and down “Proves 
with them; must necessarily too be subject to Ў 
others, to such as can procure or prevent what he 

desires or is averse to : if, rising in the morning, 

hé observes and keeps to these rules; bathes and 

eats as a man of fidelity and honour; and thus, 

on every subject of action, exercises himself in 

his principal duty; as a racer, in the business of 
racing; as a public speaker, in the business of 
exercising his voice: this is he who truly im- 
proves; this is he who hath not travelled in vain. 

But if he is wholly intent on reading books, and 

hath laboured that point only, and travelled 4 for 

that: I bid him go home immediately, and not 

neglect his domestic affairs; for what he travelled 

for is nothing. The only real thing is, studying , 

how to rid his life of lamentation, and complaint, 

and ‘Alas!’ and ‘I am undone,’ and misfortune, 

е» and disappointment ; and to learn what death, what}. — 
exile, what prison, what poison is: that he may 
be able to say in a prison, like Socrates, ‘My dear; 
Crito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it Бе”; 
and not—‘ Wretched old man, have I kept my 
grey hairs for this!’ Who speaks thus? Do 
you suppose I will name some mean and despic- 
able person? Is it not Priam who says it? Is it 
not CEdipus? Nay, how many kings say it? 
For what else is tragedy, but the suflerings of 
men, struck by an admiration of externals, repre- 
sented in that kind of poetry? If one was to be 
taught by fictions, that externals independent upon 
choice are nothing to us; I, for my part, should 
wish for such a fiction, as that, by which I might 

* 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

“ii True live: prosperously and undisturbed. 

. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

ee! КИИ УУ сс 
ver айыы 

14 THE DISCOURSES OF 

What you 

bene- wish for, it is your business to consider. 

“actors 

nena nan ee E 

MS 

8 5. Of what service, then, is Chrysippus to us? 

' To teach you that those things are not false on 
which prosperity and ease depend. ‘Take my 
books, and you will see how true and conformable 
to nature those things are which render me easy.’ 
How ‘great a happiness! And how great the 
benefactor who shows the way! To Triptelemus 
all men have raised temples and altars, because he 
gave us a milder kind of food; but to him who 
hath discovered, and brought to light, and com- 
municated, the truth to all; the means: not of 
living, but of living well; who among you. ever 
raised an altar or a temple, or dedicated a statue, 
or who worships God on that account? Wre-offer 
sacrifices on the account of those who have 
given us corn and the vine; and shall we not 
give thanks to God, for those who have produced 
that fruit in the human understanding, by which 

they proceed to discover to из:їһе true doctrine of 
happiness ? T 

(SEINE REV 
Concerning the Academics 

§ 1. Ir any one opposes very evident truths, it is 
not easy to find a reason which may persuade him 
x to alter his opinion. This arises neither from 
his own strength, nor from the weakness of his 
teacher: but when, after being driven upon an 
absurdity, he becomes petrified, how shall we deal 
with him any longer by reason? 

MM а 

б: in Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar = ~ 

ae ganm 

Ea Oa a pen, 

ape 

a a аааз аата ne E aa a R 

———————— 

vm —ÁÓ a arra Loue ap CRM A HERO Gi quar eT aam e i i ——— 

` Digitized by Arya Samaj Founda ion 

EPICTETUS . 15 

§ 2. Now there are two sorts of petrifaction : Two 
the one, a petrifaction of the understanding; the sorts of 
other, of the sense of shame, when a person hath Petri- 
obstinately set himself not to assent to evident Бес 
truths, nor to quit the defence of contradictions, — 
We all dread a bodily mortification; and would 
make use of every contrivance to avoid it: but 
none of us is troubled about a mortification of the 
soul... And yet, indeed, even with regard to the 
soul, when a person is so affected as not to appre- 
hend or understand any thing, we think him in a 
sad condition : but where the sense of shame and 
modesty is under an absolute mortification, we go 
so far as even to call this, strength of mind.? 

§ 3. Are you certain that you are awake ?—¢] 
am not’ (replies such a person): ‘for neither am I 
certain, when, in dreaming, І appear to myself to 
be Awake.’—Is there no difference, then, between 
these appearances ?—‘ None.’—Shall I argue with 
this man any longer? for what steel or what caustic 

«can I apply to make him sensible of his mortifica- 

> tion? He is sensible of it, and pretends not to 

be so. Не is even worse than dead. Doth not 

> he see the repugnancy of contradictory proposi- 
1 tions? Не sees it, and is never the better. Не 

is neither. moved, nor improves. Мау, he is in a 

': yet worse condition: his sense of shame and 
© modesty is utterly extirpated. His reasoning 
faculty indeed is not extirpated, but turned wild 

and savage. Shall I call this strength of mind? 

By no means: unless we allow.it be such in the 
vilest debauchees, publicly to speak and act what- 
ever comes into their heads. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

MM" 

PER A trea nee ame ne ee M 

16 THE DIGCOURSES OF 

3e] MS CHAPTER VI 

gy i MS 

| | Same Of providence 

| | Design § 1. From every event that happens in the world 

{ | ] in the it is easy to celebrate providence, if a person hath 
^ world but these two circumstances in himself; а faculty 

of considering what happens to each individual, 
and a grateful temper. ithout the first he will 
not perceive the usefulness of things which happen, 
and without the other he will not be thankful for 
them. If God had made colours, and had not 

made the faculty of seeing them, what would have 
been their use ? 

None. 

On the contrary, if he had made the faculty 
without such objects as fall under its observation, 
what would have been the use of that? 

None. | 
Again: if he had formed both the faculty and. 

the objects, but had not made light ? d 

Neither in that case would they have been of 
any use. 

8 2. Who is it, then, that hath fitted each of these 
to the other? Whois it that hath fitted the sword 
to the scabbard, and the scabbard to the sword ? 
Ів it no one? From the very construction of a 
complete work, we are used to declare positively, 
that it must be the operation of some artificer, 
and not the effect of mere chance. Doth every 
such work, then, demonstrate an artificer; and do 
not visible objects, and the sense of seeing, and 
Light, demonstrate one? Doth not the difference 
of the sexes, and their inclination to each other, 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 
$ 
I 
i 
Í 
| 
| 
} i 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Ina iani i tad A ria Roa S ie eai Aa eR A URS MR Ra 

EPICTE?US e 17 

and the use of their several powers; do not these Use and 

things, neither, demonstrate an artificer ? under- 
Most certainly they do. standing 
§ 3. But farther: this constitution of under- 5, 

standing, by which we are not simply impressed by aS 

sensible objects; but take and subtract from them; 

and add and compose something out of them; and 

pass from some to others absolutely remote :! Ig 

al К not all this, neither, sufficient to prevail on some 
‘ll Hn men, and make them ashamed of leaving an 
^n, i artificer out of their scheme? If not, let them 
Bé y explain to. us what it is that effects each of these; 
ot [d and how it is possible that things so wonderful, and 
e $ which carry such marks of contrivance, should 
ў come to pass spontaneously and without design. 
|j What, then, do these things come to pass for 
йу [ our service only? 
= " Many for ours only; such as are peculiarly 
j necessary for a reasonable creature; but you will 
d find many common to us with mere animals. 
nd. ji Then do they too understand what is done? 
E Not at all; for use is onc affair, and under- 
Ss standing another. But God had need of animals 
to make use of the appearances of things; ? and of 
е us to understand that use. It is sufficient, there- 
rd fore, for them to eat and drink and sleep and 
d? continue their species, and perform other such 
А offices „as belong to each of them; but to us, to 
ly whom he hath given likewise a faculty of under- 
ds standing, these offices are not sufficient. For if 
ry we do not act in a proper and orderly Manner, and 
ЧС suitably to the nature and constitution of each 
na thing, we shall no longer attain our end. For 
сс where the constitution of beings is different, their 
en offices and énds are different likewise. ‘Thus 

VOL. 1. B 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

eni еса 

| 18 THE DISCOURSES OF 

| 2 

і 

| т Man where the constitution is adapted only to use, there 

i and the use is alone sufficient; but where understanding is 
1 PELLE added to use, unless that too be duly exercised, 

j К = the end of such a being will never be attained. 

\ «d § 4. Well then: each of the animals is consti- 
| tuted either for food, or husbandry, ог to produce 
| milk, and the rest of them for some other like 
bh ox use; and for these purposes what need is there of 
understanding the appearances of things, and being 
able to make distinctions concerning them? Bur 
God hath introduced man as a spectator of him- 
self and his works; and" not only as a spectato 

= 

ectator, 

but an interpreter of them. It is therefore shame- 
ful that man should begin and end where irrationa 
creatures do. Не is indeed rather to begin there, 
but to end where nature itself hath fixed our end ; 
and that is in contemplation and understanding, 
and in a scheme of life conformable to nature. 

§ 5. Take care, then, not to die without being 
spectators of these things. You take a journey to 
Olympia to behold the work 3 of Phidias, and each. 
or you thinks it a misfortune to die without a 
knowledge of such things ; and will you have no 
inclination to understand and be spectators of those 
works for which there is no need to take a 
journey ; but which are ready and at hand, even 
to those who bestow no pains?* Will you never 
perceive, then, either what you are or for what 
you were born; nor for what purpose you are 
admitted spectators of this sight? 

Dut there are some things unpleasant and diffi- 
cult in life. 

And are there none at Olympia? Are not you 

heated? Are not you crowded? Are not you 

№ without good conveniences for bathing?5 Are not 

Se 

ILL 

————7 

[otc D 

n 
—À LL 

XM 

Кее нч АО 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar - E 

o mmm j 

nas 

p 

E 

| 

Cu 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Accu ——— — mm 

EPICTEYUS , Ig 

you wet through when it happens to rain? Do How 
not you bear uproar and noise and other disaprec- to bear 

able circumstances? But, I suppose, by comparing 
all these with the advantage of seeing so valuable a 
sight, you support and go through them. Well, 
and [in the present case] have. not you received 
faoulties by which you may support every суеп? 
Have not you received greatness of soul? Have 
not you received a manly spirit? Have not you 
received patience? . What signifies to me any 
thing that happens, while I have a greatness of 
soul? : What shall disconcert or trouble or ap- 
pear grievous to me? Shall I not make usc 
of.my faculties, to that purpose for which they 
were granted me, but lament and groan at what 
happens? 

- § б. Oh, but my nose 6 runs.: 

And what have you hands for, beast, but to 
Wipe ‘it? 

r But was there, then, any good reason that there 
should be such a dirty thing in the world? 

And how much better is it that you should wipe 
your nose, than complain? Pray, what figure do 
you think Hercules would have made if there had 
not been such a lion, and a hydra, and a stag, and 
unjust and brutal men; whom he expelled and 
cleared away? And what would he have done 
if.none of these had existed? Is it not plain that 
he must have wrapt himself up and slept? In the 

first place, then, he ‘would never have become a 

Hercules by slumbering away his whole life in such 
delicacy and ease; or if he had, what good would 

it have done? What would have been the use of 

his arm, and the rest of his strenpth; of his 
. э . . . 
patience, and greatness of mind, if such circum- 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

life's 
^ little ils 

К 

т" 

л-ге 

d Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eG 

1 Sus у 
AE 20 THE DISCOURSES OF 
d Use your stances and subjects of action had not roused and 
Eu powers exercised him? d 
| t: — With COn- What then, must we provide these things for — | үе 
E." adence ourselves, and introduce a boar, and a lion, and a FEM 
x || d hydra, into our country ? 
Zi This would be madness and folly. But as they 
M were in being, and to be met with, they were ‹ 
| E t proper subjects to set off and exercise Hercules. 0) 
А | Do you therefore likewise, being sensible of this, ғ | 
EU. ERU inspect the faculties you have, and after taking a E 
T view of them, say, * Bring on me now, O Jupiter, | 8 
|і what difficulty thou wilt, for I have faculties j of 
|, granted me by thee, and abilities by which 1 may | ar 
H acquire honour and ornament tọ myself’ —No; $. fo 
\ but you sit trembling, for fear this or that should dn 
i happen; and lamenting, and mourning, and groaning ies ad 
\ ‘at what doth happen; and then you accuse the Ai 
i gode. For what is the consequence of such a |o bi 
| meanspiritedness, but impiety? and yet God hath |. fo 
eet not only granted us these faculties, by which we | in 
\ may bear every event without being depressed ог |. ™) 

broken by it; but, like a good prince, and a true $a 

father, hath rendered them incapable of restraint, — | ОГ 
compulsion, or hindrance, and entirely dependent |! ep 
on our own pleasure: пог hath he reserved a | of 
power, even to himself, of hindering or restraining ; an 
them. Having these things free, and your own, |) Р" 
will you make no use of them, nor consider what |. um 
| you have received, nor from whom? but sit | le 
wal groaning and lamenting, some of you, blind to him |. sca 
a who gave them, and not acknowledging your |, x 
benefactor; and others, basely turning yourselves | — 0”: 
to complaints and’ accusations of God? yet I # ке 
undertake 13 show you that you have qualifications S 
| | and occasions for greatness of soul, and a manly | dis 
\ 

d 
| 

. : : Jis. а '- 'CC-0.In Public Domain. Gurukul'Kangri Collection’, Haridwar ^ 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Founda’ 

EPICTETUS ° 21 

of convertible and hypothetical and interrogatory 
arguments, and, in general, of all other logical 
forms, hath any relation to the duties of life. For 
in every subject of action, the question is, how a 
wise and good man may find a way of extricating 

ad spirit, but what occasions you have to find fault, Of right 
and complain, do you show me. reasoning 
or 
а Wi ке 
еу | СНАРТЕК УП 
ге o 
c8. ^^ Of the use of convertible and hypothetical propositions, ы 
is, Ж and the like. 
а 4 . 
E | ` .§ 1. Ir? isa secret to the vulgar, that the practice 
— y 
| 
j 

Lyme 

„е 
[o У 

Eo himself, and a method of behaviour conformable to 

2 his duty upon the occasion. Let them say, there- 
h d fore, either that the man of virtue will not engage 
we їп questions and answers; or that, if he doth, he 
c will not think it worth his care whether he behaves 

=> 4° e»rashly and at hazard in questioning and answering; 

ЫБ | or if they allow neither of these, it is necessary to 
cnc confess that some examination ought to be made 
EV of those topics, in which the affair of question and 
ing answer is principally concerned. For what. is the 
vs profession of reasoning? to lay down true positions; 
Er to reject false ones; and to suspend the judgment 
A in doubtful ones. Is it enough, then, to have 
ae learned merely this ?— It is enough, say you.—Is 
M it enough, then, for him who would not commit 
pe any mistake in the use of moncy, merely to have 
[d ‘heard, that we are to receive the good pieces, and 
: reject the bad ?—This is not enough.— What must 
on be added besides ?— T'hat faculty which tries and 3 R 
niy distinguishes what pieces are good, what eS 

ZAR) 

(y^ NN с 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Imma prec AT Samaj eor ior CER Haut ee, 

Tow 22 THE DISCOURSES OF 
4 

t: Of con- Therefore, in rcasoning too, what hath been already 

Wi 
1 g: cessions said is not enough; but it is necessary that we ‚Сс 
) should be able to prove and distinguish between — co 
4 bu “~~ the true and the false and the doubtful. — It is to 
i 76 necessary. fo 
pont 8 2. And what farther is professed in reasoning? ‚со 
1 | — Го admit the consequence of what you have WM 
1 i ‘properly granted.—Well; and here, too, is the fr 
i i mere knowing this enough ?— It is not; but we À Чо 
Bol „must learn how such a thing is the consequence of | git) thi 
los gm such another; and when one thing follows from ibe 
Es one thing, and when from many things in common. | ico 
Я И ls it not moreover necessary, that he who would | ex 
foo: А behave skilfully in reasoning, should both himself ‘an 
E n demonstrate whatever he delivers, and be able to зец 
үг, p comprehend the demonstrations of others; and not | “the 
: 5 { | be deceived by such as sophisticate, as if they were of 
E i i demonstrating? Hence then the employment and be; 
E ЕЕ exercise of concluding arguments and figures arises, v 
| ot and appears to be necessary. со; 

; | | $ 3. But it may possibly happen, that from the» 

j ИЙ 

premises which we have properly granted, there 
arises some consequence, which, though false, is 
nevertheless a consequence. What, then, ought I 
to do? To admit a falsehood ?— And how is that 
possible?— Well; or to say that my concessions 
were not properly made?—But neither is this 
allowed.— Ог that the consequence doth not arise 
from the premises ?— Nor is even this allowed.— 
What, then, is to be done in the case ?—Is it not 
this? As the having once borrowed money is not 
enough to make a person a debtor, unless he still 
continues to owe money and hath not paid it: so 
the having granted the premises is not enough to 
^^. make it necessary to grant the inference, unless 

D 

uideat; 
MY 
ODE EIE 

xw 

eM 1 
x. 
ы 

~CC-0. In Public: Domain-Gurukul:KáhgrkCollection, Haridwar... 

igitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

ОГОО Орр 

EPICTETUS. 23 
ly „we continue our concessions. If the premises Of hypo- 
" ¿continue to the end, such as they were when the thetical 
n ^ concesslons were made, it is absolutely necessary SUUS 
is to continue the concessions, and to admit what mens 
follows from them. But if the premises do not 
2? -continue’ such as they were when the concession 
е Мав made, it is absolutely necessary to depart 
ie from the concession, and from admitting what 4 
е À ‚Чо! not: follow from the argument itself. For 
of P this, inference is no consequence of ours, nor 

m belongs to us, when we have departed from the 
‘concession of the premises. We ought then to 
examine these kinds of premises, and their changes 
‘and conversions, on which any one, by laying hold, 
either in the question itself, or in the answer, or in 
ithe syllogistical .conclusion, or in any other thing 
of that sort, gives an occasion to the unthinking of 
being disconcerted, not foreseeing the consequence. 
т Why во ?—That in this topic we may not behave 

| contrary to.our duty, nor with confusion. 

‚ «mo! § 4..The same thing is to be observed in 

* hypotheses and hypothetical arguments. For it is 
sometimes necessary to require some hypothesis to 
be granted, as a kind of step to the rest of the 
argument. Is every given-hypothesis, then, to be 
granted, or not every one; and if not every one, 

which? And is he who has granted an hypothesis 
'foriever to abide by it? Or is he sometimes to 
depart from it, and admit only consequences, but 
not.to admit contradictions ?)— Ay ; but a person 
may say, on your admitting the hypothesis of a 
‚ possibility, I will drive you upon an impossibility. 
With such a one as this, shall the man of prudence 
-not engage, but avoid all examination and con- 
versation with him?—And yet who, besides the ~ 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

шшш ыйа Digitized by Arya Saraj Foundation Che 

EP oco! In Public Domain. Gurükul Kangri Collection, ‘Haridwar: ES а 

ret ees a À— —— —— M 
xi 
: | 24 THE DISCOURSES OF 
i I ас What man of prudence, is capable of treating an argument, 
«| | fault have or who besides is sagacious in questions and answers, 
И Icom. and incapable of being deceived and imposed on by 
= f с mitted? SNC { c : 
3s] cw. sophistry ?—Or will he indeed engage, but without 
Eu regarding whether he behaves rashly and at hazard, 
Wi j in the argument ?— Yet how then can he be such а бт 
e In one as we are supposing him? But, without some т, 
H Ж such exercise and preparation, ів it possible for arg 
Wee him to preserve himself consistent? Let them As 
ij ү show this: and all these theorems will be super- раї 
wel fluous and absurd, and unconnected with our idea bor 
Ed of the virtuous man. Why then are we still owt 
indolent, and slothful, and sluggish, seeking pre- | belt 
tences of avoiding labour? Shall we not be \ Fo 
watchful to render reason itself accurate ?—¢ But | he: 
suppose, after all, I should make a mistake in | equ 
these points: have I killed a father ??— Wiretch ! й 
why, in this case, where had you a father to kill? oth: 
What is it, then, that you have done? The only ] 
fault that you could commit, in this instance, you | int 
have committed. This very thing I myself said to œ» V. ethe 
Rufus, when he reproved me for not finding some- | in 
thing that was omitted in some syllogism. Why, | sho 
said I, have I burnt the Capitol then? Wretch! Wo! 
answered he, was the thing here omitted the nec 
Capitol? Or are there no other faults, but burning | of 
the Capitol, or killing a father? And is it no | arg 
fault to treat the appearances presented to our minds part 
rashly and vainly and at hazard; not to compre- add 
hend a reason, nor a demonstration, nor a sophism ; evel 
nor, in short, to eee what is for or against one’s pers 
self in a question or answer? Is nothing of all elat 
this any fault ? you 
that 
they 

' Ko Digitized by Arya Sama, 
ХЫ r 

m&y be varied, in so. many may the forms of do not 
arguments and enthymemas be varied likewise. exercise 

по 7 РИС dera dash OP Oe =~ E 
EPICTETUS • 25 

{ 

, | 

: | CHAPTER VIII 

t | That faculties are not safe to the uninstructed Se 

] i 

i | $ т. In as many ways as equivalent syllogisms Why we 
| 
| 

£, As for instance: if you have borrowed, and not mur 
г paid, you owe me money. Dut you have not RET 
| borrowed, and not ‘paid, therefore you do not 
| owe me money. Го perform this skilfully, 
: belongs to no one more than to a philospher. 
: \ For if ап enthymema be an imperfect syllogism, 

| he who is exercised in a perfect syllogism must be 
| equally ready at an imperfect one. 
| Why, then, do not we exercise ourselves and 
others after this manner ? 1 
Decause even now, though we are not exercised 
| in these things, nor diverted by me, at least, from 
ethe study of morality: yet we make no advances 
| in virtue. What is to be expected then if we 
| should add this avocation too? Especially as it 
would not only be an avocation from more 
necessary studies, but likewise a capital occasion 
) of conceit and insolence. For the faculty of 
| | arguing and of persuasive reasoning is great ; and, 
| particularly, if it be much laboured and receive ап 
additional ornament from rhetoric. For in general ^ 
every faculty is dangerous to weak and uninstructed 
persons; as being apt to render them arrogant and 
elated. For by what method can one persuade a ~ 
young man who excels in these kinds of study 
that he ought not to be an appendix to them, but 
they to him? Will he not trample upon all such 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

26 THE DISCOURSES OI 

Accidents advice; and walk about elated and puffed up, not 

and bearing any one should touch him, to put him 
properties ; 2 
о 

in mind where he is wanting and in what he goes 
wrong. : 
What then, was not Plato a philosopher ? 
Well, and was not Hippocrates a physician? 
Yet you sce how he expresses himself. Dut 
ig it in quality of physician, then, that he ex- 

|. presses himself so? Why do you confound 

things, accidently united from different causes, in 

` the same men? If Plato was handsome and well- 

made, must Í too set myself to endeavour at 
becoming handsome and well-made ; as if this was 
necessary to philosophy, because a certain person 
happened to be at once handsome and a phi 
sopher? Why will you not perceive and distinguish 
what are the things that make men philosophers, 
and what belong to them on other accounts? Pray, 
if I? were a philosopher, would it be. necessary that 
you should be lame too? : 

a 

. So 

$2. What then? Do I reject these faculties? .. 

By no means. For neither do I reject the faculty 
of seeing. But if you ask me, what is the good of 
man? I have nothing else to say to you but that 
it is a certain regulation of the choice with regard 
to the appearances of things. 

CHAPTER IX 

How from the doctrine of our kindred to God we are 
to proceed to its consequences 

$1. Ir what philosophers say of the kindred 
between God and man be true, what has any 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

——————————— 

— 

VEL 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS `o 27 

one to do, but, like Socrates, when he is asked А 
what countryman he is, never to say that he is citizexi 
a citizen of Athens, or of Corinth, but of the 9f ue 
world? For why do you say that you are of 5 
Athens: and not of that corner only where that ` 
paltry body of yours was laid at its birth? Is 
it fot, evidently, from what is principal, and com- 
prehends not only that corner, and your whole 
house; but the general extent of the country from 
which your pedigree is derived down to you, that 
ou call yourself ап Athenian, or a Corinthian? 
Why may not he, then, who understands the 
administration of the world; and has learned that 
the greatest and most principal and comprehénsive 
of all things is this system, composed of men and 
God; and that from him the sceds of being are 
descended, not only to my father or grandfather, 
but to all things that are produced and born on 
earth; and especially to rational natures, as they 
alone are qualified to partake of a communication 
| e» With the deity, being connected with him by 
reason:. why may not such a one call himself 
3 citizen of the world? Why not a son of God? 
And why shall he fear anything that happens 
among men? Shall kindred to Cæsar, or any 
other of the great at. Rome, enable a man to live 
secure, above contempt, and void of all fear what- 
{ ever; and shall not the having God for our 
Maker, and Father, and Guardian free us from 
griefs and terrors ? 
' i -§ 2. «But how shall I subsist? For I have 
nothing.’ | 
| t Why, how do slaves, how do fugitives? To 
what do they trust when they run away from 
their masters? Is it to their estates? their 

cm 

n 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

a M M M — MÀ 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

M 

| 28 THE D¥SCOURSES OF 
t; 
E The servants? their plate? to nothing but them- tyran 
5 Spirit selves, Yet they do not fail to get necessaries. ri accou 
di (онога And must а philosopher, think you, when he | us to 
| EE leaves his own abode, rest and rely upon others, ! § 4 
E and not take care of himself? Must he be more | answt 
| helpless and anxious than the brute beasts, each | give | 
E of which is self-sufficient, and wants neither proper į} then 
| food, nor any suitable and natural provision? Опе to re 
-H would think there should be no need for an old The 
il fellow to sit here contriving that you may not ` t0 8 
{| think meanly, nor entertain low and abject notions | tyran 
f of yourselves; but that his business would be, to | of ji 
i | take care that there may not happen to be among ассо! 
ju you young men of such a spirit, that, knowing 1 Stay 
ir their affinity to the gods, and that we are as it | § 
ji were fettered by the body and its possessione, and | prec 
ii by so many other things as are necessary, upon | stanc 
1 these accounts, for the economy and commerce | him. 
\ of life; they should resolve to throw them off, | had 
E as both troublesome and useless, and depart to | mori 
i. their kindred. Е МЕ Dave 
i $ § 3. This is the work, if any, that ought to goo 
‘ employ your master and preceptor, if you had lame 
E one; that you should come to him, and say: tears 
1} * Epictetus, we can no longer bear being tied down any 
ү to this paltry body, feeding and resting and s. < he 
E cleaning it, and hurried about with so many | who 
1 low cares on its account. Are not these things i higk 
L indifferent, and nothing to us, and death no evil? i and 
I Are not we relations of God, and did we not | Th 
1 come from him? Suffer us to go back thither the 

from whence we came; suffer us, at length, to 
| be delivered from these fetters, that chain and 
weigh us down. Here thieves and robbers, and 
courts of judicature, and those who are called 

1 
4 

ае ROO 
. 
Fa arcs an mite 

„ба 
р 
i 

i" 

о 

”ч 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` 

о ыар TT "ol lS eet e аа 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS » 29 

——— A tá 

tyrants, seem to have some power over us, on Wait 
account of the body and its possessions. Suffer until God 
| us to show them, that they have no power.’ gives me 
i 84. And in this case it would be my part to PEN 
| answer: ‘My friends, wait for God, till he shall 
| give the signal, and dismiss you from this service ; 
{ then return to him. For the present, be content 
to remain in this post where he has placed you. 
The time of your abode here is short, and easy 
to such as are disposed like you. . For what 
tyrant, what robber, what thief, or what courts 
of judicature are formidable to those who thus 
| account the body and its possessions as nothing ? 
1 Stay. Depart not inconsiderately." 

8 5. Thus ought the case to stand between a 
preceptor and ingenuous young men. But how 
stands it now? The preceptor has no life in 
him: you have none neither. When you have 
had enough to-day, you sit weeping about to- 
morrow, how you shall get food. Why, if you 
| have it, wretch, you will have it: if not, you will 
go out of life. The door is open: why do you 
lament? What room doth there remain for 
tears? What occasion for flattery? Why should 
any опе person envy another? Why should 
he be struck with awful admiration of those 
who have great possessions, or аге placed іп 
high rank? Especially if they are powerful 
and passionate? For what will they do to us? 

The things which they can do we do not regard : 

ў the things which we аге concerned about they 

! cannot do. Who then, after all, shall command 
a person thus disposed? How was Socrates ` 
affected by these things? As it became one 
persuaded of his being a relation of the gods. * If 

(tent ica rete "АТ 

we, n 
eu 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Ех Collection, Haridwar 

go 4 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Body you. should tell me (says he to his judges), We 
pand soul wi] acquit you upon condition that you shall no 
263 877: longer discourse in the manner you have hitherto 
done, nor make any disturbance either among our 
oung or our old people; I would answer: 
No are ridiculous in thinking that if your 
general had placed me in any post, I oughteto 
maintain and defend it, and choose to die a 
thousand times rather than desert it; but if God 
hath assigned me any station or method of life, 
that I ought to desert that for you." 1 

: 86. This it is for a man to be truly a relation 
of God. But we consider ourselves as a mere 
assemblage of stomach and entrails and bodily 
arts, · Because we fear, because we desire, we 
flatter: those. who can help us in these matters; 
we dread the very same persons. : 

^: 8 7. A person desired me once to write for 
him to Rome. He was one vulgarly esteemed 
unfortunate, as he had been formerly illustrious 
and rich, and afterwards stript of all his possessions 
and reduced to live here. I wrote for him ina 
submissive style, but, after reading my letter, he 
returned it to me and said: ‘I wanted your 
assistance, not your pity; for no evil hath be- 
fallen me.’ 

§ 8.2 Thus Rufus to try me used to say, This 
or that you will have from your master. When 
I answered him, These are [uncertain] human 
affairs: Why then, says he, should I . intercede 
with him 8 when you can receive these things from 
yourself? For what one hath of his own it is 
superfluous and vain to receive from. another. 
Shall I, then, who can receive greatness of soul 
and a manly spirit from myself, receive an estate, 

sao 

Dy 

ww 

a a a a a ree cee) 
mac ў, R uS y "ЭИ его, Ае АЛАДА аара eS An 

г СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar у 

2 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri. . 
EPICTETUS , 31 

possessions. But if a person is fearful and abject, 
what else is necessary but to write Ictters for him 
as-if he was dead? ‘Pray oblige us with the 
corpse and blood of such a onc. For,.in fact, 
sush a one is corpse and blood; and nothing 
more. For if he was anything morc, he would be 
sensible that one man is not rendered unfortunate 

by another. 

CHAPTER X 

Concerning those who strove for preferments 
ie at Rome 

§ 1.’ Ir we all applied ourselves as heartily to our 
proper business as the old fellows at Rome do to 
their; schemes; perhaps we too might make 
some proficiency. І know a man older than I 
am, and who is now superintendent of provisions 
at Rome. When he passed through this place 
on his return from exile, what an account did he 
give me of his former life! and how did he 
promise that for the future when he-was got back, 
he would apply himself to nothing but how to 
spend the remainder of his days in repose and 
tranquillity. ‘For how few have I now remain- 
ing !’—You will not. do it, said I. When you 
are once got within the smell of Rome, you will 
forget. all this, and, if you can but once gain 
. admittance to court, you will go in heartily 
rejoiced and thank God. ‘If you ever find me, 
Epictetus,’ said he, * putting one foot into the coutt, 

ew 

Soe : CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

PRAEEST AES e al т f А Mut eit з) КӨКТҮ? M 
e елсе Loi 385 С Ааа. ER gie sete da 

or a sum of money, or a place from you? Heaven Not 

forbid! : I will not be so ine~ Ыс of my own slothful 
in 

business 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

4 
р” за THE DISCOURSES OF 

| A more think of me whatever you please. Now, after 
Н excellent al], how did he act? Before he entered the city 
business ee by a billet from Cæsar. On receiving 
| s it he forgot all his former resolutions, and has 
| `> Gu since been heaping up one encumbrance upon 
another. I should be glad now to have an 
opportunity of putting him in mind of his discourse 
| upon the road, and of saying, How much more 
"NK Ra a prophet am I than you! 

| 8 2. What then do I say? that man is made 
| "for an inactive life? No, surely. * But why is 
not ours a life of activity?’ For my own part, 
as soon as it is day, I recollect a little what things 
I am to read over again [with my pupils}, and 
then say to myself quickly, What is it to me how 
such a one reads? My chief point is to get te 
k sleep. : 

ў § 3. But, indeed, what likeness is there between 

E anys : 

| the actions of these jo fellows at Rome] and з do 
ours? If you consider what it is they do you H 
will see. For about what are they employed the | сы 
whole day but in calculating, contriving, consult- J. the 
ing about provisions; about an estate or other abc 
emoluments like these? Is there any likeness, . da 
then, between reading such a petition from any one In 
| as—‘I entreat you to give me a permission to ‘aw: 
! export corn’; and— І entreat you to learn from An 
| Chrysippus of what nature the administration of It 
the world is, and what place a reasonable creature Hi сог 
| holds in it. Learn, too, what you yourself are, a. wil 
2 and wherein your good and evil consists.’ Are E AI 
| these things at all alike? Do they require an E ма 
{ equal degree of application? And is it as shame- Ж; 
ful to neglect the one as the other 2 1 Ш ма 
$4. Well, then, аге we preceptors the only Ў ha] 
ү M. 
| Ж 
$ "E 
H IE 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar - 

хет 

еттт 

е. 

ед 
Sas сарны 

АНРИ ра 

EPICTETUS , 33 

idle dreamers? No; but you young men are so А 
first, in a greater degree. And so even we old Sensitive 
folks, when we see young ones trifling, are tempted (Rien 

to grow fond of trifling with them. Much more, 
then, if I was to sce you active and diligent, 1 

# should be excited to join with you in serious 

"indystry. 

CHAPTER XI 
Of natural affection 

§ x. When one of the great men came to visit 
him, Epictetus, having inquired into the par- 

ticulars of his affairs, asked him whether he had 

a wife and children? The other replying that he 
had, Epictetus likewise inquired, In what manner 
do you live with them? Very miserably, says he. 
How so? for men do not marry and get 
children to be miserable; but rather to make 

“themselves happy. But I am so very miserable 

about my children, that the other day, when my 
daughter was sick and appeared to be in danger, 
I could not bear even to be with her, but ran 
‘away, till it was told me that she was recovered. 
And pray do you think this was acting ripht? 
It was acting naturally, said he. Well: do but 
convince me that it was acting naturally, and [ 
. will convince you that everything natural is right. 
All or most of us fathers are affected in the same 
way. I do not deny the fact, but the question 
between us is whether it be right. For, by this 
way of reasoning, it must be said that tumours 
happen for the good of the body, because they do 

VOL. 1. c 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

РЧР 
А аит i aot D cauta sunt аа ARR ААИ ААТЫН ANT 

pd ——— аА, 

34 THE DISCOURSES OF 
A i { 

1 A happen: and even that vices are natural, because ` It is 
| criterion all or the most part of us are guilty of them. Do i Ther 
{ of pen you show me, then, how such a behaviour as yours X the futu 
| are appears to be natural. | else, bu 
i I cannot undertake that. But do you rather * of what 
| show me how it appears to be neither natural judging 

| nor right. e B $2. 
| If we were disputing about black and white, | you tc 
E. what criterion must we call in to distinguish them? q affectio 
| The sight. thing ?: 
t If about hot and cold, and hard and soft, What? _ Hov 
f The touch. : so Wel 
| Well then, when we are debating about natural l reason 
| and unnatural, and right and wrong, what criterion m Ву: 
1 are we to take? Bo Is t 
f. I cannot tell. | and aff 
р And yet, to be ignorant of a criterion of colours, | Ith 
| | or of smells, or tastes, might perhaps be no very { If tl 
| great loss. But do you think that he suffers only |. the oth 
| a small loss who is ignorant of what is £ood and | Itn 
| evil, and natural and unnatural, to man ? w Wh 
ра No. The very greatest. > LP reason 
| Well, tell те: Ате all things which аге judged | right a 
| good and proper by some, rightly judged to beso? — | Ag 
( Ів it possible that the several opinions of Jews i We 
| and Syrians and Egyptians and Romans con- | run a 
i cerning food should all be right? “ч. reason 
f How can it be possible ? | be con 
| I suppose, then, it is absolutely necessary, if the | Let 
| opinions of the Egyptians be right, the others must E Dic 
be wrong: if those of the Jews be good, all the | do rig 

| rest must be bad. | herm 
i How can it be otherwise ? і Үе 
And where ignorance is, there likewise is wa | We 
of learning and instruction in necessary points. | 
А 

\ 
| 

| ; 
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar . MA: 

Bá — 

ee 0 

we риге 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGang 

EPICTETUS œ 35 

It is granted. 

Then, as you are sensible of this, you will for 
the future apply to nothing, and think of nothing 
else, but how to acquaint yourself with the criterion 
of what is agreeable to nature, and to use that in 
judging of each particular casc. 

§ 2. At present the assistance I have to give 

| уой towards what you desire is this: Doth 

А 

affection seem to you to be a right and a natural 

thing?! 

How should it be otherwise ? 

Well; and is affection natural and right, and 
reason not so? 

Ву no means. 

Is there any opposition, then, between rcason 
and affection ? 

I think not. 

If there was, of two opposites if one be natural, 
the other must necessarily be unnatural, must it not? 

It must. 

What we find, then, at once affectionate and 

[ 
reasonable, that we may safely pronounce to be 

right and good. 

Agreed. $ ' 

Well, then, you will not dispute but that to 
run away and leave a sick child is contrary to 
reason. It remains for us to consider whether it 
be consistent with affection. 

Let us consider it. 

Did you, then, from an affection to your child, 
do right in running away and leaving her? Hath 
her mother no affection for the child? 

Yes; surely she hath. 

Would it have been right, then, that her mother 
too should leave her, or would it not ? 

otri 

Reason 
and 
affection 

ЭШ Foundation Chennai and обадва 

THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

It would not. 

And doth not her nurse love } 

i 
i 
‘ 
{ 
i 
і 
1 
i 
! 

i 
f 

T'hen ought not she like 
Dy no means. 
And doth not he 

Wise to leave her? 
Г preceptor love her? 
Then ought not he lave run away, 
ауе been left 
“great affection 
Or to die in g 
ved her nor 

parents, and he 

people who nei 
deaven forbid ! 
Ut 18 it not unre 

you think ri 

1e hands of! 
took care о 

asonable and ип 
ourself, on the 
ot be allowed 
ction as you 

just, that what 
account of your 

to others, who 
cry same affe 

адл ттт ИРОНИИ 
i r 

ray, if you w 
willing to h 
and childre 

should you be 
and eyen your wif 
nate as to le 

ave your family, 
П, 50 very affectio 
and alone ? 
y no means. 
Or would 
rlends, as fr 

TUM 

d by your 
ction always 
you were sick? 
re possible, to h 
your enemies as to 

you not rather 
such a kind of 
make them 
remains th 
affectionate 
at induced you to c 
How is that possible ? 

as some such motiye 
€ to hide his face wh 

affection from 
always keep fror 
at your beh 

UM P a E 

crt your child 2 
? 

25 induced 
ile a horse 

—— 

4 person at Rom 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Col SER 

jand w 

forbe: 

shoul 
Jr right 
was 
ever) 
of a 
too 1 
chilc 
shou 
seem 
beca 
alter 
wor 
thin 
or I 
prin 

{ 
i : 

5555. |. . Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and Sangoi 

F EPICTE?US • 37 
(was running to which he carnestly wished success ; Principle 
‘and when, beyond his expectation, it won the the root 
[race, he was obliged to have recourse to sponges of action 
to recover his senses. Е 
Апа what was this motive ? 
At present perhaps it cannot be accurately ex- 
|. phined. It is sufficient to be convinced (if what 
lone] philosophers say be true) that we are not to seck 
‘one, а | it from without ; but that there is univerally one 
‘and the same cause, which moves us to do or 
forbear any action; to speak or not to speak; to 
be elated or depressed; to avoid or pursue; that 
very cause which hath now moved us two; you, 
to. come and sit and hear me; and me to speak 
as I do. - 
And what is that ? 
Is it anything else than that it seemed right to 
|. usto do во? 
Aq Nothing else. : 
And if it had seemed otherwise to us, what 
‘e should we have done else than what we thought 
) . right? This, and not the death of Patroclus, 
was the cause of lamentation to Achilles (for 

ur every man is not thus affected by the death 
їз 0- of a friend), that it seemed right to him. ‘This 
d ў too was the cause of your running away from your 
c child, that it seemed right; and if hereafter you 
o. should stay with her it will be because that 
t ££ seemed right. You are now returning to Rome 
i because it scems right to you; but if you should 
> alter your opinion you will not return, In a 

word, neither death nor exile, nor pain, nor any- 
thing of this kind is the cause of our doing, 
or not doing, any action; but our opinions and 
principles. Do I convince you of this, or not? 

gri'Oollection, Haridwar 

=== ЕЕЕ usc cU 
— - = ылыс 

38 THS DISCOURSES OF 

Look You do. 

i 

‘slothful, | 

to the 3. Wellthen; such as the cause is, such will be (third sor 
of ER the effect. From this day forward, then, when- | but only 

Me 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collectiori, Haridwar’ ет 

ever we do anything wrong we will impute it only 
to the principle from which we act; and we will 
endeavour to remove that, and cut it up by the 
roots, with greater care than we would wens a^d 

tumours from the body. In like manner, we will | 

ascribe what we do right to the same cause; and 
we will accuse neither servant, hor neighbour, nor 
wife, nor children as the causes of any evils to 
us; persuaded that if we had not such principles, 
such consequences would not*follow. Of: 
principles we ourselves, and not externals, are 
the masters. У 

Agreed. 

From this day, then, we will neither consider 
nor inquire of what sort, or in what condition, 
anything 18; our estate, or slaves, or horses, or 
dogs, but only our principles. 

I wish to do it. 

You see, then, that it is necessary for you to 
become a scholar: that kind of animal which 
every one laughs at; if you really desire to make 
an examination of your principles. But this, as 
you are sensible, is not the work of an hour or 

a day. 

CHAPTER XII 
Of contentment 

8 1. Concerning the gods, some affirm that there 
is no deity: others, that he indeed exists; but 

mener mea atte 

PNET TTR рутун SO" 

rv nothing u 

learth; t 
i fifth, like 

( 
t i 

It is, 
i each of : 
Хваіа. « D 
end tof 
\no care 
| case, to 
\take car 
‘from t 
| particul: 
А wise 
J things, 
[the wh 
| commo: 

acquies 

1, 
\ ‘may I 

! one ca 
§ Wh 
Ко Ву 
1? incon) 
| But 
i be rig 

| be 
en- 
nly 

WY 

the 
and 
vill i 
ind 

ге 
ut. 

EPICTETUS • 39 

‘slothful, negliger , and without a providence: a The 
jthird sort admits both his being and providence, 
‘but only in great and heavenly objects, and in 

c nothing upon earth: a fourth, both in heaven and 

;earth ; but only in general, not individuals; a 
fifth, like Ulysses and Socrates: 1 
o 
О thou, who, ever present in my way, 
у, Dost all my motions, all my toils survey. 
Porz's Homer. 

It is, before all things, necessary to examine > 

{ each of these; which is, and which is not, rightly 
maid. ^ Now, if there are no gods, how is it our 
jnd to follow them? If there are, but they take 
‘no care of anything, how will it be right, in this 
‘case, to follow them? Or, if they both are, and 
\take care; yet, if there is nothing communicated 
‘from them to men, nor indeed to myself in 
| particular, how can it be right even in this case? 
(A. wise and good man, after examining these 
J things, submits his mind to him who administers 
| the whoie, as good citizens do to the laws of the 
| commonwealth. 
f 2. He, then, who comes to be instructed, 
| ought to come with this intention: * How may 

in everything follow the gods? How may 
| acquiesce in the divine administration ? And how 
, may I be free?? For he is free to whom all 
ў happens agreeably to his choice, and whom no 
one can restrain. 

What! then is freedom distraction ? 
R By-no means; for madness and freedom are 
| incompatible. 
ў But I would have whatever appears to me to 
| be right, happen, however it comes to appear so. 

к СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

gods 

px. pen e 

——— — ——ü 

a 

yee cc 

Freedom You are mad: you h 
and 
obedience 

C 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, ШЕШШ 

bo 

40 THE DISCOURSES OF | 

Ё 
ave lost your senses. Dmetho 

not you know that freedom is a very beautiful апуу t 
valuable thing? But for me to choose at randomjppear 
and for things to happen agreeably to such aheles: 
choice, may be so far from a beautiful thing a 
to be, of all others, the most shocking. For howalone, 
do we proceed in writing? Do I choose to w.itecall tl 
the name of Dion (for instance) as I will? No мл 
but I am taught to be willing to write it as it neigh 
ought to be writ. And what is the case in music ? ‘alone. 
The same. And what in every other art or {yours 
science ? Otherwise, it would be to no purpose fin‘ cc 
to learn anything, if it was to be adapted to each Гапа 
one's particular humour, Is it, then, only in Һе and 
greatest and principal point, that of freedom, рег then 
mitted me to will at random ? By no means, but. To 
true instruction is this: learning to will that with 
things should happen as they do. Апа how do Dis 
they happen? As the appointer of them hath bad 
appointed. He hath appointed that there should |owid 
е summer and winter, plenty and dearth, virtue E Th 
and vice, and all such contrarieties, for the | he 
harmony of the whole.? To each of us he hath | wil 
given a body and its parts, and our several 
properties and companions. Mindful of 
appointment, we should enter upon 
education and instruction not to change the con- í leg 
stitutions of things, which is neither put within | wi 
our reach nor for our good; but that, being as 

syou a 

| 
this | . pri 
à course of | 

yc 
they are, and as their nature is with regard to us, yc 
we may have our mind accommodated to what м 
exists, Сап we, for instance, fly mankind? And di 
how is that possible? Can we, by conversing Б] 
with them, change them? Who hath given us о 
such a power? What, then, remains, or what 

ey 

Ú 

‘ EPICTETUS * 41 

ез. Dmethod is there to be found for such a commerce The 

hardest 

tiful апуу them, that while they act agreeably to the PE 
n: unish- 

randomappearances in their own minds, we may ney 

cr- 
ment for 

such aheless be affected conformably to nature? But discontent 

thing asyou are wretched and discontented. If you are 
For howalone, you term it a desert; and if with men, you 
Ad еса them cheats and robbers. You find fault, too, 
? No;lwith' your parents and children and brothers and 
it as it neighbours. Whereas you ought, when you live 
| music ?{alone, to call that a repose and freedom, and to esteem 
art or yourself as resembling the gods ; and when you are 
'urpose lin company, not to call it a crowd and a tumult 
to cach} and a trouble, but an assembly and a festival ; 
' in thet and thus to take all things contentedly. What, 
m, per. then, is the punishment of those who do not ? 
ans, but То be just as they are. Is any one discontented 
ill that with being alone? Let him be in a descrt. 
how do . Discontented with his parents ? Let him be a 
m hath bad son, and let him mourn. Discontented 
should | with his children? Let him be a bad father. 
| Virtue L Throw him into prison. What prison? Where 
or the | he already 1s; for he is in a situation apainst his 
e hath { will, and wherever any one is against his vill, 

several |. that is to him a prison ; just as Socrates was not 1n. , 
! 

f this prison, for he was willingly there. ‘What, then, 
irse of | must my leg be lame?? And is it for one paltry 
ccuse the world? Why 

е con- Ё leg, wretch, that you à 
within b will you not give it up to the whole? Why will 
ing as | ou not withdraw yourself from it? Why will 
to us, |! you not gladly yield it to him who gave it ? And 
what |^ will you be angry and discontented with the 
And | decrees of Jupiter, which he, with the Fates who 
ersing f spun in his presence the thread of your birth, 
cn us L ordained and appointed ? Do not you know how 
what © very small a part you are of the whole? That 18; 

es ie : PE: In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

7 aby Ата Sam Foundation Chennai and аи ' 
E DUET ate Sie Lis 

i 
42 THE DISCOURSES ор | 
5 } 

For as to body; for as to reason you are neither en, sh 
what we worse, nor less, than the gods. For reason is пог ЛГ. wh 
алй measured by lenpth or height, but by Ргїпсїр[ев. ‘ing ‹ 
-~ Will you not therefore place your good there, 
where you are equal to the gods? ‘Howl | 
wretched am I in such a father and mother! ^j] | 
What, then, was it granted you to come befose- [i 
hand, and make your own terms, and вау: * Let i, 
such and such persons, at this hour, be the authors |! 
of my birth?" It was not granted; for it was |! 
necessary that your parents should exist before | Wen 
you, and so you be born afterwards. OF whom ? iaccept 
Of just such as they were. What, then, since | 
they are such, is there no remedy afforded you? 

ately - 
Now, surely, if you were ignorant to what \ ably t 
Purpose you possess the faculty of sight, you would | water, 
be wretched and miserable in shutting your eyes | he do 
at the approach of colours, and are not you more } be foi 
wretched and miserable in being ignorant that you | | 
have a greatness of soul and a manly spirit, !/ Bu 

answerable to each of the above-mentioned j 

accidents? Occurrences proportioned «o jour E broth 
faculty [of discernment] are brought before you; Í 
but you turn it away at the very time when you 
ought to have it the most open and quick-sighted. 
Why do not you rather thank the bods that they 
have made you superior to whatever they have 
not placed in your own power, and have rendered 
you accountable for that only which is in your own 
power? ОҒ your parents they acquit you; as not 
accountable of your brothers they acquit you; of 
ody, possessions, death, life, they acquit you. 
For what, then, have they made you accountable ? 
For that which is alone in your own power, a 
right use of the appearances of. objects. Why, 

1 
H 
Í 
, 

| EPICTETUS , 43 
neither En, should 
is пог ar which y 
ciples.: "ing one's sel 

ou are not accountable ? his 
£ trouble without need. 

there,h | 
* How|t jj 
her 1^] 7 
* [87 
ius те CHAPTER XIII 
MES {i How everything may be performed acceptably 
| 1o tbe gods 

t was | 

оге 1 Waen a person inquir 
nom? f acceptably to the gods : If he eats with justice, says 
since } Epictetus, and gratitude, and fairly and temper- 
you? |ately.and decently, must he not also eat accept- 

what \ ably to the gods? And when you call for hot 

} 
гоша | water, and your servant doth not hear you, or, if 
; or perhaps is not to 

eyes | he doth, brings it only warm 
more | be found at home; then not to be angry, or burst 

ed, how any one might eat 

| 
| you li with passion, is not this acceptable to the gods ? 
рии, v But how, then, can one bear such things? 

oned ү ' Wretch, will you not bear with your own 
your E brother, who hath God for his father, as being a 
rou; |} son from the same stock, and of the same high 
you |. descent? But if you chance to be placed in some 

superior station, will you presently sct yourself up 
fora tyrant? Will you not remember what you 
are, and over whom you bear rule? That they 
“are by nature your relations, your brothers ; that 

wn |. they are the offspring of God? ! 
| ight of purchase, and not 

red 

à 
Б. 

not $ But I have them by r 

of 1 they me. 
ou. | Do you see what it is you regard? ‘That it is 
le? ^ earth and mire, and these wretched laws of dead ? 
‚а t. men, and that you do not regard thosc of the 

y, | gods. 

т 

kul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

M E LE Ыл 

you draw those things upon yourself Sursum 
js corda 

th 

Heavenly 8 г. Wury a person asked him, 
acuccsmisht be cg 

are there seen 
decrease of the moon, and 
departure of 

th and sympathy 
have not our 80 

ag being indeed mem 
18 essence ; 

movement of them 

eGangotri 

45 
ETUS * 
aa THE Dfscoursgs OF | Mida ies spend, Опар 
4 } е things, deny QF ab in spirits 
d ssent to some nd preserve ! 
once à rning others, à "arious * 
dr judgment сопсе so many and vari 
CHAPTER xy "ir mind impressions from 
That all things are under the d, 

‘ed by [the 
t enever, you are move se which 
tivine inspection үү ы on ideas similar B im ot 
ices of] Hu ou: can you retain send things, 
ор M Me RAAE pae. all things, 
actions gari a c SUGY 

under the inspection of God: О not you think ha is not God capable o 

says Epictetus, that all things are ; 
together and united ? 

how 
nvinced that each of his 

"Ns tain 
ying à сег 
ith all, and receiv ble of 
? : sent with all, capable 
mutually boungnd being ee from all? Is ane cR and 
Communic portion of Cne Aap NT 
do. illuminating so deo d part of it unillumin 
Well; and do not you think tha: things of of leaving only tha 
earth feel the influence of the heaven! i 
es. 

; and 
by the shadow of the carth; 
y bodies? yhich is covered by 

a 
volves the sun; 
and revolve! hole, 
} who made with the w 
Y E * of himself if compared i 
ly, as Vl sma ра ive all things a 
k. a ‘attend to 
4,1 blossom, bring) cannot Е (say you) m tell you 
itd f 1 Bu | апу 
t », 052.160 doth 
hen let it drop, and shed] $ аР Ма 
es, and lie cont ithin themselves] things а 
peaks the word 2} 

y q V ег: . 
t rat ou jaye е ua. po wer vit Jup t o 

man à 
E to each 
assigned 
the increase апай but nevertheless he has g 

Ё 
the appro 

Else how could 
by God's e 

the trees во regular 

the sun, 

itted him 
ius, and comm 
h and? ‘director, his own good genius, 
ach andj; ‘director, 
$0 great vicissitu 
changes to the direct c 

toi : no 
des and? to his guardians APE А whom no je on care- 
ontrary in earthly things? £ slumbers MET aa to what better Bie us? So 
aves, and our own bodies, |. can deceive. uld he have сои darkened 
with the Whole, and f ful guardian TE shut your doors, that you are 
uls much more? ut our souls are $ that when you ber never to say, ithin, and 
Eo m 1 room, remem - but God is w 
and buc ac iar to God, [e for you are not; 
ers an Ist > - alone, 
and must not 

ave then the very le 
18 connection 

US connected 

have they 
а зас лесі 2 i 
nius is within, and x doing? To? o 
ar ath 
of every ў our ge what you а such ап o: 
ag belonging, and connatural | of light Vani renes ought о db they, in order 
5 3 20 Д5 5, MES 1 тог 
to himself? Сап even you think of the divine | God Ufo dis to сееш to prefer before А, 
administration, and every other divine subject, 4 ав the & e their pay, swea nd will not you кыы 
'and, topether with these, of human affairs also: ; ROME ie safety of Caen 80 great favours, 
can you at once receive impressions on your senses TS ave received so many 
and your understanding from a thousand objects ; who h 
TM MG 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukfil-Kangri Collectio 

— MNT 

n, Haridwar. 

тт 

46 TH DISCOURSES OF 

“To or if you have sworn, will you not stand to it? 
thyself And what must you swear? Never to disobey, 
Бе true nor accuse, nor murmur at any of the things 

appointed by him, nor unwillingly to do or suffer 
anything necessary. Is this oath like the former ? 
In the first, persons swear not to honour any other 
beyond Cæsar ; in the last, beyond all, to honour 
themselves. 

CHAPTER XV 
1 What it is that philosophy promises 

§ 1. Wuen one consulted him, how he might 
persuade his brother to forbear treating him ill: 
Philosophy, answered Epictetus, doth not promise 
to procure anything external to man, otherwise it 
would admit something beyond its proper subject- 
matter. For the subject-matter of a carpenter is 
wood; of a statuary, brass: and so of the art of , 
living, the subject-matter is each person's own 
life. 

What, then, is my brother's? 

That, again, belongs to his own art (58 living]; 
but to yours is externallike an estate, ike health, 
like reputation. Now, philosophy promises nonc 
of these. In every circumstance I will preserve 
the governing part conformable to nature. Whose 
governing part? His in whom I exist. 

But how, then, is my brother to lay aside his 
anger against те? 

Bring him to me, and I will tell him; but I have 
nothing to say to you about his anger. 

82. Well, but I still farther ask, How am I to 

Ser ges emerat 

рр 9 vsu 

— 

EPICTETUS * 47 

Linsen = ш 

keep myself in a state of mind conformable to A soul 

nature though he should not be reconciled to mc? grows 
No great thing is brought to perfection suddenly, ? owiy 

when not so much as a bunch of grapes or a fig is. 

If you tell me that you would at this minute have 

{ a fig, I will answer you, that there must be time. 

i Let it first! blossom, then bear fruit, then ripen. 

Is then the fruit of a fig-tree not brought to per- 

€ fection suddenly, and in one hour; and would you 

| possess the fruit of the human mind in so short a 

| time, and without trouble? I tell you, expect no 

| such thing. 

CHAPTER XVI 
Of providence 

§ т. Be not surprised, if other animals have all 
things necessary to the body ready provided for 
them, not only meat and drink but lodging: that 
they want neither shocs, nor bedding, nor clothes, 
while we stand in need of all these. For they 
not being made for themselves, but for service, it 
was not fit that they should be formed so as to need 
the help of others. For, consider what it would 
be for us to take care, not only for ourselves, but 
for sheep and asses too, how they should be clothed, 
| how shod, and how they should cat and drink. 

| But as soldiers are ready for their commander, + 
| shod, clothed, and armed (for it would be a 
| grievous thing for a colonel to be obliged to до 
| through his regiment to put on their shoes and 
& clothes), so nature likewise has formed the animala 

› | made for service, ready provided, and standing in 
f 

— 

i : `ЄС-б. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| — . LLL c <<< 

Ў Digitized by Агуа.Ѕатај Foundation Chennai апа eGangotri m 

" 

„т Fat Ud suit e EE R EERE ELERIA a TE SUI. 

4B 

48 THE DISCOURSES OF 
Nature's need of no further care. Thus one little boy, 
-» PrO- with only a crook, drives a flock. 
vidence 85. But now we, instead of being thankful for 
Р this, complain of God that there is not the same 
kind of care taken of us likewise. And yet, 

good heaven! any one thing in the creation is his 
sufficient to demonstrate a providence to a modpst 
and grateful mind. Not to instance at present in 
great things, but only in the very production of 
milk from grass, cheese from milk, and wool from 
skins: who formed and contrived these things? 
No one, say you. О surprising stupidity, and 
want of shame! But come, let us omit the works 
of nature. Let us contemplate what she hath done, 
as it were, by the bye. What is move useless 
.. than the hairs which grow on the chin? And yet, 
hath she not made use even of these in the most 
becoming manner possibly? Hath she not by 
these distinguished the sexes? Doth not nature 

in each of us call out, even at a distance, Í am a 
man; approach and address me as such; inquire 

~ no farther; see the characteristic. On the other 
= hand, with regard to women, as she hath mixed 
something softer in their voice, so she hath deprived ' 
them of a beard. But no, to be sure, the animal 
should have been left undistinguished, and each of 

us obliged to proclaim, I am a man! But why 

is not this characteristic beautiful and becoming 
and venerable? How much more beautiful than 
the comb of cocks; how much more noble than 
the mane of lions! ‘Therefore, we ought to have 
preserved the divine characteristics ; we ought not 

to have rejected them, nor confounded, as much as 

~ in us lay, the distinct sexes. 

§ 3. Are these the only works of providence, 

БИТИРЕ" pneter 
lac! 
A 
o 

Tess patris gap re 

b | CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

—— 
€ 

——— 

a асууна Sonn e eee 

bie Micon TA GA a odia Ses т ; А M 

EPICTETUS *' 

49 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

with regard to us . . 1 Апі what words can Hymns 

proportionably express our applauses and praise ? of praise 

For, if we had any understanding, oupht we not 
both, in public and in private, incessantly to sing 
hymns, and speak well of the Deity, and rehearse 
his benefits? Ought we not, whether we are 
digging, or ploughing, or cating, to sing the 
hymn to God? Great is God, who has supplied 
us with these instruments to till the ground: 
great is God, who has given us hands, a power of 
swallowing, a stomach: who has piven us to grow 
insensibly, to breathe in sleep. Even these things 
we ought upon every occasion to celebrate; but to 
make it the subject of the greatest and most divine 
hymn, that he has given us the faculty of ap- 
prehending them, and using them in a proper way. 
Well then: because the most of you are blind and 

. insensible, was it not necessary that there should be 

some one to fill this station, and give out, for all men, 
the hymn to God? For what else can I, a lame 
old man, do but sing hymns to God? If I was a 

* nightingale, I would act the part of a nightingale: 

if a swan,? the part of a swan. But, since I am 
a reasonable creature, it is my duty to praise God. 
This is my business. I do it. Nor will I ever 
desert this post as long as it is vouchsafed me; 
and I exhort you to join in the same song.8 

CHAPTER XVII 

That the art of reasoning ts necessary 

§ 1. Since it is reason which sets in order and 
finishes all other things, it ought not itself to be left 
in disorder. But by what shall it be set in order? 

VOL. I. D 

-CC-0. |n Public, Domain..Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

(€— ee ee 

"Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Gromek Bien 

TEE DISCOURSES OF 

Evidently either by itself, or by something else. 
Well: either that too is reason, or there is 
mething else superior to reason (which is 
and if it be reason, what, again, 
For, if reason can set 
it can in another; and, 
hing further, it will be 

impossible) Я 
shall set that in order? 
itself in order in one case, 
if we will still require anyt 
infinite and without end. 
But the more urgent necessity 
passions) and the like. 
ar about these, therefore ? 
But then, if you should say to 
cannot tell whether your arguments are 
should happen to 
myself doubtfully, and you should say, 
I will bear with you no longer; but | 
n words upon you, ‘The | 
Therefore, I 

is to cure [our 

Would you he 

will retort your ow 
more urgent necessity is,’ 

adm 
T 
V 
In і 
else 
invo 
must 

B 

ing is first settled; just i natu 

suppose, the art of reason 

as, before the we settle the 

measuring of corn, 
unless we first determine w 
s, how shall we bel 
Thus, in the present 
first learnt and accurately 
ne criterion of other 
hings are learnt, how 

y thing else? 1: 
Well, a bushel, however; £ : 
alue in itself; but ў 
And logic (you say) is of no 
That we will consider hereafter. 
then, make the conces-: 
distinguishes and еха-ў 
measures and weighs 

Vho says this ? 

bushel and what a balance 1 
able to measure or weigh? 

case, unless we have 
examined that which is tl 
things, and by which other t 
shall we be able accurately to learn an 
And how is it possible ? 
is only wood, a th 
it measures corn. 
value in itself. 

Let us, for the present, 
It is enough that it 
mines, and, as one may вау, 
all other things. 

ing of no v 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

——————.. 

V 

assist: 

А qm ' Digitized'by Arya Samaj Foundation ; 

EPICTETUS «* 5I 

Chrysippus and Zeno and Cleanthes? And doth To 
not Antisthenes say it? And who is it, then, who interpret 
has written that the beginning of a right education the will 
is the examination of words? Doth not Socrates offnature 
say it? Of whom, then, doth Xenophon write, 
that he began by the examination of words, what 
eaon signified ? 2 

§ 2. Is this, then, the great and admirable 
thing, to understand or interpret Chrysippus ? 

Who says that it is? But what, then, is the 
admirable thing ? 

T'o understand the will of nature. 

Well, then, do you apprehend it of yourself? 

In that case, what need have you for any one 
else? For, if it be true, that men never err but 
involuntarily, and you have learnt the truth, you 
must necessarily act right. 

But, indeed, I do not apprehend the will of 
nature. 

Who, then, shall interpret that ? 

They say Chrysippus.5 I go and inquire what 
this interpreter of nature says. I begin not to 
understand his meaning. I seek one to interpret 
that. Here explain how this is expressed, and 
as if it were put into Latin. How, then, doth 
a supercilious self-opinion belong to the inter- 
preter? 

Indeed, it doth not justly belong to Chrysippus 
himself, if he only interprets the will of nature, 
and doth not follow it; and much less to his 
interpreter. For we have no nced of Chrysippus 
on his own account, but that by his means we 
may apprehend the will of nature; nor do we need 
a diviner on his own account, but that by his 
assistance we hope to understand future events, 

- GC-0. In-Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

I ner 

52 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Choice and what is signified by the gods; nor the entzails 
compels of the victims on their own account, but on the 

choice account of what is signified by them; neither is it 

the raven or the crow that we admire, but the 
god who delivers his significations by their means. 
I come, therefore, to the diviner and interpreter of 
these things, and say, * Inspect the entrails for me: 
what is signified to me?’ Having taken and laid 
them open, he thus interprets them :— You hare a 
choice, man, incapable of being restrained or 
compelled. This is written here in the entrails. 
I will show you this first in the faculty of assent. 
Can any one restrain you from assenting to truth ? 
—‘No one.'— Can апу one compel you to admit 
a falsehood ?—* No one.’ —You see, then, that you 
have in this topic a choice incapable of being 
restrained or compelled or hindered. Well, is it 
any otherwise with regard to pursuit and desire? 
What can conquer one pursuit ?—‘Another pursuit.’ 
What desire and aversion?—‘ Another desire 
and another aversion.’ If you set death before 
me (say you) you compel me. No; not what is 
set before you doth it, but your principle, that it 
is better to do such or such a thing than to die. 
Here, again, you see it is your own principle 
which compels you—that is, choice compels choice. 
For, if God had constituted that portion which 
he hath separated from his own offence and given 
to us, capable of being restrained or compelled, 
either by himself or by any other, he would not 
have been God, nor have taken care of us in a 
due manner. $ к 

§ 3. These things, says the diviner, I find in 
the victims. These things are signified to you. 

If you please, you are free. If you please, you Be Ow 

eA GC AT e os t CRIT LT 
Г. 

t] 

| adult 

€ 
б 

В 

adt pene: ion Chennai and eGangotri 
н Digitized by Arya Баа) Foundation С! ; 

EPICTETUS * 

53 

will have no one to complain of, no one to accuse, Pity 
e * AI will be equally according to your own mind, the' errors 
t f and to the mind of God. of the 
e n $4. For the sake of this oracle I ро to the Multiturie 
5, diviner and the philosopher, admiring not him 
of merely on the account of his interpretation, but 
jg theethings which he interprets. 
id 
= a 
г 5 CHAPTER XVIII 
That we are not to be angry with the errors of others 
? $ 1.1 Ir what the philosophers вау bc true, that 
ut all men’s actions proceed from one source ; that, 
ou as they assent, from а persuasion that a thing is so, 
ng and dissent, from à persuasion that it js not, and 
K suspend their judgment, from a persu 
e? 

asion that it 
likewise, they exert the 

asion that such 

is uncertain j 50, 
| 

ir pursuits, 
„ from а persu 

a thing is for their 
te ji advantage; ‘апа it is impossible to esteem one 
re n thing advantageous, and desire another; to esteem | 
18 one thing а duty, and pursue another: 
it 

why, after 
all, should we be angry at the multitude? 

E" They are thieves and pilferers. 
ple | hat do you 

mean by thieves and pilferers ? 

cee V They are in an error concerning good and evil. | 
ich Ought you, then, to be angry, Or to pity them? f ! 
ren | Do but show them their error, and you will see | 
ed, ў that they will amend their faults; but, if they do | 
not | not see it, the principles they form are to them | 
п а | their supreme rule. 

L- What, then, ought not this thief and this 
dn | adulterer to be destroyed ? 
ou- 5 By no means [ask that]; but вау rather? 

you ў 

Ought not he to be dest 

royed who errs and js 

"71^ 6C. in Public Domain: Gurükul'Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

aic 

$4 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Philo- deceived in things of the greatest importance; | а 
sophic blinded, not in the sight that distinguishes white P th 
Ec from black, but in the judgment that distinguishes і D 
good from evil?’ Ву stating your question thus I, 

ou see how inhuman it is, and just_as if you be 

would say, * Ought not this blind, or that deaf, th 

man to be destroyed ?' For, if the greatest hurt Пе 

be а deprivation of the most valuable things, and un. 

the most valuable thing to every one is a right I, 
judgment in choosing; when any one is deprived on] 

of this, why, after all, are you angry ? You ought bec 

not to be affected, man, contrary to nature, by the hea 

ills of another. Риу? him rather. Do not be WI 
angry; nor say, as many do, What! shall these and 

А execrable and odious wretches dare to act thus? pos 
Whence have you 50 suddenly learnt wisdom? § 
Because we admire those things which such people leg. 

take from us. Do not admire your clothes, and Wh 

ou will not be angry with the thief. Do not | take 

admire the beauty of your wife, and you will not | advi 

.be angry with an adulterer. Know that a thief t M 

and an adulterer have no place in the things that © -E 

are properly your own; but in those that belong / thin; 

. to others, and which are not in your power. бара 

you give up these things, and look upon them as { а pai 
nothing, with whom will you any longer be angry “ау. 

But while you admire them, be angry with your- E ward 

self rather than with others. 
You have a fine suit 
has not. 
them. 

consists, but imagines it is in a 
the very thing which you imagine too. 
he, then, of course, come and t 
When you show a cake to gree 

? 
dy people, and 

| 

ake them азау MSS 

Consider only :} bring 
of clothes, your neighbour bawl 
You have a window, you want to air (hates 

He knows not in what the good of man pes: 
fine suit of clothes; (walk 

Must not tbody 

W 

EPICTETUS , 55 

are devouring it all 
them snatch it from you? Do not provoke them. 

К 
з "| Шо not have a window. Do not air your clothes, 
3 Т, too, the other day, had an iron Jam 

yourself, would not 

— 

p burning 
4 before my household deities, Hearing a noise at 
5 Í the window, Iran. I found my lamp was stolen. 
: I considered, that he who took it away did nothing 
d unaccountable. What then? To-morrow, says 
i I, you shall find 

an earthen one; for a m 
d only what he hath. Ih 

nt because you had a coat. 

he head. Why, can you have a pain in your horns ?4 

We Why, then, are you out of humour? For loss 
a and’ pain can be only of such things as are 
s? | possessed. 

ao § 2. But the tyrant will chain— what? —A 
ple | leg.—He will take away—what?— A head. 
nd What is there, then, that he can neither chain nor 
not | take away?—The will and choice. Hence the 
not | advice of the ancients—IK now thyself. 

def || What ought to be done, then? 

hat © -Exercise yourself, for heaven's sake, in little 
| greater. ‘T have 

ong | things; and thence proceed to 
If | a pain in my head.'— Do not cry,-Alas!—*T haye 
з аз { a pain in my ear.’ —Do not cry, Alas! Тао not 
ту? say . you may not groan, but. do not groan in- 
ihe 1, wardly ;. or, if your servant is a long while in 
nly :} / bringing you something to bind your head, do not 
pour bawl апа distort yourself, and say, * Everybody 
| te such a onc ? 

hese principles, 
not trusting to bulk of 
for one should not be 
e that an ass is, 

ho then is unconquerable? He whom nothing, 

an loses 
ave lost my coat. Ay, 
I have a pain in my 

» ciis (hates me.? For who would not ha 
man [5:8 3. Relying for the future on t 

hes ; | Walk: upright and free; 

not body like a wrestler : 

vay бт 1n the sens 
and 

you have The will 

cannot be 
chained 

D 

` CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGan ri 

56 THE DISCOURSES OF 

ы, we independent on choice, disconcerts. | Then I run ў 
ned over every circumstance and consider (say) of { an 
querable? 20 athletic champion, He has been victorious f. cy 
in the first encounter: what will he do in the : 
second? What if the heat should be excessive ? | Nu 
"What if he were to appear at Olympia? So | 296 
І вау in this case. What if you throw moacy ; ex 
in his way? He will despise it. What, ifa i d 
gil? What, if in the dark? What, if he be " a 
tried by popular fame, calumny, praise, death? | Jos 
He is able to overcome them all. What then, йй тер: 
if he be placed in the heat, or in the rain? f” MS 
What if he be hypochondriac, or asleep? (Just ie 
the same.) "із is my unconquerable athletic; ore 
champion. hi at fe 
| ana 
| Fey 
CHAPTER XIX EU 
|^ terro 
Of the behaviour to le observed towards tyrants ({ BUatc 
В сапп‹ 

essed of some either |, itself. 

/ 51. Wuen a person is poss 
unless he hath been { 

real or imagined superiority, 
he will necessarily be puffed upi 

t 
with it. A tyrant, for instance, says: cI am E pity : 
supreme over al 
Can you exemp | 
How should you? 
own aversions ? Are your ow 
Whence should you come 
Pray, on shipboard, do you 
the pilot? In a chariot, to whom but the driver ? master 
And to whom in all other arts? 4 
In what then, doth your power 

~ men pay regard to me.’ 

j—And what can you do for me? 

consist 2—* 

VULP 
257 

CC-0. In Püblic Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection’ H 

EPICTETUS * 

So do I to m 

y desk. 
and drive 

ra cut aur 

me ??— No: 
and. therefore 
not I pay reg 
feet ? 
that sever 
you, just 
regard to you as a man 
| would wish to be like 

| sto imitate. you, 

but they 
I pay reg 

a nail for the service 
* What then, are these things to 

are of some use 
ard to them. 
ard to an ass? 
Do not I clean him? 
Y one pays regard t 
as he doth to an ass 

you? 
аз he would S 

57 
I wash it and Wipe it; What the 
of my oil flask... tyrant 

be valued beyond Caa go 

to me, 

Why, do 

Do not I wash his 

Do not you know 

o himself, and to 

? For who pays 
Show that. Who 
Who would desire 
Ocrates ?—‘ But I 

? 

t can take off your head’ —You Say right. I had 
> (^ forgot that one is to pay regard to you as to 
L^ a‘fever. or the colic, and that there should be 
(an altar erected to you, as there is to the goddess 
| < Fever at Rome, 
| § 2. What is it, then, that disturbs and strikes 
É terror into the multitude ? The tyrant and his 
[| guards? Ву no means, What is by nature frec, 
&. cannot be disturbed Or restrained by anything but 
er | itself. But its own principles disturb it. Thus, 
cn} when the tyrant says to any one: ©] will chain 
up i: your leg’: he who values his leg, cries out for 
m | pity: while he who sets the value on his own will 
e? | and . choice, Says: ‘If you imagine it for your 
194: interest, chain it,’ —« What! do not you care? '— 
шў No; I do not care.—*I will show you that I am 
e? V'master.'— You? How should you? Jupiter has 
е? | set me free. What! do you think he would 
tOVauffer his own son to be enslaved? You are 

cr 

gane of my carcase. 
ne. 

you come into m 
р P] ? 6 
me ? "—No; 
Ine say, to you also: 

y presence, 

but to myself; 

Take it.—*So that when 

you pay no repard to 
or, if you will have 

I tell you; the same to you 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Toadying 
Natu | flunkeys 

of 

-are at the bottom, there must necessarily be a 

58 THE DISCOURSES OF . i 

as to a pipkin. This is not selfish vanity ; for j 
every animal is so constituted as to do everything í 
for its own sake. Even the sun doth all for his 
own sake: nay, and to name no more, even [ 
Jupiter himself. But when he would be styled 
the Dispenser of Rain and Plenty, and the Father 
of Gods and Men, you вес that he cannot attain 
these offices and titles unless he contributes to the 
common utility. And he hath universally so 
constituted the nature of every reasonable creature, 
that no one can attain any of its own proper 
advantages without contributing something to the 
use of society. And thus it becomes not unsociable | 
to do everything for one's own sake. For, do } 
you expect that a man should desert himself and (< 
his own interest? How, then, can all beings have 
one and the same original instinct, attachment to 
themselves? What follows, then? ‘That where 
those absurd principles concerning things dependent 
on choice, as if they were either good or evil, 

regard paid to tyrants: and I wish it were to 
tyrants only, and not to the very officers of their 
bed-chamber too. And how wise doth a man 
grow on a sudden when Cæsar has made him 
Clerk of the Close-stool! How immediately we 
say, ‘Felicio talked very sensibly to те!” I 
wish he were turned out of the bed-chamber, that 
he might once more appear to you the fool he is. 

§ 3. Epaphroditus had {a slave, that was] a 
shoemaker; whom, because he was good for 
nothing, he sold. This very fellow being, by some 
strange luck, bought by a courtier, became shoe- 
maker to Cesar. Then you might have seen how 
Epaphroditus honoured .him. “How doth good 

some 
hoe- 
how 

good 

ii 

you;could tel] every one s 
When you are dead? 
Write it upon a sto 
well. | But, pray, what ren 
~ of you out of Nicopolis ? 

crown ? of gold.’ 
‚a crown, take and put 
Make 

qa pt 

Бат Chennai and eGangotri 

СРИ А 

Anya Samaj Fou 

EPICTETUS * 
Felicio do, pray?' And if any of us 

the great man himself was about, it was 
e is consulting about affairs with Felicio? Did 
1m as good for nothing ? Who, then, 
a sudden made a wise man of him ? 
his it is to honour anything besides what depends 
Ow choice, > 
- § 4. Is any one exalted to the office of tribune? 
All that meet him congratulate him, One kisses 
his eyes, another his neck, and the Slaves his hands. 
e goes to his house; finds it illuminated. He 
ascends the Capitol. Offers a sacri 
who iever offered a 
desires? For exerti 
nature? - For we than 
we place our good. 

5. person wag talking with me to-day 
about the Priesthood ! of Augustus. I say to him, 
Let the thing alone, friend ; you will be at great 
expense for. nothing. ‘But my name,’ says he, 
‘will be written in the 

annals.’ Will you stand 
by, then, and tell those who read them, ©] am the 
person. whose name is Written there"? Dut, if 

О now, what will you do 
—‘ My name will remain? — 
ne and it will rem 

sacrifice for having good 

ain just as 
nembrance wil] there be 
—‘But I sgh 

all wear a 
ТЕ your heart is 

quite sct upon 

on one of roses, for it wil] 
the prettier. appearance. 

C-0 Public Domain, Guruku K angr Collection, Haridwa 
Й 
С 

asked what Ambition 
answered : for trifles 

[Sa Rede i 

= ee 

Sr teem tias I iOS D arcto ea tt are pots tme reme HE ST ы ы ылыы ыты 

What is 
reason? 

and eGangotti 
Sates eat d deei ni 

Samaj Foundation Chennai 
ata cu oa ИИ 

. 

i 
i 
1 

60 THE DISCOURSES or | 
| 
5 в 
CHAPTER XX б h 
In what manner reason contemplates itself F B 
t 
Every art and every faculty contemplates some nc 
things as its principal objects. Whenever, there- fre 
fore, it is of the same nature with the objects of its th 
contemplations, it necessarily contemplates itself — qu 
too. But where it is of a different nature, it $ 2. 
cannot contemplate itself. T'he art of shoemaking, wk 
for instance, is exercised upon leather, but is itself — || an 
entirely distinct. from the materials it works upon; fac 
therefore it doth not contemplate itself. Again, | Fo 
grammar is exercised on articulate speech. Isthe : уо! 
art of grammar itself, then, articulate speech ? аге 
Ву no means. Е Ьу 
Therefore it cannot contemplate itself. То what wit 
purpose, then, is reason appointed by nature ? “tol 
To a proper use of the appearances of things. ie far: 
And what is reason? - © goo 
‘A composition of certain appearances to the ^ 
mind: and, thus, by its nature, it becomes con- © . and 

templative of itself too. Again, what subjects of B ous 
contemplation belong to prudence ? 

Good, and evil, and indifferent. 

What, then, is prudence itself? 

Good. 

What, imprudence ? - 

Evil. 

You sce, then, that it necessarily contemplates 
both itself and its contrary. "Therefore the first 
and greatest work of a philosopher is to try and 
distinguish the appearances, and to admit none 
untried, Even in money, where our interest 

d 

dev 
Б 

B 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

. Digitized by A 

AE TEC UE eme ERI IER ae 

nés y Sos recor 

| EPICTETUS * ё 

4 seems to be Concerned, you все what ап art we Things 

have invented, and how many ways an assayer vital and 
indifferent 

4 uses to try its value. Dy the sight, the touch, 

ЖҰ the smell, and lastly, the hearing. He throws 

the piece down, and attends to the jingle; and is 

not contented with its jingling only once; but, by 

frequent attention to it, becomes quite musical. In 

the same manner, whenever we think it of consc- 

quence whether we are deceived or not, we use 

-a€ utmost attention to distinguish those things 

which may possibly deceive us. But, yawning 

and. slumbering over the poor miserable ruling 

t^ faculty, we admit every appearance that offers. 

~ For here the mischief doth not strike us. When 

you would know, then, how very languidly you 

are affected by good and evil, and how vchemently 

by things indifferent; consider how you are affected 

With regard to being blinded, and how with regard 

to being deceived, and you will find that you are 

far from being moved, as you ought, in relation to 

good and evil. 

ү. But much previous qualification, and much labour 
~ . and learning, are wanted. 

а Має: еп? Do you expect the greatest of 

arts is to be acquired by slight endeavours ? And 

yet the principal doctrine of the philosophers, of 

itself, is; short. If you have a mind to know it, 

read Zeno, and you will ѕее.1 For what prolixity 

44 718 there in saying, Our end is to follow the gods; 

5 and, The essence of good consists in the proper 

suse of the appearances of things? Indeed, if you 

вау, What, then, is God? What is an appearance? 

What is particular, what universal nature ?—herc 

ithe affair: becomes prolix. And so, if Epicurus 

should come and say, that good must be placed in 

rya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ч 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

rectum 

62 THe DISCOURSES ОЕ 

Empty body; here, too, it will be prolix: and it will 

popularity be necessary to hear what is the principal, the 

substantial and essential part in us. It is unlikely 

that the good ofa snail should be placed in the 

shell: and is it likely that the good of a man 

should? You yourself, Epicurus, have something 

superior to this. What is that in you which 

deliberates, which examines, which forms the 

judgment concerning body itself, that it is the 

principal part? And why do you light your lamp, 

and labour for us, and write so many books? 

That we may not be ignorant of the truth ? What 

are we? What are we to you? Thus the 
doctrine becomes prolix. 

Temi ee mer anh o Rus 

Ere erra i test im 

CHAPTER XXI 
Of the desire of admiration 

When a person maintains his proper station in life, 
he doth not gape after externals. What would 
you have, man? 

* I am contented if my desires and aversions are 
conformable to nature: if I manage my powers of 

and assent, in the manner I was formed to do.’ 

Why, then, do you walk as if you had swallowed 
a spit? 

*I could wish, moreover, to have all who meet 
me adinire me, and all who follow me cry out, 
What a great philosopher ! ? | 

Who are those by whom you would be ad- 
mired? Are they not the very people who you 
used to say were mad? What, then, would you | 
be admired by madmen? 

ча, 

тл pe imer 

eM $a mein 

Cus IE ENN ae ЄЛ. 

la 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection; Haridwar : 

pursuit and avoidance, my purposes and intentions |. 

e] Tn MR РР 

ici a А ie ssi my did MEET „бла ‘eGangotri. ИЕ, 
f ' Digitized by Arya Safia] панавдабад ао ee s 
ie 

D 
Kk. 

ч EPICTETUS » 63 

will | 
, the 1 CHAPTER XXII 
Ki Y Of pre-conceptions . 
man РЕС PRE CON CENTI A are common to all men; Applica. 
thing f and one pre-conception doth not contradict another, tion of 
hich 4 Eor, who of us doth not lay it down as a maxim, Principles 
the | that good is advantageous and eligible, and at all 
the | — events to be pursued and followed ; that justice is Я 
amp, | fair and becoming ? Whence, then, arises the 
oks? dispute ?—In adapting these pre-conceptions to 
Vhat particular cases. As when one cries: *Such a 
the 

V" person hath acted well, he is a gallant man’; and | 
© another: ‘No, he hath acted like a fool Hence | 
| arises the dispute among men. ‘This is the dis- 
pute between Jews and Syrians 
|^ and Romans, not whether sanctit 
| to all things, and in every instanc 
| but whether the eating swine's fl 

and Egyptians 
y be preferable 
е to be pursued ; 

| esh be consistent 
life, | with sanctity or not. This, too, you will find to 
ould | have been the dispute between Achilles and Aga- 

| memnon. For, call them forth. Wh 
sare | Agamemnon? Ought not that to be done which 
rs of |^ is fit and right ?— Yes, surely.— Achilles, what 
tions |. вау you? Is it not agreeable to you, that what js 
i | right should be done ?— Yes, beyond every other 
wed |. thing. Adapt your pre-conceptions, then. Here 
^ begins the dispute. One Says: ‘It is not fit that 

at say you, 

neet |} I'should restore Chryseis to her father.’ The 

out, i other says: < Yes, but it is? One or the other of | 
1 them certainly makes а wrong adaptation of the | 

ad- 4 pre-conception of fitness. Again, one says: ‘If 

you © it be fit that I should give up Chryseis, it is fit, 

уои“ too, that I should take some one of 

your prizes.’ 
The other: * What, that you should take my 

“cco. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

sty hast Sei 

t 

xv. 

ve. 

AER 

Sea 

— — 
ДШШЩ 

es 

СУ Жш. 

Latet ALS 

Digitized by Arya S 

d DES 
amaj Foundation 
« 

64 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Duty and mistress?" Ау, yours? ‘What, mine only? 
interest Must I only, then, lose my prize?’ 

82. What, then, is it to be properly educated ? 
'To learn how to adapt natural pre-conceptions to 
particular cases, conformably to nature; and, for 
the future, to distinguish that some things are in 
our own power, others not. In our own powor 
are choice, and all actions dependent on choice ; 
not in our power, the body, the parts of the body, 

roperty, parents, brothers, children, country, and, 
in short, all with whom we are engaged in society. 
Where, then, shall we place good? To what 
kind of things shall we adapt the pre-conception 

‘of it? ‘Lo that in our own power. 

§ 3. What, then, is not health, and strength, 
and life good? And are not children, nor 
parents, nor country? Who will have patience 
with you? 

Let us transfer it, then, to the other sort of 
things. Can he who suffers harm and is disap- 
pointed of good things be happy ? 

He cannot. 

And can he preserve a right behaviour with 
regard to society? How is it possible he should ? 
For I am naturally led to my own interest. If, 
therefore, it is for my interest to have an estate, it 
is for my interest likewise to take it away from 
my neighbour. If it is for my interest to have 
a suit of clothes, it is for my interest likewise 
to steal it wherever I find it. Hence wars, 
seditions, tyranny, unjust invasions. How shall I, 
if this be the case, be able any longer to preserve 
my duty towards Jupiter? IfI suffer harm and 
am disappointed, he takes no care of me. And 
what is Jupiter to me if he cannot help me, or 

EPICTETUS » 65 

? j again, what is he to me if he chooses I should Answer 

be in the condition I am? Henceforward I begin а fool 
› to hate him. What, then, do we build temples, NUS 
o | Чо we raise statues to Jupiter, as to evil demons, ly 
elt as to the goddess Fever? How, at this rate, is he 
WA the preserver, and how the dispenser of rain and | 
s l5 penty? 1f we place the essence of good any- | 
. |. where here, all this will follow.— What, then, 
ч &hall we do? | Am l ; E 
| $4 Тыз is the inquiry of him who philoso- 
|o phises in reality and labours to bring forth [truth]. 
x | “Шо not I now see what is good and what is 

п „ү €vil?* Surely І am in my senses. Ay, but shall 
i I place good anywhere on this other side; in 

h, | things dependent [only] on my own choice? | 
or | Why, every one will laugh at me. Some grey- | 
се | headed old fellow will come with his fingers | 

| covered with gold rings, and shake his head, and | 
of say: ‘Hark ye, child, it is fit you should learn | 
р- philosophy, but it is fit too you should have brains. 

This is nonsense. You learn syllogisms from 
| philosophers; but how you are to act, you know 
th |) better than they. ‘Then, why do you chide me, 

12 © sir, if I do know?! What can I say to this 
If, | wretch? If I make no answer, he will burst. I 
dt — must e'en answer thus: *Forgive me, as they do 
mm | people in love. I am not myself. І have lost 
e my senses. i 

ise Ж 

rs, A "CHAPTER XXIII 

i М | ; : Against Epicurus 

ind i § 1. Even Epicurus is sensible that we are by 
nd i^ nature sociable; but having once placed our good 
or } 

VOL. I. E 

€C-0. In Public Domain. Gur 

Й 

LT 

MALA 

элыз 

eee 
SERS 

Sener NE ae 

ДААСАН 

з 

xu 

X I 

a 
SL 

КЕЗ 

dai 
eene d marre tA M pap e R EE aros 
8090: 

X 

66 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Hostages in the mere shell, he can say nothing afterwards 

to fortune different from that. For, again, he strenuously 
maintains, that we ought not tq admire or receive 
anything separated from the nature of good. Ага 
he is in the right to maintain it. But how, then, 
came! any such suspicions [as your doctrines 
imply to arise], if we have no natural affecticy 
towards an offspring? Why do you, Epicurus, 
dissuade a wise man from bringing up children? 
Why are you afraid that upon their account he 
may fall into uneasiness? Doth he fall into any 
for a mouse, that feeds within his house? What 
is it to him if a little mouse bewails itself there? 
But Epicurus knew that, if once a child is born, 
itis no longer in our power not to love and be 
solicitous for it. For the same reason, he says, a 
wise man will not engage himself in public business, 
for he knew very well what such an engagement 
would oblige him to do; for what should restrain 
any one from affairs if we may behave among 
men as we would among a swarm of flies? 

82. And doth he who knows all this dare to | / 

bid us not bring up children? Not even a sheep if 
„ог a wolf deserts its offspring, and shall man? 
What would you have? That we should be as 
silly as sheep? Yet even these do not desert their 
offspring. Or as savage as wolves? Neither do 
these desert them. Pray, who would mind you if 
he saw his child fallen upon the ground, and cry- 
ing? For my part, І am of opinion that your 
father and mother, even if they could hare fore- 
seen that you would have been the author of 

euch doctrines, would not, however, have thrown -¥ 

you away. 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul-Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` 

ii EPICTETUS® 67 

| | 
| CHAPTER XXIV | 
| How we are to struggle with difficulties . | 

(8r. Difficulties are the-things that show what Eripitur 
men are. For the future, on any difficulty, re- persona, 
member that God, like a master of exercise! has Manet 

| | engaged you with a rough antaponist. y 
LM For what end? ШЕ: 
| That you may be a conqueror like one in the | 
' |. Olympic games, and it cannot be without toil. No | 
> 0 man, in my opinion, has a more advantageous | 
f ! difficulty on his hands than you have; provided | 
‚ l| you will but use it as an athletic champion doth | 
> | his antagonist. We are now sending? a spy to | 
a | Rome; but no one ever sends a timorous spy, { 
| | 

Я who, when he only hears a noise or sees a 
t | shadow, runs back, frighted out of his wits, 
n \ and says: ‘The enemy is just at hand.’ So now, 
g {if you should come and tell us: ¢ Things are in a 
fearful way at Rome, death is terrible ; banishment, 

o (| terrible; calumny, terrible; poverty, terrible ; 
p | run, good people, the enemy is at hand’: we will | 
) answer: Get you gone, and prophesy for yourself ; | 
is |. our only fault is that we have sent such a spy. | 
ir |. Diogenes? was sent a spy before you ; but he told | 
o |. ug other tidings. He says that death is no evil, ! 
f. | for it is nothing base; that defamation is only the | 
= | “noise of madmen. And what account did this | 
w | spy give us of pain? Of pleasure ? Of poverty? | 
». | He says that to be naked is better than a purple 
of & robe, to sleep upon the bare ground the softest { 
m .& bed, and gives a proof of all he says by his own | 

courage; tranquillity, and freedom; and, more- 
over, by a healthy and robust body. There is no 

x `Сб-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

УЗ Ыса by.Arya Samaj Fouridatiori Chennai and 'eGàngotri +s." 

68 THE DISCOURSES OF d 

Vitaque enemy near, says he. All is profound peace.— 
mancipio How so, Diogenes? Look upon me, says he. 
nulli 4 I › 5 g ' . me 
datur AM hurt? Am I wounded? Have I run | ar 
away from any one? This is such a spy as he | | 

ought to be. But you come and tell us one thing 
р 

after another. Go back again and examine things | 
more exactly and without fear. 

8 2. What shall I do, then? 
What do you do when you come out of a ship? 

> 

" Do you take away the rudder or the oars along 
| with you? What do you take, then? Your own, 
i your bottle, and your bundle. So, in the present 
1 case, if you will but remember what is your own, 

you will not claim what belongs to others. Are 4j 
you bid to put off your consular robe J— Well I | 
am in my equestrian. Put off that too. —I have \{ 

^ things is mine? How, then, do we call them ©- § 1 
| mine? Аз a bed in an inn. If the landlord B 

| | only my coat. Put off that too.— Well, I am 
ig naked. Still you raise my envy.—Then e'en take 
n my whole body. If I can throw off a paltry 
| body, am I any longer afraid of a tyrant? í 
| | d» 8 5. But such a one will not leave me his heir. 
| | : What, then, have I forgot that none of these 
| 
I 

when he dies leaves you the beds, well and 

A 

He good; but, if to another, they will be his, and < all 

1 
X it н © 
k di you will seek one elsewhere; and consequently, UA 
i i if you do not find one, you will sleep upon the i be 
E ln: ^ ground; only keep quiet and snore soundly, and б іп 
ij Bil remember that tragedies have no other subjects ба 
Ku x but the rich, and kings, and tyrants. No poor { 
P ut man fills any other place in one than as part of 
"m the: chorus: whereas kings begin, indeed, with 
i | Воз ‘Crown the palace with festive раг- 
i 
1 

ands. 5—Dut, then, about the third or fourth | 

omain.-Gurukul Kangri-Collection;-Haridwar. 

m £ 

rd | 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation. Chennai and eG 

EPICTETUS. - 69 

act: * Alas, Cithewron! why didst thou receive Depart, 

те?” Where are thy crowns, wretch: where 
is thy diadem? Cannot thy guards help thee ? 
Whenever you approach any of these, then, 
remember that you meet a tragic player; or, 
rather, not an actor, but CEdipus himself. — But 
Such a one is happy. He walks with a numerous 
train. Well: ] join myself with the crowd, and 
I too walk with a numerous train. 
5.84. But remember the principal thing: that 
the door is open. Do not be more fearful than 
children; but as they, when the play doth not 
“please them, say, ‘I will play no longer’: so 
do you, in the same case, say, ‘I will play no 
longer, and go; but, if you stay, do not 
;complain. 

CHAPTER XXV 

On tbe same subject 

© $ т. Ir these things are true, and we are not 
stupid or acting a part when we say that the 
good or ill of man consists in choice, and that 
all:besides is nothing to us, why are we still 
troubled... Why do we still fear? What hath 
been. our ‘concern is in no one's power; what is 
in'the power of others we do not regard. What 

!- embarrassment have we left? 

. But direct me. 

Bip Why should I direct you? Hath not Jupiter 

‘directed you? Hath he not given you what ie 
` your“ own, incapable of restraint or hindrance ; 

A and^what is not your own, liable to both? What 

SS 

6650: In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Н 

angotri 

or be 
content 

aridwar 

70 THE DISCOURSES OF 

How directions, 

~ loag to from him? 
keep up 

then, what orders have you brought E for 
t By all methods keep what is your f: ©5\ 
the game OWN: what belongs to others do not covet. {7 sup 

is your own. Who, then, can deprive you of 
these? Who can restrain you from making use 
of them but yourself? And how do you do itt | «— 
When you make that your concern which is nori <V 
a your own, you lose what is.’ Having such (are 
precepts and directions from Jupiter, what sort do | hy] 
ou still want from me? Am I better than he? } 
Моге worthy of credit? If you observe these, \ 
what others do you need? Ог are not these і 
directions his? Produce your natural pre-concep- } 
tions: produce the demonstrations of philosophers: 1 Teu 

Honesty is your own; a sense of virtuous shame j тїр] 
[^ 
i 

produce what you have often heard, and what you | anc 
have said yourself; what you have read, and what B ob] 
you have studied. | fou 

How long is it tight to observe these things, | I 

and not break up the game? 

Hj As long as it goes on agreeably. A king is 
i chosen at the Saturnalian festival (for it was 
Ej agreed to play at that game): he orders, ‘Do 
E you drink: you mix the wine: you sing: you go: 
4: you come.’ І obey; that the game may not be 
й broken up by ту fault. —* Well: but I bid you 
p think yourself to be unhappy.’ I do not think so, 
4 and who shall compel me to think so? Again : 
ү! | we agree to play Agamemnon and Achilles. Не 
IM who is appointed for Agamemnon, Says to me: 
ү i | * Go to Achilles, and force away Briseis.’ I go. 
E | | ‘Come.’ I come. 
i 

82. We should converse in life as we do in 
hypothetical arguments. ‹ Suppose it to be night. - 
— Well: suppose it. ‘Is it day, then 2? —No: 

Ë eee 

“rat 

"Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
yes pesetas d йыр DN EEE i : : 

дз 

VERTU Une 

Time nem 

| 

t É£PICTETUS*' 71 | 
ght l for I admitted the hypothesis that it is night. The open | 
our ‘Suppose that you think it to be night.’—Well : door | 

night." —' That doth not follow from the hypothesis. | 
'Thus, too, in the other case. Suppose you have 
use | Ш luck.—Suppose it. * Аге you, then, unlucky gU 
i | «Yes. ‘Have you some cross dumon?’—Yes. 
not { .§Well: but think too [in earnest] that you 
ich | are unhappy. —This doth not follow from the | 
до | hypothesis: and there is one who forbids me to 

| 
t 
vet, |) suppose it. ‘But think also, in reality, that it is | 
I 9 
ү 
$ 

е? | think so. 
se, t How long, then, are we to obey such orders? | 
ese { As long asit is worth while: that is, as long i 
p- {ав I preserve what is becoming and fit. | 
rs: ү: ‚ $ 2. Further, some are peevish and fastidious, | 
ou | and say, I cannot dine with such a fellow, to be 
t |^ obliged to hear him all day recounting how he 

[; fought in Mysia. ‘I told you, my friend, how 
gs, I gained the eminence. There I am besieged 

again.” But another says, ‘I had rather get a 
! dinner, and hear him prate as much as he pleases.’ 
“1 Do:you compare the value of these things, and 
- judge for yourself; but do not let it be with 
„depression and anxiety, and with a supposition 
that you are unhappy, for no one compels you to 
that. Is the house in a smoke? If it be a 
‘moderate one I will stay, if a very great one І 
will. go out. For you must always remember , 
and hold to this, that the door is open. ‘Well, 
do not live at Nicopolis.’—I will not live there. 
«Мог at Athens.’—Well, пог at Athens. ‘Nor 
“at Rome.’—Nor at Rome neither. ‘But you 
shall: live at Gyaros.’ 1—1 will live there. But 
living at Gyaros seems to me like living in a great 
smoke.’ I will retire where no one can forbid me 

25 

TNR NETS 

CC:0. In Public Domai 

í 

. E 
72 THE DISCOURSES OF | 
t 

| Revilerto live (for that abode is open to all), and put : § 4 

] md off my last garment,? this paltry body of mine: | 
t с < beyond this no one hath any power over me. 
Thus Demetrius said to Nero: * You senten 

to death; and nature, you!’8 Jf I place my land fi 
admiration on body, I give myself up for a slave; Кү T} 
if on an estate, the same; for I immediately Беа, 43 
myself how I may be taken. Just as when afi 
| snake pulls in his head, I say, strike that part of UY. ne’s 
E him which he guards: and be you assured, that | ell t 
whatever you show a desire to guard, there your 

‘count 
ce me jstudy 

Hi augh 

||| master will attack you. Remember but this, whom | A 

|! . will you any longer flatter or fear? I ei 
^ — But I want to sit where the senators do. \ Db 

Do not you see that by this you stra 
self? You squeeze yourself? 

Why, how else shall I see the show in the 
amphitheatre cleverly ? 

Do not see it at all, man, and you will not be 

iten your- 

— 
SSS 

a squeezed. Why do you give yourself trouble? 

i Or wait a little while, and when the show is 

| t over, go sit in the senators’ places and sun your- 

É | self. For remember that this holds universally ; 

& we squeeze ourselves; we straiten ourselves: that 

й is, our own principles squeeze and straiten из. 

Й What із it to Бе reviled, for instance? Stand by 

р a stone and revile it; and what will you get? 

И ү! lf you, therefore, would hear like a stone, what $ 
Tu would your reviler be the better? But if the facon 
f Wii: reviler hath the weakness of the reviled for an | cise 
\ M advantage ground, then he carries his point. | and 
ü ‘Strip him.'—* What do you mean by him?’ j the 
i ‘Take my clothes; strip off them [if you will]? |: whi 
{ <I have put an affront upon you.'—* Much good | 
Д may it do you.’ ү say 
4 B. 
1 £^ 

Moe 

..CC-0. In Public.Domainz Сакын 

‘Digitizedby Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

TS 

Vaca ESNA 

EPICTETUS 73 

put 158 4. These things were the study of Socrates; Precept 

ne: and, by this means, he always preserved the same @ 
me. ‘countenance. But we had rather exercise and P 
me jgtudy anything than how to become unrestrained 
my land free. 

The philosophers talk paradoxes. 

ray dù end are there not paradoxes in other arts ? 
na ү Vhat is more paradoxical than the pricking any 
t of пев eye to make him sce? If a person was to 
21] this to one ignorant of surgery, would not he 
augh at him? Where is the wonder, then, if, in 
jphilosophy too, many truths appear paradoxes to 

CHAPTER XXVI 
What the law of life is 

) 

§ 1. As one was reading hypothetical syllogisms ; 
Tt is likewise a law in these, says Epictetus, 
i^o admit what follows from the hypothesis: but 

o 

ur- 

ly; ‘much more is it a law in life to do what follows 
that {тот nature. For, if we desire in every subject 
us. {of action, and in every circumstance, to keep 
by {ир to nature; we must, on every Occasion, cvi- 
et? Bi dently make it our aim neither to let conse- 
hat (quences escape our observation, nor to admit 
the f contradictions. Philosophers, therefore, first exer- 
an “се us in theory, which is the more casy task, 
int. ү and then lead us to the more dillicult: for in 
1 ? 3 id 

theory there is nothing to A our following 
ife there are many 
then, to 

lJ.’ i what'we are taught; but in 
| things to. draw us aside. It is ridiculous, 
say we must begin from these, for it is not casy 

Ware anms eo 
: 

nd 
ractice 
^ 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

«Ignor- to begin from the most difficult; and this excuse 
m must be made to those parents who dislike chat 
; their children should learn philosophical specu- # 

74 THE DISCOURSES OF | 
$ 
|, 

: a mc 
€ " * + a 
lations.—* Am I to blame, then, sir, and ignorant I whol 

of my duty and of what is incumbent on me? Ту ог c; 
this 1s neither to be learnt nor taught, why с 

should teach me the art of living ?"— Yhis, һом-Ё 

ever, is allowed to be said only by one who real ly} Of i 
Ета 

= 

il 
Ii 

үй Үй A 

Hi ut А г t ЧАЧ fluxe: 
1 li you find fault with me? If it is to be tug f Eider 
Wy pray teach me yourself; or, if you cannot, gi 4 xdronvi 
i 4 me leave to learn it from those who profess храме 
j| | understand it. Besides: do you think that коом 
[|| voluntarily fall into evil, and miss of goo |. 
| i Heaven forbid! What, then, is the cause of n} | уе a 

ИШЕ кни Ка У 

i | faults?’—Ignorance. * Аге you not willing, the ff уз 

ү i that I should get rid of my ignorance? Who № gas 

il : ui - 

| i ever taught the art of music or navigation hy 

HI ? А "ст 

i i anger? Do you expect, then, that your ang ltr) 

Ha t 

| 

| 

hath that intention. But he who reads these 
things, and applies to the philosophers, merely foil 81. 

_ rae Co. 

ESET SAR ESD CR VES 

TES OLI 

I 

| 

| | . ^ 

! | the sake of showing at an entertainment that һе! Thin 

i understands hypothetical syllogisms; what doth neith 

in y A а 1 

[ү he do it for but to be admired by some senator}. 
| { ^ y j not a 
i who happens to sit near him??... Loto b 
| 82. ... Г once saw a person weeping and em-[^ cases 

bracing the knees of Epaphroditus; and deploring} Ви 

his hard fortune that he had not £50,000 left. 
What said Epaphroditus, then? Did he laughs: 
at him, as we should do? No; but cried out. 
with astonishment, Poor man! How could yo 

Sa EIIE GEN 

NEP А 
eee SESS a 

appli 
thing 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar’ 

pss 

j 5 

{ 

| | EPICTETUS ^? 75 
15е f not immediately employ it in great attempts. But Habit 
hat i for want of this, some, who can scarce get down 

u=- 5 a morsel, buy, and set themselves to swallow, 
ant i whole treatises; and so they throw them up again, 
d or cannot digest them; and then come colics, 
CH B es and fevers. Such persons ought to con- 
bwieider what they can bear. Indeed, it is easy to 
4x¢convince an ignorant person in theory; but in 
ip. Wnatters relating to life no one offers himself to 
“)\ieonviction ; and we hate those who have convinced 
lis. Socrates used to say that we ought not to 

ji M . б 
[pie a life unexamined. 
Wai 

X 9 45 

у 

gter] CHAPTER XXVII 

D ME 

T iy Of the several appearances of things to the mind: 
d and what remedies are to be provided for them 

Things are either what they appear to be; or they 
о neither are, nor appear to be: or they are, and do 
tor}. not appear to be: or they are not, and yet appear 
to be. To form a right judgment in all these 
m cases belongs only to the completely instructed. 
ing| But whatever presses, to that a remedy must be 
eftf applied. : If the sophistries of Pyrrhonism! or 
ugh the Academy press us, the remedy must be 
applied there: if specious appearances, by which 
things seem to be good which are not so, let us 
seek for a remedy there. If it be custom which 
ү presses us, we must endeavour to find a remedy 
Һа against that. 

hen: + What remedy is to be found against custom ? 
Ш.А contrary custom. You hear the vulgar say, 

sya, Samal Fouidetion Chennai and eGangotri 

Жы ee 

cures 
habit 

nr nny ene cee 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

death 

—— CÓ se Li ath GS rmm t APT pip PPS - 
TU ee = ~= : 

ae See 

Brite Ary a Samaj Found 

* CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridw: 

ЧАРК ЫТА j 
hennai.and eGangotri 

d E RET 

76 THE DISCOURSES OF 

The ‘Such a one, poor soul! is dead.'— Why, his 
fear of father died; his mother died. * Ay; but he was 

cut off in the flower of his age, and in a foreign 
land.'— Hear the contrary ways of speaking: 
withdraw yourself from these expressions. Oppose 
to one custom a contrary custom; to sophistry 
the art of reasoning, and the frequent use «2nd 
exercise of it. Against specious appearances we 
must have clear pre-conceptions brightened up and 
ready. When death appears as an evil, we ought 
immediately to remember that evils may be avoided, 
but death is necessity. For what can I do, or 
where can I fly from it? Let me suppose myself 
to be Sarpedon, the son of Jove, that I may speak 
in the same gallant way. 

Brave though we die, and honoured if we live ; 
Or let us glory gain, or glory give. Porr. 

If I can achieve nothing myself, I will not envy 
another the honour of doing some gallant action. 
Dut suppose this to be a strain too high for us; 
are not we capable at least of arguing thus?— 
Where shall I fly from death? Show me the 

place; show me the people to whom I may have 

recourse, whom death doth not overtake. Show 
me the charm to avoid it. If there be none, what 
would you have me do? I cannot escape death ; 
but? cannot I escape the dread of it? Must I die 
trembling and lamenting? For the origin of the 
disease is wishing for something that is not 
obtained. In consequence of this, if I can bring 
over externals to my own inclination, I do it; if 
not, I want to tear out the eyes of whoever 
hinders me. For it is the nature of man not to 
bear the being deprived of good; not to bear the 

аг - 

uf at VY V CB aa aaus 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

С in el nd tct bg Dott n ados tih utat Mos Mdospi DLN Dane далымда, 
T 
EPICTETUS ' » 

118 falling into evil. And во, at last, when I can Evidence 
as neither bring over things to my own inclination, of the 
gn Dor tear out the eyes of him who hinders me, L sit 5епзез 
g: down and groan, and revile him whom I can; 

i 
{ 
| 
Jupiter, and the rest of the gods. For what are 
they to me if they take no care of me? 
&h! but you will be guilty of impicty. 
What then? Can I be in a worse condition 
nd than I am now? In general, remember this, that, 
unless piety and interest be placed in the same 
thing, piety cannot be preserved in any mortal 
breast. 
§ 2. Do not these things seem to have force ? 3 
Let a Pyrrhonist or an Academic come and oppose 
them. For my part, I am not at leisure, nor able * 
to stand up as an advocate for general consent. 
Even if the business were concerning an estate, I 
| Should call in another advocate. With what 
! 

vy advocate, then, am I contented? With any 

n. that may be upon the spot. I may be at a 

5; loss, perhaps, to give a reason how sensation is 

— performed; whether it be diffused universally, 

he or reside in a particular part; for I find diffi- | 
ve culties that shock me in each case; but, that you | 
Ww and I are not the same person, I very exactly | 
at know. 

1; Ноу во? ; 

ie % Why, I never, when I have a mind to swallow 

he anything, carry it to your mouth, but my own. 

ot I never, when I wanted to take a loaf, took a | 
пр р brush; but went directly to the loaf, as fit to | 
if answer my purpose. And do you yourselves, who | 
ег deny all evidence of the senses, act any otherwise ? | 
to Who of you, when he intended to go into a bath, | 
he ever went into a mill? 

сс. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

— --tEprpsapescc: UE ———— —— 

78 THE DISCOURSES OF 

The What, then, must not we to the utmost defend it 
under- these points? support the general consent [of jf, vc 
(ae mankind]? be fortified against everything that | ар 
чо truth Opposes it? 4 | in 
Who denies that? But it must be done by him i 
who hath abilities, who hath leisure; but he who 
is full of trembling and perturbation and inward di 
"s disorders of heart, must employ his time about lik 
something else. 
ta; 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
That we are not to be angry with mankind. What 
things are little, what great among men 
§ 1. Wuar is the cause of assent to anything? ra 
Its appearing to be true. tas 
It is not possible, therefore, to assent to what 
appears to be not true. | 
Why? sh 
Because it is the very nature of the under- 18 

standing to agree to truth, to be dissatisfied with 
falsehood, and to suspend its belief in doubtful 

cases. 

What is the proof of this? 

Persuade yourself, if you can, that it is now 
night. 

Impossible. 

Unpersuade yourself that it is day. 

Impossible. 
Persuade yourself that the stars are, or are not, 

even. 

Impossible. А 
2. When апу опе, then, assents to what 15 

false, be assured that he doth not wilfully assent to 

€——1 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar E 

ais asusta Digilized by Arya, Samal Foundation Chennai and.eGangoir, 68 таска 

EPICTETUS ` 79 

it as false (for, as Plato affirms, the soul is never and is dis- 
voluntarily deprived of truth); but what is false satisfied 
appears to him to be true. Well, then, have we, АИ 
in actions, anything correspondent to true and false 
іп propositions ? ^ z 

Duty, and contrary to duty: advantageous, and 
disadvantageous: suitable, and unsuitable; and the 
like. 

A person, then, cannot think a thing advan- 
tageous to him, and not choose it. 

He cannot. But how says Medea? 

Cru а Җә 

‘I know what evils wait my dreadful purpose 5 

T But vanquished reason yiclds to powerful rage.’ 

Because she thought that very indulgence of her 
rage, and the punishing her husband, more advan- ! 
tageous than the preservation of her children. 

Yes; but she is deceived. 

‘Show clearly to her that she is deceived, and 
she will forbear ; but, till you have shown it, what 
is she to follow but what appears to herself? 

Nothing. 

Why, then, are you angry! with her, that the 
unhappy woman is deceived in the most important a 
points, and, instead of a human creature, becomes 
a viper? Why do not you rather, as we pity the 
blind and lame, so likewise pity those who are 
blinded and lamed in their superior faculties? 
Whoever, therefore, duly remembers that the 
appearance of things to the mind is the standard 
of every action to man: that this is either right 
or wrong: and, if right, he is without fault, if 
wrong, he himself bears the punishment ; for that | 
one-man cannot be the person deceived, and f 
another the sufferer: will not be outrapcous and | 

at 

Ww 

Mam 

ot, 

т 
е 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennar 

80 THE DISCOURSES or 

Appear- angry at any one; will not revile, 

n ances hate, or quarrel with any one. 

M § 3. So, then, have all the great and dreadful 
deeds that have been done in the world no other 
original than appearance ? . 

Absolutely no other. The Shad consists of 
nothing but the appearances [of things to the 
mind], and the use of those appearances. "It 
appeared to Paris to carry off the wife of 
Menelaus. It appeared to Helen to follow him. 
If, then, it had appeared to Menelaus to per- 
suade himself that it was an advantage to be 
robbed of such a wife, what would have hap- 
pened? Not only the Ziad had been lost, but the 
Odyssey too. 

Do these great events, then, depend on so small 
a cause? 

What are these events which you call great? 

Wars and seditions, the destruction of numbers 
of men, and the overthrow of cities. 

And what great matter is there in all this? 
Nothing. What great matter is there in the 
death of numbers of oxen, numbers of sheep, or 
in the burning or pulling down numbers of nests 
of storks or swallows ? 

Are these like cases, then ? 

Perfectly like. "һе bodies of men аге de- 
stroyed, and the bodies of sheep and oxen. The 
houses of men are burnt, and the nests of storks. 
What is there great or dreadful in all this? Pray, 
show me what difference there is between the 
house of a man, and the nest of a stork, so far as 
it is a habitation,? excepting that houses are built 
with beams and tiles and bricks; and nests with 
sticks and clay? 

ог reproach, or 

Seay ar 

` CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 

nam т t 
| x 

———— ÁO 

EPICTETUS 81 

What, then, is a stork and а man a like thing ? Ruin of 
What do you mean? 5 the better 
With regard to body, extremely like. part ir 
Is there no difference, then, between a man and 2 
a stork ? a 
Yes, surely; but not in these things. 
In what, then? 
Inquire, and you will find that the difference 
consists in something else. Sce whether it be 
not in acting with discernment; whether it be 
not in a social disposition; in fidelity, honour, 
steadiness, judgment. he” | 
`8 4. Where, then, is the great good or evil of | 
man? | 
Where his difference is. If this is preserved | 
and remains well fortified, and neither honour, | 
fidelity, or judgment is destroyed, then he himself | 
is preserved likewise; but when any of these is 
lost and demolished,.he himself is lost also. In | 
this do all great events consist. Paris, they say, | 
was undone, because the Greeks invaded Troy | 
and laid it waste, and his family were slain in 
battle. .By no means; for no one is undone by 
an action not his own. АП that was only laying 
waste the nests of storks. But his true undoing 
was when he lost the modest, the faithful, the 
hospitable, and the decent character. When was c 
Achilles undone? When Patroclus died? By 
no means. But when he gave himself up to rape; 
when he wept over a girl; when he forgot that he 
came there not to get mistresses, but to fight. 
This is human undoing; this is the siege; this 
the overthrow; when right principles are ruined ; 
when these are destroyed. 
But when wives and children are led away 

YOL. I. F 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

П 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai 

82 THE DISCOURSES OF 

themselves killed ar 
» are not 
and these evils? 
guess- 

| оза й Whence do you conclude them such? 
| inform me in my turn. 

| Nay ; but whence do you affirm that they are 
not evils? 

| Principle captives, and the men 
| 
| 

Ргау, 

8 5. Let us recur to the rules. Produce the 
| pre-conceptions. One cannot sufficiently wonder 
| ` 8t what happens in this respect. When we would 

judge of light and heavy, we do not judge by 

! guess; when of straight and crooked, not by 
guess: and, in general, when it concerns us to 
f know the truth of any particular, no one of us 
| will do anything by guess. But, where the first 
| апа principal cause is concerned of acting either 
|+ right or wrong; of being prosperous or un- 
f prosperous, happy or unhappy; there only do we 
| act rashly and by guess. Nowhere anything like 
a balance; nowhere anything like a rule; but 
some fancy strikes me, and I instantly act con- 
formably to it. For am I better than Agamemnon 
or Achilles; that they, by following their fancies, 
should do and suffer so many things, and fancy 
not suffice me? And what tragedy hath any 
other original? The Hreus of Euripides, what 
is it? Fancy. The (Шри; of Sophocles? 
Fancy. The Phenix? The Hippolytus? All 
fancy. To what character, then, doth it belong, 
think you, to take no care of this point? What 
are they called who follow every fancy ? 

Madmen. 

Do we, then, behave any otherwise? 

———— — 

- CC-0. İn Public Domain. ©К Kangri Collection; Haridwar 

EPICTETUS , 83 

CHAPTER XXIX 
Of inlrepidity 

§ 1. THE essence of good and evil is a certain 
disposition of the choice. 
aV hat are externals, then? 

Materials to the faculty of choice: in the 
management of which it will attain its own good 
or evil. 

How, then, will it attain good ? 

If it doth not admire the materials themselves: 
for right principles concerning these materials con- 
stitute a good choice; but perverse and distorted 
principle, a bad one. This law hath God 
ordained, who says, *If you wish for good, 
receive it from yourself! You say, No; but 
from another.—‘ Nay; but from yourself.’ In 
consequence of this, when a tyrant threatens and 
sends for me; I say, Against what is your threaten- 
ing pointed? If he says, ‘I will chain you’; 
I answer, It is my hands and fect that you threaten. 
If he says, ‘I will cut off your head’; I answer, 
It is my head that you threaten. If he says, “1 
will throw you into prison’; I answer, It is the 
whole of this paltry body that you threaten: and, 
if he threatens banishment, just the same. 

„о not he threaten you, then? 

__ I£ am persuaded that these things are nothing 
to me, he doth not; but, if I fear any of them, 
it is me that he threatens. Whom, after all, is 
it that I fear? The master of what? Of things 

- іп my own power? Of these no one is the 

master. Of things not in my power? And what 

are these to me? 

My mind 
to me 

a king- 
dom ts 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

84 ThE DISCOURSES OF 

Thereal $ 2. What, then! do you philosophers teach us 
Socrates a contempt of kings? 

t 

Dy no means. Who of us teaches any one to 
contend with them about things of which they 
have the command? Таке my body, take my 
possessions, take my reputation, take those who 
are about me. IfI persuade any one to contend 
for these things as his own, accuse me with 
justice. — “Ау, but I would command your 
principles too.'— And who hath given you that 
power? How can you conquer the principle of 
another ?— Dy applying terror І will conquer it.— 
Do not you see that! what conquers: itself is not 
conquered by another? Апа nothing but itself 
can conquer the choice. Hence, too, the most 
excellent .and equitable law of God, that the 
better should always prove superior to the worse. 
'Теп are better than one. 

To what purpose ? 

For chaining, killing, dragging where they 
please; for taking away an estate. Thus ten 
conquer one in the instance wherein they are better. 

In what, then, are they worse? 

When the one hath right principles and the 
others have not. For can they conquer in this 
point? How should they? If we were weighed 
in a scale, must not the heavier outweigh ? 

§ 3. That ever Socrates should suffer such things 
from the Athenians! 

Wretch! what do you mean by Socrates?? 
Express the fact as it is. "That ever the poor 
paltry body of Socrates should be carried away 
and dragged to prison by such as were stronger : 
that ever any one should give hemlock to the 
body of Socrates; and that it should expire! 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection; Haridwar 

= 2 
A ———€É———————— ' 'O—2 

| 

М “Digitized by Atya Samaj Foundation Che 
LJ 

LJ 
EPICTETUS : ` 85 

Do these things appear wonderful to you? These A good 
things unjust? Is it for such things as these bargain 
that you accuse Ged? Най Socrates, then, X 
no equivalent for them? In what, then, to him 

did the essence of good consist? Whom shall 

we mind, you or him? And what doth he вау? 

cA КЕ 8 : к E 

Mytus and Melitus may indeed kill; but hurt 
me they cannot? And again: ‘If it so pleases ~ . 
God, so let it Ье. | 

~ $4. But show me that he who hath the worst 

principles gets the advantage over him who hath 
the better. You never will show it, nor anything 
like it: for the law of nature and of God is this; | 
Let the better be always superior to the worse. | 

In what? | 

In that wherein it is better. One body is | 
stronger than another: many than one; and a i 
thief than one who is not a thicf. Thus I, too, } 
lost my lamp because the thief was better at | 
keeping awake than I. But he bought a lamp í 
at the price of being a thief, a rogue, and a wild 
beast. This seemed to him a good bargain, and 
much good may it do him ! 

§ 5. Well; but one takes me by the coat and 
draws me to the Forum ; and then all the rest bawl 
out—* Philosopher, what good do your principles 
do you?, See, you are dragging to prison: sce, 
you are going to lose your head !?— And pray 
what. rule of philosophy could I contrive, that 
when a stronger than myself lays hold on my 
coat, I should not be dragged? Ог that when 

` ten men pull me at once and throw me into prison, 
I should not be thrown there? But have I learned 
nothing, then? I have learned to know, what- 
ever happens, that if it is not a matter of clioice 

CC-0. In Public Domain: Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Ó T ` "s 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
D 

86 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Clap it is nothing to me. Нах inci 
hands done me dem 2d What, Wd 
Е j x , ! do І seek for 
| child anything else to do me good but what I have 
! learned? Afterwards, as I sit in prison, І say: 
He who makes this outcry neither hears what 
signal is given nor understands what is said; nor 
is it any concern to him to know what philosophers 
say or do. Let him alone. Well; but I am 
bid to come out of prison again. If you have 
no further need for me in prison, I will come out 
if you want me again, I will return. ‘For how 
| long will you go on thus?’—Just as long así 
1 reason requires Í should continue in this paltry 
body: when that is over, take it and fare ye well. 
Only let not this be done inconsiderately, nor 
i from cowardice, ner upon every slight pretence ; 
for that, again, would be contrary to the will of 
God: for he hath need of such a world and such 
j | creatures to live on earth. But if he sounds a 
retreat as he did to Socrates, we are to obey him 

i when he sounds it as our general. 

b P § 6. Well; but are these things to be said to 
| the world ? 

! ^ For what purpose ? Is it not sufficient to be 

| convinced one’s self? When children come to 
| us clapping their hands and saying: * To-morrow 
is the good feast of Saturn,’ do we tell them that 

| 
*. + . 
ir good doth not consist in such things? Ву по. 

| means: but we clap our hands along with them. | 
i Thus, when you are unable to convince any one, : 

a i BÀ 

p : 
en mr A RECESSU QS ar id 

consider him as a child, and clap your hands with |. 

А him; or if you will not do that, at least hold ue 
ў ^ tongue. hese things we ought to remember ; 
1 д А 

i and when we are called to any difficulty, know 
i that an opportunity is come of showing whether 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection; Haridwar- 3 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatión Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS ' 87 
ES we have been well taught. For he who goes from A youth 
T a philosophical lecture to a dificult point of of spirit 
с practice, is like а young man who has been studying ° 
T. to solve syllogisms. If you propose an easy one, 
at he says: Give me rather а fine intricate one, that 
or I may try my strength. Even athletic champions 
Т5 “are displeased with a slight antagonist. He cannot 
m | lift me, says опе. This is a youth of spirit. No; 
Ө oy but I warrant you when the occasion calls upon Е 
TE him, he must fall a-crying and say: ‘I wanted to 
x learn a little longer first.'— Learn what? If you 
TEE did not learn these things to show them in practice, 
ry | why did you learn them at all? I am persuaded 
L i there must be some one among you who sit here 
Or that feels secret pangs of impatience, and says: 
e; * When will such a difficulty come to my share 
of as hath now fallen to his? Must I sit wasting my 
ch life in a corner when I might be crowned at 
я Olympia? When will any one bring the news of 
im ЧУ such a combat for me?’ Such should be the 
i disposition of you all. Even among the gladiators 
to of Cæsar there are some who bear it very ill, that 

they are not brought upon the stage and matched ; 
and. who offer vows to God, and address the 
officers, begging to fight. And will none among 
you appear such? I would willingly take a voyage 
on purpose to see how a champion of mine acts ; 
how he treats his subject. ‘I do not choose such 
a subject,’ say you. Is it in your power, then, 
to take what subject you choose? Such a body 
is given you; such parents, such brothers, such a 
country, and such a rank in it; and then you 
come to me and say: ‘Change my subject.’ 
Besides, have not you abilities to manage that 
which is given you? It is your business [we 

И СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

€ 

+ ee LOLS 

The 

garb and 

the man 
( 

88 THE DISCOURSES OF 

should say] to propose; mine to tre 
well.—*No. But do not propose such an argu- 
ment to me; but such a one: do not offer such an 
objection to me; but such a one.’—There will be 
a time, I suppose, when tragedians will fancy them- 
selves to be mere masks, and buskins, and long 
trains. "These things are your materials, man, and 
your subject. Speak something, that we may 
know whether you are a tragedian or a buffoon: 
for both have all the rest in common. If any one, 
therefore, should take away his buskins and his 
mask, and bring him upon the stage in his 
common dress? is the tragedian lost or doth he 
remain? If he hath a voice he remains. * Here, 
this instant, take upon you the command.’ I take 
it; and, taking it, I show how a person who hath 
been properly instructed behaves. ‘Lay aside 
your robe, put on rags, and come upon the stage 
in that character.'— What then? is it not in my 
power to bring a good voice [and manner] along 
with me? “Ја what character do you now 
appear ?’—As a witness cited by God. ‹ Соте 
you, then, and bear witness for me, for you are 
a witness worthy of being produced by me. Is 
anything external to the choice, either good or 
evil? Do I hurt any one? Have I placed the 
good of each individual in any one but in himself? 
What evidence do you give for God?’—I am in 

at the subject 

. a miserable condition, О Lord;7 І am undone; 

а mmt tam . а 
р dearer MM M ——M ie 4 

no mortal cares for me; no mortal gives me 
anything; all blame me, all speak ill of me.—Is 
this the evidence you are to give? And will you 
bring disgrace upon his citation who hath conferred 
such an honour upon you, and thought you worthy 
of being produced as a witness in such a cause ? 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar `“ 

ee 
Wee er сн ышш=т==—=шсто— 

$ 

i uii bid sais os Digitized by BE Foundation Chennai and ae 

Ty teret ы. & 

——O^A————————— A 

| EPICTETUS 89 

1 87. Вш he who hath ihe power hath piven Who 

i sentence. ‘I judge you to be impious and profane.’ Condemns 
| What hath befallen you?—I have been judged SD 
| to be impious and profane. Anything else 3 — 

| Nothing. Suppose he had passed his judgment 

|| upon an hypothetical proposition, and pronounced 

| eto be a false conclusion, that if it be day it is 

| light; what would have befallen the proposition ? 

€ In this case who is judged; who condemned ; 

] the proposition, or he who is deceived concern- 

ing it? Doth he, who hath the power of pro- 
nouncing anything concerning you, know what 
pious or impious mean? Hath he made it his 
study, or learned it? Where? From whom? 

` A musician would not regard him if he pro- 
nounced bass to be treble: nor a mathematician, 

if he passed sentence that lines drawn from the 
centre to the circle are not equal. And shall he, 

who is truly learned, regard an unlearned man, 
when he pronounces upon pious and impious, just 

and unjust ? 

| $8. *Oh, the injuries to which the learned are 

exposed!" Is it here that you have learned this? 
Why do not you leave such pitiful reasonings to 
idle pitiful fellows ;8 and let them sit in a corner, 
and receive some little sorry pay, or grumble that 
nobody gives them anything? But do you appear, 
and make use of what you have learned. It is not 
| reasonings that are wanted now. On the contrary, 
j| books are stuffed full of Stoical reasonings. 

i What is wanted, Шеп? 

One to apply them, whose actions may 
bear testimony to his doctrines. Assume me 
this character, that we may no longer make 
use of the examples of the ancients in the 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri i 

с 
90 THE DISCOURSES OF 

d pods schools; but тау have some example of our | 
ter? OWN. А 

mas 89. To whom, then, doth the contemplation of | 

these [speculative reasonings] belong ? 1 

To him that hath leisure. 

animal fond of contemplation. 

to take a view of these things as runaway slaves @о 

2 of a play. We are to sit quietly and listen, some- 

times to the actor, and sometimes to the musician : 

and not do like those, who come in and praise the 

actor, and at the same time look round them every 

way: then, if апу one happens to name their 

master, are frighted out of their wits and run 

off. It is shameful for a philosopher thus to 

contemplate the works of nature. Now, what, in 

this case, is the master ? Man is not the master 

i of man; but death, and life, and pleasure, and 

i pain: for without these, bring Cæsar to me, and 

j you will see how intrepid I shall be. But, if he 

comes thundering and lightning with these; and 

ү these are the objects of my terror; what do I else 

| but, like the runaway slave, acknowledge my 

master? While I have any respite from these, as 

the fugitive comes into the theatre, so I bathe, 

drink, sing; but all, with terror and anxiety. | 

| Dut, if I free myself from my masters, that is, — | 

i from such things as render a master terrible, what 
rouble, what master have I remaining ? З 

/ . 810. What, then, аге we to publish these things 

| to all men? E 

No. But humour the vulgar, and say: This 

poor man advises me to what he thinks good for 

himself. I excuse him; for Socrates, too, excused 

the jailor who wept when he was to drink the | 
poison, and said, ‘ How heartily he sheds tears 

Р 
For man is an i 
But it is shameful | 

с=ш= йз 

р 

1 
1 

eer 
Dis 6С { 
Я C EHE кте ee ae EIE mi con 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar С 

ARV rece ety 

Digitized by Arya Samay Pot tHOhenmai-end-eGangoltisse eas 

EPICTETUS 91 

’ . . . =) 
for us. Was it to Him that Socrates said, * For How to 
this reason we send the women out of the way’? brace the 

| Мо; but to his friends: to such as were capable mio aoa 
of hearing it, while he humoured the other as a 
CHAPTER XXX ij 

| 

| child. 

| í 

Li 
What we ought to have ready in difficult circumstances 
Wuen you are going to any one of the great, 

р remember, that there is Another, who sees from | 
above what passes; and whom you ought to please 
rather than man. He, therefore, asks you: 

In the schools, what did you use to call exile, 
and prison, and chains, and death, and defamation? 

I? Indifferent things. | 

What, then, do you call them now? Are they | 
at all changed ? 

1. М№о. 

Are you changed, then? 
о. 
T'ell me, then, what things are indifferent. 

| Things independent on choice. 

( Tell me the consequence too. 

Things independent on choice, are nothing to 
me. 

Tell me, likewise, what appeared to us to bc 

the good of man. 

A. right choice and a right use of the appear- 
ances of things. 

What his end? 

To follow thee. 

Do you say the same things now, too? 

mL 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

The test 

92 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ EPICTETUS 

Yes. I do say the same things, even now. 

Well, Bo 1n, then, boldly, and mindful of these 
things: and you will scc what a youth, who hath 
studied what he ought, is among men who have 
not. I protest, I imagine you will have such 
thoughts as these: «Why do we provide so 
many and great qualifications for nothing? Is the 
power, the antechamber, the attendants, the guards, 
no more than this? Is it for these that I have 
listened to so many dissertations? These are 

nothing: and I had qualified myself as for some 
great encounter.’ 

END OF THE FIRST BOOK 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` 

"n 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

BOOK II 

c CHAPTER I 
That courage is not inconsistent «with caution 

81. Wuar is asserted by the philosophers may, Courage 
perhaps, appear a paradox to some: let us, how- ап. 
ever, examine, as well as we can, whether this be Caution 
true: That it is possible in all things to act at once 
with caution and courage. For caution seems, in 
some measure, contrary to courage; and contraries 

аге by no means consistent. ‘lhe appearance of a 
paradox to many, in the present case, seems to me 

to arise from something like this. If, indeed, we 
assert that courage and caution are to be used in 

the same instances, we should justly be accused of 
uniting contradictions: but, in the way that we 
affirm it, where is the absurdity? For, if what 
hath been so often said, and so often demonstrated, 

be certain, that the essence of good and evil con- 

sists in the use of the appearances; and that 
things independent on choice are not of the nature 
either of good or evil: what paradox do the 
philosophers assert, if they say: ‘Where things 

are not dependent on choice, be courageous; where 

they are, be cautious’? For in these only, if ~ 
evil consists in a bad choice, 1s caution to be used. 
And if things independent on choice, and not in 

our power, are nothing to us, in these we are to 
make use of courage. Thus we shall be at once 

cautious and courageous: and, indeed, courapcous 
fa 

: CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

The on the account of this very caution; 

fear of д : : A 
Reacts caution with regard to things really evil, we shall 

be feared 

——— 

Digitized by Arya Samaj oundal 

on THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

for, by using 

gain courage with regard to what are not so. 

82. But we are in the same condition as deer: 
when these in a fright fly from the feathers,! 
where do they turn, and to what do they retire for 
safety ? T'o the toils. And thus they are undone, 
by inverting the objects of fear and confidence. 
Thus we, too. In what instances do we make 
use of fear? In things independent on choice. 
In what, on the other hand, do we behave with 
courage, as if there were nothing to be dreaded? 
In things dependent on choice. To be deceived, 
then, or to act rashly or impudently, or to indulge 
ап ignominious desire, is of no importance to us, if 
we do but take a good aim in things independent 
on choice. But where death, or exile, or pain, 
or ignominy are concerned, there is the retreat, 
there the flutter and fright. Hence, as it must be 
with those who err in matters of the greatest 
importance, what is naturally courage we render 
bold, desperate, rash, and impudent; and what is 
naturally caution, timid and base, and full of fears 
and perturbations. For if a person was to transfer 
caution to choice, and the actions of choice, by a 
willingness to be cautious, he will at the same 
time have it in his power to avoid [what he guards 
against]; but if he transfers it to things not in our 
power, or choice, by fixing his aversion on what is 
not in our own power but dependent on others, he 
will necessarily fear; he will be hurried; will be 
disturbed. For it is not death or pain that is to 
be feared; but the fear of pain or death. Hence 
we commend him who says: 

Death is no ill, but shamefully to dic. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Ice 

мв sra; 

t 

tmt c 

ULT a 

| 
| 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and ecangoti m 
a 

nt een 

| EPICTETUS 
Courage, then, oupht to be opposed to death, The 
and caution to the fear of death : whercas we, on mask 
the contrary, oppose to death, fight; and to our а the 
principle concerning it, carelessness DE 
ness and indifferencc. 

§ 3. Socrates used very properly to call these 
things vizards: for, as masks appear shocking and 
formidable to children, from their inexperience, 
we are affected in like manner, with regard to 
things, for no other reason than as children are 
with regard to vizards. For what is a child? 
Ignorance. What is a child? Want of learning ; 
for, so far as the knowledge of children extends, 
they are not inferior to us. What is death? A 
vizard. "lurn it, and be convinced. Sec, it doth 
not bite. his little body and spirit must be 
separated (as they formerly were) cither now, or 
hereafter: why, then, are you displeased if it be 
now? For if not now, it will be hereafter. Why? 
To complete the revolution of the world : for that 
hath need of some things present, others to come, 
and others already completed. What is pain? A 
vizard. Turn it, and be convinced. 

This paltry flesh is sometimes affected by harsh, 
sometimes by smooth impressions. If suffering be 
not worth your while, the door is open; if it be, bear 
it: for it was fit the door should be open against 
all accidents. And thus we have no trouble. 

§ 4. What, then, is the fruit of these principles ? 
What it ought to be; the most noble, and the | 
most becoming, the truly educated;? tranquillity, | 
security, freedom. For in this case we are not to give 
credit to the many, who say that none ought to be 
educated but the free; but rather to the philosophers, 
who say that the well-educated alone are free. 

95 

and desperate- 

- CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

What is 
freedom ? 

96 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

How so? 

Thus, is freedom anything else than the po 
of living as we like? PO 

Nothing else. 

Well, tell me, then, do you like to live in 
error ? 

We do not. No one, sure, that lives in error? 
is free. 

i Do you like to live in fear? Do you like to 
live in sorrow? Do you like to live in pertur- 
bation ? 

By no means. 

No one, therefore, in a state of fear, or sorrow, 
or perturbation, is free; but whoever is delivered 
from sorrow, fear, and perturbation, by the same 
means is delivered likewise from slavery. How 
shall we believe you, then, good legislators, when 
you say, ‘We allow none to be educated, but the 
free’? for the philosophers say, ‘We allow none 
to be free, but the liberally-educated”: that is, 
God doth not allow it. 

What, then, when any person had turned his 
slave about before the consul hath he done 
nothing ? 

Yes, he hath. 

What? 

He hath turned his slave about before the 
consul. 

Nothing more? 

Yes. He pays a fine for him. 

Well, then, is not the man who hath gone 
through this ceremony rendered free ? 

No more than he is rendered exempt from 
perturbation. Pray, have you, who are able to 
give this freedom to others, no master of your 

ee 

Б: 

ад 

p-e 

EPICTETUS * 97 

own? Are not you a slave to money? toa girl? How 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

to a boy? toa tyrant? to some friend of a tyrant ? Socrates 

‘else, why do you tremble when any of these is іп Wrote, 

question? Therefore I so often repeat to you, 
Let this be your study ; have this always at hand ; 
in what it is necessary to be courageous, and in 
"what cautious :, courapcous in what doth not depend 
оп choice; cautious in what doth. 

i 8 5. 5 But have not I read my papere to you? 
Do not you know what I am doing ? . 

In what? 

In my essays. 

Show me in what state you are as to desire and 
aversion. Whether you do not fail of what you 
wish, and incur what you would avoid : but, as to 
these commonplace essays, if you are wise, you 
will take them and obliterate them. 

Why, did not Socrates write ? 

Yes, who® so much? But how? As he had 
not always one at hand to argue against his 
principles, or be argued against in his turn, he 
argued with, and examined himself; and always 
treated, at least, some one natural notion, in a 
manner fitted for the use of life. These are the 
things which a philosopher writes, but for such 1 
commonplace essays as those I am speaking of, 
he leaves to the insensible, or to the happy creatures 
whom idleness 8 furnishes with leisure; or to such 
as are too weak to regard consequences. And 
will you, when you are gone from ћепсе,? which 
the time now calls for, be fond of showing, and 
reading, and be ridiculously conceited, of these 
things? ў 

Pray, вее how І compose dialogues. 

Talk not of that, man; but rather be able to 

VOL. I. G 

рата 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

c SS нел г тили гъы Eme жинакы ee 

Я 

1% 

| 
f 
f 
| 
! 

[ 

Both 
cautious 
and 
cour- 
ageous 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
98' THE DISCOURSES ОР 

say : See how I avoid being disappointed of my 
desire; sce how I secure myself against incurrin 

my aversion. Set death before me, set pain Hes 
prison, set ignominy, set condemnation before me 
and you will know me. This is the [Proper] 
ostentation of a young man come out from the 
schools. Leave the rest to others. Let no one 
ever hear you utter а word about them, nor suffer 
it, if any one commends you for them: but think 
that you are nobody, and that you know nothing. 
Appear to know only this, how you may never be 
disappointed of your desire; never incur your 
aversion. Let others study causes, problems, and 
syllogisms. Do you study death, chains, torture, 
exile:19 and all these with courage, and reliance 
upon him who hath called you to them, and judged 
you worthy a post in which you may show what 
the rational governing faculty can do when set in 
array against powers independent on the choice. 
And thus, this paradox becomes neither impossible 
nor a paradox, that we must be at once cautious 
and courageous: courageous in what doth not 
depend upon choice, and cautious in what doth. 

CHAPTER II 
Of tranquillity 

6 т. Consiper, you who are going to take your 
trial, what you wish to preserve, and in what to 
succeed. For if you wish to preserve a choice 
conformable to nature, you are entirely safe; evcry- 
thing gocs well; you have no trouble оп your 
hands. While you wish to preserve what is in 
your own power, and which is naturally free, and 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, TEES 

| 

ee 
Sp rs 

EPICTETUS ' 99 

are contented with that, whom h 
care for? Гог who js the m 
these? Who can take them 
to be a man of honour and fidelity, who shall 
prevent you? If you wish not to be restrained 
or compelled, who shall compel you to desires 
contrary to your principles ; tO aversions contrary 
to your opinion? The judge, perhaps, will pass a 
Sentence apainst you which he thinks formidable : 
but how can he likewise make you receive it with 
aversion? Since, then, desire and aversion are in 
your own. power, what have you else to care for? 
Let this be your introduction,! this your narration, 
this your proof, this your victory, this your con- 
clusion, and this your applause. Thus Socrates, 
to one who put him in mind to prepare himself for 
his trial: «Do not you think,’ says he, ‘that I have 
been preparing myself for this very thing my whole 
life?’ By what kind of preparation? “І have 
preserved what was in my own power.’ What do 
you mean? ‘I have done nothing unjust, cither 
in public or in private life.’ 

§ 2. But if you wish to preserve externals too ; 
your paltry body, your estate or dignity ; I advise 
you immediately to prepare yourself by every 
possible preparation, and besides, consider the 
disposition of your judge, and of your adversary. 
If it be necessary to fall down at his feet, fall 
down at his feet: if to weep, weep: if to groan, 
groan. . For when you have subjected what is in 
your own power to externals, submit to slavery at 
once, and do not strupple, and at one time be 
willing to be a slave, and at another not willing : 
but simply, and with your whole Intention, be one 
or the other; free or a slave, well-educated or 

ave you longer to 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Care 

aster of things like only for 

away? If you wish WE 

power 

— Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation 

Aly А › OF give out at once; and do not 

: . be soundly beat first, and then give out at last. 

| If both these be shameful, make the distinction 

1 immediately. 

| $ 3- Where is the nature of good and evil? 

| Where truth likewise is. Where Ga" and 

| where nature are,? there is caution: where truth 

and where nature are not, there is courage. Wh 

| do you think that if Socrates had wished to пе T 

| serve externals, that he would have said, when he 

че, at his trial, * Anytus and Melitus may 

i ' indeed kill, but hurt me they cannot’? Маз 

| һе во foolish as not to see that this way doth not 

|; lead to that end, but the contrary? What, then, 

| is the reason that he not only disregards, but 

4 

| 

тоо THE DISCOURSES ОЕ | 
| 

| 

provokes his judges? Thus my friend Heraclitus, 
in a trifling suit about a little estate at Rhodes, 
after having proved to the judges that his cause 
was good, when he came to the conclusion of his 
speech, ‘I will not entreat you,’ says he, ‘nor care 
what judgment you give: for it is rather you who ! 
are to be judged than I.’ And thus he lost his { 
suit. What need was there of this? Ве content f 
not to entreat: do not tell them too, that you will { 
not entreat, unless it be a proper time to provoke — } 
the judges designedly, as in the case of Socrates. 
But if you too are preparing such a speech, what 
do you wait for? "Why do you submit to be 
tried? — For if you wish to be hanged, have 
| patience, and the gibbet will come. But if you 
| choose rather to submit, and make your defence 
as well as you can, all the rest is to be ordered 
accordingly : with a due regard, however, to the 
preservation of your own character. 

| 

ORPA a e eTe T E Doce TROT BP MTT AATE p AA AEA 

CC-0.In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar, „` ` 

{ 
| 

Же Digitized бу Агуа Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Ma eae mei 

me EPICTETUS 101 

"A 
\ § 4. For this reason it is ridiculous too to say, 
uggest to me what is to be done.’ How should 
know what to suggest to you? You should 
rather say, Inform my understanding to accommo- 
date itself to whatever may be the event. The 
former is just as if an illiterate person should say : 
* Tell me what to write when any name is pro- 
posed to me’; and I direct him to write Dion; 
and then another comes, and proposes to him the 
name, not of Dion, but of Theon; what will be 
the consequence ? What will he write? Where- 
a8, if you had made writing your study, you would 
be ready prepared for whatever word might occur : 
if not, how can I suggest to you? For, if the 
circumstances of the affair should suggest some- 
thing else, what will you say, or how will you 
act? Remember, then, the general rule, and you 
will need no suggestion: but if you gape after 
externals you must necessarily be tossed up and 
down, according to the inclination of your master. 
And who is my master ? 
He in whose power is placed whatever you 
strive to acquire, or would avoid. 

CHAPTER III 

Concerning such as recommend. persons to the 

philosophers 

$ I. Diıocenxes rightly answered one who desired 
etters of recommendation from him, ‘At first 
sight he will know you to be a man: and whether 
you are a good or a bad man, if he hath any skill 
in distinguishing, he will know likewise: and, if 
he hath not, he will never know it, though I should 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Prepare 
yourself 
for a!l 
needs 

N 

A 

touch- 
stone o 

character 

Lon fA Y Va Ts 

102 THE DISCOURSES OF 

write a thousand times.” Just as if you were a 
piece of coin, and should desire to be recom- 
mended to any person as good, in order to be 
tried : if it be to an assayer, he will know your 
value, for you will recommend yourself. i 

§ 2. We ought, therefore, in life also, to have 
something analogous to this skill in gold; that one 
may be able to say, like the assayer, Bring me 
whatever piece you will, and I will find out its value: 
or as I would say with regard to syllogisms, Bring me 
whomever you will, and I will distinguish for you, 
whether he knows how to solve syllogisms or not. 
Why? Because I can solve syllogisms myself, 
and have that faculty, which is necessary for one 
who knows how to find out persons skilled in the 
solution of syllogisms. But how do I act in life? 
I at some times call a thing good; at others, 
bad. What is the cause of this? The contrary 
to what happens in syllogisms: ignorance and in- 
experience. 

CHAPTER IV 

Concerning a person who had been guilty 

of adultery 

§ 1. As he was saying, that man is made for 
fidelity ; and that whoever subverts this subverts 
the peculiar property of man; one of those who 
pass for men of literature happened to come tn, 
who had been found guilty of adultery in that 
city. But, continues Epictetus, if, laying aside 
that fidelity for which we were born, we foem 
designs against the wife of our neighbour, what © 
we do? What else but destroy and ruin—what? 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul К L 

¢ 

р ne ad E pm 

SUME SNC Rr n CN Y Lu 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Fidelity, honour, and sanctity of manners.— Only False 
these ? Апа do not we ruin neighbourhood ? friendship 
Friendship? Our country? [п what rank do 
we place ourselves? How am I to consider you, 
sir? Аз a neighbour? А friend? What sort 

| ofone? As а citizen? How shall I trust you? 

H Yv е 
| EPICTETUS 103 
i 

Indeed, if you were some sorry vessel, so noisome 
that no use could be made of you, you might be 
f thrown on a dunghill and no mortal would take д 

the trouble to pick you up; but if, being а man, 
you cannot fill any one place in human society, 
what shall we do with you? For, suppose you 
cannot hold the place of a friend, can you hold 
even that of a slave? Апа who will trust you? 
Why, then, should not you also be contented to 
be thrown upon some dunghill as a useless vessel, 
and indeed as mere dung? Will you say, after 
this, Hath no one any regard for me, a man of 
letters? Why, you are wicked, and fit for no use. 
Just as if wasps should take it ill that no one hath 
any regard for them, but all shun, and whoever 
can beats them down. You have such a sting 
that whoever you strike with it is thrown into 
troubles and pangs. What would you have us do 
with you? ‘There is nowhere to place you. 

§ 2. What, then, are not women by nature 
common ? 

Iadmitit; and so is a pig at table common to 
those who are invited. But, after it is distributed, 
go, if you think proper, and snatch away the share 
of him who sits next you, Or slyly steal it, or 
stretch out your hand and taste; and, if you 
cannot tear away any of the meat, dip your fingers 
and lick them. A fine companion! A Socratic 
guest indeed! Again: is not the theatre common 

SS EEG 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 
|! 
И 

A 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri Г 

104 THE DISCOURSES OF | 

Man to all the citizens? 
or Ape? are seated, if you thin 
Я of them out of his 
common by nature ; 
the master of an ent 
will not you, like the rest of 

үсеш come, when all | 
Proper, and turn any one c 
place. Thus, women are 

at belongs to another ? 
ut I am a man of le 

bis 
rre meo ma 

Archedemus.1 ER асыш foi 
With all your understanding of Archedemus o 
then, be an adulterer and a rogue; and, NT r 
of a man, a wolf or an ape. For where is the n 
difference ? e 
о 

Е а 

CHAPTER V = 

How magnanimity may be consistent with care е 
$ 1. THe materials of action are indifferent ; but 4 
the use of them is not indifferent. ў 

How, then, shall one preserve intrepidity and P 
tranquillity; and at the same time be careful, and | К 
neither rash nor indolent ? 

By imitating those who play at tables. The а 
dice are indifferent; the pieces are indifferent. г 
How do I know what will fall ош? But it is С 
my business to manage carefully and dexterously К 
whatever doth fall out. Thus in life, too, this я 
is the chief business; distinguish and separate s 
things, and say, * Externals are not in my power, Е 
choice is. Where shall I seek good and evil? e 
Within; in what is my own.’ But in what JEN 
belongs to others, call nothing good, or evil, or Sia 

profit, or hurt, or anything of that sort. 

er een e emi T 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 9 d 

- Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennar and eGangom mm, 

LJ 
" EPICTETUS IO 
| 5 

82. What, then, are we to treat these in a Do your 
careless way? . best and 

| By no means; for this, on the other hand, is leave the 
| an evil exercise of the faculty of choice; and, s 
| on that! account, against nature. But we are to 
act with care, because the use of the materials 
\ 18 not indifferent; and at the same time with 
| intrepidity and tranquillity, because the materials 
themselves are indifferent. For where a thing Я 
is not indifferent, there по опе сап restrain 
or compel me. Where I-am capable of being 
restrained or compelled, the acquisition doth 
not depend upon me; пог is either good or 
evil. The use of it, indeed, is either good 
or evil; but.that doth depend upon me. It is 
difficult, I own, to.blend and unite the careful- 
ness of one who is affected by the materials of 
action, and the intrepidity of one who disregards 
them; but it is not impossible: if it be, it is 
impossible to be happy. How do we act in a ^ 
voyage? What is in my power? To choose the 
pilot, the sailors, the day, the time of day. After- 
wards comes a storm. What have I to care for? 
My part is performed. The subject belongs to 
another, to the pilot. But the ship is sinking: 
+ . what then have I to do? That which alone L 
can do; I am drowned, without fear, without 
clamour, or accusing God ; but as one who knows 
that what is born must likewise die. For I am 
|| дос eternity, but a man; a part of the whole, as 
|| ап hour is of the day. І must come like an hour, 
| 
| 
ї 

and like an hour must pass away. What signifies 
it whether by drowning or by a fever? For, in 
some way or other, pass I must. 

5 § 3. This you may see to be the practice of 

E 

. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri UA 

ийй EL LEEA ATSA 
i 
IN 

DUDAuIUU I IL bee 

106 THE DISCOURSES OF 
| “Pla i 
| у those who play skilfully at ball. N 
| the game tends for the ball, as either a good pae Sio cms 
| but how he may throw and catch it again. Here Dé 
| lies the address, here the art, the nimbleness, the DUE 
| sagacity ; that I may not be able to catch it, Gua one 
| if I hold up my lap for it; another may catch it E 
| whenever Ithrow it. Виш if we catch or throw ME | 
| : it with fear or perturbation, what kind of play e 

wil this be? How shall we keep ou 
i rsel 
steady ; or how see the order of the RS ore | E 

will say, Throw ; another, Do not throw; a third, | TA 
You have thrown once already. This is a mere | likex 

quarrel, not a play. Therefore Socrates well 
understood playing at ball. 

What do you mean? 

Using pleasantry at his trial. ‘Tell me,’ says 
he, * Anytus, how can you say that I do not believe 
a God? What do you think dæmons are?? Are 
they not either the offspring of the gods, or 
compounded of gods and men?’—*Yes.’ ‘Do 
you think, then, that one can believe there are 
mules, and not believe that there are asses?’ 
This was just as if he had been playing at ball. 
And what was the ball he had to play with? 
Life, chains, exile, a draught of poison, separation 
from a wife, and the desertion of orphan children. 
These were what he had to play with; and yet, 
nevertheless, he did play, and threw the ball with 
address. Thus we should be careful how we 
play, but indifferent as to the ball itself. ; We are 
by all means to manage external materials with 
art; not taking them for ourselves, but showing 
our art about them, whatever they may happen to 
be. Thus a weaver doth not make the wool, but 
employs his art upon what is given him. Tt is 

cL Iu LM LLLA ш ———— 
EU о ev enpe g` 
i REBET"SGS =; 
pe TOnAyP aes 

Ir. manner PIL 
cnn АКНЕ Ne 1 

Ex л | x. CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ; — НЕЕ 

Digitized by. Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS 107 

another who gives you food, and a property; and The 
may take them away, and your paltry body too. 8004 
Do you, however, work upon the materials you О, me d 
have received; and then, if you come off unhurt, EN E ood 
others, no doubt, who meet you, will congratulate of the 
you on your escape. But he who hath a clearer whole 
insight into such things, if he sees you have 
behaved in a becoming manner, will praise and 
congratulate you; but, if you owe your escape to 
any unbecoming action, the contrary. Гог where 
there is a reasonable cause of rejoicing, there is 
likewise a reasonable cause of congratulation. 
© 84. How, then, are some external things said 
to be according to nature; others contrary to it? 

When we are considered as unconnected 
individuals. I will allow it is natural for the 
foot, for instance, to be clean. But if you take 
it as a foot, and not as an unconnected individual 
thing, it will be fit that. it should walk in the dirt, 
and tread upon thorns; and sometimes that it 
should even be cut off for the good of the whole: 
otherwise it is no longer a foot. We should 
reason in some such manner concerning ourselves. 
What are you? A man. If then, indeed, you 
consider yourself as an unconnected individual, it 
is natural that you should live to old age, be rich 
and healthy ; but if you consider yourself as a 
man, and as a part of the whole, it will be fit, on 
the account of that whole, that you should at one 
time be sick; at another, take a voyage, and be 
exposed to danger; sometimes be in want; and 
possibly it may happen, die оше your time. 
Why, then, are you displeased ? Do not you 
know that else, a8 the other is no longer a fot 
во you arc no longer a man? For what ts a man! 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

b i Аю = ЕЕЕ Chennai апа eGango 

otri 

108 

THE DISCOURSES OF 

Do your A part of a commonwealth, 
own рагі which consists of gods and 
° that to which you immediately belong, which is a 
, miniature of the universa] city. 

8 5. What, then, must I at one ti 
to a trial; must another 
scorched by a fever; 
sea; another die; and 

Yes; for it is imp 
such a world, and 

Principally of that 

men; and next, of 

n A 

me be called 
at another time be 
another be exposed to the 
another be condemned ? 
ossible, in such a body, in 
among such companions, but 
f us must fall into such cir- 
cumstances.) Your business, when you come into 
them, is to say what you ought, to order things. 
as you can. ‘Then, says one, « I decide that you 
have acted unjustly.” Much good may it do you; 
I have done my part. You are to look to it, 
whether you have done yours; for there is some 
danger BF that too, let me tell you. 

OJS 248 C.Do 

^ ш 

3 CHAPTER VI 
Of indifference 

§ 1. A HYPOTHETICAL Proposition is an indifferent 
thing; but the judgment concerning it is not 
indifferent, but is either knowledge, or opinion, 
or mistake. Thus life is indifferent; the use of 
it not indifferent. When you are told, therefore, 
that these things are indifferent, do not, upon that 
account, ever be careless; nor, when you are 
excited to carelessness, be abject, and struck by 
the admiration of the р of action. It is 
good to know your own qualifications and poeni 
that, where you are not qualified, you may 

i SS EURO Digitized by Arya 

ee! Ree 
ыша а. 2 
ааа 
EPICTETUS ' 109 

it ( quiet, and not angry that others have the advan- Com- 
of tage of you in such things. For you too will posed 
ia | think it reasonable that you should have the firmness 

advantage in the art of syllogisms; and, if others оша 
ed should be angry at it, you will tell them, by way 
be of consolation, ‘I have learned it, and you have 
һе not.’ Thus, too, wherever practice is necessary, 

do not pretend to what can be obtained no other 
in way; but leave the matter to those who are 
ut pracused in it, and do you be contented with a 
= composed firmness of mind. ‘Go, for instance, 
to and pay your compliments to such a person.’ — 
25 *How?' ‘Not meanly.' — ‘But I have been 
m shut out; for I have not learned to get in at the 
; window ; and, finding the door shut, I must 
t necessarily either go back, or get in at the 
" window.’ «Вис speak to him too.'—*I will 

speak to him. ‘In what manner?! —— «Not 
meanly.' But you have not succeeded; for this 
was not your business, but his. Why do you 
claim what belongs to another? Always remem- 
ber what is your own, and what is another's; and 
you will never be disturbed. è 
$2. Hence Chrysippus rightly says: While 

consequences are uncertain, I will keep to those 

E things which are best adapted to the attainment. of F 
р what is conformable to nature: for God himself 
1 hath formed me to choose this. If I knew that 

it was now destined for me to be Sick, I would 
even exert my pursuits towards it: for even the 
foot, if it had understanding, would exert itself 
to get into the dirt. For why are ears of corn 
produced, if it be not to ripen? and why do they 
ripen, if not to be reaped? For they are i 
separate individuals. If they were capable o 

unes it 15 "* C020: In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

пај. Eoundati 

2% 

110 ТНЕ DISCOURSES ор 

ке a sense, do you think the 
shock o ? 
corn fully E CR. 3 Curse upon ears of corn 
ripe i ses ve ought to know, that it 
would be a curse upon man not to die: lik 
Е ; like that 
of not ripening, and not being reaped. Since 
then, it is necessary for us to be reaped, and we 
have, at the same time, understanding to know it, 
ie are we angry at it? This is only because we 
| neither know what we are, nor have studied what 
| belongs to man, as jockeys do what belongs to 
Е! horses. Yet Chrysantas, when he was about to 
B strike an enemy, on hearing the trumpet sound a 
| || retreat, drew back his hand: for he thought it 
I5. more eligible to obey the command of his general 
| than his own inclination.! But not one of us, 
| even when necessity calls, is ready and willing to 
obey it: but we suffer, whatever things we do 
suffer, weeping and groaning, and calling them our 
circumstances.? What circumstances, man? For 
| if you call what surrounds you circumstances, 
| everything is a circumstance: but, if you apply 
| this name to hardships, where is the hardship that 
| whatever is born must die? The instrument is 
| either a sword, or a whecl, or the sea, or a tile, 
| or a tyrant. And what doth it signify to you 
t 
I 
| 
| 
$ 
| 
H 
| 
| 
| 

Y would wish never to be 

by what way you descend to Hades? All are 
equal: but, if you would hear the truth, the 
shortest is that by which a tyrant sends you. No 
tyrant was ever six months in cutting any mans 
throat: but a fever is often a year in killing. 
All these things are mere sound, and the pomp of 
?mpty names. 
My life is in danger from Czsar. 

And am not I in danger, who dwell at 
lo Nicopolis, where there are so many earthquakes? 

CRIT) 

."CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

EPICTETUS ' rrr 

And when you yourself cross the Adriatic what 
18 then іп danper? Is not your Ше? 

Ay; but I am in danger with respect to 
opinion. 

What, your own? How so? Can any one 
compel you to have any opinion contrary to your 
own inclination ? 

But the opinions of others too. 

And what danger is it of yours if others have 
false opinions ? 

ennai and eGangotri 

Hymns 
of praise 
in prisoa 

о But I am in danger of being banished. 
a What is it to be banished? To be somewhere 
it else than at Rome. 
1 Yes; but what if І should be sent to Gyaros? 
5 If it be worth your while, you will go: if not, . 
о you have another place to go to; where he who 
о now sends you to Gyaros must go likewise, 
r whether he will or not. Why, then, do you 
r come to these as to great trials? They are not 
, equal to your qualifications. So that an ingenuous 
y young man would say, It was not worth while for 
t this, to have read and writ so much, and to have 
sa sat во long listening to a good-for-nothing old 
Ж fellow. Only remember that division by which 
u your own, and not your own, 18 distinguished, and 
c you will never claim what belongs to others. А 
e tribunal and a prison is, each of them, a place; 
o one high, the other low: but choice is equal, and 
5 if you have a mind to aap it equal for Бай 
| places, it may be kept. We shall then become 
| Imitators of Socrates, when, even in a prisom, 
we are able to write hymns‘ of praise: but, as 
д we now are, consider, whether we could bear 
t % аі even another should say to an сҮ 
| í Shall I read you a hymn of praise ?'— yc 

«4 4*- CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 

112 THE DISCOURSES Ор 

you trouble me: do you know in what 

situation I am? In such cir 
able to hear hymns?’ «What circumstances ??— 

«I am going to die. «Апі are all other men to 
be immortal ?? 

a sad 
cumstances, am I 

CHAPTER VII 
Of divination 

51. From an unseasonable regard to divination, 
we omit many duties.! For what can the diviner 
see, besides death, or danger, or sickness, or, in 
short, things of this kind? When it is necessary, 
then, to expose one’s self to danger for a friend, 
or even a duty to die for him, what occasion have 
I for divination? Have not I a diviner within, 
who hath told me the essence of good and evil, 
and who explains to me the indications of both? 
What further need, then, have I of the entrails 
of victims, or the flight of birds? Сап I bear 
with the other diviner, when he says, ¢ This is for 
your interest?” For doth he know what is for 
my interest? Doth he know what good is? 
Hath he learned the indications of good and evil 
as he hath those of the victims? If so, he knows 
the indications likewise of fair and base, just and 
unjust. Do you tell me, sir, what is indicated 
to me; life or death, riches or poverty. But 
whether these things are for my interest or not, 
I shall not inquire of you. ‘Why?’ Because you 
do not give your opinion about grammar; and do 
you give it here, in things about which we all take 
different ways and dispute with one another ? 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Harid 

^em 

eR ER DRE 

$T qv руу С А En r рр У 

^m" $ 

ee ЖШ € 

um e a ta i + 

| 
| 

EPICTETUS ^ 113 

Therefore, the lady who was going to send a Coward- 

month's provision to Gratilla,? in her banishment, 
made a right answer to one who told her 
Domitian would seize it; I had rather, says she, 
that he should seize it than I not send it. 

82. What, then, is it that leads us so often 
to divination? Cowardice, the dread of events, 
Hence we flatter the diviners. ‘Pray, sir, shall 
I inherit my father’s estate?’—‘Let us sce, let 
us sacrifice upon the occasion.’ ‘Nay, sir, just as 
fortune pleases.” Then, if he says, ‘You shall 
inherit it,’ we give him thanks, as if we received 

‘the inheritance from him. ‘The consequence of 

this is that they play upon us. 

§ 3. What, then, is to be done? 

We should come without previous desire or 
aversion. As a traveller inquires the road of the 
person he meets, without any desire for that which 
turns to the right hand, more than to the left; for 
he wishes for neither of these, but that only which 
leads him properly. ‘Thus we should come to 
God as to a guide. Just as we make use of our 
eyes, not persuading them to show us one object 
rather than another, but receiving such as they 
present to us. But now we hold the bird with 
fear and trembling, and, in our invocations to 
God, entreat him, ‘Lord have mercy upon me: 
suffer me to come off safe.’ You wretch! 
would you have anything, then, but what is best? 
And what is best, but what pleases God? Why 
do you, as far as in you lics, corrupt your judge 
and seduce your adviser ? 

VOL. 1. H 

vy -Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

m" » up 
re ast in Lo ta l——————— ————— ннде, 

ice and 
super- 
stition 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

CHAPTER VIII 

Wherein consists the essence of good 

God § т. Сор is beneficial. Good is also beneficial. 
and good [t should scem, then, that where the essence of 

God is, there too is the essence of good. What, 
then, is the essence of God? Flesh ?—By no 
means. Ân estate? Fame ?—By no means. 
Intelligence ? Knowledge ? Right reason ?— Cer- 
tainly. Here then, without more ado, seek the 
essence of good. — For, do you seek it in a plant? 
—No. Or in a brute ? —No. If, then, you seek 
it only in a rational subject, why do you seek it 
anywhere but in what is distinct from irrationals ? 
Plante have not the use of the appearances of 
things, and therefore you do not apply the term 
good to them. Good, then, requires the use of 
these appearances. And nothing else? If so, 
you may say that good, and happiness, and un- 
happiness belong to mere animals. But this you 
do not say; and you are right; for how much 
soever they have the use of the appearances of 
things, they have not the faculty of understanding 
that use, and with good reason, for they are made 
to be subservient to others, and not principals 
themselves. Why was an ass made? Was it 
as a principal ? No, but because we had need of 
a back able to carry burthens. We had need too 
that he should walk; therefore he had the use of 
the appearances of things added, otherwise he 
could not have walked. But here his endowments 
end; for if an understanding of that use had been 
likewise added, he would not in reason hare been 

X3 

: mr a ars neem t aii Y : 
we — 

СС-0. In Public Domain. jai aa j i 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

АСА eis pd iai УНИН ЕЛИНИН И 

EPICTETUS * 115 

subject to us, nor have done us these services, but 
would have been like and equal to ourselves, 

Why will you not, therefore, seck the essence of 

good in that, witheut which you will not say 
there can be good in anything ? 

§ 2. What then? Are not these likewise the 
works of the gods? They are, but not principals 
nor parts of the gods. But yeu are a principal. 
You are a distinct portion of the essence of God, 
апа, contain a certain part of him in yourself.! 
Why, then, are you so ignorant of your noble 
birth? Why do not you consider whence you 
came? Why do not you remember, when you 
are cating, who you are who cat, and whom you 
feed? When you are in the company of women, 
when you are conversing, when you are exercising; 
when you are disputing, do not you know that it is 
a god you feed, a god you exercise? You carry 
a god about with you, wretch, and know nothing 
ofit. Do you suppose I mean some god without 
you, of gold or silver? Itis within yourself you 
carry him, and profane him, without being sensible 
of it, by impure thoughts and unclean actions. If 
even the image of God were present, you would 
not dare to act as you do; and when God himself 
is within you, and hears and sees all, аге not you 
ashamed to think and act thus, insensible of your 
own nature and hateful to God ? 

& 3. After all, why are we afraid, when we 
send a young man from the school into action, 
that he should behave indecently, cat indecently, 

converse. indecently with women; that he should 

either debase himself by a shabby dress, or clothe 
himself too finely? Doth not he know the pod 
within him? Doth not he know with whom he 

God 
in man 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Let not 
the work 
dishonour 
the maker 

ROUTE eT анном 
Une ra ee acit pA oho THEE gi (Se tay = ep T 

digitized by Arya Samaj-Foundation Chennai and.eGangotri г 
T. EDD TE al a es Ыы de 

116 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

sets out? Have we patience to he 
wish to have you with me’? ' 
Have you not God? Do you seek 
while you have him? Or will. he tel 
bius cher ли Шла асе еца) 
1пегуа, you would 
remember both yourself and the artist; and, if 
you had any sense, you would endeavour or 
nothing unworthy of him who formed you, or of 
yourself: nor to appear in an unbecoming Tanner 
to spectators. And are you now careless how 
you appear, because you are the workmanship of 
Jupiter? And yet, what comparison is there 
either between the artists or the things the ; 
have formed? What work of any artist 2007 
tains in itself those faculties which аге shown in 
forming it? s it anything but marble, or b 
or gold, or ivory? And the Minerva 37 Phidias. 
1 : idias, 
when its hand is once extended and a Victory 
placed in it, remains in that attitude for ever. But 
the works of God are endued with motion, breath, 
the use of the appearances of things, judgment. 
Being, then, the formation of such an artist, will 
you dishonour him, especially when he hath not 
only formed, but intrusted and given the guardian- 
ship of you to yourself? Will you not only be 
forgetful of this, but, moreover, dishonour the trust? 
If God had committed some orphan to your charge, 
would you have been thus careless of him? Не 
hath delivered yourself to your care, and says, *I 
had по one fitter to be trusted than you: preserve 
this person for me, such as he is by nature; modest, 
faithful, sublime, unterrified, dispassionate, tranquil." 
And will you not preserve him? 
8 4. But it will be said: * Whence this super- 

ar him вау, «I 

any other, 
| you any 

——— 
“л 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Ja M 

— Pe i ER e D ne 

F 

as 

ROM oe / 
To "e err Seide 

Vr TT RR n e Sag nn 

Rn rM — MÀ —— e all 

' Digitized by 

» 
EPICTETUS 117 

cilious look, and gravity of face?’ [in our young Faithful, 
philosopher].— I have not yet so much gravity modest, 
as the case deserves, I do not yet trust to what I tranquil 

have learned, and assented to. I still fear my own 
weakness. Let me but take courage a little, and 
then you shall see such a look and such an 
appearance as I ought to have. Then I will show 
you the statue when it is finished, when it is 
polished. Do you think I will show you a super- 
cilious countenance? Heaven forbid! For Olym- 
pian Jupiter doth not lift up his brow, but keeps a 
steady countenance, as becomes him who is about 
to say— 
Th’ immutable decree 
No force can shake: what is, that ought to be. 
| Porr. 

*Such will I show myself to you: faithful, 
modest, noble, tranquil.'— What, and immortal 
too, and exempt from аре and sickness ?—* No. 
But sickening and dying as becomes a god. This 
is in my power; this I can do. The other is not 
in my power, nor can I do і.’ Shall I show you 
the? perves of a philosopher ? 

What nerves are those ? 

A desire undisappointed ; an aversion unincurred; 
pursuits duly exerted; a careful resolution; an 
unerring assent. These you shall sce. 

CHAPTER IX 

That when we are unable to fulfil what the character 
of a man promises, we assume that of a philosopher 

§ 1. Ir is no common attainment merely to fulfil 
what the nature of man promises. For what is man? 

—- 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

THES 
4 

Sárhaj 

IS Бра Ан Ve epee КОКУЛ ЛАР ААК уын 
' Digitized by Arya ndation'Chennai and éGangbtrt: 

118 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Manand A rational and mortal being. : 

beast — Well: from what are we distingui 
‹ агг guished by reason? 

From wild beasts. 

From what else ? 

From sheep and the like. 

Таке care, then, to do nothing like a wild beast; 
otherwise you have destroyed the man; you have 
not fulfilled what your nature promises. Take 
care, too, to do nothing like cattle; for thus like- 

S wise the man is destroyed. 
In what do we act like cattle? 

| When we act gluttonously, lewdly, rashly, 

. sordidly, inconsiderately, into what are we sunk ? 
Into cattle. 
What have we destroyed ? 
The rational being. 
When we behave contentiously, injuriously, 

passionately, and violently, into what are we sunk? 

Into wild beasts. 

У 82. And further: some of us are wild beasts of 
a larger size; others, little mischievous vermin; 
whence there is room to say, Let me rather be eat 
by a lion. Ву all these means is destroyed what 
the nature of man promises. For when is a 
conjunctive proposition preserved? — 

When it fulfils what its nature promises. — — 

So that the preservation of such a proposition 
consists in this, that its several parts are a con- 
junction of truths. : » ; 

When is a disjunctive proposition preserved : 

When it fulfils what its nature promises. 

When is a flute, a harp, a horse, or a dog 
preserved ? ў > 

When each fulfils what its nature promises. 

Where is the wonder, then, that man should be 

—— 

——— 

o 

— d ——— раи 

ТУШ, ete et ie 

woa 

"T < e S 
МЕЕ РЕР ми 

—— ——— 3 

ee 

22 ete 

wo — 

PAD BSE QURE, Ln de ando RN талдан ut Mises ott i 

4 

EPICTETUS ' 119 

j Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

preserved and destroyed in the same manner? Precept 

АП are preserved and improved by operations 8nd _ 
practice 

correspondent to their several faculties; as a 
carpenter, by building; a grammarian, by grammar; 
but if he accustom himself to write ungrammatically, 
his art will necessarily be spoiled and destroyed. 
Thus modest actions preserve the modest man, and 
immodest ones destroy him; faithful actions, the 
faithful man, and the contrary destroy him. Оп 
the other hand, contrary actions heighten contrary 
characters. Thus impudence, an impudent one; 
knavery, a knavish опе; slander, a slanderous one; 
anger, an angry one; and uncquitable dealings, a 
covetous onc. 

§ 3. For this reason philosophers advise us not 

to be contented with mere learning; but to add 
meditation likewise, and then practice. “For we 
have been long accustomed to contrary actions, 
and have practised upon wrong opinions. If, there- 
fore, we do not likewise habituate ourselves to 

` practise upon right opinions, ме shall be nothing 

more than expositors of the PEE of others. 
For who among us is not already able to discourse, 
according to the rules of art, upon good and evil? 
That some things are good, some evil, and others 
indifferent: the good, virtue, and whatever partakes 
of virtue; the evil, the contrary; and the in- 
different, riches, health, reputation: and then, if 
while we are saying all this there should happen 
some more than ordinary noise, or one of the 
bystanders should laugh at us, we are disconcerted. 
Philosopher, what is become of what you were 
saying? Whence did it procecd ? Merely from 
your lips? Why, then, do yeu pollute the aids 
which others have provided? Why do you trifle on 

od 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

^4 . Act the most important subjects ? 

what you hoard up provision in a store-ho 
.projess 

120 THE DISCOURSES oR 

It is one thing to 
use, and another to 
cted, digested, and 
blood, colour, breath. 

eat it. What is eaten is conco 
becomes nerves, flesh, bones, 

Whatever is hoarded up is ready, indeed, whenever 
you have a mind to show it; but of no further use 
to you than the mere notion that you have it. For 
what difference is there, whether you explain these 
doctrines, or those of persons of opposite principles? 
Sit down now, and comment, according to the 
rules of art, upon the principles of Epicurus : and 
perhaps you may comment more practically than 
he could have done himself Why, then, do you 
call yourself a Stoic? Why do you act a Jew, 
when you аге a Greek? Do not you see on what 
terms each is called a Jew, a Syrian, an Egyptian? 
And, when we sce any one wavering, we are wont 
to say, This is not a Jew, but acts one. But, 
when he assumes the sentiments of one who hath 
been baptized and circumcised,! then he both 
really is, and is called, a Jew. Thus we, falsifying 
our profession, are Jews in name, but in reality 
something else. Our sentiments are inconsistent 
with our discourse; far from practising what we 
teach, and what we pride ourselves in the knowledge 
of. Thus, while we are unable to fulfil what the 
character of a man promises, we assume, besides, 
80 vast a weight as that of a philosopher. As if 
a person incapable of lifting ten pounds should 
endeavour to heave the same stone with Ajax. 

“COOH Public Domain: Guruktil Kangri Colléction; 

"0.5 m maw 

4 "ч ст с=с t re A 5 су 

m 

t 
N 
a 
$ 
C 
t 
V 
C 
a 
E 

— 

EPICTETUS ° 121 

CHAPTER X 

How we may investigate the duties of life from the 
names which we bear 

§ 1. Examine who you are. In the first place, a 
man: that is, one who hath nothing superior to 
the faculty of choice; but all things subject to this; 
and this itself unenslaved, and unsubjected, to 
anything. Consider, then, from what you are 
distinguished by reason.. You are distinguished 
from wild beasts: you are distinguished from 
cattle. Besides, you аге a citizen of the world, 
and a part of it; not a subservient, but a principal 
part. You are capable of comprehending the 
divine economy; and of considering the connec- 
tions of things. What then doth the character of 
a citizen promise? To hold no private interest ; 
to deliberate of nothing as a separate individual, 
but like the hand or the foot, which, if they had 
reason, and comprehended the constitution of nature, 
would never pursue, or desire, but with a reference 
to the whole. Hence the philosophers rightly say, 
that, if a wise and good man could foresee what 
was to happen, he would help forward sickness 
and death, and mutilation, to himself; being 
sensible that these things are appointed from the 
order of the universe, and that the whole is superior 
to a part, and the city to the citizen. But, since 
we do not foreknow what is to happen, it becomes 
our duty to adhere to what is more naturally 
adapted to our option: for, amongst other things, 
we were born for this. 

2. Remember, next, that you are a son; and 

S 

A. 
citizen 
of thc 
world 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

\ 

Proper 
duties 
of man 

122 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

what doth this character promise? To esteem 
everything that is his, as belonging to his father: 
in every instance to obey him: not to revile him 
to another: not to say or do anything injurious to 
him: to give way and yield in everything; co- 
operating with him to the utmost of his power. 

$3. After this, know likewise, that you area 
brother; and that to this character it belongs,to make 
concessions; to be easily persuaded; to use gentle 
language; never to claim for yourself any of the 
things dependent on choice, but cheerfully to give 
these, that you may have the larger share of what 
is dependent on it. For consider what it is, instead 
of a lettuce, for instance, or a chair, to procure for 
yourself a good temper? How great an advantage 
gained ! 

§ 4. If, besides this, you are a senator “ОЁ any 
city, consider yourself as a senator: if a youth, as 
a youth ; if an old man, as an old man. For each 
of these names, if it comes to be considered, 
always points out the proper duties. But, if you 
go and revile your brother, I tell you you have 
forgot who you are, and what is your name. For 
even if you were a smith and made an ill use of the 
hammer, you would have forgot the smith : and, if 
you have forgot the brother, and are become, 
instead of a brother, an enemy, do you imagine 

ou have made no change of one thing for another 
in that case? If, instead of a man, a gentle social 
creature, you are become a wild beast, mischievous, 
insidious, biting; have you lost nothing? But 
must you lose moncy, in order to suffer damage ; 
and is there no other thing, the loss of which 
endamages a man? If you were to part with your 
skill in grammar, or in music, would you think 

Мада д, 

| 
| 
| 

“Digitized by Arya'Sà 

e 
EPICTETUS 123 

the loss of these a damage? And, if you part 
with honour, decency, and gentleness, do you think 
that no matter? Yet the first are lost by some 
cause external, and independent on choice ; but the 
last by our own fault. There is no shame cither 
in! having, or losing the one; but either not 
to have, or to lose, the other, is equally shameful 
and Mus and unhappy. What doth the 
pathic lose? The man, What doth the smooth, 
effeminate fellow lose! 2 Many other things ; but, 
however, the man also. What doth an adulterer 
lose? The modest, the chaste character; the 
neighbour. What doth an angry person lose? 
Something else. A coward? Something else. 
No one is wicked without some loss or damage. 
Now, if, after all, you make the loss of money 
the only damage, all these are unhurt and un- 
damaged. Nay, it may be, even gainers; as, by 
such practices, their money may possibly be in- 
creased. But consider: if you refer everything 
to money, the man who loses his nose is not hurt. 
Yea, say you, he is maimed in his body. Well; 
but doth he, who loses his smell itself, lose nothing? 
Is there, then, no faculty of the soul which he 
who possesses it is the better for, and he who parts 
with it the worse? 

What sort do you mean? 

Have we not a natural sense of honour ? 

We have. 

Doth he who loses this suffer no damage? Ie 
he deprived of nothing? Doth he part with 
nothing that belongs to him? Haye we no 
natural fidelity ? No natural affection? No 
natural disposition to mutual usefulness, to mutual 
forbearance? Is he, then, who carelessly suffers 

Real 
damage 
and Joss 

Р CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Га 

Forgive- 
ness and 
forbear- 
ance 

7 

124 THE DISCOURSES oR 

himself to be dam 
and undamaged ? 

§ 5. What, 
hath hurt me? 

Consider first what hurt is 5 
you have heard from the Philosophers. For, if 
both good and evil consist in choice, see whether 
what you say doth not amount to this: « Since he 
hath hurt himself by injuring me, shall not I 
hurt myself by injuring him ?? Why do we not 
make some such representation to ourselves as 
this? Are we hurt when any detriment happens 
to our bodily possessions, and are we not at all 
hurt when any happens to our faculty of choice? 
He who is deceived, or hath done an injury, 
hath no pain in his head, nor loses an eye, a leg, 
ог an estate, and we wish for nothing beyond 
these. Whether we have a modest and faithful, 
or a shameless and unfaithful, will and choice, we 
make not the smallest difference ; except only in 
the schools, as far as a few words go. ‘Therefore 
all the improvement we make reaches only to 
words, and beyond them is absolutely nothing. 

aged in these respects, unhurt 

then, shall not I hurt him who 

and remember what 

CHAPTER XI 
What the beginning of philosophy is 

в 1. Tue beginning of philosophy, at least to such 
as enter upon it in a proper way, and by the door, 
is a consciousness of our own weakness, and 
inability in necessary things. For we came into 
the world without any natural idea of a sis 
angled triangle, of a diesis or a hemitone 1n music ; 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

"s Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

даа а Pisa ES 
SDSS Eois nici in qd s aula a за Md. a att eit tt Rear Sa tt 

LJ 
0 

E EPICTETUS 125 

t but we learn each of these things by some instruc- Precon- | 
i tion of art. Hence, they who do not understand ceptions | 
о them do not form any conceit of understanding 224 self- 
them. But whoever came into the world without олсе 

| an innate idea of good and evil, fair and base, 
f becoming and unbecoming, happiness: and misery, | 
r^ proper and improper, what ought to be done and | 
е what not to be done? Hence we all make use of 
I the names, and endeavour to apply our pre-concep- j 
t tions to particular cases. ‘Such a опе hath acted 
3 well, not well; right, not right; is unhappy, is {| 
s happy; is just, is unjust.” Who of us refrains from E 
l} these names? Who defers the use of them till he | 
? } hath learnt it, as those do who are ignorant of lines 
, and sounds? The reason of this is, that we! come 
, instructed in some degree by nature upon these 
d subjects, and from this beginning we go on to add im | 

| self-conceit. ‘For why, say you, should not I 
e know what fair and base is? Have not I the idea 
n of it?’—You have. ‘Do not I apply this idea to 
с particulars?'—You do. ‘Do not I apply it 
о right, then?"— Неге lies the whole question; 11 
and here arises the self-conceit. For, beginning in 
from these acknowledged points, men proceed to | 
what is in dispute by means of their unsuitable 
application. For, if they possess a right method 
of application, what would restrain them from | 
being perfect ? Now, since you think that you | 
make a suitable application of your pre-conceptions 
to particular cases, tell me whence you derive this. 

From its seeming so to me. 

But it doth not seem so to another, and doth 
not he too form a conceit that he makes a right 
application ? 

He doth. 

| 
| 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri ' . ve 

126 THE DISCOURSES ор 

Istherea Is it possible, then, that each of 
standard? apply your pre-conceptions right, 
mails subjects about which you hay 
opinions ? 
It is not. 
Have you anything to show us, then, for this - 
pcr, preferable to its seeming so to you? 
nd doth a madman act any otherwise than seems 

to him right? Is this, then, a sufficient criterion 
to him too? i 

| It is not. 

| Come, therefore, to something preferable to what 
! seems. ; 
j 
| 

you should 
on the very 
e contradictory 

"m 

What ie that ? 

82. The beginning of philosophy is this: The 
being sensible of the disagreement of men with 
each other; an inquiry into the cause of this dis- 
agreement, and a disapprobation and distrast of 
what merely scems; a certain examination into 
what seems, whether it seem rightly; and. an 
invention of some rule, like a balance for the 
determination of weights, like a square for straight 
and crooked. 

Is this the beginning of philosophy, that all 
things which seem right to all persons are so? 

Why, is it possible that contradictions can be 
right ? 

Well, then, not all things; but all that seem so 
to us. 

And why more to you than to the Syrians, or 
Egyptians? Than to me, or to any other man? 

Not at all more. 

§ 3. Therefore merely what seems to each 
man 18 not sufficient to determine the reality of a 

$ thing. For even in weights or measures we are 

ridwar 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Ha 
Pend ay canine epe mrt Lec Drm оттек CF 

"ub vn 4 ei 
M is ctio 

EPICTETUS 127 

not satisfied with the bare appearance; but for 
everything we find some rule. And is there 
in the present сазе, then, no rule preferable to 
what seems? Is it possible that what is of the 
greatest necessity in human life should be left 
incapable of determination and discovery ? 

"There is, then, some rule. 

And why do we not seek and discover it; and 
when we have discovered, niake use of it, without 
fail, ever after, so as not even to move a finger 
without it? For this, I conceive, is what, when 
fouad, will cure those of their madness who make use 
of no other measure but their own perverted way 
of thinking. That afterwards, beginning from cer- 
tain known and determinate points, we may make use 
of pre-conceptions properly applied to particulars. 
What is the subject that falls under our inquiry ? 

Pleasure. 

Bring it to the rule. Throw it into the scale. 
Must ‘good be something in which it is fit to 
confide, and to which we may trust? 

Yes. 

Ts it fit to trust to anything unsteady ? 

No. 

Is pleasure, then, a steady thing? 

No. 

Take it, then, and throw it out of the scale, 
and drive it far distant from the place of good 
things. But, if you are not quick-sighted, and 
one balance is insufficient, bring another. Is it fit 
to be elated by good ? 

Yes. 

Is it fit, then, to be elated by a present pleasure ? 
See that you do not say it is; otherwise I shall 
not think you 80 much as worthy to use a scale. 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Let 

us scelc 
until we 
find one 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ten mem 

———————— Ó——— аш 

€———À 

The 'Thus are things judged, and wej 
philo- have the rules ready. This Ba 

L 
the good use of them when they are known i 
man of a wise and good man. 

Digitized by Tm Sarl Pounds m "e 
128 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

ghed, when we 

; € part of philo- 
sophy, to examine, and fix the rules; and ed 

8 the business 

CHAPTER XII 
Of disputation X! 

\ 

. \ 

81. Wuar things аге to be learned in order to the 
right use of reason, the philosophers of our sect 
have accurately taught, but we are altogether 
unpractised in the due application of them. Only 
give any of us that you please some illiterate 
person for an antagonist, and he will not find out 
how to treat him. But when he hath a little 
moved the man, if he happens to answer beside 
the purpose, he knows not how to deal with him 
any further; but either reviles or laughs at him, 
and says, ‘He is an illiterate fellow: there is no 
making anything of him. Yet a guide, when he 
perceives his charge going out of the way, doth 
not revile and ridicule and then leave him; but 
leads him into the right path. Do you also show 
your antagonist the truth, and you will see that he 
will follow. But till you do show it, do not 
ridicule him; but rather be sensible of your own 
incapacity. 

82. How, then, did Socrates use to act? He 
obliged his antagonist himself to bear testimony to 
him, and wanted no other witness. Hence he 
might well say, ‘I give up all the rest, and am 
always satisfied with the testimony of my opponent; 
and I call in no one to vote, but my antagonist 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Fay Se. NS 

DE 

€———— 
E e e m Re m НАА 

è 
'EPICTETUS 129 

alone.’ For he rendered the arguments drawn 
from natural notions so clear, that every one saw, 
and avoided the contradiction. ‘Doth an envious 
man rejoice?' — * Ву no means. He rather 
Brieves." (This he moved him to say, by pro- 
posing the contrary.) ‘Well, and do you think 
envy to be a grief for misery ?’—‘ And who ever 
envied misery ?? (Therefore he makes the other 
say, that envy is a grief for happiness.) ‘Doth 
апу one envy those who are nothing to him ? '— 
*No, surely.' Having thus drawn [from his 
opponent] a full and distinct idea, he then left that 
point ; and doth not say, * Define to me what envy 
18”; and after he had defined it, * You have defined 
it wrong; for the definition doth not reciprocate 
to the thing defined.’ Technical terms, and 
therefore grievous, and scarcely to be made 
intelligible to the illiterate, which yet we, it seems, 
cannot part with. But we have no capacity at all 

‘to move them by such arguments as might induce 

them, in following the track of the appearances in 
their own minds, to allow or disprove any point. 
And from a consciousness of this incapacity, those 
among us, who have any modesty, give the matter 
entirely up; but the greater part, rashly entering 
upon these debates, mutually confound and are 
confounded; and at last, reviling and reviled, walk 
off... Whereas. it was the principal and most 
peculiar characteristic of Socrates never to be 
provoked in a dispute, nor to throw out any 
reviling or injurious expression, but to bear 
patiently with those who reviled him, and to put 
an end to the controversy. If you would know 
how great abilities he had in this particular, read 
Xenophon's Banguel, and you will see how many 

VOL. 1. 1 

maj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

The 
skill of | 
Socrates | 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Агу: 

a Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

— - as 

ee ae 
L—— TEE 

a 
! 130 THE DISCOURSES OF 

i The controversies he ended. Hence, even among the ан 

Socratic poets, that person 18 justly mentioned with the . [h 

„method highest commendation, th 

| dee | wl 

IE . Whose lenient art attentive crowds await, : mi 

‘ To still the furious clamours of debate, Ü lif 

% Незтор, \ m 

But what then? This is no very safe affair — in 

JA now, and especially at Rome. For he who doth 
it must not do it in a corner, but go to some rich 
) consular senator, for instance, and question him. 
*Pray, sir, can you tell me to whom you intrust 
your horses 2’ Yes, certainly? — * Is it, then, to 
any one indifferently, though he be ignorant of 
horsemanship?—* By no means. ‹ То whom do 
you intrust your gold, or your silver, or your 
clothes ? '—* Not to any one indifferently.” ¢ And 
| did you ever consider to whom you committed 
the care of your body ?'—* Yes, surely. То 
one skilled in exercise, or medicine, I suppose ?'— ` 
‘Without doubt. ‘Are these things your chief 
good; or are you possessed of something better 
| than all of them?’—*What do you mean?’ 
| * Something which makes use of these, and proves 
i and deliberates about each of them?'—* What 
then, do you mean the soul?” < You have guessed 
right; for indeed I do mean that.'—*I do really 
think it'a much better possession than all the rest.’ 
*Can you show us, then, in what manner you 
have taken care of this soul? For it is not prob- 
b able that a person of your wisdom, and approved 
| 
i 

— 

character in the State, should carelessly suffer the’ 
most excellent thing that belongs to you to be 
neglected and lost.’ —‘No, certainly. ‘But do 
be! you take care of it yourself? And is it by the 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ЖУУЛУУ SIS P VRAT PHAR T PERO RENE 
ar Mode yn d oe Rene REMO aac 

L] 
EPICTETUS 131 

instructions of another, or by your own discovery 
[how it ought to be done]? Here now comes 
the danger, that. he may first say, Pray, good sir, 
what business is that of yours? What are you to 
me? Then, if you persist to trouble him, he ma 

lift up his hand and give you a box on the car. { 
mysclf was once a great admirer of this method of 
instruction, till I fell into such kind of adventures. 

CHAPTER XIII 
Of solicitude 

81. When I see any one solicitous, I say, What 
doth this man mean?. Unless he wanted some- 
thing or other not in his own power, how could 
he still be solicitous? A musician, for instance, 
feels no solicitude while he is singing by himself: 
but when he appears upon the stage he doth; even 
if his voice be ever so good, or he plays ever so 
well. For what he wants is, not only to sing well, 
but likewise to gain applause. But this is not in 
his own power. In short, where his skill lies, 
there is his courage. (Bring any ignorant person, 
and he doth not mind him.) But in the point 
which he neither understands, nor hath studied, 
there he is solicitous. 

What point is that ? $ 

He doth not understand what a multitude 18, 
nor what the applause of a multitude. He hath 
learnt, indeed, how to strike bass and treble; but 
what the applause of the many is, and what force 
it hath in life, he neither understands, nor hath 
studied. Hence he must necessarily fremble and 

. @ 

and why 
Epictetus 
avoids it 

h 

| 

| 
| 
j 
| 
| 
1 

] 

р 
Sd aa S у 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri ч 

уым ШЫМ detect Sel OTR a ep EATER AES арды, 
3 ахад М a wi i 

6 
132 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

room із musician when I sce him afraid; but I ; 
Р Б something else, and that not one, but man) hae 
йе? And, first of all, I call him a stranger, a d sa 
This man doth not know in what country he us 
M e. and, though he hath lived here so long, he ik 
ignorant of the laws and customs of the State and 
what is permitted and what not; nor hath Dos 
consulted any lawyer who might tell and explain 
to him the laws. Yet no man writes a will with- 
out knowing how it ought to be written, or con- 
sulting some one who doth know; nor doth he 
| rashly sign a bond or give security. But he uses 
> his desire and aversion, exerts his pursuits, inten- 
tions, and resolutions, without consulting any 
| lawyer about the matter. 
f How do you mean without a lawyer ? 
| nae He knows not that he chooses what is not 
| 
F 
14 

i 
| "What turn pale. I cannot, indeed, вау that a man is no 
i 

alowed him, and doth not choose what is 
necessary ; and he knows not what is his own and 
what belongs to others; for if he did know, he 
would never be hindered, would never be restrained, 
would never be solicitous. 

How so? 
Why, doth any one fear things that are not 
`- evils ? 
w No. 

i 

| | 

| Doth any one fear things that are evils indeed, 

| but which it is in his own power to prevent ? 

| No, surely. 

| 8 2. If, then, the things independent on choice 

| are neither good nor evil; and all that do depend 
on choice are in our own power, and can neither 

| be taken away from us, or given to us, unless we 

| please; what room is there left for solicitude? 

| 

i 

m CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 

нн 

d ais d 25 e THAT N n CCS х0 | 
AES TAE KORE Ee ДИ Vr ee eee de aM RE] eee L р 
НЕУРОНИ Р otl al 

EPICTETUS 133 

But we are solicitous about this paltry body or 
estate of ours, or about the determination of Cesar, 
and not at all about anything internal. Are we 
ever solicitous not to take up a false opinion? No, 
for this is in our own power. Or not to excrt our 
?ursutts contrary to nature? No, nor this neither. 
Vhen, therefore, you see any one pale with solici- 
tude, аз the physician pronounces from the com- 
plexion that such a patient is disordered in the 
spleen, another in the liver, во do you likewise 
say, this man is disordered in his desires and 
aversions, he cannot walk steady, he is in a 
fermentation. For nothing else changes the com- 
plexion or causes a trembling or sets the teeth a- 
chattering. 

No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows ; 

He shifts his place, his colour comes and goes, 

Terror and death in his wild eyc-balls stare ; 

With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffened hair, 
Porz's Homer. 

'Therefore Zeno, when he was to meet Anti- 
gonus,! felt no solicitude. For over what he 
admired Antigonus had no power, and those 
things of which he had the power Zeno did not 
regard. But Antigonus felt а solicitude when he 
was to meet Zeno, and with reason, for he was 
desirous to please him, and this was external. But 
Zeno was not desirous to please Antigonus; for 
no one skilful in any art is desirous to please a 
person unskilful. ; | 

I am desirous [says one of his scholars] to please 
you. À 
For what? Do you know the rules by which 
one man judges of another? Have you studied 
to understand what a good, and what a bad man 

He Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mental 
disease 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and 

p i 
E | : 
E - THE DISCOURSES or 
a 
d In ie; and how each becomes such? Why, then, are 

calmness not you yourself a good man? 
and СОП-. On what account am I not? 
fidence Because no good man laments i 
sball be » nor sighs, nor 
your groans; no good man turns pale and trembles and 
strength says, * How will such a one receive me, how will 
he:hear me?’ As he thinks fit, wretch. ‘Thy 
do you trouble yourself about what® belongs to 
others? Is it not his fault if he receives you ill? 
5: Yes, surely. 
-i And can one person be in fault, and another the 
sufferer ? 2 
No. 
Why, then, are you solicitous about what belongs 
to others? 
Well, but I am solicitous how I shall speak to 
him. | ' 
What, then, cannot you speak to him as you 
-will ? 
But I am afraid I shall be disconcerted. 
If you were going to write the name of Dion, 
should you be afraid of being disconcerted ? 
з. By no means. 
- What is the reason? is it not because you have 
studied how to write? 
Yes. 
And if you were going to read, would it not be 
exactly the same ? 
Exactly. 
What is the reason? 
Because every art hath a certain assurance and 
confidence in the subjects that belong to it. 

And what else did you study at school ? 
‚. Syllogisms and convertible propositions. 

' | СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

aye you not studied, then, how to speak? . 

— 

— 

EPICTETUS ' 135 

in what purpose? Was it not in order to Whois 
2 вере And what is that but to talk fit to 

seasonably and cautiously and intelligibly and with- 
out flutter and hesitation, and in consequence of 
all this with courage? 

Very true. 

When, therefore, you go into the field on horse- 
back, are you solicitous about one who is here 
now on foot? Solicitous in a point which you 
have studied, and another hath not? 

Ay, but the person [with whom I am to talk] 
hath power to kill me. 

Then speak the truth, pitiful wretch, and do 
not be arrogant; nor take the philosopher upon 
you; nor conceal from yourself who are your 
masters: but while you may thus be laid hold on 
by the body, follow every one who is stronger 
than you. Socrates, indeed, had studied how to 
speak, who talked in such a manner to tyrants and 
judges, and in a prison. Diogenes? had studied 
how to speak, who talked in such a manner to 
Alexander, to Philip, to the pirates, to the person 
who bought him. This belonged to them who 
had studied the point, who had courage. But do 
you walk off about your own affairs, and never 
stir from them. Retire into some corner, and 
there sit and weave syllopisms, and propose 
them to others. For there is not, in you, one 
able 

To rule the sacred citadel within, 

X ‘CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

бәет 

Я 

| 
| 

| 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

D 

| 16 THÉ DISCOURSES OF > 
os age CHAPTER XIV "fi б 
j oat | i fat 
| : Concerning Naso a 
The § 1. WHEN a certain Roman came to him with 80 
well-dis- his son and had heard one lesson}. This, said ni 
cem Epictetus, is the method of teaching; and stopped. th 
When the other desired him to go on, Every art, CO 
0 answered Һе, is tedious when it is delivered to a (th 
. person ignorant and unskilful in it. Indeed, the ` su 
things performed by the common arts quickly dis- | to 
cover the use for which they were made, and | th 
most of them have something engaging and agree- © oth 
able. Thus the trade of a shoemaker, if one & th 

would stand by and endeavour to comprehend it, | 
is: an unpleasant thing; but the shoe is useful, | is 
and, besides, not disagreeable to see. ‘The trade | ac 
of a smith is extremely uneasy to an ignorant 
person that chances to be present,! but the work | as 
shows the usefulness of the art. You will see this | pl 
much more strongly in music; for if you stand by, | 

t 

er 
while a person is learning, it will appear to you of m 
all sciences the most unpleasant; but the effects h 
are agreeable and delightful, even to those who do а 
not understand it. in 
82. Now here, we imagine it to be the work : 
of one who studies philosophy to adapt his will 
to whatever happens; so that none of the things íi n 
which happen may happen against our inclination, st 
nor those which do not happen be wished for by 
us. Hence, they who have settled this point have 
it in their power never to be disappointed of their 
desire, or incur their aversion ; but to lead a life j 
exempt from sorrow, fear, and perturbation in Б 
themselves; and іп society preserving all the u 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

ААЫА ПИР РРА. 

EPICTETUS 137 

i natural and adventitious relations of a son, a Manto 
father, a brother, a citizen, a husband, a wife, be the 
a neighbour, a fellow - traveller, a ruler, or a S C 
subject. Something like this is what we imagine e 
to be the work of a philosopher. It remains to 
inquire how it is to be effected. Now we sce 
that a carpenter by learning certain things be- 
comes a carpenter ; and a pilot by learning certain 
{ things becomes a pilot. Probably, then, it is not 
sufficient, in the present case, merely to be willing 
to be wise and good; but it is moreover necessary 
that certain things should be learned. What these 
things аге is the question. ‘The philosophers say ^ 
{ that we are first to learn that there is a bod, and 
| that his providence directs the whole; and that it 
is impossible to conceal from him, not only our 
actions, but even our thoughts and emotions. We 
are next to learn what the Gods are: for such 
as they are found to be, such must he, who would 
please and obey them to the utmost of his power, 
endeavour to be. If the deity is faithful, he too 
must be faithful; if free, beneficent, and exalted, 
he must be free, beneficent, and exalted likewise ; 
and, in all his words and actions, behave as an 
imitator of God. ’ 
§ 3. Whence, then, are we to begin ? 
If you will give me leave, I will tell you. It is 
necessary, in the first place, that you should under- 
stand words. 
So, then, I do not understand them now? 
No. You do not. 
How is it, then, that I use them? 
Just as the illiterate do written expressions, and 
t brutes the appearances of things. For use As one 
thing, and understanding another. But if you 

ee тшш: з 

DE 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

00 LLL —— ——————— HÓA 

EEIN NS RET it Foundation Chennai and ебапооій i 
by A SATa iis 

бна 
А Й 
i t 

138 THE DISCOURSES ор 
The one think you understand th 

ПЁ you please, and le 
lacking j, or not. 

Well, but it is a grievous thing ft `a man tg be 
confüted who is grown old, and perhaps arrived 
through a regular course of military servico to the 
dignity of a senator, ~ 

I know it very well, for you DOW, come to me ав 
if you wanted nothing. And how can it enter into 
your imagination that there should be anythi 

Which you are defective? You are rich, and per- 
haps have а wife and children, 

of domestics: Cèsar takes notice of you; you 
| have many friends at Rome; you render to all 
| their dues; you know how to r 
| ` revenge an injuy. In what are you deficient? 
| Suppose, then, I should prove to you that you are 
» cessary and important 
E to happiness, and that hitherto you have taken care 
4 of everything, rather than your duty; and, to 
complete all, that you understand neither what God 
or man or good or evil means? That you are 
ignorant of all the rest, perhaps, you may bear to 
| be told; but if I prove to you that you are 
| ignorant even of yourself, how will you bear with 
| me, and how will you have patience to stay and 
be convinced? Not at all. You will immediately 
be offended and go away. And yet what injury 
have I done you? unless a looking-glass injures 
a person not handsome, when it shows him to 
himself such as he is. Or unless a physician can 
be thought to affront his patient when he says о 
him, *Do you think, sir, that you ail nothing? 
You have a fever. Бағ no meat to-day, and 
drink water.’ Nobody cries out here, * What 

em, bring “wh 

atever word 
t us see whether V 

€ understand 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

et 

th f A w pa A дл 

; Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

base EESO RE 

EPICTETUS 139 

an intolerable affront!’ But if you say to any one, Vanity 
Your desires are in a fermentation; your aversions Fair 
are low; your intentions contradictory ; your 
pursuits not conformable to nature; your opinions 
rash and mistaken; he presently goes away, and 
complains he is affronted. || 
f $4. This is the nature of our proceedings. | 
A As in a crowded fair the horses and cattle are 
j brought to be sold, and the greatest part of men 
| come either to buy or sell; but there are a few 
! who come only to look at the fair, and inquire 
| how it is carried on; and why in that manner; 
| and who appointed it; and for what purpose : 
+ thus, in the fair of the world, some, like cattle, 

trouble themselves about nothing but fodder. For 

as to all you who busy yourselves about possessions 

and farms and domestics and public posts, these ie 
| things are nothing else but mere fodder. But P UD 
|. there are some few men among the crowd who || | 
|! are fond of looking on and considering, * What 
‘ then, after all, is the world? Who foverns it? 
{ Hath it no governor? How is it possible, when 
neither a city nor a house can remain ever so | | 
short a time without some one to govern and take 1168 
care of it, that this vast and beautiful system | 
14 should be administered in a fortuitous and dis- 
orderly manner? Is there then a governor? | 
What sort of one is he? And how doth he Hn | 
govern; and what are we who are under him? PHE 
And for what designed? Have we some con- И | | 
nection and relation to him; or none?" In this. И | 
manner are the few affected ; and apply themselves 
only to view the fair and then depart. Well: 
i and are they laughed at by the multitude? Why, 
so are the lookers-on by the buyers and sellers ; 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

by A à j Foundation 

TUER A iA. LEES N COE EINER S eig 

140 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

For my and, if the cattle had any apprehension, th A 
word's would laugh at ; у Mew) 1 
sake fodder, gh at such as admired anything but 

-— t - —À—— A — € 

CHAPTER XV 

Concerning those who obstinately persevere in what- 
ever they have determined 

81. боме, when they hear such discourses as 
these, That we ought to be steady ; that choice is 
by nature free and uncompelled ; and that all else 
is lable to restraint, compulsion, slavery, and 
belongs to others; imagine that they must remain 
immutably fixed to everything which they have 
determined. But it is first necessary that the 
determination should be a sound one. І agree 
that there should be a tension of the nerves in the 
body; but such as appears in a healthy, an 
athletic body: for, if you show me that you have 
the tension of a lunatic, and value yourself upon 
that, I will say to you, Get yourself to a physician, 
man: this is not a tension of the nerves, but a 
relaxation of another kind.. Such is the distemper 
of mind in those who hear these discourses in a 
wrong manner: like an acquaintance of mine, 
who, for no reason, had determined to starve 
himself to death. I went the third day, and 
inquired what was the matter. He answered, 
*I am determined. Well: but what is your 
motive? for, if your determination be right, we 
will stay and assist your departure ; but, if un- 
reasonable, change it.—* We ought to keep our 
determinations.’ What do you mean, sir? „not 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

^^ 

anf 

an La c 

pete OD 

SR Oe Г rev СУ 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chehnai and eGangotri 

РАР 
таа 

EPICTETUS un li 

|, all; but such ав are right. — Else, if you should A fool il! 
just now take it into your head that it is night, neither mM 

if you think fit, do not change; but persist, and ва non | 

| We ouphtto keep our determinations. What 5 

| say, We ouglit.to keep our determination rat 

do you mean, sir? Notall. Why do not you begin 

| by first laying the foundation in an inquiry whether 

your determination be a sound one or not, and 

then build your firmness and constancy upon it? mi 

e 

| 5 For if you lay a rotten and crazy foundation, you Е |! | 
| à must not buid:! and the greater and тоге CH 
i ¥ weighty the superstructure is, the sooner will it | 

| fall. Without any reason you are withdrawing 

| from us, out of life, a friend, a companion, a 

) * ^ fellow-citizen, both of the same greater ? and lesser 

tity: and while you are committing murder and 
| destroying an innocent person, you say, We must | MB 
| keep our determinations. Suppose, by any means, TE 
it should ever come into your head to kill me, |! 
must you keep such a determination ? | 
| 82. With difficulty this person was, however, 
j at last convinced; but there are some at present 
4 whom there is no convincing. So that now I 
| f think I understand what before I did not, the 
meaning of that common saying, that a fool will 
neither bend nor break. May it never fall to my 
} } lot to have a wise, that is an intractable, fool for 
my friend.’ ‘It is all to no purpose: I am 
! determined.’ So are madmen too; but the more 
strongly they are determined upon absurditics, the 
! more need have they of hellebore. Why will - 
| you not act like a sick person, and apply yourself 
| toa physician ? «Sir, lam sick. Give me your 
assistance: consider what I am to do. It is my 
part to follow your directions.’ So, in the present 
| case, 1 know not what I ought to do; and I am 

ру э 

-— a 

i aii st be ste 

~ Sc DE mme es A 
Sc EAs 

су 

— e 

Digitized. by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri ` 

142 . THE DISCOURSES OF 

3E rable come to learn. ‘No; but talk to me about other 
obstinacy things; for upon this І am determined’? What 

; other things? What is of greater consequence 
than to convince you that it is not sufficient to be 
determined, and to persist? This is the tension 

if you compel me to this. Why so, man: what 
is the matter ?—‘I am determined. I have а 
lucky escape that you are not determined to kill 
“те. ‘I take no money.’ Why so? ‘I am 

| bj of a madman, not of one in health. І will die 
| e. 

"etermined. Ве assured that with that very 
te tion which you now make use of to refuse it, 

reasonable a propensity to take it; and again to 
say, ‘I am determined. Asin a distempered and 
rheumatic body the humour tends sometimes to one 
part, sometimes to another; thus it is uncertain 
which way sickly mind will incline. But if to 
its inclination and bent an obstinate tension be 
likewise added, the evil then becomes desperate and 
incurable. ttr 

| | you may very possibly, hereafter, have as un- 

CHAPTER XVI 

That «ve do not study to male use of the principles 
concerning good and evil 

§ т. Wuere lies good? In choice. Where evil? | 

things independent on choice. What then? Doth 

any of us remember these lessons out of the 

schools? Doth any of us study how to answer 

' for himself in things as in questions ? ‘Is it 
day??—‘Yes.’ ‘Is it night, then? ’—‘ No.” ‘Is 

tell? 

| 
| 
: | In choice. Where neither good nor evil? In 
| 
| 
| the number of stars even?’—‘I cannot 
| 
| 

ч СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` 

тте ТЫСЫ 
EE SCIT E n 

«+ v" nh) "P A4 QA O ALLG mm 0d 

Tt? C D Q fF А A 

5 

————————— — лл м 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS 143 

When money is offered you! have you studied Applause 
to make the proper answer that it is not a ‘good ? and 
Have you exercised yourself in such answers as Censure 
these; or only in &ophistries ? Why do you 
wonder, then, that you improve in points which 
you have studied; and in those which you have 
not studied, there you remain the same? When 
an orator knows that he hath written well; that 
he hath committed to memory what he hath 
written; and that he brings an agreeable voice 
with him; why is he still solicitous? Because 
he is not contented with what he hath studied. 
What doth he want, then? To be applauded by 
the audience. He hath studied the power of 
speaking, then; but he hath not studied censure 
and applause. For when did he hear from any 
one what applause, what censure is? What is 
the nature of each? What kind of applause is 
to be sought, and what kind of censure to be 
shunned? Апа when did he ever apply himself 
to study what follows from these lessons? Why 
do you wonder, then, if in what he hath learned 
he excels others; but where he hath not studied, 
he is the same with the rest of the world? Just 
as a musician knows how to play, sings well, 
and hath the proper dress of his profession, yet 
trembles when he comes upon the stage. For 
the first he understands ; but what the multitude is 
or what the clamour and laughter of the multitude 
is he doth not understand. Nor doth he even know 
what solicitude itself is: whether it be our own 
affair or that of others, or whether it be possible to 
suppress it or not. Hence, if he is applauded, he 
is puffed up when he makes his exit: but if he is 
laughed at, the tumour is pricked and subsides. 

. 
TR a Raa D, 

A ES TE 
| : i NE ЛУ: - CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

- Loue ls p own abeo ——_——————— 

l 
144 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

И ore Wine 
é esc at do we strive ? 
Externals. And are we, then, in any doubt how 
we come to fear and be solicitous? What is the 
consequence, then, when we esteem the things 
that are brought upon us to be evils ? We cannot 
but fear; we cannot but be solicitous. And then 
we say, *O Lord God, how shall I avoid 
solicitude!? — Have you not hands, fool?2 Hath 
not God made them for you?? Sit down now 
and pray that your nose may not run! Wipe it 
rather, and do not murmur. Well: and hath 
he given you nothing in the present case? Hath 
not he given you patience? Hath not he given 
you magnanimity ? Hath not he given you 
fortitude? When you have such hands as these, 
do you still seck for somebody to wipe your nose ?4 
But we neither study nor regard these things. 
For give me but one who cares how he doth 
anything, who doth not regard the success of 
anything but his own manner of acting. Who, 
when he is walking, regards his own action? - 
Who, when he is deliberating, the deliberation 
itself, and not the success that is to follow it? If 
it happens to succeed, he is elated, and cries, 
‘How prudently have we deliberated! Did not 
І tell you, my dear friend, that it was impossible, 
when we considered about anything, that it should 
not happen right?’ But if it miscarries, the poor 
wretch is dejected, and knows not what to say: 
about the matter. Who among us ever upon this 
` account consulted a diviner? Who of us ever 
slept in a temple to be informed concerning his 
manner of acting? 5 І say, who? Show me one 
(that I may see what I have long sought) who 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

E Pe 

ee 

2, ое. 
екы Ер: 

-O M ш зл t ee t 

MEME 

ae: Digitized by WIV Samaj Fou dation Chennai and eGangotri 

H 
EPICTETUS 145 

18 truly noble and ingenuous. Show me cither a 
young or an old man. 

§ 3. Why then are we etill surprised, if, when 
we waste all our attention on the materials of action, 
We are, in the manner of action itself, low, sordid, 
worthless, fearful, wretched, and a mere heap of 
disappointment and misery? For we do not care 
about these things nor make them our study. If 
we had feared not death or exile, but fear itself, 
we should have studied not to fall into what 
appears to us to be evil. But, as the case now 
stands, we are eager and loquacious in the schools ; 
and when any little question arises about any of 
these things, we are prepared to trace its con- 
Sequences: but drag us into practice, and you 
will find us miserably shipwrecked. Let some 
alarming appearance attack us, and you will 
perceive what we have been studying, and in what 

we are exercised. Besides this Negligence, we , 

always accumulate somewhat else, and represent 
things greater than the reality. In a voyage, for 
instance, casting my eyes down upon the ocean 
below, and looking round me and secing no land, 
I am out of my wits, and imagine that if I should 
be shipwrecked I must swallow all that Ocean ; 
nor doth it once enter my head, that three pints 
are enough to do my business. What is it then 
that alarms me? The ocean? No, but my own 
principle. Again, in an earthquake, I imagine the 
city 1s going to fall upon me; but is not one little 
stone enough to knock my brains out? What is 
it then that oppresses and puts us out of our 
wits? Why, what else but our principles? For 
what is it but mere principle that oppresses him 
who leaves his country, and is separated from 

VOL. 1. K 

жугше ЛЫШЫ р аа ЕДЕН EK at a 

How to 
act nobly 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

LOL n OMM REMIT 

78 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Cherinai and eGangotri 

Ss б а wine a i ^. за i 
PAE Sh ene MO ы ОУ ТТ igs 
| SRS TES ctos) 

| 
146 THE DISCOURSES OF 
“© The his acquaintance, and friends, and place, and 1 
i dizine manner of life? When Sere cry if ee 
aw 

nurse happens to be absent for a little while, give 
them a cake, and they forget their grief. Shall 
we compare you to these children, then? 

No, indeed. For I do not desire to be pacified by 
a cake, but by right principles. And what are they ? 

Such as a man ought to study all day long, so 
as not to be attached to what doth not belong to 
him; neither to a friend, to a place, an academy, 
nor even to his own body, but to remember the 
Jaw and to have that constantly before his eyes. 
And what is the divine lav? To preserve in- 
violate what is properly our own, not to claim 
what belongs to others; to use what is given us, 
and not desire what is not given us; and, when 
anything is taken away, to restore it readily, and 
to be thankful for the time you have been per- 
mitted the use of it, and not cry after it, like a 
child for its nurse and its mamma. For what 
doth it signify what gets the better of you, or on 
what you depend? And in what are you superior 
to him who cries for a puppet, if you lament for 
a paltry academy and a portico and an assembly 
of young people, and suchlike amusements? An- 
other comes, lamenting that he must no longer 
drink the water of Dirct. Why, is not the 
Marcian water as good? ‘But I was used to 
that. And in time you will be used to the 
other. Апа when you are attached to this too, 
you may cry again and set yourself, in imitation 
of Euripides, to celebrate in verse 

The baths of Nero, and the Marcian water. 

Hence see the origin of tragedy when trifling 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

pe 

_ 

:/* .; Digitized.by Arya. 

Г Чайоп Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS 147 | 

accidents befall foolish теп. * Ah, when shall I Play 
| see Athens and the citadel again!? Wretch, are the man 

not you contented with what you sce every day? 
Can you see anything better than the sun, the 
moon, the stars, the whole earth, the sea? But 
if, besides, you comprehend him who administers 
the whole, and carry him about in yourself, do you 
still Jong after pebbles and a fine rock?® What E 
will you do, then, when you are to leave even the ү 
sun and moon? Will you sit crying like an 
infant? What then have you been doing in the 
scheol? What did you hear? What did you learn? 
Why have you written yourself a philosopher, 
instead of writing the real fact? I have made 
some introductions,’ you may say, and read over 
Chrysippus; but I have not so much as gone near 
the door of a philosopher.8 For what pretensions | 
have I to anything of the same kind with Socrates, 
who died and who lived in such a manner? Ог 

with Diogenes? Do you observe either of these i 
crying, or out of humour, that he is not to sce | 
such a man or such a woman; nor to live any } 
longer at Athens, or at Corinth, but at Susa, for | 

instance, or at Ecbatana? For doth he stay and | 
repine who is at his liberty, whenever he pleases, ! 
to quit the entertainment and play no longer? | 
Why doth he not stay аз children do, as long as 
he is amused? Such a one, no doubt, will bear | 
perpetual banishment and a sentence of death 
wonderful well! Why will you not be weaned, 
as children are, and take more solid food? Will 
you never cease to cry after your mammas and 
nurses, whom the old women about you have 
taught you to bewail? ‘But if I go away I shall 
trouble them.’ You trouble them ! No, it will not 

MS == — ————— 
ттт? 

DER .* CC-0: In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

148 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Lift be you, but that which troubles you too, principle. 
up your What have you to do, then? Pluck out your 
База principle, and, if they are wise, they will pluck 

out theirs too; or, if not, they will groan for 
themselves. 

§ 4. Boldly make a desperate push, man, as 
the saying is, for prosperity, for freedom, for 
magnanimity. Lift up your head at last, as free 
from slavery. Dare to look up to God and say, 
* Make use of me for the future as thou wilt. I 
am of the same mind; I am equal with thee. I 
refuse nothing which seems good to thee. Lead 
me whither thou wilt. Clothe me in whatever 
dress thou wilt. Is x thy will, that I should be 
ina public or a private condition, dwell here or 
be banished, be poor or rich? Under all these 
circumstances I will make thy defence to men. 
I wil show what the nature of everything is.’ 
No. Rather sit alone in a warm? place, and 
wait till your mamma comes to feed you. If 
Hercules had sat loitering at home, what would 
he have been? Eurystheus, and not Hercules. 
Besides, by travelling through the world, how 
many acquaintance and how many friends had 
he? But none more his friend than God, for 
which reason he was believed to be the son of 
God, and was so. Їп obedience to him, he went 
about extirpating injustice and lawless force. But 
you are not Hercules, nor able to extirpate the 
evils of others; nor even Theseus to extirpate 
the evils of Attica. Extirpate your own, then. 
Expel, instead of Procrustes and Sciron, grief, 
fear, desire, envy, malevolence, avarice, effeminacy, 

‘intemperance, from your mind. But these can 

be no otherwise expelled than by looking up to 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

терисини 

e 

E Digitized by Агуй Samaj Foundation Chennai-and-eGangotri — — — — 
к, 

VU RA С— (Re {лүм „Лу "ЫА a iad ММ М МЛ БГ нь 2004 

Or сч 

m msi è 

' 
4 
О 

EPICTETUS 149 

God alone as your pattern; by attaching your- First 
self to him alone, and being consecrated to his Part with 
commands. If you wish for anything else, you xen. 
will, with sighs and groans, follow what is stronger conga 
than you, always secking prosperity without, and 

never able to find it. For you seek it where it 

is not, and neglect to seek it where it is. 

/ 

CHAPTER XVII 
How to adapt pre-conceptions to particular cases 

§ 1. Wuar is the first business of onc who studies © 
philosophy?! ‘To part with self-conceit. For 
it is impossible for any one to begin to learn what 
he hath a conceit that he already knows. We all 
go to the philosophers, talking at all adventures 
upon negative and positive duties, good and evil, 
fair and base. We praise, censure, accuse; we 
judge and dispute about fair and base enterprises. 
And for what do we go to the philosophers ? То 
learn what we suppose ourselves not to know. 
And what is this? Theorems. We are desirous 
to hear what the philosophers say, for its elegance 
and acuteness, and some with a view only to gain. 
Now it is ridiculous to suppose that a person will 
learn anything but what he desires to learn, or 
make an improvement in what he doth not learn. 
But most are deceived in the same manner as 
Theopompus the orator, when he blames Plato 
for defining everything. ‘ For what,’ says he, * did 
none of us, before you, use the words good and 
just, or did we utter them as empty sounds, with- 

ы ? 
out understanding what each of them meant? 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

cere apf nt Ot ALLA 

ннн 

o M 

Why 
do we 
differ ? 

150 THE DISCOURSES or 

Why, who tells you, Theopompus, that we had 
not natural ideas and pre-conceptions of each of 
these? But it is not possible to ada 

5 3 pt pre-con- 
ceptions to their correspondent subjects, without 
having minutcly distinguished them, and e ET 
what is the proper subject to each. You may 
make the same objection to the physicians. For 
who of us did not use the words wholesome and 
unwholesome before Hippocrates was born? or 
did we utter them as empty sounds? For we 
have some pre-conception of wholesome too, but 
we cannot adapt it. Hence, one says, Let the 
patient abstain from meat; another, Give it him; 
one says, Let him be bled; another, Cup him. 
And what is the reason, but not being able to 
adapt the pre-conception of wholesome to particular 
cases? Thus, too, in life; who of us doth not 
talk of good and evil, advantageous and dis- 
advantageous: for who of us hath not a pre- 
conception of each of these? But is it then a 
distinct and perfect one? Show me this. 

How shall I show it? 

82. Adapt it properly to particular subjects. 
Flato, to go no further, puts definitions under the 
pre-conception of useful; but you, under that of 
useless. Can both of you be right? How is it 
possible? Again, doth not one man adapt the 
pre-conception of good to riches? Another, not 
to riches, but to pleasure or health? Upon the 
whole, if none of us who use words, either utter 
them without meaning, or need to take any manner 
of care in distinguishing our pre-conceptions, why 
do we differ? Why do we wrangle? Why do 
we censure each other? But what occasion have 

I to mention this mutual contradiction? If you 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 
б e 

ме had 
each of 
pre-con- 
without 
'Xamined 
"ou may 
18. For 
some and 
orn? or 
For we 
too, but 
Let the 
dt him; 
‘up him. 
able to 
articular 
loth not 
ind dis- 
а pre- 
t then a 

subjects. 
nder the 
that of 
ow is it 
lapt the 
her, not 
pon the 
ler utter 
' manner 
ns, why 
Nhy do 
on have 

If you 

- Digitized by Arya’ Samaj F 

^ 
4 

EPICTETUS ' 151 

yourself adapt your pre-conceptions properly, how The 
comes it to pass that you do: not prosper ? Why error of 
do you meet with any hindrance? Let us for the See 
present omit the second topic, concerning the 
pursuits, and the duties relative to them; let us 
omit the third too, concerning assent. I make 
you a present of all these. Let us insist only on 
the first,2 which affords almost a sensible proof 
that you do not adapt your pre-conceptions right. 
You desire what is possible in itsclf, and possible 
for you. Why then are you hindered? Why 
are not you in a prosperous way? You do not 
decline what is necessary. Why then do you 
incur anything which is your aversion? Why 
are you unfortunate? When you desire anything, 
why doth it not happen ? When you do not 
desire it, why doth it happen? For this is the 
greatest demonstration of ill success and misery. 
I desire something, and it doth not happen: and 
what is more wretched than I? From an im- 
patience of this, Medea came to murder her own 
children, an action of a noble spirit in this view; 
for she had a proper impression of what it was to 
be disappointed of one’s desire. ‘Thus, I shall 
unish him who hath injured and dishonoured me ; 
and what is so wicked a wretch good for? But 
how is this to be effected? I will murder the 
children. But that will be punishing myself. And 
what do I care?" This is the error of a soul 
endued with great powers. For she knew not 
where the completion of our desires 18 to be 
found ; that it is not to be had from without, nor 
by altering the appointment of things. Do not 
desire the man for your husband, and nothing 
which you do desire will fail to happen. Do not 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

SEE 

M M 7 

MM II 

Lem 

Look desire to keep him to yourself. 
up to stay at Corinth, and, in a word, 

Goena the will of God; 

ERN 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
RE заны ы Et eei 

152 THE DISCOURSES ОЕ 

Do not desire to 

have no will but 
and who shall restrain you, who 

shall compel you any more than Jupiter?. When 
you have such a guide, and conform your will and 
inclinations to his, what need you fear being dis- 
appointed ? Yield up your desire and aversion 
to riches, or poverty; the one will be dis- 
appointed, the other incurred. Yield them up 
to health, power, honours, your country, friends, 
children, in short, to anything independent on 
choice, you will be unfortunate. But yield them 
‘up to Jupiter and the other gods. Give yourself up 
to these; let these govern, let both be ranged on 
the same side with these; and how can you be any 
longer unprosperous? But if, poor wretch, you 
envy, and pity, and are jealous, and tremble, and 
never cease a single day from complaining of 
yourself and the Gods, why do you boast of 
your education? What education, man? That 
you have learned convertible syllogisms? Why 
do not you, if possible, unlearn all these and begin 
again, convinced that hitherto you have not even 
touched upon the point? And, for the future, 
beginning from this foundation, proceed in order, 
to the superstructure, that nothing may happen 
which you do not wish, and that everything may 
happen which you do. Give me but one young 
man who brings this intention with. him to the 
school, who is a champion for this point, and says, 
*I yield up all the rest: it suffices me, if once I 
become able to pass my life, free from hindrance 
and grief; to stretch out my neck to all events, as 
free; and to look up to heaven, as the friend o GO 
fearing nothing that can happen. Let any one o 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

S E 

k 127 U с” ч 

RR 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Fotindation Chennai and eGangotri 

mut 

ly liuc Um Esai ere Lua fa i RE АРИБИ 

EPICTETUS 153 

you show himeclf of such a disposition, that I may Secure 

say, * Come into the place, young man, that is of and un- 

right your own; for you are destined to be an orna- euis 

ment to philosophy. Yours are these possessions; 

yours these books; yours these discourses.’ Then, 

when he hath mastered and got the better of this 

first class, let him come to me again, and say, 

«I desire indeed to be free from passion and 
erturbation; but I desire too, as a pious, a 
philosophic, and acarefully attentive man, to know 

what is my duty to God, to my parents, to my 
relations, to my country, and to strangers. ‘Come 

into the second class too; for this likewise is 
yours.” ‘But Ihave now sufficiently studied the 
second class too; and I would willingly be secure, 

and unshaken® by error and delusion, not only 
awake, but even when asleep; when warmed with 

wine; when diseased with the spleen.’ * You 

are a god, man; your intentions are great.’ 

§ 3. «No. But I, for my part, desire to under- 
stand what Chrysippus says, in his logical treatise 
of the Pseudomenos.' * Go hang yourself, pitiful 
wretch, with such an intention as this. Vhat 
good will it do you? You will read the whole, 
lamenting all the while, and say to others, trembling, 
«Do as 1 do.'— Shall I read to you, my friend, 
and you to me >You write? surprisingly sir, and 
you very finely imitate the style of Plato; and you, 
of Xenophon ; and you, of Antisthenes? And 
thus, having related your dreams to each other, 
you return again to the same state. Your desires 
and aversions, your pursuits, your intentions, your 
resolutions, your wishes and endeavours, are just 
what they were. You do not so much as seck 
for one to advise you; but are offended, when 

i : CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

РЕАЛЬ eee 

„Ноў 
.habits 
,. are 
formed 

ann 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and Bonon 
154 THE DISCOURSES or 

ou hear such things as these, and cry: < An ill- 
natured old fellow! He never wept over me, wh 
I was sctting out, nor said, To what a 4 As 
are you going to be exposed! Jf you come off 
safe, child, I will illuminate my house.—T his 
would have been the part of a good-natured man. 
Truly, it will be a mighty happiness, if you do 
come off safe; it will be worth while to make an 
illumination. For you ought $ to be immortal and 
exempt from sickness, to be sure. 

$4. Throwing away then, I say, this self- 
conceit, by which we fancy we have gained some 
knowledge of what is useful, we should come to 
philosophic reasoning, as we do to mathematics 
and music; otherwise we shall be far from making 
any improvement, even if we have read over all 
the collections and compositions, not only of Chry- 
sippus, but of Antipater and Archedemus too. 

а Чапрег 

CHAPTER XVIII 
How the appearances of things are to be combated 

$1. Every habit and faculty is preserved and 
increased by correspondent actions: as the habit of 
walking, by walking; of running, by running. If 
you would be a reader, read; if a writer, write. 
But if you do not read for a month together, but 
do somewhat else, you will see what will be the 
consequence. So, after sitting still for ten days, 
get up and attempt to take a long walk, and you 
will find how your legs are weakened. Upon the 
whole, then, whatever you would make habitual, 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

n 

а 

EPICTETUS ' 155 

practise it; and, if you would not make a thing Do not 
habitual, do not practise it, but habituate yourself feed a 
bad 

to something else. 

§ 2. It is the same with regard to the operations 
of the soul. Whenever you are angry, be assured 
that it is not only a present evil, but that you have 
increased a habit, and added fuel to a fire. When 
you are overcome by the company of women, do 
not esteem it as a single defeat; but that you have 
fed, that you have increased, your dissoluteness. 
For it is impossible but that habits and faculties 
must either be first produced, or strengthened and 
increased, by correspondent actions. Hence the 
philosophers derive the growth of all infirmities. 
When you once desire money, for example, if a 
degree of reasoning sufficient to produce a sense 
of the evil be applied, the desire ceases, and the 
governing faculty of the mind regains its authority : 
whereas, if you apply no remedy, it returns no 
more to its former state; but, being again excited 
by a correspondent appearance, it kindles at the 
desire more quickly than before, and, by frequent 
repetitions, at last becomes callous: 1 and by this 
infirmity is the love of money fixed. For he who 
hath had a fever, even after it hath left him, is not 
in the same state of health as before, unless he was 
perfectly cured: and the same thing happens in 
distempers of the soul likewife. There are certain 
traces and blisters left in it, which, unless they 
are well effaced, whenever a new hurt is receive 
in the same part, instead of blisters become sores. 

3. If you would not be of an angry temper, 
then, do not feed the habit. Give it nothing to 
help its increase. Ве quiet at first, and reckon 

the days in which you have not been angry. І 

a rq а 

eal aay ^ 
“<Pigizetby Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

habit 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

k : Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri : ЕЕН 

Г) 
1 П 
{ 

! 
156 ТНЕ DISCOURSES OF 

He that used to be ang , 
| , ruleth then every did. ee Чом, Crery other day; 
his spirit + | oat ourth дау: and, if you mie, 
It so Jong as thirty days, offer a sacrifice H eee 
il giving to God. For habit is first v k шр 
| then entirely destroyed. “Т o NDS 
| КЕ. nor the ко с [s not vexed to- 
i months after; but took de ia D т 
pi provoking things happened.? pM Е 
i are їп a fine way. ‘To-day, when ona 
[i some person, I did not say NES p. 
i possess her! And, How happy H her husb vr 
|| (for he who Says this, says too, How h Es 
i EE. р арру is her 
" gallant!): nor do I £O On to represent her a | 
fi present, as undressed, as lying down beside mer | 
lh On this I stroke my head, and say, Well done 
| Epictetus: thou hast solved a pretty soplism ; А 
much prettier than one very celebrated in the 
schools.? But if even the lady should happen to 
be willing, and give me intimations of it and send 
for me, and press my hand, and place herself. next 
b to me, and I should then forbear and get the ( 
victory, that would be a sophism beyond all the | 
, subtleties of logic. This, and not disputing artfully 
is the proper subject for exultation. 
A 8 4. How, then, is this to be effected? Be will- 
| ing to approve yourself to yourself. Be willing 
to appear beautiful in the sight of God : be desirous 
to converse in purity with your own pure mind, 
li and with God ; and then, if any such appearance 
ү! strikes you, Plato directs you: ‘Have recourse to 
| explations: ро a suppliant to the temples of the 
li averting deities.’ It is sufficient, however, if you 
| propose to yourself the example of wise and good 
i 
1 

pta mM sal E 

men, whether alive or dead; and compare your 
conduct with theirs. Go to Socrates, and see him 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

~ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatl 

EPICTETUS 2 

lying by Alcibiades, yet slighting his youth and Strive for 
beauty. Consider what a victory he was conscious ап incor- 
of obtaining! What an Olympic prize! In ruptible 
what number did he stand from Hercules? So € 972 
that, by Heaven, one might justly salute him, 

Hail! incredibly great, universal victor!) not 

those sorry boxers and wrestlers; nor the gladia- 

tors, who resemble them. 

§ 5. By placing such an object over against you, 

you will conquer any appearance, and not be drawn 

away by it. But, in the first place, be not hurried 

along with it, by its hasty vehemence: but say, 
Appearance, wait for me a little. Let me see what 

you are, and what you represent. Let me try you. 

Then, afterwards, do not suffer it to go on drawing 

gay pictures of what will follow: if you do, it will 

lead you wherever it pleases. But rather oppose 

to it some good and noble appearance, and banish 

this base and sordid one. If you are habituated to 

this kind of exercise, you will see what shoulders, 

what nerves, what sinews, you will have. But 

now it is mere trifling talk, and nothing more. 

He is the true practitioner who exercises himself 

against such appearances as these. Stay, wretch, 

do not be hurried away. The combat is great, 

the achievement divine ; for empire, for freedom, 

for prosperity, for tranquillity. Remember God. 

Invoke him for your aid and protector, as sailors 

do Castor and Pollux in a storm. For what” 

storm is greater than that which arises from volca! 
appearances, contending to overset our доходи 
Indeed, what is the storm itself, but appearance · 
For, do but take away the fear of death, and let 
there be as many thunders and lightoings as you 
please, you will find that, in the ruling faculty, all 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 
тог Temm ) 

os с ЛЕБ e 

"Un 
or 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and ec 

158 THE DISCOURSES OF 

The is sereni ә 
latter enity and calm: but 

GER and say you will get the victory 
the weal then the same thing over again 
man you will at last be reduced to п 

à condition, that you will 

When you do amiss ; 
make defences for your 

the saying of Hesiod : 

another t 
j assure 

but you will even 

With constant ills the dilatory strive, 

CHAPTER XIX 

Concerning those who embrace Philosophy only 

§ 1. THE argument, called the ruling one, con- 

if you are once defeated, 

behaviour, and thus verify 

| 
| 

ime, and ‹ 
yourself, | 

О 50 weak and wretched 
not so much as know , 

begin to 

In word 

cerning which disputants questioned each other, 

appears to have its rise from hence.! 

following propositions, any two imply a contradiction 
to the third. They are these. That everything 

past is necessarily true; that an impossibility is not | 
the consequence of a possibility ; and that some- 

thing is a possibility which neither is nor 

true. Diodorus, perceiving this contradiction, 
made use of the probability of the two first to prove 
that nothing is possible which neither is nor will 
be true. Some again hold the second and third : 
that something is possible which neither is nor will 
be true; and that an impossibility is not the 
consequence of a possibility : and, consequently, 
assert that not everything past is necessarily true. 

This way Cleanthes and his followers took ; 

Antipater copiously defends. Others, lastly, main- 

Of the 

wil be | 

whom 

tain the first and third : that something is possible | 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

=т=т гш Н 

BEARIN АЕ @ ў 
ТИР 

ап 

az 
= 

= = 
а ies be oe at ae tO 

ГГ 

| 
| 
| 

Digitized by Arya.Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS 159 

which neither is nor will be true; and that every 
thing past is necessarily true; but then, that an 
impossibility may be the consequence of a possi- 
bility. But all these three propositions cannot be 
at once maintained, because of their mutual con- 
tradiction. If any one should ask me, then, which 
of them I maintain: I answer him, that 1 cannot 
tell. But I have heard it related that Diodorus 
held one opinion about them; the followers of 
Panthoides, I think, and Cleanthes, another ; and 
Chrysippus a third. 

What, then, is yours ?? 

None. Nor was I born to examine the appear- 
ances of things to my own mind; to compare 
what is said by others, and thence to form some 
principle of my own, as to the topic [which you 
mention}. Therefore, [in respect to it] I am no 
better than a grammarian [who repeats what he hath 
read]. Who was the father of Hector? Priam. 
Who were his brothers? Paris and Deiphobus. 
Who was his mother? Hecuba. This I have 
heard related. From whom? From Homer. 
But I believe Hellanicus and other authors 
have written on the ваше subject. And what 
better account have I of the ruling argument ? 
But, if I was vain enough, I might, especially at an 
entertainment, astonish all the company by an 

The 
ruling 
argument 

enumeration of authors relating to it. Chrysippus 

hath written wonderfully, in his first Book, of 
possibilities. Cleanthes and Archedemus have each 
written separately on this subject. Antipater too 
hath written, not only in his treatise of possibilities, 
but purposely in а discourse on the ruling argument. 
Have not you read the work ? ‘No. Read it, 
then.—And what good will it do him? Te will 

mret Tn Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Nl 
S 

Stern be more triflin 
realities For wh 

SAREE dat a 

24 = ‘a tct loeo ETEEN 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation 

PTET + 

1бо THE DISCOURSES ор 

g and impertinent than he 

at else have you gained b 
What principle have you formed upon this subject? 
But you tell us of Helen and Priam and TS Isle 
Calypso, which nor eyer will be 
And here, indecd, it is of no gre , 
you retain the Story, without forn 
of your own. But it is our mi 

much more in morality than u 

is already, 

never was, 

ling any principle 
sfortune to do 80, 

pon such subjects 
as these. 
§ 2. Talk to me concerning good and eyil.5 
Hear. 

. The wind from Шш 
Hath driven me— 

Of things, some are good, some evil 
indifferent. Now the good are the v 
whatever partakes of them 
what partakes of vice; the indifferent lie between 

these, as riches, health, life, death, pleasure, pain. 
Whence do you know this? 

Hellanicus Says it, in his 
For what doth it signify, whether one names the 
history of Hellanicus, or the ethics of Diogenes, 
or Chrysippus, or Cleanthes? Hare you, then, 
examined any of these things, and formed a 
principle of your own? But show me how you 
are used to exercise yourself on shipboard. 
Remember this division," when the mast rattles, 
and some idle fellow stands by you while you are 
screaming, and says, ‘For heaven's sake, talk as 
you did a little while ago. Is it vice to suffer 
shipwreck? Ог doth it partake of vice ? 

ould not you take up a log, and throw it at his 
head? «What have we to do with you, . sir? 

n to the Cicon's shore 

› and some 

irtues, and 
and the evil vices, and 

Egyptian history.$ 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

y reading it? 

at consequence if 

| 
| 
| 

| 

| 
| 

| 
1 

EPICTETUS 161 

I . . 
К ‚ аге perishing, and you come and jest.” Coward- 
gain, if Cæsar should summon you to answer an ice in 

accusation, remember the division. If, when you 
are going in, pale and trembling, any one should meet 
you and say, «Why do you tremble, sir? What 
is this affair you are engaged in? Doth Cæsar 
within give virtue and vice to those who approach 
him ?? —* What, do you too insult me, and add to 
my evils?’ ‘Nay, but tell me, philosopher, why 
you tremble? Is there any other danger but 
death, or a prison, or bodily pain, or exile, or 
defamation ?'—* Why, what should there be else?’ 
* Are any of these vice? or do they partake of 
vice? What, then, did you yourself use to say of 
these things?'—* What have you to do with me, 
sr? Му own evils are enough for me. ‘You 
say right. Your own evils аге indeed enough for 
you; your baseness, your cowardice, and that 
arrogance by which you were elated as you sat in 
the schools. Why did you plume yourself with 
what is not your own? Why did you call your- 
self a Stoic ?' 

8 3. Observe yourselves thus in your actions, 
and you will find of what sect you arc. You 
will find that most of you are Epicureans, a few 
Peripatetics, cand those but loose ones. For, by 
what action will you prove that you think virtue 
equal, and even superior, to all other things? 
Show me a Stoic if you have one. Where? 
Or how should you? You can show, indeed, a 
thousand who repeat the Stoic reasonings. But 
do they repeat the Epicurean worse ! Exe they 
not just as perfect in the Peripatetic ? W ho, then, 
is a Stoic? As we call that a Phidian statue, 
which is formed according to the art of Phidias. 

L 
VOL. 1. 

:6С-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangfi Collection, Haridwar 

borrowed 

lumes 

i 

: mc Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

162 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Stoic 50 show me some one person, formed according to 
pretence the principles which he professes. Show me one 

who Is sick, and happy; in danger, and happy; 
dying, and lappy ; exiled, and happy ; ЕЕ 
and happy. _ Show him me, for, by heaven, I lon 
to see a Stoic. But (you will say) you Rave nak 
one perfectly formed. Show me, then, one who 
is forming, one who is approaching towards this 
character. Do me this favour. Do not refuse an 
old man a sight which he hath never yet seen. 
Do you suppose that you are to show thc Jupiter 
or Minerva of Phidias, a work of ivory or gold ? 
Let any of you show me a human soul, willing to 

| to accuse either God ог man, not to be disappointed 
| of its desire, or incur its aversion, not to be angry, ` 
| not to be envious, not to be jealous, in a word, 
| 

| 

1 

i 

| 

if willing from a man to become а God, and, in this 

| poor mortal body, aiming to have fellowship with 
Jupiter. Show him to me. But you cannot. Why, 
then, do you impose upon yourselves, and play tricks 

your own; and walk about in it, mere thieves and 
pilferers of names and things which do not belong 
to you? Here, I am your preceptor, and you come 
to be instructed by me. And indeed my intention 
is to secure you from being restrained, compelled, 
hindered ; to make you free, prosperous, happy ; 
looking to God upon every occasion, great or small. 
And you come to learn and study these things. 
Why then do not you finish your work, if you 
have the proper intention, and I, besides the 
intention, the proper qualifications? What is 
wanting? When I see an artificer, and the 
materials lying ready, I expect the work. Now 

LAM ÉÁÉÁÉ——Ll 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

with others? Why do you put on a dress not: 

have the same sentiments with those of God, not | 

re 
———— —————————— 
M EE tc A ы 

ns А 

Эл» rei re»: /] 

5 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and-eGangotri. 

EPICTETUS 163 

t | . о А 3 

x | here is the artificer; here are the materials; what Throw 
e | is it we want? Is not the thing capable of being off the 
T : : я 

5 } taught? Itis. Is it not in our own power, then? past and 
] j Th IMS 5 Б begin 

› } "he only thing of all others that is so. Neither anew 
g | riches, nor health, nor fame, nor, in short, anything 

ťt o; else, is in our power, except the right use of the 

o | appearances of things. This alone is, by nature, 
not subject to restraint, not subject to hindrance. 
n j Why, then, do not you finish it? Tell me the 
| cause. It must be by my fault, or yours, or from 
the nature of the thing. The thing itself is 
? practicable, and the only one in our power. The 
0 fault then must be either in me, or in you, or, 
more truly, in both. Well, then, shall we now, at 
last, bring this intention along with us? Let us 
lay aside all that is past. Let us begin. Only 
believe me, and you will see the consequence. | 

i 

‹ 

$ 

i 

1 

[| 

ў 

i 

| 

CHAPTER XX 
Concerning the Epicureans and Academics 

§ 1. TRUE and evident propositions must, of 
necessity, be used even by those who contradict 
them. And, perhaps, onc of the strongest proofs 
that there is such a thing as evidence, is the 
necessity which those who contradict it are 
under to make use of it. If a person, for instance, 
should deny that anything is universally true, he 
will be obliged to assert the contrary, that nothing 
is universally true. What, wretch, not even this i 
itself? For what is this but to say, that every- | 

i ‘versal is false? Again, if any one should 
pee «Know that there is nothing to be 

come and say; 

a — £-0-1e-Public-Dornair; GütüküF Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

етар 

Di itized by-Arya Samaj Foundation Сһеппаѓапа eGang 
2l ПАРАМИ АРИУ ТНВ, - ae à 

( 

THE DISCOURSES OF 
- The known, but al] things are Uncertain ? . 
agnostic « Believe те, and it wil] be the better 
! fallacy man ought to be believed in anything? 
hs * Learn from me, th 1 

at nothing is to be 
tell you this, and wil] te 

164 

5 Ora third, 
learned; Į 

uthi: ach the proof of it, if you | 
please. Now What difference i8 there between | 
such ag these, and those who С 

all themselves | 
аў олив, Ве сопу be 
need. Believe us, 

"e Academics? Who s 
i no one ever is сопу 
n believes anybody,’ 

. fi 2. Thus also, when E 
the natural relation o 

makes use of the very thing he is destroying, 
For what doth he bay? «pe not deceived, be 
not seduced and mistaken, There is no Natural 
relation between reasonable beings. Believe me, 
Those who Say otherwise mislead and impose 
upon you.” Why are you concerned for us, then ? 
Let us be deceived. ^ You will fare never the 
worse if all the rest of us are persuaded that 
there is a natural relation between mankind, and | 
that it is by all means to be preserved. Nay, it j 
( 

А 

| 
picurus would destroy | 
f mankind to each 

УШ be much safer and better, Why do you give 
yourself any trouble about us, sir? Wh 
break your rest for us? Why do you light your 
lamp? Why do you rise carly? Why do you 
compose so many volumes? Js it that none of us 
should be deceived concerning the gods; as if 
they took any care of men? Or that we may 
Dot suppose the essence of good consists in anything 
but pleasure ? For, if these things be 50, lie down 
and sleep, and lead the life of which you judge 
yourself worthy—that of a mere reptile. Eat and 
rink, and satisfy your passion for women, and 
ease yourself, and snore. What 18 it to you 

y do you 

emm. 

i i i r 
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwa 

4 "Digitizedby Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

à 
. 

EPICTETUS 165 

whether others think right or wrong about these Naturam 
things? For what have you to do with us? You expellas 
take care of sheep, because they afford us their furca 

milk, their wool, and at last their flesh. And 
would it not be a desirable thing, that men might 
be so lulled and enchanted by the Stoics, as to give 
themselves up to be milked and fleeced by you, 
and such as you? Should not these doctrines be 
taught to your brother Epicureans only, and con- 
cealed from the rest of the world; who should 
by all means above all things be persuaded that 
we have a natural relation to cach other, and that 
temperance 18 a good thing, in order that all may 
be.kept safe for you? Ог is this relation to be 
reserved towards some, and not towards others? 
hm. whom, then, is it to be preserved? 
Towards such as mutually preserve, or such as 
violate it? Апа who violate it more than you, 
who teach such doctrines ? 

§ 3. What was it, then, that waked Epicurus 
from his sleep, and compelled him to write what 
he did? What else but that which is of all 
others the most powerful in mankind, nature; 
which draws every one, however unwilling and 
reluctant, to its own purposes? For since, says 
she, you think that there is no relation between 
mankind, write this doctrine, and leave it for the 
use of others, and break your sleep upon that 
account; and, by your own practice, confute your: 
own principles. Do we say that Orestes was 
roused from sleep by the agitation of the Furies; 
and was not Epicurus waked by Furics more cruel 
and avenging, which would not suffer him to rest, 
but compelled him to divulge his own evils, as 

1 Q 
wine and madness do the priests of Cybele? So 

——77—€€-0-tmPubtic'Domáin: Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

RET ee eT RRO eana " — : М 
aoa Cetin ON ie a ran e ut ANB PD LE en Mose eiat 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

zum 

166 THE DISCOURSES OF 

A human strong and unconquerable a thing is human nature ! І 

( ч can a vine have the Properties not of a ) 
entirely Vine, but of an olive tree? Or an olive tree not t 
166 those of an olive tree, but of а vine? It iş | 
human impossible. It jg inconceivable, Neither, the | 
affections fore. is it »ossible fi 1 PE 
E possible for a human creature entirely to 

I 

lose human affections. But even those who have 
| 

n 

7 undergone a mutilation cannot have their inclina- 
tions also mutilated: and во Epicurus, when he had | 
mutilated all the offices of 4 man, ofa master ofa | — ! 
family, of a Citizen, and of a friend, did по: | 

mutilate the inclinations of humanity, for he could 

ia not, any more than the idle Academics can throw 

i away, or blind their own senses, though this be, of 

' all others, the point they labour most. What a 

|! misfortune is it when any one, after having 

f received from nature standards and rules for 

{| the knowledge of truth, doth not strive to add 

| to these, and make up their deficiencies ; but, 

| on the contrary, endeavours to take away and 

i destroy whatever truth may be known even by 

il them! ` 

| $4. What say you, philosopher? What do 

you think of piety and sanctity ?—If you please, 

[ will prove that they аге good.— Pray, do prove 

it, that our citizens may be converted ! and honour 

the deity, and may no longer neglect what is of 

the highest importance.— Have you the proofs, 

-then ?— I have, and I thank you. Since you are | 

во well pleased with this, then, learn the contrary : | 

SSS 

SS eee Дл 

шышы 

that there are no gods, or, if there are, that they 
take no care of mankind, neither have any concern 
with them ; that this piety and sanctity, which is j 
во much talked of by many, is only an imposition 
of boasting and sophistical men; or, perhaps, o 

MM 
TUUM MM ———M———M— x 
——————--— E Ll 

Mum 
———— M M— € К 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

m 

o аа 

— 

этти 

„а тш „шр. aer 
———— ——— 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS. 167 

legislators, for a terror and restraint to injustice. — Corrupt 
Well done, philosopher. Our citizens are much principles 

the better for you. You have already brought 
back all the youth to a contempt of the deity.— 
What! doth not this please you, then? Learn 
next, that justice is nothing; that shame is folly ; 
that the paternal relation is nothing, the filial 
nothing.— Well said, philosopher; persist, con- 
vince the youth, that we may have many more 
to think and talk like you. By such doctrines as 
these have our well-governed states flourished ! 
Upon these was Sparta founded! Lycurgus, by 
his laws and method of education, introduced such 
persuasions as these: that it is just as honourable, 
as it is dishonourable, to be slaves; and just as 
dishonourable, as honourable, to be free! They 
who died at Thermopylæ, died from such principles 
as these! And from what other doctrines did the 
Athenians leave their city ? ? 

8 5. And yet, they who talk thus marry, and 
produce children; and engage in public affairs, 
and get themselves made priests and prophets (of 
whom? Of gods that have no existence) ; and 
consult the Pythian priestess, only to hear false- 
hoods, and interpret the oracles to others. What 
monstrous impudence and imposture ! 

§ 6.8 What are you doing, man? You con- 
tradict yourself every day, and yet you will not 
give ир these paltry cavils. When you eat, where 
do you carry your hand? To your mouth, or © 
your eye? When you bathe, where do you до: 
Do you ever call a kettle a dish; or a peus 8 
spit ? If I were a servant to one of these gent e- 
men, were it at the hazard of. being flayed every 
day, I would plague him. ‘Throw some oil into 

-CC-0-In-Pablic-Domain- Gürukul Kangri Collection, ‘Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samay Poundation-Cherinaiva nd eGdngolri-. ; n 

168 THE DISCOURSES OF 

TE Tene 

, Common the bath, boy.’ “Ti would take pick 
sense upon his head. « What is ieee ae epum 

appearance struck me во 

sophistry ` perfectly alike, as not 

o be distinguished from oil. 
| RUP I would Carry him a dish ful 
i id not I ask for the soup?’ Yes 
Йй the soup. «Is not this vinegar ?? 
more than soup? «Таре it and smell t 
it and taste it.’ “Ноу do you know, then, but 
our senses deceive us?? Jf I had three or four 
fellow-servants to join with me, I would make 
him either choke with passion and burst, or change 
his opinions. — But now they insult us by making 
use of the gifts of nature, while in words they 
destroy them. Grateful and modest men, truly ! 
who, if there were nothing else in the case, while 
they are eating their daily bread dare to say, 
‘We do not know whether there be any Ceres, or 
Proserpine, or Pluto.'* Not to Mention that 
while they enjoy the night and day, the seasons 
of the year, the stars, the earth and sea, they are 
not the least affected by any of these things, but 
only study to throw out some idle problem; and, 
when they have cleared their stomachs, go and 
bathe: but take not the least care what they say ; 
nor on what subjects; nor to whom; nor what 
may be the consequence of their talk; whether 
any well-disposed young man by hearing such 
doctrines may not be affected by them, and so 
affected as entirely to lose the seeds of his good 
disposition; whether they may not furnish an 
adulterer with occasions of growing shameless in 
his guilt; whether a public plunderer may not 
find excuses from these doctrines; whether he 
Who neglects his parents may not gain an addi- 

lir mi a ct tr mE nee TA LI : "y d E А 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

^ ———m 

EPICTETUS 169 

tional confidence from them.® What, then, in 
your opinion, is good and evil, fair and Баве; ? 
such things, or such things?’ Why should one 
вау any more against such creatures as these, or 
give them any account, or receive any from them, 
or endeavour to convince them? By Jupiter, one 
might sooner hope to convince the most unnatural 
debauchees, than those who are thus deaf and 
blind to their own evils.” 

CHAPTER XXI 
Of inconsistency 

§ 1. Тнекв are some things which men confess 
with ease; others, with difficulty. No one, for 
instance, will confess himself a fool, or a block- 
head; but, on the contrary, you will hear every 
one say, ‘I wish my fortune was equal to my 
mind. But they easily confess themselves fear- 
ful, and say, ‘І am somewhat timorous, I confess ; 
but in other respects you will not find me a fool.’ 
No one will easily confess himself intemperate 
in his desires; upon no account dishonest, nor 
absolutely very envious, or meddling ; but many 
confess themselves to have the weakness of being 
compassionate. What is the reason of all this? 
The principal is, an inconsistency and confusion 
in what relates to good and evil. But different 
eople have different inducements. In general, 
whatever they imagine to be base they do not 
absolutely confess. Fear and compassion (еу 
imagine to belong to a well-meaning disposition ; 
but stupidity to а slave. Offences agains’ society 

—aeERU ee 

^ шору Агуа Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Human 
incon- 
sistencies 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

LLL EEUU EDT 

25: igiized:by.Arye'Siama] Foundation Chennai and eGangot ; 

What they do not Own; but 

faults a brou htt 1 i 
б а : 
да g a confession chie 

owa to 

ameter ЧАЦЕ „ ” Do 

а аан, 

170 THE DISCOURSES OF 

› In most faults, they are 

fly from ma t t 

1 agining ha 

there 18 something Involuntary In them аз in fear 
, 

and compassi 
i коше Fer М, Шош а pen! d 
desires, he accuses his imseif intemperate in his 
: ..* Passion, and expects for- 
glveness as for an involuntary fault, But dis- 
honesty 18 not imagined to be, by any means 
involuntary. In jealousy, too, there is something, 
they suppose, of involuntary; and this likewise, in 
some degree, they confess. 
§ 2. Conversing among such men, therefore, 
thus confused, thus ignorant what they say, what 
are or are not their evils, whence they have them, 
and how they may be delivered of them, it is 
worth while, I think, to ask one's self continually, 
* Am I, too, one of these? What do I imagine 
myself to be? How do I conduct myself? As 
a prudent, as a temperate тап? Do I, too, ever 
talk at this rate, that I am sufficiently instructed for 
what may happen? Have I that persuasion, that 
I know nothing, which becomes one who knows 
nothing? Do I go to a master, as to an oracle, 
prepared to obey; or do I, as well as others, like 
a stupid driveller,? enter the school only to learn 
the history [of philosophy], and understand books 
which I did not understand before; or, perhaps, 
to explain them to others?? 3 You have been 
fighting at home with your servant, sir; you have 
turned the house upside-down, and alarmed the 
neighbourhood ; and do you come to me or a 
pompous show of wisdom, and sit and pass judg- 
ment how I explain a sentence? How I prate 
whatever comes into my head ? Do you come, 
envious and dejected that nothing is brought you 

МЕНИНИ 
iet eae Tete 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

| 

——————— 

if 9 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai-and-eGengotri-———— 

EPICTETUS 171 

from home? And, in the midst of the disputa- What 
tions, sit thinking on nothing but how your father came ye 
or your brother may behave to you? * What are out for tt 
they saying about me at home? Now they think [сай 
I am improving; and say, He will come back with 
universal knowledge. 1 wish I could learn every- 
thing before my return; but this requires much 
labour; and nobody sends me anything. The 
baths are very bad at Nicopolis; and things go 
very ill both at home and here." 

$3. After all this it is said nobody is the 
better for the philosophic school. Why, who 
comes to the school? I mean, who comes to be 
reformed? Who to submit his principles to 
correction? Who with a sense of his wants ? 
Why do you wonder, then, that you bring back 
from the school the very thing you carried there ? 
For you do not come to lay aside, or correct, or 
change your principles. How should you? Far 
from it. Rather consider this, therefore, whether 

ou have not what you come for. You come to 
talk about theorems. Well; and are not you 
more impertinently talkative than. you were ? Do 
not these paltry theorems furnish you with matter 
for ostentation? Do not you solve convertible 
and hypothetical syllogisms ? Why, then, are you 
still displeased if you have the very thing for 
which you came ?—* Very true ; but if my child 
or my brother should die, or if I must die or be 
tortured myself, what good will these things do 
те?’ Why, did you come for this? Did you 
attend upon me for this? Was it upon any such 
account that you ever lighted your lamp, or sat up 
at night? Or did you, when you went into fie 
walk, propose any appearance to your own mint 

Б 

= 
Mmm 

` CC-0.'In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ойи. 
+ EOE и 7 

The to be discussed instead of llogism ? ic 
кое a syllogism? Dig an 

prepara- 

Etre tm nengen erea 

172 THE DISCOURSES OF 

of you ever go through such a subject Jointly 

And, after al], you say theorems “are useless, | 

© whom? То Such аз apply them Ш. For 

medicines for the Cyes are not useless to those | 
who apply them when and as they ought. | 

Fomentationg are not useless; poisers are not 
useless; but they are useless to some, and, on the 
contrary, useful to others. If you Should ask 
me now, Are syllogisms useful ? l answer, that 
they are useful ; and, if you please, I will show 
you how. «Will they be of Service to me, 
then 2? — Why, did you 38k, man, whether they 
would be useful to you, or in general? Jf any 
one in a dysentery should ask me whether acids 
be useful, I answer, ‘They are, * Are they useful 
for me, then? —[ say, No. First try to get the 
flux stopped, and the exulceration healed. Do 
you, too, first get your ulcers healed; your fluxes 
stopped. Quiet your mind, and bring it free from 
distraction to the school, and then you will know 
what is the force of reasoning. 

CHAPTER XXII 
Of friendship 

§ 1. To whatever objects a person devotes his 
attention, these objects he probably loves. Do 
men ever deyote their attention, then, to evils ?— 
By no means. Or even to what doth not concern 
them?—No, nor this. It remains, then, that 
good must be the sole object of their attention; 
and, if of their attention, of their love too. Who- 

omain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

СС-0. In Public D 

EPICTETUS 175 

; ever, therefore, understands good is capable lik 
wise of love; and he who cannot distinguish go 
from evil, and things indifferent from both, how 15 
it possible that he can love? The prudent person 
3lone, then, is capable of loving. 

How so? Iam not this prudent person, yet I 
love my child. 

I protest it surprises me that you should, in the 
first place, confess yourself imprudent. For in 
what are you deficient? Have you not the use of 
your senses? Do not you distinguish the appear- 
ances of things? Do not you provide such food 
and clothing and habitation as are suitable to you? 
Why, then, do you confess that you want prudence? 
In truth, because you are often struck and dis- 
concerted by appearances, and their speciousness 
gets the better of you; and hence you sometimes 
suppose the very same things to be good, then 
evil, апа lastly, neither; and, in à word, you 
grieve, you fear, you envy, you are disconcerted, 
you change. Is it from hence that you confess 
yourself imprudent ? And are you not changeable 
too in love? Riches, pleasure, in short, the very 
same things, you at some times esteem good, and 
at others evil; and do not you esteem the same 
too, alternately good and bad? And at 
kindness, at another 
end, and at another 

persons, 
one time treat them with 
with enmity? one time comm 

censure them? 

Yes. This too is the case with me. 

Well, then, can he who is deceived in another 
be his friend, think you? 

No, surely. NM 
Or doth he who loves him with a changeable 

affection bear him genuine goodwill ? 

e- Who are 
od they can 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

жыша, 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatiö 

174 THE DISCOURSES OF 
The test Мог he, neither. 

DTI or 

of love Or he, who now vilifies, then admires him? | P 

Nor he, I abl 

Do you not often see little d 'ssi lik 

playing with each other, that y MR EM DE ns К, 

| SE 5 a lat you would say nothing ant 

n › > more friendly; but, to learn what this th 

li friendship 18, throw a bit of meat between them, ev 

“н | and you will $ce. Do you too throw a bit of an th 

|| estate betwixt you and your son, and you will sce Et 

i that he will quickly wish you underground, and m 
you him: and then you, no doubt, on the other hand, 

1 will exclaim, What a son have I brought up! He | in 

would bury mealive! Throw in a pretty girl, and vi 

the old fellow and the young one will both fall in ar 

love with her; or let fame or danger intervene, the in 

words of the father of Admetus will be yours : ! pe 

You hold life dear ; doth not your father too? S 

Do you suppose that he did not love hisow, | I 

child when he was a little one? That he was not j- if 

in agonies when he had a fever, and often wished a 

to underpo that fever in his stead ? But, after all, 8 

when the trial comes home, you see what expressions c 

he uses. Were not Eteocles and Polynices born f 

of the same mother and of the same father? Were t 

they not brought up, and did they not live and 1 

cat and sleep, together? Did not they kiss and : 

fondle each other? So that any one who saw them \ 
would have laughed at all the paradoxes which | 
philosophers utter about love. And yet; when i 

kingdom, like a bit of meat, was thrown betwixt 

them, sce what they say, and how eagerly they | 
wish to Kill each other.? For universally, be not 
deceived, no animal is attached to anything so 
~~ strongly as to its own interest. Whatever there- 

i СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

1 

SA —M 

EPICTETUS 175 

fore appears a hindrance to that—be it brother, or Each 

father, or child, or mistress, or friend—is hated, 

being mo- 
mentous 

abhorred, execrated у for by nature it lover nothing: ЖИА; 
|»; zc 

like its own interest. ‘Chis is father, and brother, 
and family, and country, and God.3 Whenever, 
therefore, the gods seem to hinder this, we vilify 
even them, and throw down their statues and burn 
their temples, as Alexander ordered the temple of 
JEsculapius to be burnt, because he had lost the 
man he loved. 

82. Whenever, therefore, any one makes his 
interest to consist in the same thing with sanctity, 
virtue, his country, parents, and friends, all these 
are secured; but wherever they are made to 
interfere, friends, and country, and family, and 
justice itself, all give way, borne down by the 
weight of self-interest. For wherever / and mine 
are placed, thither must every animal gravitate. 
If in body, that will sway us; if in choice, that ; 
if in externals, these. If, therefore, I be placed in 
a right choice, then only I shall be a friend, a 
son, or a father, such as 1 ought. Vor in that 
case it will be for my interest to preserve the 
faithful, the modest, the patient, the abstinent, the 
beneficent character; to keep the relations of life 
inviolate. But, if I place myself in one thing, 
and virtue in another, the doctrine of lpicurus 
will stand its ground, That virtue is nothing, or 
mere opinion.* 

§ 3. From this ignorance it was that the 
Athenians and Lacedemonians quarrelled with 
each other; and the Thebans with both: the 
Persian king with Greece; and the Macedonians 
with both: and now the Romans with the Getes. 
And in still remoter times, the Trojan war arose 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

DOREM LESE EMAIL —— 

176 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Who from the same cause. 

Paris 

: was the guest of | bo 
Ny Menelaus; and Whoever had seen uice d th 
proofs "i ol that passed between them would fr 

never have re 2 і 
mer e TELS that they were not friends. ar 
empting bit, a pretty woman, was thrown th 

, in between them; and for this they went to war. | 
At present, therefore, when you see dear brothers | fc 
have, in appearance, but one soul, do not immedi- 
ately pronounce upon their friendship ; 

| frien not though о 
they should swear It, and affirm it was impossible to. ! h 
live asunder. (For the governing faculty of a bad у 
man is faithless, unsettled, injudicious; successively t 
vanquished by different appearances.) But inquire 
not as others do, whether they were born of the t 

same parents, and brought up together, and under 

the same preceptor; but this thing only, in what 

they place their interest. in externals, or in choice. 

If in externals, no more call them friends, than 
„ faithful, or constant, or brave, or free; пау, nor | 

even men, if you are wise. For it is no principle 
of humanity that makes them bite and vilify each 
other, and take possession of public assemblies as 
wild beasts do of solitudes and mountains; and 
convert courts of justice into dens of robbers ; nor 
that prompts them to be intemperate, adulterers, 
seducers, or leads them into other offences that 
men commit apainst each other, from the onc 
single principle by which they place themselves 
and their own concerns in things independent on 
choice. 

84. But if you hear that these men in reality 
suppose good to be placed only in choice, and in a 
right use of the appearances of things, no longer 
take the trouble of inquiring if they are father and 
son, or old companions and acquaintance; but as 

дес EN 

l í CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ЕБЕР 

А98 d by Arya. Samaj Foundation Chennai and.eGangotih ааа, 

Qe 

EPICTETUS 177 
29 | PORT PNE that they are friends, as that U proot 
uld 4 foe A ү ul and just. For where else can Re 
ik riendship be met. but with fidelity and modesty, 
xj and a communication 5 of virtue ; and of no other 
wnt thing? 
ar. р Well; but such a one paid me the utmost regard 
ere] for so long a time, and did not he love me? 
di- | How can you tell, wretch, if that regard be any 
gh | other than he pays to his shocs, or his horse, when 
to | he cleans them? And how do you know but 
ad when you cease to be a necessary utensil, he may 
ely throw you away, like a broken stool ? 
re, Well; but it is my wife, and we have lived 
he together many years. 
ler And how many did Eriphyle live with Amphi- 
lat araus, and was the mother of children, and not 
е. a few? But a bracelet fell in between them. 
an What was this bracelet? The principle [she had 
og formed] concerning such things. This turned her 
le | into a savage animal; this cut asunder all love, 
ch and suffered neither the wife nor the mother to 
3D) continue such. 
id § 5. Whoever, therefore, among you studies to be 
or or to gaina friend, let him cut up all these principles 
5, by the root ; hate them ; drive them utter]y out of 
at his soul. Thus, in the first place, he will be secure 

from inward reproaches and contests; fron. change 
of mind and sclf-torment. Then, with respect 
to others: to every one like himself he will be 
unreserved. To such as are unlike he will be 
patient, mild, gentle, and ready to forgive them, as 
failing in points of the greatest importance : but 
severe to none; being fully convinced of Plato's 
doctrine, That the soul is never willingly deprived 
of truth. Without all this you may, in many 

VOL. 1. М 

| 
| 
| 

о ~~ a hs 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitizedby Arya Samaj Foundatior 

178 

THE DISCOURSES op 
Man, be res 

pects, live as friends ; i 
not un- and travel together. a EE 
grateful ^n oaa and Бе бога of 

parents; and so may’ serpents too- 
, 

they nor you can ever be friends, whi 

these brutal and execrable Principles, 

CHAPTER XXIII 

Of the faculty of speaking 

8 1. A noox will always be read wit 
pleasure, and сазе too, if it 
character ; therefore every one 
attend to discourses, likewise ornamented with 
proper and beautiful expressions. [r1 ought not, 

then, to be said that there is по such thing as the 
faculty of clocution : for this would be at once the 

part of an impious and fearful person.? Impious, 
because he dishonours the gifts of God; just as if he 
should deny any use in the faculty of sight, hearing, 

Я and speech itself. Hath God, then, given you eyes 
in vain? Is it in vain that he hath infused into 
them such a Strong and active Spirit as to be able 

to represent the forms of distant objects?3 What 
messenger is so quick and diligent? Is it in vain 
that he hath made the intermediate air so yielding 
and elastic that the sight penetrates through it? 
And is it in vain that he hath made the light, 
without which all the rest would be useless? Man, 
be not ungrateful; nor, on the other hand, un- 
mindful of your superior advantages; * but for 
sight and hearing, and indeed for life itself, and 
the supports of it, as fruits, and wine, and oil, be 
thankful to God: but remember, that he hath 

h the greater 
be written in a fair 
will the more easil 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

БАЖ РТ EN LUE Ladin ER еи и 

i ^y. Digitized by'Arya Samaj: Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTÉTUS 179 
ige | given you another thing, superior to them all; The 
me E which makes use of them, proves them, estimates A à "t 
vr | the value of cach.^ For what is it that pronounces ася 
ve [| upon the value of cach of these faculties? Is it the 

| — faculty itself? Did you ever perceive the faculty 
of sight or hearing to say anything concerning 
itself? Or wheat, or barley, or horses, or dogs? 
No. These things are appointed as instruments 
and servants, to obey that which is capable of 
using the appearances of things. If you inquire 
the value of anything, of what do you inquire? 

by what is said? Is it the faculty of hearing? 

No; but that of choice. Will this, then, perceiving 

itself to exist in [man amidst] the other faculties, 

which are all blind and deaf, and unable to | 
discern anything but those offices in which they | 
are appointed to minister and be subservient to 1; 
and that itself alone sees clearly, and distinguishes 
the-value of each of the rest; will this, I say, 
inform us that anything is supreme but itself? 
What doth the eye, when it is opened, do more, 
than see? But whether we ought to look upon 
the wife of any one, and in what manner, what 

er What is it that answers you?® How, then, can 
dr any faculty be superior to this, which both uses 
y | all the rest as instruments and tries and pronounces 
h concerning cach of them? For which of them 
t knows what itself is, and what is its own value ? 
е Which of them knows when it je to be used, and 
€ when not? Which is it that opens and shuts the | 
Я eyes, and turns them away from improper objects ? 
: Is it the faculty of sight? No; but that of choice. 
, Which is it that opens and shuts the сагв? What 
5 is it by which they аге made curious and in- 
) quisitive ; or, on the contrary, deaf, and unaffected 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

" : : -— 

Choice 
alone is 
vice and 
virtue 

by. Ar Samaj Foundation ‘Chennai and eGangotri 
HAVADAN Saan 4 à 

——— Ern Тау 
180 ТНЕ DISCOURSES OF 

oes that tells ug? The | faculty of choice, 
ler we ought to believe, or to disbelieve, 
what is said; or whether, if we do believe, we 
EU Hise E Шш ы К 
: aculty of choice? Again, 
the very faculty of clocution, and that which 
Ornaments discourse, if there be any such peculiar 
faculty, what doth it more than mere 
and arrange expressions, as curlers do the hair? 
But whether it be better to Speak or to be silent ; 
Or better to speak in this or in that manner; 
whether this be decent or indecent; and the 
season and use of each; what is it that tells us, 
but the faculty of choice ? What then, would you 
have it appear and bear testimony against itself ? 
What means this? If the case be thus, that 
which serves may be superior to that to which it 
18 subservient; the horse to the rider; the dog 
to the hunter; the instrument to the musician; or 
Servants to the king. What is it that makes use 
of all the rest? Choice. What takes care of 
all? Choice. What destroys the whole man, 
at one time by hunger; at another by a rope or 
a precipice? Choice. Hath man, then, any- 
thing stronger than this? And how is it possible, 
that what is liable to restraint should be stronger 
than what is not? What hath а natural power of 
hindering the faculty of sight? Both choice, and 
what depends on choice. And it is the same of 
the faculties of hearing and speech. And what 
hath a natural power of hindering choice ? Nothing 
independent on itself, only its own perversion. 
"Therefore choice alone is vice; choice alone is 
virtue. 
8 2. Since, then, choice is such a faculty, and 

d x Ae m 
— 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

„о >, то Te} fo) 

| 
| 
d 

= UM o m DR 

3 
| 
f 
L 
| 
i 
| 
H 
| 
| 
i 
f 

/ lane. by Arya ‘Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

HERREN н eae SS 
EPICTETUS 181 

placed in authority over all the rest, let it come Other 
forth and say to us that the body is, of all things, things arc 
the most excellent. If even the body itself pro- uc 
nounced itself to be the most excellent, it could andusa 
not be borne. But now, what is it, Epicurus, that 
pronounces all this? What was it that composed 
volumes concerning The End of Being, The 
Nature of Things, The Rule [of Reasoning] ;7 that 
assumed a philosophic beard; that, as it was dying, 
wrote that it was then spending its last and 
happiest day?8 Was this body, or was it the 
faculty of choice? And can you, then, without 
madness, confess anything superior to this? Are 

you in reality so deaf and blind ?* What then, doth 

any one dishonour the other faculties? Heaven 
forbid! Doth any one deny that the faculty of 
sight? is useful and preferable to the want of it? 
Heaven forbid! It would be stupid, impious, and 
ungrateful to God. But we render to each its 

due. There is some use of an ass, though not so 
much as of an ox ; and of a dog, though not so 
much as of a servant; and of a servant, though 

not so much as of the citizens; and of the citizens, 
though not so much as of the magistrates. And, 
though some are more excellent than others, those 

uses which the last afford are not to be despised. 

The faculty of elocution hath its value, though not 
equal to that of choice. When, therefore, I talk 

thus, let not any one suppose that I would have 

you neglect elocution, any more than your eyes ог 

ears or hands or feet or clothes or shoes. But if 

rou ask me what is the most excellent of things 
what shall I say? I cannot вау elocution, but a 
right choice; for it is that. which makes use of 

this and all the other faculties, whether grea or 

erp сезерин 

CC: SAN : 
C-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

i tri 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotr 
igi 

182 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Keep small. If this be set r 

Keep ГА ав d man becomes 
faculties Wicked. B this We arene 
“in order y 

аге unfortuna 
approve each other, 

forms unhappi 

we disapprove or 
it is this which 
well cultivated, 

ness, and, 
3: But to take aw 

For such a 

that, if there be any such facult 
on occasion be able to treat it 

Such are they too, who deny 

t cowardly too, 
to be afraid 
У We may not 
with contempt. 
any difference 

illes, or Helen as any ?0 other 
Е Е z 

woman? These also are the foolish and clownish 
notions of those who are ignorant of the nature 

of things, and afraid that whoever perceives a 
difference must presently be carried away and 
is to leave to 

Overcome. But the great point 
per faculty, and then to see 

each thing its own pro 
What the value of that faculty is, and to learn 
principal thing; and upon every 

what is the 
and to make it the chief 

occasion, to follow that 
object of our attention; to consider other things 
and yet, as far 

as trifling in comparison of this; 
a8 we are able, not to neglect even these. We 
ought, for instance, to take care of our eyes; but 
Not as of the principal thing, but only on account 
at will no otherwise 

of the principal; because th Е 
Preserve its own nature, than by making a due 
estimation of the rest, and preferring some to 
‘others, What is the usual practice, then? That 

returning into his own country, 

of a traveller, who, E 
and meeting on the road with а good inn, being 

z ES 

cx: 

: 3 = a a N idwar 
ОТО” CC-0.In Public Domain: Gurükul Kangri Collection, Haridw 

ач 

.. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

! 

| 
| 
I 
f 
| 

EPICTETUS 183 
Ties pleased with the inn, should remain at the inn. for the 
nes Have you forgot your intention, man? You were sake of 
te; not travelling to this place, but only through it. the chief 

| 
} 
ў 
| 
| 
b 
| 
id | 

‘But this is a fine place.” And how many other 
fine inns are there, Апа how many pleasant fields ? 
But only to be passed through in your way. The 
business is, to return to your country, to relicve 
the anxieties of your family, to perform the duties 
of a citizen, to marry, have children, and go 
through the public offices. For you did not set 
out to choose the finest places, but to return to: 
live in that where you were born, and of which 
you are appointed a citizen. ' 
§ 4. Such is the present case. Because by 
speech and verbal precepts we are to arrive at 
erfection, and purify our own choice, and rectify 
that faculty of which the office is the use of the 
appearances of things; and because for the delivery 
of theorems a certain manner of expression, and 
some varicty and subtilty of discourse, becomes 
necessary ; many, captivated by thece very things— 
one by expression, another by syllogisms, a third 
by convertible propositions, just as our traveller was 
by the good inn—go no further, but sit down and 
waste their lives shamefully there, as if amongst 
the sirens. Your business, man, was to prepare 
ourself for such an use of the appearances of 
things as nature demands: not to be frustrated of 

your desires, or incur your aversions ; never to be 

disappointed or unfortunate, but free, unrestrained, 
uncompelled ; conformed to the administration of 
Jupiter, obedient to that, finding fault with nothing, 
but able to say from your whole soul the verses 

which begin, 

Conduct me, Jov 

с; and thou, О Destiny. 

CC-0. | г 
diae ———7 OAN Rublio oma ЕСП Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ad 

— 7 OUTRE TOTEM Samai Foundation Che : О ; т 
i igi socis шш ЖОН is 

184 

THE DISCOURSES OF 
Set While you h 

f 
ave such а business before т m 
$ c , { ( 
aot your you be so pleased WILD S f you, wil] р Id 
heart on = КЧ шу (оў ese: I 

TCSSION | He, 
: Or a few the : oe 
trifles 9T 2 orems, as Y and live бе| a 

with them, forpetful Of your home, and say l skilful 

hey are fine things!? ^w Y, who says ee | must 
are not fine things ? But only as a Passage ; P | you г 
ап inn. Бог, could YOu speak like - emosthenes | benefi 
what hinders but th i I" 

disappointe; | they H 

А wretch? Could you resolve syllogisms like Chry i DUE 
Slppus, what hinders but that i 

miserable, Sorrowful, enyj 

unhappy ? Nothing. You see, 

are mere inns of smal] value; and that your point 

in view is quite another thing. When f talk thus 

to some, they Suppose that I am overthrowing all 

care about speaking, and about theorems: but ү 

do not overthrow that ; only the resting in these 

things without end, and placing our hopes there, 

any one, by maintaining this, hurts an audience, 

place те amongst those hurtful people; for I 

d cannot, when I see one thing to be the Principal 

and most excellent, call another so, to gain your 

favour. 
| CHAPTER XXIV 
| Concerning 4 person whom he treated with disregard 

often come to you with a desire of hearing you, 

and you have never given me any answer; but 

now, if possible, I entreat you to say something to 

me’: Do you think, replied Epictetus, that, as in 

other things, so in speaking, there is an art b 
| which he who understands it speaks skilfully, and 
| he who doth not, unskilfully ? 

| 

l . . . ‹ 

' 8 1. Wuzw a certain person said to him, ‘I have 
| 

Г; 

| 

| 

| 

i i ; idwar 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridw; 

0000s ЕЕ 

él 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

EPICTETUS 185 

Jl Тао think so. The 
1, | He, then, who by speaking both benefits him- hearing 
e | self and is able to benefit others, must speak 7f 
» | skilfully; but he who rather hurts, and is hurt, 
y | must be unskilful in this art of speaking. For 
| you may find some speakers hurt, and others 
» benefited. And are all hearers benefited by what 
| they hear? Or will you find some benefited, and 
some hurt? 1 

Both. 

Then. those who hear skilfully are benefited, 
and those who hear unskilfully, hurt. 

Granted. 

Is there an art of hearing, then, as well as of 
speaking ? 

It seems so. 

If you please, consider it thus too. To whom 
do you think the practice of music belongs? 
‚+ To a musician. 
| 'To whom the proper formation of a statue? 

Е eo 

м. 

To a statuary. 

And do not you imagine some art necessary to 
view a statue skilfully ? 

I do. 

If, therefore, to speak properly belongs to one 
who is skilful, do not you sce, that to hear with 
benefit belongs likewise to опе who is skilful? 
For the present, however, if you please, let us 
say no more of doing things perfectly, and with 
benefit, since we are both far enough from any- 
thing of that kind; but this seems to be universally 
confessed, that he who would hear philosophers 
needs some kind of exercise in hearing. Is it not 
во? Tell me, then, on what I shall speak to you? 

| On what subject are you able to hear me? 2 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennaí and eGangotti” 3 

EU ER 

i 

186 THE DISCOURSES ор | 

. ,Pre- Оп good and evil. | 
PER Lhe good and evil of what? Оға horse ? ERE of 

ў о. x of It, 
Of an ox. | reward 
No. | engagi 
What then, of a man? | and c 
Yes. 

д Do we know, then, what man is? What ist 
his nature; what our idea of him is; and how 
far our ears are Open in respect to this matter ?3 
Nay, do you understand what nature is; or aret 
you able, and in what degree, to comprehend me, 
when I come to say, ‘But I must use demon- 
stration to you’? How should you? Do you 
comprehend what demonstration is; or how a 
thing is demonstrated, or by what methods; or} 
what resembles a demonstration, and yet is not a 
demonstration? Do you know what true or false 
is? What is consequent to a thing, and what con- 
tradictory? Or unsuitable, or dissonant? But ] 
must excite you to philosophy. How shall I 
show you that contradiction among the generality 
of mankind, by which they differ concerning good 
and evil, profitable and unprofitable, when you 

/ know not what contradiction means? Show me, 
then, what I shall gain by discoursing with you? 
Excite an inclination in me, as a proper pasture 
excites an inclination to eating in a sheep: for 
if you offer him a stone, or a piece of bread, he 
will not be excited. Thus we too have certain 
natural inclinations to speaking, when the hearer 

s appears to be somebody ; when he gives us en- 
couragement: but if he sits by, like a stone or a 
tuft of grass, how can һе excite any spo UM da 3t 
man? Doth a vine say to an husbandman, “Таке | t 

——-66-0-In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Conect Нена ооо 7. 
MA MERI TU D E 

“©, Digitized by Arya j Foundation C 
t ya Samaj F ion Chennai anc 
j сла Chennai and eGangotri 

NEUESTEN ü 
ныды a acm eia Ue Aot 7 

EPICTETUS 187 

| 
| 
| 
| 

5 Lf : 
саге of me’? No; but invites him to take care Ignor- 
| ance the 

bof it, by showing him that if he doth, it w 

| reward him for his care. Who is there whom oe of 
f engaging sprightly children do not invite to plays ES 
f and creep, and prattle with them? But who 

| was ever taken with an inclination to divert him- 

self, or bray, with an ass? For, be the creature 

| ever so little, it is still a little ass. 
2. Why do you say nothing to me, then ? 

› 
$n ko І have only this to say to you: That whoever 
AO О ignorant what he is, and wherefore he was born; 
a and in what kind of a world, and in what society ; 
“ath . what things are good, and what evil ; what fair, 
EN and what base: who understands neither discourse 
| nor demonstration ; nor what is true nor what 18 
P. false; nor is able to distinguish between them : 
is such a One will neither exert his desires, nor 
aversions, nor pursuits, conformably to nature: 
$5 he will neither intend, nor assent, nor deny, nor 
| 1 suspend his judgment conformably to nature - but 
: will wander up and down entircly deaf and blind, 
БУ supposing himself to. be somebody,* while he is 
ea in reality nobody. Is there anything new. in a 
oe this? 18 not this ignorance the cause of all the 
i errors that have happened from the very original 
Es of mankind ? Why did Agamemnon and Achilles 
t of knowing what 18 

differ? Was it not for wan 

what disadvantageous ? Doth not 

advantageous, 

hg one of them say, It is advantageous to restore 
ХЕ Chryseis to her father; the other, that 1t 18 not? 
S Doth not one 83» that he ought to take away 
Е the prize of the other; the other, that he ought 

| not? Did they not, by these means, forget who 
a à they were, and for what purpose they had come 
97] there? Why, what did you come for, man; tO 

t CC-0. i г : 

: Sm M In Public.Demain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

188 THE DISCOURSES OF 

Petty pain a mi 4 
squabbles PN 2 Wu the TUBE ?— To fight.’ With] sol 
the Trojans.’ Dos: ce on Greer With}. phi 
Jans “Caving Hector Шеп dor not 
draw your sword upon your owe pos ou = 
do you ood sir, f, ; IDEE А And | 
you, g sir, Orgetting the duties of a k to | 
i Cares | 
1 go to енш about а girl with the bravest of | 
© PN reserve? Aye method 
inferior to a subtle s h Б en bs 
In Priest, who Wi 
me 
der 
at, richer than Agamemnon? ve 
‘But I am handsome too.” — What, handsomer wh 
than Achilles ? * But I have fine hai bei 
ihi i Yet he neither ow 
combed it nicely, nor curled it. «Ви I am stron its 
too." — Can you lift such a stone, then, as Hector itt 
or Ajax? ‘But ү am of a noble family too.’ — 
8 your mother a goddess, or your father descended 
from Jupiter ? And what good did all this do 
Achilles, when he sat crying for a girl? «But 
am ап orator.’—And was not he? Do not 
you see how he treated the most eloquent of the 
reeks, Phoenix and Ulysses? How he struck $1 
them dumb? This is all I have to say to you; for 
and even this apainst my inclination. to 
Why so? ае 
Decause you have given me no encouragement. | i 
For what can I see in you to encourage me as E 
spirited horses do their riders? Your person ? pa 
That you disfigure. Your dress? That i on 
effeminate. Your behaviour? Your look? Ab 

WU IM 
—————— n SSS 

i i idwar 
СС-0. In Public:Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridw; 

Dri m uae Tro hy i fern 

EPICTETUS 159 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and-eGangotri— 

solutely nothing. When you would hear a Ready 

philosopher, do not say to him, ‘You tell me to hear, 

nothing ’; but only show yourself worthy, or fit eae 

to hear; and you will find how you move him 
to speak. 

CHAPTER XXV 

That logic is necessary 

When one of the company said to him, * Convince 
me that logic is necessary’: Would you have me 
demonstrate it to you? says he.—* Yes. Then 
I must use a demonstrative form of argument.— 
‘Granted.’ And how wil you know then 
whether I argue sophistically ? On this, the man 
being silent: You see, says he, that even by your 
own confession, logic is necessary; since, without 
its assistance, you cannot learn so much as whether 
it be necessary or not. 

CHAPTER XXVI 
What is the property of errors in life 

§ 1. Every error in life implies a contradiction: 
for, since he who errs doth not mean to err, but 
to be in the right, it is evident that he acts 
contrary to his meaning. What doth a thief 
mean? His own interest. If, then, thieving be 
against his interest, he acts contrary to his own 
meaning. Now every rational soul is naturally 
averse to self-contradiction : but so long as any 
one is ignorant that it is a contradiction, nothing 

en een 

dy to 

: CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

- The restrains him from 
rational whe 
goul is 

willy nilly from a falsehood whene 

190 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

f actıng contradi 
never he discovers it, he must 

renounce and avoid it, as any one must dissen 

ver he perceives it to be 

a falsehood: but while this doth not appear, he. 

assents to it as to a truth. 

82. He, then, is an able speaker, and excels 
at once in exhortation and conviction, who can 
discover to each man the contradiction by which 

he errs, and prove clearly to him, that what he 
would, he doth not; and what he woul 

that he doth.! For if that be show 
depart from it of his own accord; 
have shown it, be not surprised that 
where he is: for he doth 
that he acts rightly.2 Hence Socrates, 
this faculty, used to say, 
cite any other witness of my assertions; but I am 
always contented with my opponent. I call and 
summon him for my witness; and his single 
evidence is instead of all others.’3 For he knew 
that if a rational soul be moved by anything, the 
scale must turn whether it will or no.4 Show the 
governing faculty of reason a contradiction, and it 
will renounce it: but, till you have shown it, rather 
blame yourself than him who is unconvinced. 

n, he will 
but till you 

relying on 

END OF THE SECOND BOOK 

- CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Ctorily: but, | 

аз necessarily | 

d not do, | 

he remains | 
It on the appearance ! 

*It is not my custom to | 

Digitized by Arya Samiaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

but, 
arily 
ESEN: 
o be! 
, he: 
<cels 
can | NOTES 
hich } 
t he! INTRODUCTION 
| do, 1 Sensibus ipsis judicari voluptates. Cic. de Fin. ii. By 
will || Pleasure the Epicureans sometimes explained themselves to 
you mean only freedom from uneasiness : but the philosophers of 
lains other sects in gencral, as well as Cicero, insist, producing 
ances their own expressions for it, that they meant sensual delights. 
Se This, indeed, was morc explicitly the doctrine of Aristippus, 
p on the father of the Cyrenaics, a sect, however, which sunk into 
1 to the Epicureans, whose notions plainly led to the dissolutencss 
am so remarkable in the lives of most of them. 
and 1 The Stoics define these terms : the one, a motion by 
TA which we are carried towards somc object ; the other, a 
Бе motion by which we strive to shun it. The original words, 
new by a happiness in the Greck language, are properly opposed 
the to cach other ; which the English will not admit. I have 
the chosen the best I could find, and wish they were better. 
d it з It scems strange that the Stoics gencrally put the Assents 
th last, since both the affections and will should be governed 
+ by the understanding, which, therefore, should be rectiited in 
ms to be of this 

order to do its office well. Epictetus scc 
opinion in 1. 17. But, perhaps, they thought common sense 

or natural logic sufficient for this purpose, and artificial 
logic, which they meant, but did not express clearly by the 

? $ y 
word Assente, necessary as а guard only against sophistry. 
Yet their mentioning i 

t as a guard also against being misled 
when they were in drink, and суеп in their dreams, leaves 
but little room for this conjecture. 

4 Kal phy Ty» áperv Kpvocrmos dmoBdyriy, KredvOns дг 
eu à pév, ётоВ\№тӯ» did рёб ту кас peayxotar" 
| 6 бё, йуатоВМт т, && BeBalovs катайту. Diog. Laert. 

in Zeno. io 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

рейн E арса ete ne 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

192 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

|7 

t 
ino inebriari | 
US sib: licei 

Nam si argumentaberis, 
et retinere rectum tenorem 
colligas, nec veneno poto m 

oriturum, etc. Sen, Epi E 
d The original word is of peculi oe i 
Stoics, and I wish it could have ie бышаноп among: the 
in a manner lus ambigu ren rendered into English 
cC NE NES Buous and more expressive of 
M d eie] € stoic language perished with the Ses К 
rendered intelli ble acesa a аца termi сап [^ E 
elligible except by a paraphrase or a dean be mi 
das d | ition, 
Tiurwow èv уух. Diog. Laert. vii. 8 45 
7 ‘ Ё 
fore бё 7) mpbanyis, Evyota Proxy Tay каб Shov р 
Diog. L ji | 
8 I am sensible that Prosperity, in am aes d 
wholly to external circumstances ; but I EX TD n 
о to express the internal Eood condition of mind NER 1 
the Stoics meant by eÜpora. There is an instanc f 9m 7 
like use, 1 John iii. 2, ца т) 
9 . . . + . 1 D 
А Quidquid de Deo dixeris, quidquid tacite mentis cogita- 
tione conceperis, in humanum transilit, et corrumpitur, 
sensum : nec habet propriz significationis notam, quod nostris А 
verbis dicitur, atque ad humana negotia compositis. A 
Arnob. adv. Genres. iii, P.Itr. Ed. Lugd. Bat. 1651. | О 
10 @фбартоз kal dyévynros. Diog. Laer. vii. 8 137. S 
n 2500 
Ocdv Ó'elvat {до 404>ато>, Xoywór, тео, ў yotpàr P. 
év evdatuovla, какой mavrds dvemlóexrov, mpovonrixdy | 
kócuov re kal TOv év xócjup* pù elvat uévrot drOpwrd- 
Hoppov* elvat 0 тд» pèr бтшоурүду ray бхш», бетер xal а 
татёра тутш». 1014.8 147. Е 
13 то\\аїз mpoonyoplats тросоиор&ўєтаи катё rds õvyd- 
nes. Ibid. 
P 

13 ойо[ау бё Ocod Züjvuv pév doc rà» Srov xéspoy xal 
Tov ovpavóv. lbid.8148. 

M $ udev otv Kbopos werepacpévos early. Ibid. 

15 karà xpóvwv olas mepiddous буаМокшу els davrdy m 
Tücav thy ovclay, xal таму é éavroü уєууйу. 1011. al 
§ 137. | п 

16 Sce Philo Judzeus, of the incorruptibility of the world, р 
p.947. Ed. Par, d 

ET, 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ig the! 
nglish 
f its 
Stoic; 

ме be: 

§ 54. | 
clates | 

better | 

vhich { 

f the | 

gita- 
itur, 
astris 
651. 
ерду 
472 

„тф- 
ка} 

vrá- 

xal 
тд» 
bid, 

rid, 

—À 

s Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

NOTES 193 

Y Oebs (оті туебра vorpòr xal rupwoes, ойк {Хоу ору, 

perdBaddor бё els d BóvNcrat kal. avre£ojovoóueroy. maar. 

Posidonius, 

1% xp rexvindy. Plut, de Placit. Philosoph. i. 7. 
19 офто тд» Ocdy, арх?” бута, ata roepóv, xal хобу dv 
б\у roiotr7es, où xaÜapór, ode атћоб» ov? dairÜcrov, 
аЛа (E érépov, каї ёг érépov ázodQalrovoi, Plut. de Com- 
muribus notitus adv, Stoiccs.. р. 1085. 

2 cua бё fert, kar’ айтойз, ў ovala. Diog. Lacrt, vii. 
$150. 

31 Adv, Praxezm, с. у. Yet, De Anima, c. 7, he says, 
Omne corporale passibile est, which he certainly did not think 

God was. 

22 бокеТ D'avrois dpxàs elvat ray UN Sto, 7d тообу xal 
TO mdoxov' тд ply oiv пісҳоу elva rijv фтого» otolar, 
Thy Ön’ TÒ бё тойу, rÓv év айту Abyor, rüv Oedy. 
Diog. Lacr. vii. 8 134. 

23 Deus ista tempcrat, que circumfusa rectorem sequuntur 
et ducem. Potentius autem cst quod facit, quod cst dcus, 

uam materia patiens dei, Sen. Epist. 65. 

Nulli igitur est naturz obediens, aut subjectus dcus. 
Omnem ergo regit ipse naturam, Сіс, de Миг. Deer. ii. 
$ зо. Ed. Dav. 

24 Non potest artifex mutare materiam, Sen, de 
Provid. c. 8. 

25 yi. | 

26 Non universo hominum generi, solum, scd ctiam 
singulis, etc. Cic. de Nar. Deor, iii. 

37 Anus fatidica. Ibid. i. 

28 Nec sine ratione, quamvis subita, accidere. Sen. de 
Provid. c. i. ] я 

29 XAóyos каб фу à кбтио$ бісёауєта. Diog. Lacr. vii. 

8 149. 

50 Chrysippus Applicat sc ad cos potius, qui necessitate 

tus animos. [Azimorum. Dav.] liberatos volunt. Dum 
EE verbis utitur suis, delabitur in cas dillicultates, ut 
CUR Si ы 
ЫЕ itatem Fati confirmet invitus. Cic. de Fate, § 17. 
SES Chrysippus autem, cum et necessitatem. improbarct, 
av. 

etc, § 18. x 
VOL. 1. 

- CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

emma 

SSS асада 

oe € 

194 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

Sen. de Beneficiis, vi, 23. 
32 Ibid. iv. 7. 

33 Cic, de Natura Deorum, ii. I5. 

31 Epic. i. 14, ctc. 

35 3s дёрт elvat ras ёу rots feo. Diog, Laert. vii. 9 156. 
Tv бе Vvxijy —kal с@ра elvat, Ibid, 

3. с , 
тту” Wuxnv perà Өбуатоу Greve h: 
elvat. Ibid. ee 

33 Клей, í 5 
Er 205 Tácas eridtapeéverw gyal, ueypl ex vpigeur. 

р%тїтто$ бё, Tas TOv copay póvov. Ibd. § 157 

zu UM s A 

А Lactantius, indeed, VH. 7, says: Esse inferos Zenon 
Stoicus docuit, et sedes piorum ab impiis esse discretas : et 
illos quidem quietas et delectabiles incolere regiones ; hos 
vero luere penas in tenebrosis locis, atque in czni voraginibus 

horrendis, But І know not that any other author relates 
this of him. 

36 

о 

See i. 12, р. 39: "iil, 7- TU е злее 
Ibid. c. 10, 8 2, c. 12, 8 4. 4 9, 8 2,3. 

SiS. 

42 Ilid. c. 24. 

© The only passage that I can recollect, in which any 
intimation scems to be given of a future reward, is in the 
fifteenth chapter of the Enchiridion: and, probably, even 
there he means only a happiness to be enjoyed in the present 
life, after duc improvement in philosophy; though he 
expresses it by the very strong figures of partaking the feasts 
and empire of the gods, For, doubtless, the wise man, like 
his kindred deities, feasted upon everything that happened ; 
and, by willing as Jupiter did, reigned along with him. 
Besides, Epictetus says there, of Diogenes, and Heraclitus, or 
Hercules, not that they are, but that they were divine 
persons : which must refer to something which had ceased, 
when he wrote ; and, consequently, to their felicity before, 
not after their deaths. At least he doth not intimate 
anything concerning their second life : and if that was to be 
short, as it might be (and it could not reach beyond the 
conflagration), and was not very certain neither, the hope of 
it would be a very insufficient counterbalance to vehement 

appetites and passions, 

NOTES 

195 

a 6 А : 

4. 8 21. These expressions, diffused and Hindle, 
allude to the Stoic doctrine, that souls are portions of the 
deity, separated for a time, and that his essence is fire, 

Gu e 

12, $ 52 E 

$5 elyal twas ба[доуа; åvðpórwv avi áÜetav Éyorzas, 
€rozrás Tay drOpwrelwy Tpuyuárov. Diog. Laert, vii. 
8 151. 

Scit genius, natale comes qui temperat astrum, 
Naturz deus humana, mortalis in unum- 
Quodque caput. Hor. ii, Ep. ii, 186, etc, 

See Epict. i. 14, p. 45. 

9 elvat $'айт$ тобто той evdaluovos dperiy xal T)» 
єброа> Blov, órav rdyra тратттта‹ катат ovupwylav тоў 
map’ éxdory dalpovos, трд Thy ToU UAou дгогкађтоу Войо. 
Diog. Laert. vii. 8 88. 

© See M. Antoninus, ii, 13, 17. iii 3, 5. v. 27. 

9 Condonanda tamen sententia, Stoice, vestra cst, 
Nam si post obitum, neque praemia sint, ncque pence, 
Heu, quo perventum est |. Heu, quid jam denique restat | 
Scilicet humanas gerit aut res numen inique, 
Aut nil curat iners, aut, si bene temperat orbem, 
Nemo bonus miser cst, nemo improbus cssc beatus 
In vita possit, gens ut sibi stoica fingit. 
J. Hawxins Вдох, 
I have a singular pleasure in quoting these lines, from a 
poem which docs honour to our country. 

i, 18, § 3,4. ili. 21,§ 1, iv. 4,51, Sce likewise М. 
Antoninus, і. $ 17. іх. § 4. xii. 8 14. 
51 Est aliquid, quo sapiens antecedat deum. Ille natura: 

béneficio, non suo, sapicns cst: ccce res magna, habere 
imbecillitatem hominis, securitatem dei, Sen. Epist. 53. 

52 iv. 1,5 17. dv. 8, sub. бл. 

5 i, 15, § 2. iv. 12, § 4. 

5 j, 12, p. 40. ; ) 

55 Quis sapiens sit, aut fuerit, nec ipsos Stoicos solere 
dicere. Сіс. Acad. iv. Pe 

‚.. Cito nequitia subrepit : virtus difficilis inventu est, 

rectorem ducemque desiderat. Etiam sinc magistro vitia 
discuntur. Sen. Narural. Quest. ili. с. 30. 

57 iv. 8,8 6. 

7 €€-07In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

"m 

(= —)pigitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Ghélaakanid eG 

196 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

58 Eo епі icuri ia di 

ET М Epicuri cgregia dicta commem 
qui ad illa confugient, spe mala inducti 
sc ipsos suorum vitiorum habitur isti 

oru O3 existimant 

quocunque icrint, honeste esse vivendum. Sen Hp 
It was hard indeed to reconcile this with some of H iid 
doctrines. Soter 

59 Suidas in Voc. 

© Orig. Contra Cels, vii. § 53. 

9! Suidas in Voc, 
63 

ого, ut istis, 
» qua velamentum 

= 

Simplic. Com. р. 102. 
53 A. Gell. xv. тт. 
Simplic. Com. p. 102, | 
65 164, | 
95 Ibid. p. 272. 
7 A. Gellius, ii. x8. 
68 /Elii Spart. Adrian, c. 17. 
69 Orat. cons. ad Jovian. Imp. 
70 In Voc. 
1 The reign of Nero began А. 54; of Adrian, 117; 
of M. Antoninus, 161. 
72 Bibl, Gr. vol. iii. p. 257. 
733.87. 
74 vii, § 19. 
15 Noct, Att, i. c. 2. 
76 Contra Сей. vi. 8 2. 
7 Com. p. 2. 
75 Fabricii Bibl, Gr. vol. iii, iv, c. 8, p. 269, ete. 

BOOK I 
CHAPTER I 

1 See Introduction, 8 Ji 

2 The sacred writers also mention man as made of clay, 
Gen, ii. у; Job x. 9, xxxiii, 6. 7 со Aagàw уду mnd», 
Exdacas (oor, xxxviii. 14. 

3 One would hope, from the context, that Epictetus is here 

VR r j CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

z, Digitized by ‘Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

SED yas da n 

SEAT Lara ent; 

NOTES "sp 

speaking only of a moral, not a natural impossibility ; an 
Impossibility arising merely from the present constitution of 
things. See Introduction, 8 17. Sce likewise Book ii, 
chap. v. 8 5. 

> Plautius Lateranus, a consul clect, was put to dezth by 
the command of Nero for being privy to the conspiracy of 
Piso. His execution was so sudden, that he was not 
permitted to take leave of his wife and children, but was 
hurried into a place appropriated to the punishment of 
slaves, and there killed by the hand of the tribune Statius, 
He suffered in obstinate silence, and without making any 
Teproach to Statius, who was concerned in the same plot for 
which he himself was punished. Tacitus, xv. 60. 

€ Epaphroditus was the Master of Requests and freedman 
of Nero, and the master of Epictetus. Не assisted Nero in 
killing himself, for which he was condemned to death by 
Domitian. Suetonius іл virá Neronis, с. 49. Domit. c. 14. 

1 See Introduction, 8 9. 

8 Thrasea Pzetus, a Stoic philosopher, put to death by 
Nero. Нё was husband of Arria, so well known by that 
beautiful epigram in Martial. The expression of Tacitus 
concerning him is remarkable: ‘After the murder of so 
many excellent persons, Nero at last formed a desire of 
cutting off virtue itself, by the execution of Thrasea Pztus 
and Barca Soranus. xvi. 21. 

9 Rufus was a Tuscan of the Equestrian order, and a 
Stoic philosopher. When Vespasian banished the other 
philosophers, Rufus was alone excepted, Upton. А 

10 Agrippinus was bauished by Nero, for no other crime 
than the unfortunate death of his father, who had been 
causelessly killed by the command of Tiberius : and this 
had furnished a pretence for accusing him of hereditary 
disloyalty. Tacitus, xvi. 28, 29. 

M Aricia, a town about sixteen miles from Rome, which 
lay in his road to banishment. 

-CHAPTER 11 

ч i itude of their 
1 The Spartans, to make a trial of the fortitud 
children, aed to nave them publicly whipped at the altar of 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Шалы neci uc Wat eruta 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri . 

198 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

Diana, and often with во much severity that they expired 
The boys supported this exercise with so much constancy as 
never to cry out, nor even groan, Upton from Cicero, ete 

1 etc, 

3 The supposition made by Epictetus, that 
reasonable, sometimes, for persons to kill themselves, is a 
strong and alarming instance of the great necessity of Bern 
careful, not only in general to form just and distinct EDU 
reasonable and unreasonable, but to apply them properly to 
particular subjects; since such a man as he failed in so 

important à case at the very time when he was Biving 
cautions to others. E 

it may be 

3 The translation here 
more particular descri 
our language, 

re gives only the general sense, as a 
ption would be scarcely supportable in 

4 Nero was remarkably fond of theatrical entertainments, 
and used to introduce upon the stage the descendants of 
noble families, whom want had rendered venal, Tacitus, 
xiv. 14. 

5 An allusion to the purple border which distinguished 

the dress of the Roman nobility. к 

9 Helvidius Priscus was по less remarkable for his 
learning and philosophy, than for the sanctity of his manners 
and the love of his country. He behaved however with too 
much haughtiness on several occasions to Vespasian, who 
sentenced him to death with great reluctance, and even 
forbade the execution, when it was too late. Sueton. in Verp. 
8. 15. 

7 abr@ in the original refers to luarly; but the figure 
would have appeared harsh in the translation. 

5 Bato was a famous master of the Olympic exercises, 
Upton. 

® Domitian ordered all the philosophers to be banished. 
To avoid this inconvenience, those who had a mind to 
disguise their profession took off their beards. Upton. 

10 This term [mapagxevý] was used, among the Stoics, to 
express the natural or acquired powers necessary to the per- 
formance of any action. 

11 See Introduction, 8 9. я 

12 This is a difficult place. The text, as it stands now, із 
"Етіктттоѕ Kpelocwy Lwxpdrov ойк ёстцу. el 82 pý, ой 

CC-0. t Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

PME yr we а дашы T Pre LUE E rue уу 

м сСсСо О MO mM дос т @ c m mx 

— 
[x Са! 

— Ou Nu ALS 

undation Chennai and e 
a O x 

~—Bigitized-by Arya Samaj Fo 

NOTES Hes 

Xelpwr ; тобтб uo: lxavóv (ort, Which must be trans- 
lated, Epictetus is not superior to Socrates : but if not, he 
is not inferior ; and this is enough for me, By a change in 
the pointing, it might perhaps be translated, But if he is not 
inferior, this is enough for me. And sometimes the Stoics 
considered themselves as not inferior to the deity. Sce lib. i. 
c. xii. $8 2. But neither of these renderings makcs a proper 
connection. I have therefore adventured to supposc, that 
xpeloowy and xelpwy have changed places; that ойк hath 
arisen from a casual repetition of the two last letters of 
Lwxpdrov; and that u) où is the remainder of some proper 
name known: perhaps Merov, as he was one of the 
accusers of Socrates: which cannot now be known. This 
will give the sense which I have expressed, and it is the 
only unexceptionable one that I can find, 

CHAPTER Iv 

1 See Enchiridion, c. ii. note 2, 

2 Chrysippus is called by Cicero the most subtle inter- 
preter of the Stoic dreams, and the support of the Portico. 
He composed 705 volumes ; which is not very wonderful, 
as he was so fond of quotations, that in one of his pieces he 
transcribed almost an entire play of Euripides. Ніз chief 
study was logic, which he carried to a trifling degree of 
subtlety. There is nothing now remaining of his works 
but some of their titles. He died about 200 years before the 
Christian era, and was honoured by the Athenians with 
а statue in the Ceramicus, His death is said to have been?! 
occasioned by an immodcrate fit of laughing atlsccing an. 
ass cat figs. Chrysippus desired the ass might have a glass 
of wine to wash them down, and was so diverted with his 
own conceit, that it cost him his life. He is said to have 
been a very copious and laborious writer, but obscure and 
immoral; though опе would be inclined to think, from the 
respect with which he is mentioned by Epictetus, that this 
latter accusation was groundless, 

3 Sec Introduction, §§ 4, 5, 6. 

4 An allusion to the ancient custom among philosophers, 
of travelling into foreign countries for improvement. 

. СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

wd 

`` 

DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAPTER v 

1 The Academics held i 
that there is noth; c 
that we have not fa Itie SETUP An ; 
Eae nri culties to distinguish between truth and 
alschood ; and their custom w ith 3 
{ ; 33 neither to 
anything. uso EQ 

5 
2 jouw: : di 
A Sceptic was held to be an esprit fort, sc 
о! 
in 
5‹ 
CHAPTER VI E. 
E 
The translation follows oud i 14 t 
E 1 vóauos in M ч : 
Addenda, i n tous i a 
š { И th 
Sec Introduction, 8 Ta т 
8 The famous statue of Jupiter Olympius, : 
* The translation follows a conjectural emendation of 
Mr. Upton’s on this passage. 
5 It was оле part of the elegance of those times to bathe 
every day, 
6 Epictetus probably introduces this ridiculous complaint ux 
in order to intimate that others commonly made are little 
less so. Sec M. Antoninus 1, viii. $ 50 of Gataker’s ho 
edition and the Glasgow translation. aft 
: de; 
sto 

CHAPTER VII 

l It is but fair to warn the reader that little entertain- 
ment is to be expected from this chapter, which is wholly 
logical. 

[8 2. ‘concluding,’ i.e. of arranging in logical form.] 

avrots Aóyors mpocdéxecOat. Mrs. C. translates ‘and admit 
[rather the contrary, I mean] what,’ ctc. Schenkl marks a ` 
lacuna, rejecting the whole sentence ; an easy way of getting 
rid of a difficulty.] 

$ 

| 3 [8 3. ‘from admitting, etc. тод rò draxóNovOor той 
| 

1] 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

B | N ee сеҥа ы чбек е 

EOD a a 

+ (Waa ~ ——— RE 

: Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri—— — — — 

NOTES 301 

CHAPTER VIII 

1 This is spoken by one of the audience, 

a’, 

? Epictetus, whenever he has occasion to mention himself, 
speaks with remarkable modesty, and in a style very 
different from that of many of the more ancient philo- 
tophers, as appears by the several arrogant speeches recorded 
of them by Diogenes Laertius, cte. It is probable he might 
improve in this humble disposition by the character of 
Socrates, which he secms particularly to have studicd and 
admired. Yet other philosophers had studicd and admired 
the same character without profiting by it. Perhaps the 
sober and unassuming temper of Christianity might, from 
the example of its professors of those days, have produced 
this, and other good effects, in the minds of many who 
knew little, if anything, of the gospel itself, 

CHAPTER IX 

1 Дег quads should probably be ё браз, and is so 
translated, 

2 This passage has great difficultics, which I know not 
j how to solve, any otherwise than by supposing something 
after dv@pwriva to be lost. [It scems probable that a great 
deal ів wanting; and that ort dvOpwriwa belongs to one 
story, and rl oiv, #91, to another.—T.] 

3 The translator follows Mr. Upton's conjecture in this 
place, and the French version agrecs with it, 

[Р. зо. you can receive’ assumes a reading Ovragévov. 
The text reads the nom., i.e. * I can receive.) 

CHAPTER X 

[P. 31. Sold fellows, yépovres, ie. senators, politicians.) 

1 This passage has a striking resemblance to that in 
Scripture, where the children of this world arc said to bc 
wiser in their generation than the children of light. 

ee 

М ссо. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ITI TD UE ETE: 

co sS UTI „ E 

ya Samaj Foundation Chenriai and eGangotri : 

202 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAPTER XI 

1 The Stoics say that wise and good men have 
natural affection towards their children, 
have it not. Diog. Laert. vii. § 120, 

the truly 
and bad persons 

CHAPTER XII 

à It was the opinion of Socrates, that the gods know all 
things that are either said or done, or silently thought on : 
that they are everywhere present, and give significations to 
mankind concerning all human affairs. Xen. Мет, 1. 

3 See Enchiridion, c. xxvii, 

8 Sce Introduction, 8 20, 

+ One of the Stoic extravagances, arising from the notion 
that human souls were literally parts of the deity. 

CHAPTER XIV 

1 [f I did despise the cause of my man-servant, or my maid- 
scrvant, when they contended with me : what then shall I 
do when God riscth up? And when He visiteth, what shall 
Ianswer Him? Did not He who made me in the womb, 
make him? And did not one fashion us in the womb? 
Job xxxi. 13, 14, 15. 

2 je, Deceased legislators, who had in view low and 
worldly considerations, 

з There is a beauty in the original, arising from the 
different terminations in the verbs, which cannot Бе 
preserved in our language. 

4 Perhaps the xal in this line may have been misplaced ; 
and it should be read rovro xal rQ Өєф #06: биаз з and 
then the translation will be . . . To this [genius] and to 
God you ought to swear, etc. 

CHAPTER XVI 

1 The philosopher had forgot that fig-trees do not 
blossom : and is less excusable than the English translators 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar y 

—— —ÓÓÀRHRÓáÀ 

EHI LL LLL UL LL e MM —— 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennatand-eGangotri 

NOTES 203 

of the Bible, Hab. iii. 17, to whom fig-trecs were not so 
familiar, But the Hebrew word used there signifies rather 
in general to shoot out, thrive, than in particular to 
flower. The LXX have картофорђсє: ; reading, perhaps 
Mwan for pyan. This note was given to the translator 
by a friend, 5 

? Something here scems to be lost. 

3 E CN: 
The ancients imagined swans could sing very 
melodiously. 
M Beautiful and affecting examples of such praise and 
exhortation sce in Ps. xxxiv. civ. cxlv., and other parts of 
the sacred writings. 

CHAPTER XVII 

1 The sense here is supplied from a conjecture of 
Wolfius. 

2 The Stoics were remarkably exact in tracing the 
etymology of words: a study, certainly, of very great use: 
but, by too great subtlety and refinement, they were often 
led by it into much trifling and absurdity. 

3 See the Enchiridion, c. xlix. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

| 
1 The most ignorant persons often practise what they 
know to be evil; and they who voluntarily suffer, as many 
do, their inclinations to blind their judgment, are not 
justified by following it. The doctrine of Epictetus, there- 
fore, here and elsewhere, on this head, contradicts the voice 
of reason and conscience ; nor is it less pernicious than ill 
grounded. It destroys all guilt and merit, all punishment 
and reward, all blame of ourselves or others, all sense of 
misbehaviour towards our fellow-crcaturcs, or our Creator. 
No wonder that such philosophers did not teach repentance 
towards God, [Epictetus docs not imply this. He merely 
traces evil acts to their source in evil thought or opinion ; 
and recommends a charitable pity for them.] 

| 3 Several words are wanting in diffcrent places of some 
of the following lines of the Greek ; which are conjecturally 

| supplied in the translation from Mr. Upton’s version. 

Ü 

: ` CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

————r A EE 

TE 

2 ү 

—Ü 

hennai and eGangotri 

204 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

3 Sce Gal. vi. I, and many other parts of the New 
Testament, in which all the humanity and tenderness 
prescribed by the Stoics are eni 

; í joined, and the dangerous 
notions on which they found them are avoided, 

* This alludes to a fa 

mous quibble among the Stoics, 
What you have not lost, 

à you have: but you have not lost 
a pair of horns : therefore you have a pair of horns, Upton. 
[Rather : you can only feel pain in what you have.] 

5 Mr. Upton observes tha 

| t Epictetus here applies to the 
wise man what he had 

just been saying of the athletic 
champion; and he proposes a change in one word, by which, 
instead of the heat, or the rain, the translation will be, in a 
fever, or in drink, For the Stoics held their wise man to 
be a perfect master of himself in all these. circumstances, 
The passages which Mr, Upton produces from ii 

x1 о 
towards the end, and iii, с, 2 towards the beginning, 
makes the conjecture of owwpevos for бодеўоз as probable 

as it is ingenious, But yet the т ow ау кайда т one 
would imagine to have crept in by a repetition of the 
transcriber, from the description, a few lines before; as it 
is scarcely probable that the same word should be used by 

‘Epictetus in two different senses, at so small a distance, 

in the same discourse, 

CHAPTER XIX 

1 When temples began to be erected to the emperors, as 
to gods, the office of priest was purchased by vile flatterers, 
ata very great expense, Upton from Casaubon, 

2 Which was the ornament of the priests while they 
were offering sacrifice, , 

Nicopolis was built by Augustus in memory of thc 
victory at Actium. 

CHAPTER XX 

l Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect, was born at 
Citium, a seaport town in the island of Сурга З) 
originally a merchant, and very rich. Оп а ORE: 5 

* 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

(тош террор A” 

e rc 

"Mo poa a g e у A 

төз. 

"3 o o 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Ae XN teem ete Le 

NOTES : 205 

Tyre, where he had been trading in purple, he was ship- 
wrecked near the Pirzum. During his stay at Athens, he 
happened to mect їп а bookseller’s shop with the second 
book of Xenophon’s Afemsirs, with which he was extremely 
delighted, and asked the bookseller where euch kind of 
persons as the author mentioned were to be found, The 
bookseller answered, pointing to Crates, the Cynic, who was 
luckily passing by, Follow him: which Zeno did, and 
became his disciple, But his disposition was too modest 
to approve of the Cynic indecency: and, forsaking Crates, 
he applied himself to the Academics, whom he attended for 
ten years, and then formed a school of his own. There 
was a constant severity, or perhaps austerity, in his manners, 
his dress, and his discourse, except at an entertainment, 
when he used to appear with cheerfulness and case. His 
morals were irreproachable : and he was presented by the 
Athenians with a golden crown, because his life was а 
public example of virtue, by its conformity with his words 
and doctrines. He lived nincty-cight years, and then 
strangled himself becausc, in going out of his school, he 
happened to fall down and break his finger. Diog. Laert. 
in Zeno, 

CHAPTER XXII 

1 бее Introduction, $ то. 

2 Wars and fightings are ascribed to the same causes by 
St. James, iv. 1. [f Wherever I find it’ should be ‘from 
the bath.'] 

(P. 65. ‘labours,’ ic. “is in labour, a metaphor used by 
Socrates, Plato, Theat. 150.] 

CHAPTER XXIII 

1 This passage is obscure, and variously read age 
explained by the commentators. | It is here trans 
conjecturally. [Perhaps the sense is, whence и би ш 
picions, jcalousics, and fears concerning our children, 1 
have no natural affection towards them I—T.] 

у 2 CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

206 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAPTER XXIV 

1 The Greek word signifies a person who used to anoint 

the body of the combatants, and è А z 
| M ER euer for the Olympic games, PEPR SAS RANEE x 
i ? Probably, according to Mr. р j ^ 
| should be E We DEUM киез js 
of Wolfius imagines this passage to allude to the commotions M 
j H after the death of Nero, when there were many com- us 
E A petitors for the Empire, and every one was cager to take the th 
| part of him who appeared to have the greatest probability of ju 
| success. 
{ . 3 Diogenes, passing through the camp of Philip, at the ar 
| time that he was on his march against the Greeks, was Q 
f taken and brought before the King, who, not knowing him. 19 
{ asked if he was а spy. Yes, certainly, Philip (answered the th 
f philosopher), I am a spy of your inconsiderateness and folly, ut 
in risking your kingdom and person, without any necessity, 
upon the hazard ofa single hour. Upton. The story is thus 
told by Plutarch, but is related something differently by 
other authors, 
| 4 The translation follows Mr, Upton's reading, 
5 An allusion to the (Edipus of Sophocles. b 
gC 
CHAPTER XXV a 
1 An island in the ZEgcan Sea, to which the Romans th 
used to banish criminals, re 
po 2 The body, which Epictetus here compares to a garment, in 
1 С is, by the sacred writers, represented under the figure of a t} 
house, or tabernacle, Job iv. 19; 2 Pet. i. 13,14. St Paul, th 
with a sublime rapidity of expression, joins the two k 
metaphors together, 2 Cor. v. 2-4, as, indeed, the one is but hi 
a looser, the other a closer covering. The same apostle hi 
hath made use of the figure of clothing, in another place, in n 
a strikingly beautiful manner, 1 Cor. xv. 53, 54- P! 
3 Anaxagoras is said by some, and Socrates by others, to i 
have made the same spcech, on receiving the news of his О 
being condemned to death by the judges of Athens: and Я 
from one of them, probably, Demetrius borrowed it. 
Demetrius was а Cynic philosopher, and is mentioncd with s 

high approbation by Seneca. 

' 6C-0! In Püblic Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Hari 

wa 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri а = 

NOTES 207 

CHAPTER XXVI 

l'The text is во very corrupt in some parts of this 
chapter, that the translation must have been wholly con- 
jectural, and therefore is omitted, 

[The parts omitted are the following :— 

* For there are the grand materials (or opportunities), and 
what is wealth here secs there buta trifle, This is what 
makes it difficult there to be master of appearances, when 
there are great things to give you a fall,’ i.e. prevent a sound 
t Judgment, 'Exe? бута is emended to éxoelovra. 

* Epicurus found fault with the reader of the hypothetical 
arguments, and he who suggested the reading laughed. 
Quoth Epicurus: * You laugh at yourself, You did not 
train the lad, and never found out whether he could follow 
these arguments ; you make him your reader and nothing 
morc." '] 

CHAPTER XXVII 

1 Pyrrho, the founder of the sect of the Pyrrhonists, was 
born at Elis, and flourished about the time of Alexander, 
He held, that there is no difference between just and unjust, 
good and evil: that all things are equally indifferent, 
uncertain, and undistinguishable : that neither our senses 
or understanding give us cither a true or a false information ; 
therefore, that we ought to give them no credit: but to 
remain without opinion; without motion; without 
inclination: and to say of everything, that it no morc is, 
than it isnot ; that it is no morc onc thing than another ; and 
that against onc reason there is always an equal reason to 
be opposed. His life is said to have been conformable to 
his principles, for that he never avoided anything; and 
his friends were obliged to follow him, to prevent his 
running under the wheels of a coach or walking down a 
precipice, But these storics, perhaps, are nothing. but mere 
invention, formed to expose the absurditics of his system. , 
Once, when he saw his master Anaxarchus fallen into a. ~ | 
ditch, he passed by him without offering him any assistance. 
Anaxarchus was consistent enough with his principles not 
to suffer Pyrrho to be blamed for this tranquil behaviour, 
which he justified, as a laudable instance of indifference 

Ф 

X 

Я 

. ,CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

: Digilized by Arya ‘Samaj Foundation’ Cheiinai'ànd ебапдой i. 

208 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

and want of affection, A fine picture this of Sceptical 
filendship | 

For a more complete account of the system of Pyrrho, 
see Diog. Laert. in his Life, And Lipsius, Mandat, ad 
Stoic. Philosoph. ii. Dis. 38 

[P. 76. ‘his father died, his mother died"; should be 
* were transported with sorrow] 

[P. 77. ‘upon the spot’: should be “proper to the matter 
in hand.'] 

? The translation follows Mr. Upton’s reading, тд 
doBeto 0a. 

5 This is spoken in opposition to the Sceptics, who are 
alluded to in the beginning of the chapter, and who say 
that no argument hath any force. 

* This seems to be said by one of the hearers, who 
wanted to have the absurdities of the Sceptics confuted, and 
guarded against by regular argument. Epictetus allows this 
to be right for such as have abilities and leisure ; but 
recommends to others the more. necessary task of curing 
their own moral disorders; and insinuates that the mere 
common occurrences of life are sufficient to overthrow the 
notions of the Pyrrhonists. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

1 Sec note }, c. xviii. $ І. 

[P. 8o. Mrs. C. wrongly inserts ‘right’ after each ‘ap- 
peared.'] 

2 The order of the following words is disturbed in the 
original. The translation follows Mr. Upton's correction. 

[P. 82. ‘fancy’ : appearance.] 

CHAPTER XXIX 

[P. 83. ‘admire’ : ie. set value upon.] 

1 [Rather : ‘that it conquers itself, and is not conquered 
by another thing’: i.e. opinion only has power over opinion.] 

2 Socrates being asked by Crito in what- manner he 
would be buried? answered, As you please; if you can lay 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukül Kangri Collection; Н | 

ЭЗ, | ре, | С 

стт 

* Digitized: by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

a aa e, 

NOTES 209 
hold on me, and I do not escape from you, 
end turning to hia fiiende 

that I, who am now disputing and tanging the parts of my 
discourse, am Socrates : but he thinks с 

з the corpse, which he 
will toon behold, to be me; and, therefore, asks how he 
must bury me, Plato, in PA, 864. Forstcr's edition, 

з The two Principal accusers of Socrates, 

* This is evidently a continuation of the philosopher’s 
answer to those who reproached him, that his Principles had 
cone him no good; and therefore is translated. in the first 
person, though it is odéAnoa: and fyres in the Greek, ^ 
[The other speaker says: Then you got no good in this 
respect?” Epicurus replies : * How could you expect it ?"] 
° The meaning of Epictetus in this passage is not clear, 
If he is speaking of a voluntary death, which some of his 
expressions plainly imply, the instance of Socrates scems 
improperly chosen: for he did not kill himself, but was 
fentenced by the laws of his country : to which, indeed, he 
paid so great a reverence, as to refuse all the assistance 
which was offered by his friends, in order to his escape, 
5 dauwddy. Lord Shaftesbury [for év 190, “as a ghost’). 
7 (Rather, de Sir ДЕЕ ОТОЛЕ even then used for 
f master’ or ‘sir’; in modern Gieck it is the regular title 
Mr.’ See note on Ench., vol. ii. p. 208. 
[P. 89. *O the injuries, ctc. Perhaps rather: “О the 
guilt of “educated” men 1) 
[P. 92. *you will scc." Mrs. C. has ‘he? by a blunder.) 
8 The mercenary professore of philosophy at that time, 

Then, smiling, 

p l cannot, baya lie, гона Chita 

BOOK II 
CHAPTER I 

1 This was a kind of scarecrow, formed of different 
coloured feathers, by which the animal was terrified, and so 
driven into the nct, which was the ancient manner of hunting. 

3 watdela, in Greek, means nearly the same thing as 
what we now call liberal education. It was that sort of 
education peculiar to gentlemen—that is, such as were free,— 
and of which the slaves or lower sort of pcople were forbid 
to partake according to the systems of some legislators. 

YOL. I. © 

uM 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

210 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

Such (as well as I can remember) was the case among the 
Lacedemonians, and amongst the ancient Persians till the 
time of Cyrus, 

It must be observed that the words educated Sree, ding, and 
many others, were taken by the Stoics from cotton life, 

and by them applied solely to the character of their wise and 
perfect man, 

9 ‘And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free? John viii. 32. This is one among many other 

passages to the same purpose in that perfect law of liberty 
the New Testament. 7 

{< When a slave was to be presented with his freedom, he 
i was brought before the Consul ; and his master taking him 
| by the hand, pronounced a certain form of words and then 
| turned the slave about, who was thus rendered fice The 
fine which the master was to pay on this occasion was applied 

to the public use. Upton. 

5 This seems to be spoken by one of the scholars, 

$ No other ancient author mentions Socrates as having 
written anything except a hymn to Apollo, and a translation 
of some fables of ZEsop into verse. Many authors of credit 
affirm that he wrote nothing. Therefore Wolfius doubts 
whether some other name should not be put here instead of 
Socrates. Yet the description most properly belongs to 
him. And perhaps Epictetus doth not mean to intimate 
here that Socrates had published anything, but that he 
wrote, when he had no opportunity of discoursing, for his 
own improvement. But still, living constantly at Athens, 
the seat of philosopical disputation, he cannot be supposed 
often to have had that reason for writing. 

7 The original here scems corrupt, or inaccurate, I hope 
the translation is not far from the true sense. 

8 The Greck is йтара а, tranquillity : but it seems to 
be a false reading for drpatla. ’Arapatla is the very thing 
which Epictetus had been recommending through the whole 
chapter, and which makes the subject of the next; and, 
therefore, cannot be well supposed to be the true reading in 
a place where it is mentioned with contempt. 

9 For ётє\бш» perhaps the reading should be хелу, 
and it is so translated. The person to whom Epictetus 
speaks was a young man just leaving the philosophical 

school. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

SS d ee 

tra 
wl 
an 

chi 

Zen 

1 

2 
argui 
exist 
must 
the c 
word 
trans 
Plato 
unwo 
80 av 
and p 
he th 

were | 

* S 

c 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

and pious Socrates ) 
he thought neither his accuser nor hi 
Were likely to be influenced by, 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

nox CELL it уа м UMEN i лы 2 —— 

NOTES 2 

glish Teaders, too happy to comprehend how 
1с, and sudden executi 

ced 
prisci to 
to prepare hie 

the very 
dangers, 

CHAPTER II 

1 [The various Parts of a forma] specch.] 

З This passage ig Perplexed in the Greek 
translation conjectural, ‘The me 
where our moral conduct is concer; 
and courage is necessary in things n 
choice, and with which, according 
truth and nature have nothing to do, 

» and the 
aning seems to be, that 
ned, cantion is n 

ecessary ; 
ot dependent on 

our own 
to the Stoic Principle, 

CHAPTER Iy 

[P. 103, 8 2. This appears to have 

been a doctrine of 
Zeno, and there ma 

Y be an allusion to Plato’s Republic] 
! A Stoic philosopher of Tarsus, in Cilicia, Upton. 

CHAPTER у 

Upton's conjecture, 

have a good dæmon, and 
that he must believe the 
clieves there are mules 

§, because that species enters into 
the composition of the other. But there is a play upon the 

words in the original which cannot be preserved in the 
translation. Опе cannot, I think, help Tegretting that 
Plato should relate, and Epictetus approve, a witticism 
unworthy of the Attic &enius 5 and an instance of levity on 
%0 awful a subject, unbecoming the character of the wise 
- It may, however, be some excuse that 
s judges deserved, or 

a more serious answer, 
® Sce 1. i, note 3, 

CC-0. in Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

WI. d SA Oe — 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

212 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

CHAPTER VI 

1 In a speech which Cyrus made to his soldiers after the 
battle with the Assyrians, he mentions Chrysantas, onc of 
his captains, with particular honour for this instance of his 
obedience. Xenoph. Cyr. iv. irit. 

2 [Ieptarácets, in Greck, hath a double meaning, which 
cannot be preserved in a translation. It signifies both in 
general, circumstances, and in particular, hard circumstances 
or difficulties, . 

3 Epictetus probably means in the way home from 
Nicopolis to Rome, whence this person had come to hear 
him, 

é Socrates writ a hymn to Apollo when he was in prison 
of which Diogenes Laertius recites the first line. See the 
behaviour of Paul and Silas on a parallel occasion, Acts 
xvi. 25. 

CHAPTER VII 

1 The Stoics were advocates for divination, though they 
condemned what they deemed the abuses of it. The 
thirty-second chapter of the Enchiridion is on the tame 
subject. 

2 A lady of high rank at Rome, banished from Italy, 
among many other noble persons, by Domitian, 

[Р. 113. ‘bird’ has been emended to ‘augur, diviner' by 
a slight change.] 

CHAPTER VIII 

1 Sec Introduction, $ 19. aie 
See 1 Cor. vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16; 2 Tim. i. 14; 1 John 
ii. 24, iv. 12, 13. [Paul had doubtless read the Stoic 

writers, and he uses their ideas in his own way.] 

2 An allusion to the combatants in the public exercises, 
who used to show their shoulders, muscles, and пай: 2% 
a proof of their strength. Sce 1. iv. 8 45 1r. xvin. 3 $$ 

ur. xxii. 8 5. dp 
[P. 137. The quotation is from Honier, Iliad i. 526.) 

у. СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri (oleo ME NOE ^ cs 

[E 

BS de) Л 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

NOTES а 

CHAPTER IX 

[P. 118. A conjunctive Proposition contains a number of 
statements presented all together as true, The other gives 
alternatives.] 

! The translation follows Mr. Upton’s conjecture, 

(Perhaps Jews and Christians are here confused.] 

CHAPTER X 

1 (Mrs, С. adds ‘not’ with the note : ‘The true reading 
of the Greek is ойг’ ойк few.’ But this requires uh. The 
tense is: the things do not matter, have them or not.] 

? It hath been suggested to me, that dcaridOels, not 
Starc@els, is the true reading; and I have ventured so to 
translate it. See mn. і. pp. 352, 353 of Mr. Upton’s 
edition. [But, as arw occurs not elsewhere, and 
reading it here will make an improper repetition of ncarly 
the same sense, and бїабегуа[ туа significs to do some- 
thing to another, 4. c. 7, р. 628, cdit. Upt., and in Lysias, 
Apol. in Sim. p. 79, contra Agorat. p. 135, it will be best 
to preserve the present reading, and to translate it— What 
doth he losc who makes him such 1—Т.) 

СНАРТЕК ХІ 

1 For тау in the Greek, the sense seems to require 
neds. [Probably тоа, i.e. Sone,’ ‘mankind in general,’] 

CHAPTER XII 
[P. 130. Hesiod, Theogony, 587.) 

CHAPTER XIII 

[Р. 133. 2/24, xiii. 281.) . 
1 Antigonus Gonatas, King of Macedon, had so grcat 

an estcem for Zeno that he often took’a journey to Athens 
to visit him, and endeavoured hy magnificent promiscs to 

= 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ДАА. we nr - 

214 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

allure him to his court, but without success. He gave it as 
a reason for tho distinguished regard which he had paid him 
that, though he had made him many and very CORTE 
offers, Zeno never appeared either mean or insolent, (Diog 
Laert. Zero, vii.] p 

2 This is a Stoic extravagance. The very thing that 
constitutes the fault of the one in this case is, that oium 
the other suffer. However, if instead of vainly affecting 
insensibility, wc extend our view to the future rewards of 
those who bcar ill treatment as they ought, the position is 
true and useful, 

k 3 When Diogenes was sailing to ZEgina, he was taken by 

pirates and carried to Crete, and there set to sale. Being 
asked what he could do, he answered, Govern men: and 
pointing to a well-dressed Corinthian who was passing by 
Sell me (said he) to him | for he wants a master, The 
Corinthian, whose name was Xeniades, bought him and 
appointed him the tutor to his children, and Diogenes 
perfectly well discharged his trust. 

CHAPTER XIV 

1 The translation follows Mr. Upton. aparvyxávorrt. 

CHAPTER XV 

1 Instead of olxoddunud re б>, the true reading scems to 
be olxodounréoy, and is so translated, 

2 The world, 

3 The translation here follows Mr. Upton's copy. 

4 This probably is spoken in the person of one who is 
offered assistance necessary for his support, and refuses it. 

CHAPTER XVI 

1 Asa bribe for bad purposes, 

2 The order of this passage should be : Sit down now, 
and pray that your nose may not run. Have you not hands, 
fool? Hath not God made them for you? etc. But 
Epictetus probably might speak extempore in this inverted 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar’ 

ге M E 

t 
2 
f 
5 

| 

ст" єч t^ 

ч. 

Wy 
ds, 
Jut 
ted 

| 
| 
| 

— 

‘Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

NOTES XG 

manner; and Arrian proposes to deliver what he said with 
the greatest exactness. 

* Sitting, probably some particular sort of it, was 
anciently (tce Judgeo xx, 26 4 1 Chr. xvii. 16) one posture 
of devotion, Our ancestors in Queen. Elizabeth's time 
called kneeling, sitting on their knees. A mixed posture 
of sitting and kneeling is now used by some nations in 
prayer. 

* See 1. vi. note 6, 

* The heathen had certain temples in which it was usual 
for persons to sleep in order to reccive oracles by dreams. 
One of the most celebrated places appropriated to this 
purpose was the Temple of Amphiaraus. Sec Philostratus, 
р. 771. [This translation omits ойк, * not?) 

* Mr. Upton conjectures this to be an allusion to some 
poctical or rhetorical description. [Perhaps the ‘rock’ is the 
Acropolis, the ‘bits of stone’ statucs or decorative marbles.] 

7 Brief summaries of any science, for the usc of beginners, 
are often so called. 

8 Perhaps the true reading should be ¢iAoco¢las, Philo- 
sophy. 

9 The sense of the original phrase, ‘an ox's belly,’ is obscure 
tome. The French translation hath ‘in your cradle, [Prob- 
ably here is an allusion to the proverb cited by Wolfius, ёл} 
Búpons кабе одо, of which sce Suidas.— T. ©The most 
solemn mode of appeal among the Scythians."] 

10 Two famous robbers who infested Attica, and were at 
last killed by Thescus. Upton. 

CHAPTER XVII 

1 See a. хі. § 1. 

2 i.e. the topic of the Desires and А усгзіопз. 

3 There are several readings and conjectures. I have 
followed Wolfius, who reads for doltws, doelorws, as 
agrecing best with the sense. 

4 The Pseudomenos was a famous problem among the 
Stoics, and it is this. When a person says, I lie ; doth he 
lie, or doth he not? If he lies, he speaks truth; if he 
speaks truth, he lics. Тһе philosophers composed many 
books on this difficulty. Chrysippus wrote six. Philetas 

е 

У ХЕ Авео ет ОШ Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

216 DISCOURSES ОЕ EPICTETUS | 

wasted himself to death in studying to answer it. Menage { 
on Diog. Lacrt, ii, 8 108, Brucker, His, Суй. Philos, | 
vol. i. рр. 613, 614. [Pseudomenos means the Liar.] 

5 This is spoken by 
scholars, to ridicule the 
writings, while they ne 
of moral improvements 

6 cé Set should be сё Eee | 

Epictetus in the person of one of his 

ir complimenting each other on their 
glected the more impor 

tant concern 

CHAPTER XVIII 

| h 
1 Hardened against Proper reflections, | d 
? "These several facts ar | 

А A e here supposed to be recollected 
at different times, 

© 

А MESS | Ч 

3 In this place, and the following lines, the original j w 
mentions particular forms of argument which are now little | fv 
understood, and could not be at all instructive to the English al 
reader, | 

[Р. 156. Plato, Laws, ix. p. 854.] 

* Hercules is said to have been tl 
nastic games, and the first victor, 
conquered in wrestling, and the P. 
from him, Upton. 

5 Mr. Upton inserts vues, which he conjectures 
should be vikioas, into the text, from his manuscript ; 
where, probably, it was written merely by an accident of the 

1с author of the gym- go 
Those who afterwards 
ancratium, were numbered 

i 
transcriber’s casting his eye upon that word in the next line. f 
The sense needs not this addition, and perhaps doth better i the 
without it, [The translation assumes ‘boxers,’ etc, to be | rer 
Vocative. They are the object of vixhoas, ©The conqueror | 

of all, not of boxers only.'] 

5 This pompous title was given to those who had been 
victors in all the Olympic games. 

[P. 158. Hesiod, Works and Days, 411.] 

CHAPTER XIX 

1 The curious reader may sce this whole matter explainea 
with the greatest acuteness and accuracy, by the very learnea 
and ingenious Mr. Harris, in Mr, Upton's notes. 

? "This is spoken to Epictctus by onc of his hearers, 

| 
E 

2 

EN c. ; CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ` 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

NOTES 217 

t 

} 2 With Mr. Upton, I read ойде but it scems necessary 
| that ovdé should likewise stand, and it is so transl 

regulations, he often Strongly recommends, 

} This I apprehend to be spoken by one of the scholars of 
Epictetus, who seeing the contempt with which his master 

treats logical subtletics in the foregoing paragraph i "s 
à { їп aragraph, desires 
| him to discourse upon Ethics, [The quotation is from Hom, 
j Od. ix. 39.) 
И 

s Epictetus gives this absurd reply to ridicule the fondness 
of his scholars for quoting authors, and making a parade of 

further than talk, knows what he is talking of, or blunders 
about it ever so grossly, 

7 Of things into good, evil, and indifferent. 

8 The Peripatetics held other things besides virtue to be 
good ; but not in near so high a degree, 

? Scc п. xvi. note 5, 

CHAPTER XX 

1 A New Testament word. 

? When the Athenians found themselves unable to resist 
the forces of the Persians, they left their city, and having 
removed their wives and children and their movable effects 
to Trezen and Salamis, went on board their ships, and 
defended the liberty of Greece by their flect. 

? What follows is against the Academics, who denied the 
evidence of the senses. 

* By these terms the Stoics meant intelligent. powers, 
joining to bring the fruits of the carth to maturity, and to 
carry on the course of nature. 

5 These seem to be the words of the Academic, desirous 
of beginning a dispute with Epictetus, to revenge himself, by 
puzzling him, for the severe things which he had bcen saying 
against that sect. But Epictetus refuses to enter into ity 
and gives his reason. 

an 
gcc Sr Se Й 

ЕЕ - 

с .CC-0..In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

‘218 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

в I have followed Mr, Upton's addition of aloxpSy but 
perhaps, even каћби may be an addition, first arising from 
writing 7) какбу twice over. 

7 This tesembles what our Saviour saith to the Jewish 
rulers : * Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and the 
harlots go into the kingdom of God before you? Matt, 
xxi, 31. 

CHAPTER XXI 

1 Mr. Upton's copy. 
2 We have no expression exactly like that in the Greek. 

The translation. comes the nearest to it of any I could 
think on. 

3 This seems to be spoken by Epictetus to one of his 
scholars. 

4 The Greck is pointed at dzroüel£c, but the sense requires 
the stop at TWS. 

CHAPTER XXII 

1 Admetus, King of Thessaly, being destined to die, 
Apollo obtained a reversal of his sentence from the Fates, on 
condition that some person could be found to die in his 
stead. Admetus tried all his fricnds, and among the rest 
his father, Pheres ; but no опе chose to be his representative 
but his wife, Alcestis. After her death, Pheres is intro- 
duced preparing honours for her funeral, and condoling with 
his son on her loss. Admetus rejects his presents with great 
indignation, and makes him the severest reproaches on his 
cowardice and mean-spiritedness, in not parting with a few 
remaining years of life to save his son from an untimely 
death, and in su ffering Alcestis to descend to the grave for 
him in the bloom of youth. The quotation made by 
Epictetus is part of the answer of Phercs to the reproaches 
of his воп. (Euripides, Alcestis, 691.) 

2 The original quotes some щш from Euripides, of a 
dialogue between Eteocles and Polynices before the walls of 
Thebes, of which the translation gives the general sense. 
[Phenissa, 723-] 

з Scc Matt. xii. 50, 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

D 
A 

Де on aet МА, 

C) S fal а Д0 

Bigitized-by-Arya-Samaj Foundation Chennai and e 

NOTES 219 

t By self is here meant the proper good, or as Solomon 
expresses it, Eccl. xii. 13, tthe whole of man.’ ‘The Stoic 
proves excellently the inconvenience of placing thia in any- 
thing but a right choice (a right disposition and behaviour) ; 
but how it is the interest of cach individual, in every Үз, 
to make that choice in preference to present pleasure, and 
in defiance of present sufferings, appears only from the 
doctrine of a future recompense. 

5 Perhaps $5015, in the Greck, should be ф бое. 

6 Amphiaraus marricd Eriphyle, the sister of Adrastus, 
King of Argos. He was an excellent soothsayer ; and, by 
his skill, foresaw that it would prove fatal to him if he 
engaged himself in the Theban war. Wherefore, to avoid 
inevitable destruction, he hid himself, but was discovered by 
his wife Eriphyle, whom Polyniccs had corrupted with the 
present of a golden chain. Statius, Téebais, vi. 

1 Mr. Upton's copy. [The Greek means: ‘so are scr- 
pente. ] 

CHAPTER XXIII 

1 These are the words of Epictetus, to which there are 
others equivalent afterwards, His meaning probably is, 
that the value and usefulness of the faculty of clocution 
ought not to be denied, in opposition to the doctrine’ of 
Epicurus, who declared all the liberal arts and sciences to be 
useless and mischievous. Sco Diog. Lacrt. x. $ 6, and 
Menage’s notes there. 

2 He proves the timidity at the beginning of § 3. 

з [t was an old notion, that vision was performed by the 
emission of rays from the сус to the object, not the admission 
of rays from the object into the eye, and to this Epictetus 
here refers. 

* Mr. Upton gives a different sensc to kpetgaóra», but I 
think that та, and what afterwards follows, justifies the 
English translation. [The meaning probably is : tdo not 
forget other things which are superior to these.’ ] 

5 Sec 1. i. 

6 The hearer is understood in this place to вау, The 
faculty of Choice. „It is not improbable; however, that 
the Greck word mpoatpertxy may have been omitted in 
transcribing. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chi 

МЕРИ КУ 

nat 

220 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

7 Celebrated treatises on 

these subi t 
Epicurus, Jects, composed by 

8 These words аге part of a letter written by Epicurus 
when he was dying, to one of his friends, See Diog. Laert, 
x.822. ; 

x Probably for Tpouupertk?s should be read ӧрат:кӯ; 
which word is used by Epictetus but a little more than a 
page before. [Others suggest parts, Cof speech,’] 

10 Mr, Upton’s reading $v érvye, 

CHAPTER XXiy 

1 2 Cor, ii, 16, 
? See John viii, 43. £ 
! Ката TÓcOV, Tepl той, should be 

; А : kara тбсуор тєр} 
ToUTOU. There is no need of altering тё Gra Terpnuéva, 

“Opening the ear’ is a phrase of Scripture, Job xxxiii, 16, 
xxxvi. то; Іза, xlii, 20; Mark vii. 34, 35. 
digging open the ear, Ps. xl. 6 in the Hebrew. 

4 AoxQv pév т elvat, dy O’ovdels, is very near to doxe? 
elval rt, илбёу Gv, Gal. vi. 3. There is a similar expression 
of Plato, at the end of thc Apology of Socrates, 

[P. 188. The verse is from Homcer, Шаа, ii. 25. 

And even 

CHAPTER XXVI 

1¢For that which I do, I allow not : for what I would, 
that do I not; but what I hate, that I do,’ Rom. vii. 15, 

2 Sec 1. xviii, note 1, 

3 Scc xii. 8 2. 

* Something here is lost in the original. The translation 
hath connected the sense in the best and shortest manner 
it could, 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

This translation is a reprint of Mrs. CAxTER'S of 
| 1758. In some cases square brackets have been 
| removed, or the swords avithin them kave been cut 
| ош; a few of the notes are omitted as of -no im- 

portance; otherwise the text is unchanged. Notes 

in square brackets are by the Editor, Mr. W. H. D. 

Rouse ; (ose signed Т. are by Dr. TAYLon, and 

taken from an <cippendix to the original wwork. 

I. G, 

April 15, 1899. 

| 
| 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

T Digitized by Arya. Samaj Foundation Chennai and eG eee kw 

DTI Etage: оеш 

ТОУ 

2 
` 
ò of 
3 
à N 
P 
S 
» 
MET 

m 

e CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

E Digitized by Arya зат eetindation Chennai and eGangotri 

It 
Aes 
y 
GLOSSARY 

Achilles, the great hero of 
the Greeks in the Trojan 
War. 

Eolus, god of the winds. 

<Esculapius, god of healing. 
Alexander burnt a temple 
of ZEsculapius when’ his 
friend Heph:zestion died. 

Agamemnon, King of My- 
cenze, brother of Menelaus, 
whose wife Helen wascausc 
of the Trojan War. Caused 
the ‘wrath of Achilles’ by 
taking away from him 
Briseis a captive maiden. 

Ajax, one of the Greck 
heroes in the Trojan War. 

Caused the quarrel which 
fis the subject of Homer's 
Ё Iliada ` 
Chrystppus} ‘of Cilicia, born 
B.C. 280, one of the chief 
Philosophers of the Stoic 
school, died 207. 
Citheron, a mountain be- 
tween Bovotia and Attica, 
where QEdipus was cx- 
posed as a babe to die. 
His cry (p. 69) was for 
sorrow that he had not 
died (Gd. Tyr. 1390). 
Cleanthes, a Stoic, born 
about В.С. 300, succeeded 
Zeno as head of the school. 
composition, system, com- 
bination, 60. 
concoct, used of the pro- 
cesses of assimilating food 
in the stomach, 120, 
consent, general (p. 77), the 
received opinion about the 
knowledge and certainty 
‚ of things, which the Scep- 
tics would not admit. 
Crifo, a friend of Socrates, 
who tricd to persuade him 
to escape from prison. 
Cyócle, an Asiatic goddess, 
worshipped with wild and 
abominable rites by her 
priesthood. 

61101, letter, 32. 

Capitol, one of the seven 
bills of Rome, on which 
were the citadel and the 
temple of Jupiter. 

Castor and Pollux, sons of 
Zeus and Leda, invoked 
by sailors. 

celebrate, thank, praise, 16. 

Ceres, goddess of corn and 
agriculture. 

Chryseis, а captive damsel 
wbom Agamemnon was 
forced to restore to her 
father. He then took 
away another damsel, EY 
Briseis, from Achilles, and | dæmon, fortune, spirit. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. сигиш Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

224 

diesis, quarter-tone in music, 
I24. 

Diogenes (x) the Cynic of the 
fourth century B.c.; (2 
a later philosopher; {2} 
Laertius, wrote lives of the 
philosophers. 

Dirce, a stream 
water in Boeotia, 

discover, show, x36. 

distraction, madness, 39. 

Domitian, eleventh emperor 
of Rome, reigned A.D. 8r- 
96; a cruel tyrant. 

of pure 

Zcbatana, a summer resi- 
dence of the Persian kings. 
economy, governinent, 12r. 
enthymema, a logical term. 
Epaphroditus, once the 
master of Epictetus. 
Epicurus, of Samos, В.С. 
342-270, founder of a philo- 
sophy which cultivated 
‘life according to nature.’ 
The followers of this school 

Soon degenerated into 
sensualists. 
Eteocles, son of Cédipus, 

fought a duel with his 
brother for Thebes, and 
they slew each the other. 

Eurystheus, King of Argos, 
to whom by divine ordin- 
ance was given the right 
to command Hercules. 

Gyaros, Gyara, an island 
used by the Romans as a 
place of exile. 

Helen, wife of Menelaus, car- 
ried off by Paris, which see. 

hellebore, a drug used for 
madness, r41. 

Hercules, national hero of 
Greece. His labours were 
undertaken at the bidding 

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 

of Eurystheus. They were: 

(x) Nemean lion; (2) Ler-# 

nean hydra; (3) Arcadian 
stag; (4) 
boar; (5) cleansing of the 
stables of Augeas; (6 
Stymphalian birds; M 
Cretan bull; (8) mares of 
Diomedes; (9) Queen of 
Amazons' girdle; to) oxen 
of Geryones ; ey golden 
apples of the Hesperides; 
(12) Cerberus brought up 
from Hades. After death 
he was deified. 

Hippocrates, of Cos, greatest 
physician of antiquity, 
about B.C. 460-357. 

‘lium, Troy. 

indifferent, neither good nor 
bad in itself (a Stoic term), 
бо. 

Jupiter, chief of the Roman 
gods, 

Lycurgus, the great law-giver 
of Sparta, gth century B.C. 

Marcian water, the aqueduct 
in Rome of that name. 

Medea, of Colchis, wife of 
Jason, when Jason tired 
of her, murdered her 
two children in revenge. 
Euripides wrote a play 
so called. 

Nero, fifth Roman emperor, 
reigned A.D. 54-68, pro- 
verbial for cruelty and vice. 

CGEdipus, son of Laius, King 
of Thebes, who by ordin- 
ance of fate slew his father, 
and wedded his mother 
unawares; then, in the 

Erymanthian } 

rr Ei tt i €————s— M! 
—— 

GLOSSARY 

height of his glory and 
power was shown the 
truth. 

Olympic Games, the great 
athletic contest of Greece, 
held every four years at 
Olympia in Elis. 

Orestes slew his mother Cly- 
temnestra for murder of his 
father Agamemnon: he 
fled to Delphi, pursued by 
the Furies, or avengers of 
his mother's spirit. 

original, origin, 82. 

Paris, Alexander, son of 
Priam, King of Troy, and 
the abductor of Helen: see 
Menelaus. 

pathic, a vicious person, 123. 

Patroclus, the bosom friend 
of Achilles, borrowed his 
armour, and was slain in 
it. 

Phidias, the greatest sculp- 
tor of the world (B.C. 490- 
432). His most famous 
work was the statue of 
Zeus (Jupiter) at Olympia. 
He also made a great 
statue of Athena (Min- 
erva) holding Victory in 
her band, for the Par- 
theron. Both these were 
of gold and ivory over a 
wooden frame. 

Plato, a philosopher of 
Athens, B.C. 429-347, 
disciple of Socrates, and 

founder of the school of 
the Academy. 

Pluto, ruler of the under- 
world, who carried off 
Proserpine to.be his wife. 

potser, club, Gumb-bell, 12. 

Polynices, son of Gzdipus: 
see Excocles. : 
Priam, King of Troy, who 

VOL. 1. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Col 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

225 

was killed at the sack of 
Troy by the Greeks. 
Proserpine, daughterof Ceres, 
prudent, prudence, impru- 
dent, wise, etc., 173. 
Pythian priestess, she who 
served the oracle of Apollo 
at Delphi. 

Rhodes, an island off the 
coast of Caria. 

Saturnalia, a winter festival 
at Rome, a time of merry- 
making and licence. 

Susa, winter residence of 
the Persian kings. 

Sarpedon, a Lycian prince, 
fought for the Trojans in 
the War, slain by Patroclus. 

several, separate, 17. 

Sirens, witches who charmed 
mariners to their death by 

singing. 
Socrates, the celebrated 
dialectician and philo- 

sopher, an Athenian, B.C. 

469-399. 
sfraifezr, press, 

ence, 72. 

inconveni- 

theorem, method of inquiry, 
speculation, 24. 

theory, contemplation of 
things, 73. 

Theopompus of Chios, a his- 
torian, about B.C. 378-305. 

Thermopyle, a pass between 
Thessaly and — Phocis, 
scene of the resistance of 
Leonidas and his Spartans 
to Xerxes, В.С. 480. They 
were all slain on the spot. 

Thersites, a foul-mouthed 
hunchback in the Greek 
host before Troy. 

Theseus, national 
Attica; famous 

P 

hero of 
for his 

| pudsiactniessun<Rigitized by:Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

RARE 

226 DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS р 

conflicts with robbers and; the Trojan War, famed 
monsters: Periphates the | for his cunning. 
club-bearer, Sinis the pins- | wzsocfable, contrary to the | 
bender, Sciron and his} principle of human society, 
bowl, Procrustes and his, 58. ; 
bed, the sow of Crommyon, | 
the bull of Marathon, the | Vespasian, ninth emperor of 
bünotaunof Grete, T | Коте, A.D. 69-79, founder 
2 heading, class of things, | ofthe Flavian dynasty, 
2. E ДҮ сазы 
= Triptolemus,a fabled culture- | оз IU 
hero, associated with the 
origin of agriculture. | Zeno of Citium, founder ot 
1! the Stoic school, died 
Ulysses, а Grecian hero in about B.C, 260, aged 98. 

A^ ‚ END OF VOL. [. 

ө Printed by Т. and A. CoxsrAuLE, Printers to His Majesty 

at the Edinburgh University Press 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri'Collection, Haridwar 

МИЛА 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

MM ccn NOMINUM soos sec uo ——— —— 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

D —— À— ССС 

R 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

ND ————— ———————— —— M JÓÁ e 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

гики! Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

natan an 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 

n He 

YAT