The "Rule. 
of 3 

j St, Benedict f 

— -ranelateb - 

with am 3ntecduction — PAGS 

Cardinal Gasquet iG 

THE MEDIEVAL LIBRARY UNDER 
THE GENERAL EDITORSHIP OF 
SIR ISRAEL GOLLANCZ, Lirr.D,, F.B.A. 

THE RULE OF SAINT BENEDICT 

TIIE RULE OF 

SAINT BENEDICT 

TRANSLATED WITH AN 
INTRODUCTION BY 
CARDINAL GASQUET 

quee 

CHATTO & WINDUS: LONDON 
M-CM-XXV 

a , Or 
q 
ele, T So 
EO Pe er SE 

6, 

mmt 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

INTRODUCTION 

Tue Ru of St. Benedict may fitly find a place in 
any collection of classics. As a code of laws it has 
undoubtedly influenced Europe; and, indeed, there 
is probably no other book, save of course the Holy 
Bible, which with such certainty can be claimed as a 
chief factor in the work of European civilization. It 
is undeniable that most of the nations of modern 
Europe were converted to the Christian faith and | 
tutored in the arts of peace by the influence of the 
mode of life known as monastic. The men whose 
names are connected with the beginnings of civiliz- 
ation in the various countries of Europe, and their 
fellow-labourers, were for the most part trained for 
their mission under the Rule of St. Benedict. Such, 

for example, was Augustine in England, Boniface in 
ix 

x INTRODUCTION 

Germany, Ansgar in Scandinavia, Swithbert and 
Willibrord in the Netherlands, etc. 

In view of the facts, therefore, it will hardly be 
denied that the monastic system, as codified in the 
Rule of St. Benedict, has been proved to possess some 
strange power of influencing great bodies of men and 
winning them from the darkness of paganism and the 
horrors of savagery to the light of Christianity and 
the blessings of a civilized life. The secret of this 
fascination is obvious, and the monuments, such as 
Canterbury and Fulda, Salzburg, and the thousands 
of Benedictine abbeys which existed, or still exist, in 
Europe, all testify to the fact that it was the monastic 
life lived by monk-apostles in the midst of the peoples 
they hoped to convert, upon which their success 
mainly depended. ‘The monastic plan was similar 
to the old Roman plan of civilizing by means of 
“colonies” planted among the conquered races of 
the empire. ‘The colonists brought with them the 

arts, and to some extent the culture, of Imperial 

INTRODUCTION xi 

Rome, and their mere life lived among the subjugated 
peoples induced these latter of their own accord to 
adopt the manners, the language and the law of their 
conquerors. ‘There was probably no programme, or 
pretence, but the influence of the life followed by the 
trained Roman colonist worked its charm without 
noise or compulsion. 

In the same way the monk came with the like 
lesson of peace and civilization, but with the addition 
of the all-powerful assistance of religion and the strong 
attraction which self-sacrifice ever exerts over the 
minds of the unlettered. "Thus Augustine came to 
England with forty companions, all trained in the 
* school”? of St. Benedict, and in the principles of his 
Rule. They landed in this country and won it to 
Christ with cross and banner and religious chants. 
Then they settled down to live their lives of prayer 
and labour, and whilst their success is written in the 
annals of our country, we know the names only of a 

very few of these apostles, and they those only who 

xii INTRODUCTION 

were called later to form similar centres in other parts. 
History can tell us nothing of their preaching and 
teaching. No doubt they did all this; but what 
we know of their work is that they lived their life 
according to the Rule; they built up other places 
and formed other colonies, and then they died ; and, 
behold! the peoples among whom they dwelt were 
Christian. 
Sr. BzwrDpiCT 

St. Benedict, the author of this code of monastic 
rules, to the influence of which Europe owes so much, 
was born at Nursia, a city of Umbria, in the year 
480. The beginnings of his life witnessed the 
extinction of the Roman Empire in the West, and 
the year of his birth saw Odoacer, the first barbarian 
who had ruled in Italy, in possession of the throne 
of the Casars. All over the Western world the times 
were difficult and the outlook gloomy, and Italy 
especially presented a sad spectacle of misery and 

desolation. At a time when civilization appeared to 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

be upon the very verge of extinction, and the 
Christian Church seemed to be on the point of losing 
the foothold it had gained amid the ruins of the. 
Roman Empire, St. Benedict appears as the provi- 
dential instrument of regeneration. After experiences 
gained in the schools of Rome, in his cave amid the 
solitudes of Subiaco, and as ruler of the monks of 
Vicovaro, he gathered round him at Subiaco a body 
of monks whom he distributed in twelve separate 
colonies and ruled for eighteen years. It was here, 
probably, that he conceived the lines of his celebrated 
monastic code, which he compiled finally when, about 
the year 528, he removed to the spot where now 
stands the renowned sanctuary of Monte Cassino. 
He died, according to the tradition ofthe Benedictine 
Order, on March 21, 543 a.p. 

Tue Sriur or Monasticism 
To understand the position of the Rule set forth 

by St. Benedict, and to comprehend the reason of its 

xiv INTRODUCTION 

success in the Western world generally, it is necessary 
to know the meaning of monasticism in the early 
ages of the Church. In comparatively modern . 
times various religious Orders have come into exist- - 
ence in order to meet some accidental needs of the 
Church, using the religious life as a means to carry 
out those objects. In the early ages the conception 
of utility or purpose, other than the perfecting of the 
individual soul, does not appear to have entered into 
the ideal of the regular life. It was regarded merely 
as a systematized form of life on the lines of the 
Gospel counsels of perfection, to be lived for its own 
sake and as the full expression of the Church’s true 
and perfect life. Whatever the means, the end to be 
attained by religious life was the same in all systems 
or methods of life, namely, the more complete 
realization of the supernatural end of human exist- 
ence, and the closer conscious union of the soul with 
God. This was to be attained by the removal of every 

hindrance to this elevation of mind, arising from self or 

INTRODUCTION xv 

external things ; and by the practice of the Christian 
virtues according to the counsels of perfection. What- 
ever might conduce to the realization of the super- 
natural and higher life was enjoined and eagerly 
adopted. To some the practice of a solitary life in 
the desert appeared the most efficacious means of 
attaining to this desired elevation of the soul; to 
others the discipline of severe and sustained bodily 
labour seemed necessary; to others, again, the 
practice of astonishing austerities, of self-inflicted 
punishment, or of long and ever-increasing vocal 
prayers, seemed the most sure road by which to reach 
the object in view. In Egypt and the East generally 
the most characteristic features of the monastic life 
have been described as *the craving for austerities, 
individualism and the love of the eremitical life.” 
The early conception of what was necessary for 
monastic life was modified to some extent by St. Basil 
in the latter half of the fourth century. His changes 

tended to the introduction of community as opposed 

xvi INTRODUCTION 

to the eremitical life and the placing of religious and 
ascetical exercises under the control of a Superior. 
From Egypt monachism was introduced into Rome 
and Italy, and is found already established in Gaul 
about the time when St. Basil was modifying earlier 
practices in the East. It is somewhat difficult to say 
how far the individual rules of Eastern monastic 
reformers, like St. Basil or St. Pachomius, affected the 
life of Italian or other European monasteries. ‘That 
these rules were known is certain, both because 
Rufinus had translated into Latin that of St. Basil, 
and St. Jerome that of Pachomius, and because St. 
Benedict refers in his code to * the Rule of our Holy 
Father Basil," as well as to the Collations of Cassian 
and the Lives of the Fathers of the Desert (cap. 73). 
But those who have best reason to pass a judgment 
on the matter consider that the influence of the 
“reforms ” of St. Basil, etc., on Western monasteries 
had been very slight up to the time of St. Benedict, 

and that, at most, some of the “rules and regulations ”’ 

INTRODUCTION xvii 

had been borrowed in a spirit of eclecticism from 
the codes of Basil and Pachomius. It seems almost 
certain, writes a modern authority, that “in Italy, 
as in Gaul and Ireland, early monachism was 

thoroughly Egyptian in its ideals and its working." 

Tue Work or Sr. Benepicr 

The danger of adopting Eastern ideals by Westerns 
is obvious. A method of life which may suit the 
people of Egypt and the East generally, may and 
probably will be found to be wholly unsuitable for 
those of Italy and Gaul, and if unsuitable and im- 
practicable, such a method of life must inevitably 
lead to laxity, and tend to become a hindrance rather 
than a help to attain the end for which it exists. 
This was a recognized fact even before the time, of 
St. Benedict. Cassian found it necessary to introduce 
mitigations into the Egyptian practices to make them 
possible for European monks, and there is evidence 
at least of some laxity in the monasteries of Italy in 

à 

ute cmd 

xviii INTRODUCTION 

the fifth century. In his Rule (cap. 1) St. Benedict 
speaks with severity of the Sarabites and Gyrovagi, 
two classes of monks to be found as the result of the 
system. As the same authority, quoted above, says, 
“This falling away may no doubt have been largely 
due to the fact that the monks of Italy and Gaul 
were trying to live up to an ideal which the climatic 
and other conditions of the country rendered im- 
possible, or, at any rate, extremely difficult, and to 
the discouragement and demoralization consequent 
on an abiding sense of failure." 

It was to meet this real danger that St. Benedict 
wrote his Rule. It must be remembered, he had had 
for three years at Vicovaro personal experience of the 
existing quasi-Eastern monastic system which had 
almost ended in the tragedy of his death for endeavour- 
ing to insist upon the proper carrying out of the rule 
which the monks professed to follow. His remedy 
for the state of general laxity which prevailed amongst 

those professing to lead the higher life was bold and 

INTRODUCTION xix 

novel. He did not endeavour to insist upon the 
discarded austerities and penitential exercises of the 
East, but sought reformation on new lines. He 
secured the old ideals of the ascetical life by modera- 
tion and common-sense ruling over men given to 
prayer and labour directed and controlled by obedience 
to authority. But the life was made possible by 
sufficient food, ample sleep, proper clothing, regulated 
prayers, and even personal austerities checked by the 
will of the abbot. All this was strangely different 
from the type of monastic observance which had 
hitherto prevailed not only in the East, but in Italy 
and Gaul. The ideals, the attainment of those spiritual 
heights which the soul was competent to gain, were 
the same, but for the more sure success Benedict’s 
code of laws was characterized by a wide and wise \ 
discretion. "T'o secure this end, those who wished to 
walk in the path of the Gospel counsels were required, 
as the Prologue of his Rule tells us, to promise a life- 

long obedience. This was a new feature, and was the 

Xx INTRODUCTION 

first introduction of a life-long “profession,” or 
promise of obedience “according to the Rule,” and 
it was with the utmost care made known to the 
monk who “wished to fight under the law” that 
* from that day forth it was not lawful for him to 
withdraw his neck from the yoke of the rule." 

Tue ApoPrioN or THE Rug iN THE WesT 

The result of the introduction of this principle was 
twofold : on the one hand it established that con- 
tinuity of family life known as “stability in the 
community,” which has since become characteristic 
of the monastic life ; and on the other it substituted 
for the personal will of a Superior the code of laws by 
which his government was to be fashioned. Further, 
as the Rule shows, though St. Benedict required 
obedience to his code of laws, he never intended to 
prohibit other customs and practices not at variance 
with it. In fact, he expressly refers his followers to 

the Rule of St. Basil and to other authorities for 

INTRODUCTION xxi 

further guidance. That in process of time St. Bene- 
dict’s legislation should have superseded all others was 
in the nature of things inevitable. As I have else- 
where said, **'T'he difference of tone and form between 
his Rule and that of others is unmistakable ; and 
however deep and intense the piety which breathes 
in the Regula Cenobialis, which goes under the name 
of St. Columban, it is a relief to pass from its crude 
expositions of monastic discipline to the grave and 
noble laws of the Roman monk. Under these cir- 
cumstances it is not wonderful that by the end of the 
eighth century not merely had St. Benedict's Rule 
superseded all others, but in France the memory of 
any other code had so completely perished that it 
could be gravely doubted whether monks of any kind 
had existed before the time of this great monastic 
legislator, and whether there could be any other 

monks but Benedictines.” 

xxii INTRODUCTION 

Tue Conrents or THE RULE 

The code of monastic laws, as will be seen in the 
translation here printed, consists of a Prologue or 
Preface and seventy-three chapters. The Prologue 
contains many important principles of the spiritual 
life, and the beginning makes it clear that St. Benedict 
had before him the Latin translation of St. Basil’s 
Admonitio ad filium spiritualem. ‘The ideas, and many 
of the actual words of the introductory iparagraph 
are evidently taken from these writings of one whom 
he calls “our Holy Father Basil.” In the first 
chapter of the Rule the “Patriarch of Western 
monachism” divides those wishing to lead the 
“higher life” into hermits or anchorites, that is, 
solitaries, and ccenobites, or those living together in 
communities. It is for this latter class only that his 
Rule is intended, namely, for monks living together 
in a monastery under an abbot and following a 

common form of life. Ofthe actual material buildings 

INTRODUCTION xxiii 

we have unfortunately very few details. All that we 
gather is that they were intended to be placed in the 
midst of fields, to be enclosed by walls, and ought 
to contain as far as possible all that the monks could 
need for their life. ‘The monastery was to be looked 
on as the “school of divine service? and the 
“workshop” where the monk was to labour at the 
“artes spirituales "—the spiritual work of his super- 
natural vocation—by exercising himself in the use of 
the “Instruments of good works," described in the 
fourth chapter, which included the commandments 
of God and the natural virtues. St. Benedict shows 
himself as above all things practical in his system of 
spirituality, and he warns his followers that the first 
work on the road of perfection is the rooting up of 
their vices and labouring at the exact performance of 
what God long ago ordered as necessary in the ten 
commandments for all classes of Christians in common. 

According to the Rule the monks were to be 

occupied in manual labour, reading and, above all, in 

xxiv INTRODUCTION 

the liturgy of the Church. ‘The former included not 
merely labour in the fields, but the exercise of any 
art in which some might be proficient, the result of 
which might be sold for the benefit of the monastery, 
or be in any other way useful for the common good. 
The necesity of supplying books for public and 
private reading would show that St. Benedict, 
although he does not expressly mention it, intended 
monks that were capable of writing and illuminating 
to be employed in this way, which subsequently 
proved of the greatest service to European civiliz- 
ation by multiplying in the scriptoria of the monastic 
houses, and thus preserving to our times the litera- 
ture of classical ages and the works of the early 
Fathers of the Christian Church. ‘The time devoted 
to reading—to intellectual studies generally—varied 
according to the period of the year, but the hours 
after Vespers, from three to six o'clock, as well as 
Sundays, were apparently set apart for study (chap. 
48); whilst St. Benedict's declaration that every 

INTRODUCTION xxv 

monk must have his graphium or style, and his tablets 
for writing, shows that intellectual work was contem- 
plated by him. The centre of the monastic life, 
according to the Rule, was unquestionably the 
Liturgy, or as St. Benedict calls it, the Opus Dei, or 
Divine Office. * Nothing was to be preferred” to 
this part of the common life of the religious house, 
and the legislator devotes several chapters of his code 
to ordering and arranging the Psalmody for his 
monks. 

The monastery properly constituted resembled a 
self-centred state or city. Surrounded by walls, with 
its workshops, its farms, its gardens, its mill, etc., it 
was governed by the various necessary officials under 
the direction of a Superior. St. Benedict, however, 
conceived the religious house to resemble rather 
the family of which the abbot held the place of the 
father, and a father in whom the members of 
the family acknowledged, with affectionate respect, 

the obedience due to our Lord Himself, because, as - 

xxvi INTRODUCTION 

he says, “he occupies the place of Christ.” This 
father, or abbot, was chosen by the votes of the 
monks, and the principles which should guide him 
in ruling his family are amongst the most important 
and useful laid down by St. Benedict. ‘Though he 
has the appointment of his officials, and has the right 
and duty of ruling and watching over each individual 
member of the religious community, he himself is 
subject to the provisions of the Rule, and is bound to 

live the common life of the brethren. 

Tue Tzxr or THE RULE 

It is unnecessary to say much under the present 
circumstances as to the text of the Rule of St. Bene- 
dict. ‘There appears never to have been any serious 
doubt cast upon the fact that the book as we have it 
now is substantially what came from the pen of the 
author. In the text of a work so frequently copied 
as this must have been during the whole of the 
Middle Ages, and especially in the period from the 

INTRODUCTION xxvii 

ninth to the twelfth century, when it was practically 
the only monastic Rule of the West, it is inevitable 
that differences should be found to exist. The 
original, or what was believed to have been the 
original autograph of St. Benedict, after having been 
long preserved at Monte Cassino perished in a disas- 
trous fire in the Monastery of Teano, whither it had 
been taken for safety during the invasion of the 
Saracens into Italy. It is of interest to Englishmen 
to know that the oldest MS. at present known is 
Hatton MS. 42, written in England in the seventh 
or eighth century ; the next oldest being the St. Gall 
MS., which is probably not older than the beginning 
of the ninth century. For the benefit of nuns in 
England who followed the Rule, and of others, the work 
was several times translated into English during the 
Middle Ages, and for the benefit of the “devout 
religious women ? of his diocese it was * Englished ” 
by Bishop Richard Foxe, and printed by Pynson on 

January 22, 1516-17. In the seventeenth century 

xxviii INTRODUCTION 

another translation was made partly by Father 
Leander Jones and partly by Father Cuthbert Fursden 
in their connection with the English Benedictine 
nuns of Cambrai. This was published first in 1638, 
and has been more than once since printed. Upon this 
the present translation has been based, although it 
must be confessed that I have found it necessary 
to take considerable liberties with the work of the 

seventeenth-century translators. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

Tue Protocur 

Listen, my son, and turn the ear of thine heart to 
the precepts of thy Master.! Receive readily, and 
faithfully carry out the advice of a loving Father, so 
that by the work of obedience you may return to 
Him, whom you have left by the sloth of disobedience. 
For thee, therefore, whosoever thou be, my words are 
intended, who, giving up thy own will, dost take 
the all-powerful and excellent arms of obedience to 
fight under the Lord Christ, the true King. 

First, beg of Him with most earnest prayer to 
finish the good work begun ; that He who now hath 
deigned to count us among His children may never 
be grieved by our evil deeds. For at all times we 

must so serve Him with the good things He has 
I 

2 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

given us, that He may not, as an angry Father, dis- 
inherit His children, nor as a dread Lord, provoked 
by our evil deeds, deliver us to everlasting punish- 
ment as wicked servants who refuse to follow Him to 
glory. 

Let us, therefore, arise at once, the Scripture 
stirring us up, saying, J£ is now the hour for us to 
rise from sleep.2 And, our eyes now open to the 
divine light, let us with wondering ears hearken to 
- the divine voice, daily calling to us and warning us, 
To-day if you shall hear His voice, harden mot your 
hearts ,9 and again, He that hath ears, let him hear 
what the Spirit saith to the Churches. And what does 
He say? Come, ye children, and hearken unto Me: I 
will teach you the fear of the Lord? Run while ye 
have the light of life, that the darkness of death overtake 
ye not.® 

And our Lord, seeking His workman among the 
multitude of those to whom He thus speaks, says 
again, Who is the man that will have life, and desireth 

THE RULE OF ST, BENEDICT 3 

to see good days?" And if thou, hearing this, reply, 
“TI am he”: God says to you, If thou desirest to 
possess true and everlasting life restrain thy tongue 
from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Decline 
from evil and do good; seek after peace and pursue it 
And when you have done this My eyes shall be on 
you, and My ears shall be open to your prayers. 
And before you can call upon Me, I will say to you, 
Behold, I am present? What can be more agreeable, 
dearest brethren, than this voice of our Lord inviting 
us? Behold how in His loving kindness He shows 
us the way of life ! 

Therefore, with our loins girt by faith, and by 
the practice of good works under the guidance of His 
Gospel, let us walk in the path He has marked out 
for us, that we may deserve to see Him who has 
ca led us in His kingdom.!? 

If we would live in the shelter of this kingdom, 
we can reach it only by speeding on the way of good 

works (by this path alone is it to be attained), But 

4 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

let us, with the prophet, ask our Lord, and say to 
Him, Lord, who shall dwell in Thy tabernacle ? or who 
shall rest on Thy holy hill? And when we have 
so asked, let us hear our Lord’s answer, pointing out 
to us the way to this His dwelling, and saying, He 
that walketh without spot and worketh justice: he that 
speaketh truth in his heart: that hath not forged guile 
with his tongue: he that hath not done evil to his neigh- 
bour, and hath not taken up reproach against him? He 
that, casting out of the inmost thoughts of his heart 
the suggestions of the evil-minded devil trying to 
lead him astray, has brought them all to naught: he 
that taking hold of his thoughts whilst in their birth 
hath dashed them against the rock, which is Christ. 
They who, fearing the Lord, are not lifted up by their 
good observance, but knowing that all that is good 
in. them comes not from themselves but from the 
Lord, extol His work in them, saying with the 
prophet, Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but te Thy Name 
give glory.) 'Thus the Apostle Paul imputed nothing 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 5 

of his preaching to himself, saying, By the grace of 
God I am what I am3* And again he saith, He that 
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 

Hence also our Lord in the Gospel says, He that 
heareth these My words and doth them, I will liken him 
to a wise man that hath built his house upon a rock. The 
floods came, the winds blew and beat against that house, 
and it fell not, because it was founded upon a rock® In 
fulfilment whereof our Lord daily looketh for deeds 
in us complying with His holy admonitions. There- 
fore are the days of this our life lengthened for awhile 
for the mending of our evil deeds, according to the 
words of the apostle, Knowest thou not that the patience 
of God leadeth thee to repentance?™" For our loving 
Lord says, I will not the death of the sinner, but that 
he be converted and live.® 

So questioning the Lord, brethren, we have heard 
on what conditions we may dwell in His temple ; 
and if we fulfil these we shall be heirs of the kingdom 

of heaven. Therefore must our hearts and bodies be 

6 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

prepared to fight under the holy obedience of His 
commands, and we must beg our Lord to supply by 
the help of His grace what by nature is not possible 
to us. And if, fleeing from the pains of hell, we will 
to attain to life everlasting, we must, whilst time yet 
serves and whilst we live in the flesh and the light 
is still on our path, hasten to do now what will profit 
us for all eternity. 

We are therefore now about to institute a school 
for the service of God, in which we hope nothing 
harsh nor burdensome will be ordained. But if we 
proceed in certain things with some little severity, 
sound reason so advising for the amendment of vices 
or the preserving of charity, do not for fear of this 
forthwith flee from the way of salvation, which is 
always narrow in the beginning.? Inm living our life, 
however, and by the growth of faith, when the heart 
has been enlarged, the path of God's commandments 
is run with unspeakable loving sweetness; so that 

never leaving His school, but persevering in the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 7 

monastery until death in His teaching, we share by 
our patience in the sufferings of Christ, and so merit 

to be partakers of His kingdom.?? 

CHAPTER I 
Of tbe several kinds of Monks and their lives 

Ir is recognized that there are four kinds of monks, 
The first are the Cenobites : that is, those who live in 
a monastery under a Rule or an abbot. The second 
kind is that of Anchorites, or Hermits, who not in 
the first fervour of conversion, but after long trial in 
the monastery, and already taught by the example of 
many others, have learnt to fight against the devil, are 
well prepared to go forth from the ranks of the 
brotherhood to the single combat of the desert, 
They can now, by God’s help, safely fight against 
the vices of their flesh and against evil thoughts 

singly, with their own hand and arm and without 

8 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

the encouragement of a companion. The third and 
worst kind of monks is that of the Sarabites, who 
have not been tried under any Rule nor schooled by 
an experienced master, as gold is proved in the 
furnace, but soft as is lead and still in their works 
cleaving to the world, are known to lie to God by 
their tonsure. 

These in twos or threes, or more frequently singly, 
are shut up, without a shepherd; not in our Lord's 
fold, but in their own. ‘The pleasure of carrying 
out their particular desires is their law, and whatever 
they dream of or choose this they call holy ; but 
what they like not, that they account unlawful. 

The fourth class of monks is called Gyrovagi 
(or Wanderers). ‘These move about all their lives 
through various countries, staying as guests for three 
or four days at different monasteries. They are 
always on the move and never settle down, and are 
slaves to their own wills and to the enticements of 

gluttony. In every way they are worse than the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 9 

Sarabites, and of their wretched way of life it is 
better to be silent than to speak. 

Leaving these therefore aside, let us by God's help 
set down a Rule for Cenobites, who are the best kind 

of monks.?1 

CHAPTER: 411 
What the Abbot should be 

An abbot to be fit to rule a monastery should ever 
remember what he is called, and in his acts illustrate 
his high calling. For in a monastery he is considered 
to take the place of Christ, since he is called by His 
name as the apostle saith, Ye have received the spirit 
of the adoption of sons, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.” 
Therefore the abbot should neither teach, ordain, nor 
require anything against the command of our Lord 
(God forbid !), but in the minds of his disciples let 
his orders and teaching be mingled with the leaven 

of divine justice, 

i0 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

'The abbot should ever be mindful that at the 
dread judgment of God there will be inquiry both 
as to his teaching and as to the obedience of his 
disciples. Let the abbot know that any lack of good- 
ness, which the master of the family shall find in his 
flock, will be accounted the shepherd's fault. On 
the other hand, he shall be acquitted in so far as he 
shall have shown all the watchfulness of a shepherd 
over a restless and disobedient flock : and if as their 
pastor he shall have employed every care to cure their 
corrupt manners, he shall be declared guiltless in the 
Lord's judgment, and he may say with the prophet, 
I have mot hidden Thy justice in my heart; I have told 
Thy truth and Thy salvation ;?9. but they contemned and 
despised me.?* And then in the end shall death be 
inflicted as a meet punishment upon the sheep which 
have not responded to his care. When, therefore, 
any one shall receive the name of abbot, he ought to 
rule his disciples with a twofold teaching: that is, 

he should first show them in deeds rather than words 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT r1: 

all that is good and holy. "To such as are under- 
standing, indeed, he may expound the Lord's behests 
by words ; but to the hard-hearted and to the simple- 
minded he must manifest the divine precepts in his 
life. ‘Thus, what he has taught his disciples to be 
contrary to God's law, let him show in his own 
deeds that such things are not to be done, lest 
preaching to others he himself become a castaway,?5 and 
God say unto him thus sinning, Why dost thou declare 
My justices, and take My testament in thy mouth? Thou 
hast hated discipline, and cast My speeches behind thee.% 
And Thou, who didst see the mote in thy brother's 
eye, hast thou not seen the beam that is in thine 
own ? ?! 

Let him make no distinction of persons in the 
monastery. Let not one be loved more than another, 
save such as be found to excel in obedience or good 
works. Let not the free-born be put before the serf- 
born in religion, unless there be other reasonable cause 

for it. If upon due consideration the abbot shall see 

12 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

such cause he may place him where he pleases ; other- 
wise let all keep their own places, because whether 
bond or free we are all one in Christ,8 and bear an equal 
burden of service under one Lord : for with God there 
is no accepting of persons? For one thing only are we 
preferred by Him, if we are found better than others 
in good works and more humble. Let the abbot 
therefore have equal love for all, and let all, accord- 
ing to their deserts, be under the same discipline. 
The abbot in his teaching should always observe 
that apostolic rule which saith, Reprove, entreat, 
rebuke.89 ‘That is to say, as occasions require he 
ought to mingle encouragement with reproofs. .Let 
him manifest the sternness of a master and the loving 
affection of a father. He must reprove the un- 
disciplined and restless severely, but he should 
exhort such as are obedient, quiet and patient, for 
their better profit. We charge hin however! to 
reprove and punish the stubborn and negligent. 

Let him not shut his eyes to the sins of offenders ; 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 13 

but, directly they begin to show themselves and to 
grow, he must use every means to root them up 
utterly, remembering the fate of Heli, the priest of 
Silo.! To the more virtuous and apprehensive, 
indeed, he may for the first or second time use words 
of warning ; but in dealing with the stubborn, the 
hard-hearted, the proud and the disobedient, even at 
the very beginning of their sin, let him chastise them 
with stripes and with bodily punishment, knowing 
that it is written, The fool is mot corrected with words.® 
And again, Strike thy son with a rod and thou shalt 
: deliver his soul from death.8 

The abbot ought ever to bear in mind what he 1s 
and what he is called; he ought to know that to 
whom more is entrusted, from him more is exacted. 
Let him recognize how difficult and how hard a task 
he has undertaken, to rule souls and to make himself 
a servant to the humours of many. One, forsooth, 
must be led by gentle words, another by sharp re- 

prehension, another by persuasion ; and thus shall he 

14 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

so shape and adapt himself to the character and intel- 
ligence of each, that he not only suffer no loss in the 
flock entrusted to his care, but may even rejoice in 
its good growth. Above all things let him not slight 
nor make little of the souls committed to his care, 
heeding more fleeting, worldly and frivolous things ; 
but let him remember always that he has undertaken 
the government of souls, of which he shall also have 
to give an account. And that he may not complain 
of the want of temporal means, let him remember 
that it is written, Seek first the kingdom of God, and His 
justice, and all things shall be given to you.9* And again, 
Nothing is wanting to such as fear Him.35 

He should know that whoever undertakes the 
government of souls must prepare himself to account 
for them. And however great the number of the 
brethren under him may be, let him understand for 
certain that at the Day of Judgment he will have to 
give to our Lord an account of all their souls as well 

as of his own. In this way, by fearing the inquiry 

AC 
THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 1i; 
concerning his flock which the Shepherd will hold, he 

is solicitous on account of others souls as well as of 
his own, and thus whilst reclaiming other men by 

his corrections, he frees himself also from all vice. 

CHAPTER III 
On taking Counsel of tbe Bretbren 

WHENEVER any weighty matters have to be transacted 
in the monastery let the abbot call together all the 
community and himself propose the matter for dis- 
cussion. After hearing the advice of the brethren 
let him consider it in his own mind, and then dc 
what he shall judge most expedient. We ordain that 
all must be called to council, because the Lord often 
reveals to a younger member what is best. And let 
the brethren give their advice with all humble sub- 
iection, and presume not stiffly to defend their own 

opinion. Let them rather leave the matter to the 

16 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

abbot's discretion, so that all submit to what he shall 
deem best. As it becometh disciples to obey their 
master, so doth it behove the master to dispose of all 
things with forethought and justice. 

In all things, therefore, every one shall follow the 
Rule as their master, and let no one rashly depart 
from it. In the monastery no one is to be led by 
the desires of his own heart, neither shall any one 
within or without the monastery presume to argue 
wantonly with his abbot. If he presume to do so 
let him be subjected to punishment according to the 
Rule. 

The abbot, however, must himself do all things in 
the fear of God and according to the Rule, knowing 
that he shall undoubtedly have to give an account of 
his whole government to God, the most just Judge. 

If anything of less moment has to be done in the 
monastery let the abbot take advice of the seniors 
only, as it is written, Do a/ things with counsel, and 
thou shalt not afterwards repent of it. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 17 

[ 

CHAPTER IV 
The Instruments of Good Works 

First of all, to love the Lord God with all our 

heart, with all our soul, with all our strength.97 

N 

. Then, to love our neighbour as ourself.38 
. Then, not to kill.?? 

. Not to commit adultery.” 

. Not to steal.4! 

. Not to be covetous.£ 

. Not to bear false witness.43 

oN QN Uu Bp Q3 

. To respect all men.** 

9. Not to do to another what one would not have 
done to oneself.55 

IO. To deny oneself in order to follow Christ.*9 

11. To chastise the body.*? 

12. Not to be fond of pleasures. 

13. To love fasting.*? 

14. To give refreshment to the poor.5? 

15. To clothe the naked.5! 
2 

18 

16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
235 

22. 

23: 

24 

25. 
26. 
ok 
28. 
29. 
30. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

To visit the sick.9? 

To bury the dead.°% 

To come to the help of those in trouble.5* 
To comfort those in sadness.55 

To become a stranger to the ways of the world.59 
To prefer nothing to the love of Christ." 
Not to give way to wrath.59 

Not to harbour anger for any time.9? 

Not to foster deceit in the heart.® 

Not to make a false peace. 

Not to depart from charity. 

Not to swear at all, lest one forswears.9? 
To speak the truth with heart and lips. 
Not to return evil for evil.© 

Not to do an injury, but patiently to suffer 

one when done.® 

31. 
12. 

To love one's enemies.97 

Not to speak ill of those who speak ill of one, 

but rather to speak well of them.® 

33- 

To suffer persecution for justice sake.9? 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT tg 

34. Not to be proud.” 

35. Not to be a winebibber."1 

36. Not to be a great eater.72 

37. Not to be given to sleep.? 

38. Not to be slothful.7* 

39. Not to be a murmurer.% 

40. Not to be a detractor.76 

41. To put one's trust in God.77 

42. When one sees any good in oneself to attribute 
it to God, not to oneself./? 

43. That a man recognize that it is he who does 
evil, and so let him attribute it to himsel£,79 

44. To fear the day of judgment.®? 

45. To be afraid of hell. 

46. To desire life everlasting with entire spiritual 
longing.*? 

47. To have the vision of death before one’s eyes 
daily. 

48. To watch over the actions of one’s life every 
hour of the day.*4 

20 ‘THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

49. To know for certain that God sees one every- 
where.55 

50. 'To dash at once against Christ (as against a 
rock) evil thoughts which rise up in the mind.56 

51. And to reveal all such to one's spiritual 
Father.87 

52. To guard one's lips from uttering evil or 
wicked words.88 

53. Not to be fond of much talking.9? 

54. Not to speak idle words, or such as move to 
laughter. 

55. Not to love much or boisterous laughter.?! 

56. Willingly to hear holy reading.?? 

57. Often to devote oneself to prayer. 

58. Daily with tears and sighs to confess to God 
in prayer one’s past offences, and to avoid them for 
the future.% 

59. Not to give way to the desires of the flesh : 95 
and to hate one's own will. 

60, In all things to obey the abbot’s commands, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 21: 
even though he himself (which God forbid) should 

act otherwise, remembering our Lord's precept, Wat 
they say, do ye, but what they do, do ye not. 

61. Not to wish to be called holy before one is 
so ; but to be holy first so as to be called such with 
truth.% 

62. Daily in one’s acts to keep God’s command- 
ments.% 

63. To love chastity.100 

64. To hate no man.!?! 

65. Not to be jealous or envious.!02 

66. Not to love wrangling.10? 

67. To show no arrogant spirit.104 

68. To reverence the old.105 

69. To love the young.1% 

70. To pray for one’s enemies for the love of 
Christ.107 

71. To make peace with an adversary before the 
sun sets,108 

72. And, never to despair of God's mercy.) 

22 THE RULE: OF ST. BENEDICT 

Behold these are the tools of our spiritual craft ; 
when we shall have made use of them constantly day 
and night, and shall have proved them at the day of 
judgment, that reward shall be given us by our Lord, 
which He has promised, Which eye hath mot seen, nor 
ear heard, mor hath it entered into the heart of man to 
conceive what God hath prepared for those that love Him.) 
Steadfastly abiding in the community, the workshop 
where all these instruments are made use of is the 

cloister of the monastery. 

CHAPTER V 
On Obedience 

Tue first degree of humility is prompt obedience. 
This is required of all who, whether by reason of the 
holy servitude to which they are pledged, or through 
fear of hell, or to attain to the glory of eternal life, 
hold nothing more dear than Christ. Such disciples 

delay not in doing what is ordered by their superior, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 23 

just as if the command had come from God. Of such 
our Lord says, At the hearing of the ear he hath obeyed 
me. ^ And to the teachers He likewise says, He that 
heareth you, heareth me? 

For this reason such disciples, surrendering forth- 
with all they possess, and giving up their own will, 
leave unfinished what they were working at, and with 
the ready foot of obedience in their acts follow the 
word of command. ‘Thus, as it were, at the same 
moment comes the order of the master and the 
finished work of the disciple : with the speed of the 
fear of God both go jointly forward and are quickly 
effected by such as ardently desire to walk in the way 
of eternal life. These take the narrow way, of which 
the Lord saith, Narrow is the way which leads to life.18 
That is, they live not as they themselves will, neither 
do they obey their own desires and pleasures; but 
following the command and direction of another and 
abiding in their monasteries, their desire is to be 

ruled by an abbot. Without doubt such as these 

24... THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

carry out that saying of our Lord, J came not to do my 
own will, but the will of Him Who sent me.M* 

This kind of obedience will be both acceptable 
to God and pleasing to men, when what is ordered 
is not done out of fear, or slowly and coldly, grudg- 
ingly, or with reluctant protest. Obedience shown to 
superiors is indeed given to God, Who Himself hath 
said, He that heareth you, heareth Me.1® What is com- 
manded should be done by those under obedience, 
with a good will, since God loveth a cheerful giver 6 
If the disciple obey unwillingly and murmur in word 
as well as in heart, it will not be accepted by God, 
Who considereth the heart of a murmurer, even if he 
do what was ordered. For a work done in this spirit 
shall have no reward ; rather shall the doer incur the 
penalty appointed for murmurers if he amend not and 

make not satisfaction. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 25 

CHAPTER VI 
On Silence 

Ler us do as the prophet says, I have said, I will 
keep my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. I have 
been watchful over my mouth: I held my peace and hum- 
bled myself and was silent from speaking even good things. T 
Here the prophet shows that, for the sake of silence, 
we are at times to abstain even from good talk. If 
this be so, how much more needful is it that we 
refrain from evil words, on account of the penalty of 
the sin! Because of the importance of silence, there- 
fore, let leave to speak be seldom given, even to perfect 
disciples, although their talk be of good and holy 
matters and tending to edification, since it is written, 
In much speaking, thou shalt not escape sin8 'The mas- 
ter, indeed, should speak and teach: the disciple 
should hold his peace and listen. 

Whatever, therefore, has to be asked of the prior, 

26 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

let it be done with all humility and with reverent 
submission. But as to coarse, idle words, or such as 
move to laughter, we utterly condemn and ban them 
in all places. We do not allow any disciple to give 

mouth to them. 

CHAPTER VII 
On Humility 

Bretruren, Holy Scripture cries out to us, saying, 
Every one who exalteth himself shall be humbled, and 
he who humbleth himself shall be exalted.9 In this it 
tells us that every form of self-exaltation is a kind of 
pride, which the prophet declares he carefully avoided, 
where he says, Lord, my heart is not exalted, neither are 
my eyes lifted up ; neither have I walked in great things, 
nor in wonders above myself. And why? If I did not 
think humbly, but exalted my soul: as a child weaned 

from his mother, so wilt Thou reward my soul? 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 27 

Wherefore, brethren, if we would scale the summit 
of humility, and swiftly gain the heavenly height 
which is reached by our lowliness in this present life, 
we must set up a ladder of climbing deeds like that 
which Jacob saw in his dream, whereon angels were 
descending and ascending. Without doubt that de- 
scending and ascending is to be understood by us as 
signifying that we descend by exalting ourselves and 
ascend by humbling ourselves. But the ladder itselt 
thus set up is our life in this world, which by humility 
of heart is lifted by our Lord to heaven. Our body 
and soul we may indeed call the sides of the ladder in 
which our divine vocation has set the divers steps of 
humility and discipline we have to ascend. 

The first step of humility, then, is reached when a 
man, with the fear of God always before his eyes, 
does not allow himself to forget, but is ever mindful 
of all God’s commandments. He remembers, more- 
over, that such as contemn God fall into hell for 

their sins, and that life eternal awaits such as fear 

28 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

Him. And warding off at each moment all sin and 
defect in thought and word, of eye, hand or foot, of 
self-will, let such a one bestir himself to prune away 
the lusts of the flesh. 

Let him think that he is seen at all times by God 
from heaven ; and that wheresoever he may be, all 
his actions are visible to the eye of God and at all 
times are reported by the angels. The prophet 
shows us this when he says that God is ever present 
to our thoughts : God searcheth the hearts and reins V2 
And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men that 
they are vain. He also saith, Thou hast under- 
stood my thoughts afar off ;°3 and again, The thought of 
man shall confess TÀee.7* In order, then, that the 
humble brother may be careful to avoid wrong 
thoughts let him always say in his heart, Tem shall I 
be without spot before Him, if I shall keep me from my 
iniquity 1% 

We are forbidden to do our own will, since Scrip- 

ture tells us, Leave thy own will and desire.\*® And 

IHE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT = 29 

again, We beg of God in prayer that His will may be 
done in us, . 

Rightly are we taught therefore not to do our own 
will, if we take heed of what the Scripture teaches : 
There are ways which to men seem right, the end whereof 
plungeth even into the deep pit of hell}?8 And again, 
when we fear what is said about the negligent, They 
are corrupted, and made abominable in their pleasures.) 
But in regard of the desires of the flesh we ought to 
believe that God is present with us ; as the prophet 
says, speaking to the Lord, O Lord, all my desire is 
before Thee.\°° 

We have therefore to beware of evil desires, since 
death stands close at the door of pleasure. It is for 
this reason that Scripture bids us, Follow not thy con- 
cupiscences.81 If, therefore, the eyes of the Lord 
behold both the good and the bad ; if He be ever 
looking down from heaven upon the sons of men to 
find one who thinks of God or seeks Him ; and 

if day and night what we do is made known to Him 

30 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

—for these reasons, by the angels appointed to watch 
over us, we should always take heed, brethren, lest 
God may sometime or other see us, as the prophet 
says in the Psalm, inclined to evil and become unprofitable 
servants? Even though He spare us for a time, 
because He is loving and waits for our conversion to 
better ways, let us fear that He may say to us here- 
after, These things thou hast done and I held my peace.\*? 

The second step of humility is reached when any 
one not loving self-will takes no heed to satisfy his 
own desires, but copies in his life what our Lord said, 
I came not to do My own will, but the will of Him Who 
sent Me.1®4 Scripture likewise proclaims that self-will 
engendereth punishment, and necessity purchaseth a 
crown. 

The third step of humility is reached when a man, 
for the love of God, submits himself with all obedi- 
ence to a superior, imitating our Lord, of whom 
the apostle saith, He was made obedient even unto 
death, 199 

THE RULE: OF ST. BENEDICT 3r 

The fourth step of humility is reached when any 
one in the exercise of his obedience patiently and 
with a quiet mind bears all that is inflicted on him, 
things contrary to nature, and even at times unjust, 
and in suffering all these he neither wearies nor gives 
over the work, since the Scripture says, He only that 
persevereth to the end shall be saved 5,199 also Let thy 
heart be comforted, and expect the Lord.?! And in order 
to show that for our Lord’s sake the faithful man 
ought to bear all things, no matter how contrary to 
nature they may be (the psalmist), in the person of 
the sufferers, says, For thee we suffer death all the day 
long ; we are esteemed as sheep for the slaughter.) Se- 
cure in the hope of divine reward they rejoice, saying, 
But in all things we overcome by the help of Him Who 
hath loved us.189 

Elsewhere also Scripture says, Thou hast proved us, 
O Lord; Thou hast tried us, as silver is tried, with tire. 
Thou hast brought us into the snare; Thou hast laid tribu- 

lation upon our backs.\40 And to show that we ought 

32; THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

to be subject to a prior (or superior) it goes on, 
Thou hast placed men over our heads.41 And, moreover, 
they fulfil the Lord’s command by patience in ad- 
versity and injury, who, when struck on one cheek, 
offer the other ; when one taketh away their coat leave go 
their cloak also, and who being compelled to carry a 
burden one mile, go two; who, with Paul the 
apostle, suffer false brethren, and bless those who 
speak ill of them.142 

The fifth step of humility is reached when a monk 
manifests to his abbot, by humble confession, all the 
evil thoughts of his heart and his secret faults. The 
Scripture urges us to do this where it says, Reveal 
thy way to the Lord and hope in Him. It also says, 
Confess to the Lord, because He is good, because His mercy 
endureth for ever4* And the prophet also says, I 
have made known unto Thee mine offence, and mine in- 
justices I have not hidden. I have said, I will declare 
openly against myself mine injustices to the Lord ; and Thou 
hast pardoned the wickedness of my heart.\ 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 34 

The sixth step of humility is reached when a monk 
is content with all that is mean and vile ; and in 
regard to everything enjoined him accounts himself 
a poor and worthless workman, saying with the 
prophet, I have been brought to nothing, and knew it not. 
I have become as a beast before Thee, and I am always with 
Top. 159 

The seventh step of humility is reached when a 
man not only confesses with his tongue that he is 
most lowly and inferior to others, but in his inmost 
heart believes so. Such a one, humbling himself, ex- 
claims with the prophet, J am a worm and no man, the 
reproach of men and the outcast of the people" I have 
been exalted and am humbled and confounded 18 And 
again, It is good for me that Thou hast humbled me, that 
I may learn Thy commandments. 

The eighth step of humility is reached when a 
monk does nothing but what the common rule of the 
monastery, or the example of his seniors, enforces. 

The ninth step of humility is reached when a 
3 

34 THE. RULE OF ST. BENEDICT: 

monk restrains his tongue from talking, and, practising 
silence, speaks not till a question be asked him, since 
Scripture says, In many words thou shalt not avoid siu, 190 
and z talkative man shall not be directed upon the earth.'>1 

The tenth step of humility is attained to when 
one is not easily and quickly moved to laughter, for it 
is written, Te fool lifteth his voice in laughter 19? 

The eleventh step of humility is reached when a 
monk, in speaking, do so quietly and without laughter, 
humbly, gravely and in a few words and not with 
a loud voice, for it is written, 4 wise man is known by 
a few words.8 

The twelfth step of humility is reached when a 
monk not only has humility in his heart, but even 
shows it also exteriorly to all who behold him. 
Thus, whether he be in the oratory at the “ Work 
of God,” in the monastery, or in the garden, on a 
journey, or in the fields, or wheresoever he be, sitting, 
standing or walking, always let him, with head bent 

and eyes fixed on the ground, bethink himself of his 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 55; 

sins and imagine that he is arraigned before the 
dread judgment of God. Let him be ever saying to 
himself, with the publican in the Gospel, Lord, I a 
sinner am not worthy to lift mine eyes to heaven ; 19* and 
with the prophet, J am bowed down and humbled on 
every side.195 

When all these steps of humility have been mounted 
the monk will presently attain to that love of God 
which is perfect and casteth out fear. By means of 
this love everything which before he had observed 
not without fear, he shall now begin to do by habit, 
without any trouble and, as it were, naturally. He 
acts now not through fear of hell, but for the love of 
Christ, out of a good habit and a delight in virtue. : 
All this our Lord will vouchsafe to work by the Holy 
Ghost in His servant, now cleansed from vice and 

sin. 

56 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER VIII 
Of the Divine|Office at Night time 

In the winter time—that is, from the first of Nov- 
ember till Easter—the brethren shall get up at the 
eighth hour of the night by reasonable calculation, 
so that having rested till a little after midnight they 
may rise refreshed. Let the time that remains after 
Matins be used, by those brethren who need it, for 
the study of the Psalter or lessons. From Easter to 
the foresaid first of November let the hour for saying 
Matins be so arranged that after a brief interval, 
during which the brethren may go forth for the 
necessities of nature, Lauds, which are to be said at 

daybreak, may presently follow. 

CHAPTER IX 

How many Psalms are to be said in the night hours 

In the winter season, having first said the verse, 

O God, incline unto mine aid; O Lord, make haste to help 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 37 

7£,56 the words, O Lord, Thou shalt open my lips and my 
mouth shall declare Thy praise’ are then to be said 
thrice. After this the third Psalm is to be said with 
a Ghria; after which the ninety-fourth Psalm, with an 
antiphon, is to be recited or sung, followed by a 
hymn, and then six psalms with their antiphons. 
When these are ended and a versicle said, let the 
abbot give a blessing ; and then, all being seated, let 
three lessons from the book placed on the lectern be 
read by the brethren in turns. Between these lessons 
three responsories are to be sung, two without a Ghia. 
After the third lesson, however, let the cantor add the 
Ghria to the responsory, and as soon as he begins it 
let all rise from their seats out of honour and reverence 
to the Holy Trinity. 

.Let the divinely inspired books of the Old and 
New Testament be read at Matins, together with 
their expositions from the best known, orthodox and 
Catholic Fathers. 

After these three lessons, with their responsories, 

38 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

let six other psalms be sung with the A//eluia. A 
lesson from the Apostle is then to be said by heart, 
and a verse with the petition of the Litany—that 
is, Kyrie eleison—and so let the night watches (or 
Matins) end. 

CHAPTER X 

How Matins, or the Night Praises, are to be said in tbe Summer season 

From Easter to the first day of November the 
same number of psalms as above appointed are to be 
said. On account of the short nights, however, the 
lessons are not to be read from the book, but in place 
of the three lessons let one out of the Old Testament 
be said by heart and followed by a short responsory. 
Let all the rest be done as we have arranged above, 
so that, without counting the third and ninety-fourth 
Psalm, there may never be less than twelve psalms at 

Matins, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT . 39 

CHAPTER XI 
How Matins, or the Night Watches, are to be celebrated on Sundays 

On Sunday let the brethren rise earlier for Matins, 
in which the following order is to be observed: when 
six psalms and the versicle have been sung, as we have 
before arranged, let all sit down in proper order and 
let four lessons be read from the book with their 
responsories, in the manner before prescribed. ‘To 
the fourth responsory only let the cantor add the 
Ghria, and when he begins it let all rise at once out 
of reverence. After these lessons six other psalms 158 
follow in order with their antiphons and a versicle as 
before. Then let four other lessons be read with 
their responsories in the same way as the former, and 
then three canticles out of the Prophets, appointed 
by the abbot: these canticles are to be sung with 
Alleluia. 

When the versicle has been said, and the abbot has 

40 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

given the blessing, four more lessons from the New 
"Testament are to be read, in the same order as before. 
After the fourth responsory let the abbot begin the 
hymn Te Deum laudamus, and when that is finished he 
shall read a lesson from the Gospel, with reverence 
and fear, whilst all stand. At the conclusion of this 
let all answer Amen, and let the abbot immediately 
go on with the hymn Te decet /aus ; after the blessing 
let them begin Lauds. 

This method of singing Matins on Sundays is to 
be observed always, as well in summer as in winter, 
unless perchance (which God forbid) they get up late, 
and the lessons or responsories have to be somewhat 
shortened. Let great care be taken that this shall 
not happen ; but if it does, let him to whose care- 
lessness it is due make full satisfaction to God in the 

oratory. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 41i 

CHAPTER XII 

How Lauds are to be solemnized 

AT Lauds on Sunday let the sixty-sixth Psalm be 
first said straight on and without an antiphon. After 
this the fiftieth is to be said with 4/e/uia, with the 
hundred and seventeenth and the sixty-second. Then 
follow the “Blessings” (or Benedicite) and the 
“Praises” (or Laudate psalms), a lesson from the 
Apocalypse, said by heart, a responsory and hymn, 
the versicle and the canticle from the Gospel (or 
Benedictus) with the litanies (or Kyrie), and so 

conclude, 

CHAPTER XIII 
How Lauds are to be celebrated on ordinary days 
On ordinary week-days let Lauds be celebrated as 
follows: the sixty-sixth Psalm is to be said, as on 
Sunday, straight on without any antiphon, and some- 

what slowly, to allow of all being in their places for 

42 THE RULE OF SF. BENEDICT 

the fiftieth Psalm, which is to be said with an anti- 
phon. After this come two other psalms according 
to custom : that is, on Monday, the fifth and thirty- 
fifth ; on Tuesday, the forty-second and fifty-sixth ; 
on Wednesday, the sixty-third and sixty-fourth ; on 
Thursday, the eighty-seventh and eighty-ninth ; on 
Friday, the seventy-fifth and ninety-first ; on Satur- 
day, the hundred and forty-second and the Canticle 
of Deuteronomy, which must be divided into two 
Ghrias. But on other days let a canticle out of the 
Prophets be said, each on its proper day, according to 
the custom of the Roman Church. After these let 
the Praises (or Laudate Psalms) follow, then a lesson 
of the Apostle, said by heart, the responsory, hymn 
and versicle, the canticle from the Gospel (or Bene- 
dictus), the litanies (or Kyrie eleison), and the office is 
completed. 

Lauds and Evensong are never to be finished with- 
out the Lord's prayer at the end. This is said by 
the prior (that is, the superior) aloud, so that all may 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 43 

hear, because of the thorns of scandal which are 
always cropping up: that the community, by reason 
of the pledge given in this prayer, in the words, 
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass 
against us, may purge themselves from this kind of 
vice. In saying the other Hours, however, the last 
part of the prayer only is said aloud that all may 

answer, But deliver us from evil. 

CHAPTER XIV 
How Matins is to be said on the Feast days of Saints 

On Saints’ feast days and on all solemnities let 
Matins be said in the manner we have ordered for 
Sunday, except that the psalms, antiphons and lessons 
are said which are proper to the day itself. The 
method of saying them, however, shall remain as 

before prescribed, 

44 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XV 
At what seasons Alleluia is to be said 

From the holy feast of Easter until Whitsuntide 
Alleluia is to be always said both with the psalms 
and in the responsories. From Whitsuntide till the 
beginning of Lent let it be said every night at Matins 
only with the last six psalms. On every Sunday out 
of Lent let the Canticles, Lauds, Prime, Tierce, Sext 
and None be said with 4/eluia, but Evensong with 
antiphons. Responsories, however, except from Easter 

till Pentecost, are never to be said with 4/eluia. 

CHAPTER XVI 
How the day Divine Office is to be said 

Tue prophet says, Seven times I have sung Thy 
praises. — "This sacred number of seven will be kept 

by us if we perform the duties of our service in the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 4; 

Hours of Lauds, Prime, Tierce, Sext, None, Evensong 
and Compline. It was of these day Hours the 
prophet said, Seven times a day I have sung Thy praises, 
for of the night watches the same prophet says, 447 
midnight I arose to confess to Thee. At these times, 
therefore, let us give praise to our Creator for His 
just judgments, that is, at Lauds, Prime, Tierce, 
Sext, None, Evensong and Compline, and at night 

let us rise to confess to Him. 

CHAPTER XVII 

How many Psalms are to be said in these Hours 

We have already settled the order of the psalmody 
for the Nocturns and for Lauds, let us now arrange 
for the Hours which follow. At Prime three psalms 
are to be said separately, that is, not under one Ghria. 
After the verse, O God, incline unto mine aid, and 

before the psalms are begun, the hymn of each Hour 

46 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

is to be said. At the end of the three psalms a 
lesson is recited, then with the versicle and Kyrie 
eleison the Hour is concluded. ‘The Hours of Tierce, 
Sext and None are to be said in the same way, that 
is, the verse (O God, incline, etc.), the hymns of these 
Hours, three psalms, the lesson and versicle, and with 
Kyrie eleison they are concluded. 

If the community be large the Hours shall be 
sung with antiphons, but if it be small they are to 
be without. Evensong shall be said with four psalms 
and antiphons, after which a lesson is to be recited, 
then a responsory, hymn, versicle, canticle from the 
Gospel (i.e. Magnificat), and it is concluded by the 
litanies (or Kyrie) and the Lord’s Prayer. Compline 
shall consist in the saying of three psalms straight 
through and without antiphons, followed by the 
hymn of the Hour, a lesson, versicle, Kyrie eleison, and 

shall conclude with the blessing. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 47 

CHAPTER XVIII 
Tbe order in «vbicb tbe Psalms are to be said 

Ler the verse, O God, incline unto mine aid; O 
Lord, make haste to help me, with a Gloria, always come 
first, followed by the hymn of each Hour. Then, 
on Sundays, at Prime, four divisions of the hundred 
and eighteenth Psalm are to be said; and at the 
other Hours of 'Tierce, Sext and None three divisions 
of the same. On Monday, at Prime, psalms first, 
second and third are recited, and so on each day till 
Sunday, three other psalms in order up to the nine- 
teenth Psalm: the ninth and seventeenth Psalm 
being each divided in two by a Ghria. In this way 
the Sunday Matins may always begin with the 
twentieth Psalm. 

On Mondays, at Tierce, Sext and None let the 
remaining nine divisions of the hundred and eigh- 

teenth Psalm be said, three at each Hour. The 

48 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

hundred and eighteenth Psalm being finished on the 
two days, Sunday and Monday, therefore on Tuesday, 
at Tierce, Sext and None the three psalms at each 
Hour shall be the nine from the hundred and nine- 
teenth to the hundred and twenty-seventh. And these 
same psalms are to be repeated at the Hours till the 
Sunday. A uniform order of the hymns, lessons 
and versicles is to be likewise observed, so that the 
hundred and eighteenth Psalm is always begun on 
the Sunday. 

Four psalms are to be sung each day at Evensong. 
These begin with the hundred and ninth Psalm and 
conclude with the hundred and forty-seventh, omitting 
those already set apart for the various other Hours, 
that is to say, from the hundred and seventeenth 
Psalm to the hundred and twenty-seventh; the 
hundred and thirty-third and the hundred and forty- 
second. All the rest are to be said at Evensong, 
and because this leaves three psalms short the longest 

of them, namely, the hundred and thirty-eighth, the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 49 

hundred and forty-third, and the hundred and forty- 
fourth, are to be divided. "The hundred and six- 
teenth, however, since it is brief, is to be joined 
to the hundred and fifteenth. 

The order of the psalms for Evensong being thus 
arranged, let the other parts, such as the lessons, 
responsories, hymns, versicles and canticles, be used as 
before directed. At Compline the same psalms are 
repeated every day, namely, the fourth, the ninetieth 
and the hundred and thirty-third. 

The order of the psalmody for the day office being 
thus settled, all the rest of the psalms are to be equally 
portioned to the seven night watches (or Matins). 
Those that are too long are to be divided into two ; 
and twelve psalms are to be arranged for each night. 
If this distribution of the psalms displease any one we 
specially desire him to arrange otherwise, if he think 
something else better, provided that care be taken 
that every week the whole Psalter of a hundred and 

fifty psalms be sung, and that at Matins on Sunday it 
4 

s0 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

be begun again. Monks, indeed, show themselves in 
their service too negligent and indevout who sing 
less than the Psalter, with the usual canticles, once in 
the week, when we read that our holy Fathers 
courageously performed in one day what I would 

that we who are tepid may do in a whole week. 

CHAPTER XIX 
Of the manner of singing the Office 

We believe that the Divine Presence is everywhere, 
and that the eyes of the Lord behold both the good 
and the bad in all places. Especially do we believe 
without any doubt that this is so when we assist at 
the Divine Office. Let us therefore always be mind- 
ful of what the prophet says, Serve ye the Lord in 
fear 3161 and again, Sing ye His praises with under- 
standing ; 18 and, In the sight of angels I will sing praise 
to Thee.88 Wherefore let us consider how it be- 

hoveth us to be in the sight of God and the angels, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT zr: 

and so let us take our part in the psalmody that mind 

and voice accord together. 

CHAPTER XX 

On Reverence at Prayer 

Ir, when we wish to obtain some favour from 
those who have the power to help us, we dare not ask 
except with humility and reverence, how much more 
reason is there that we should present our petitions 
to the Lord God of the universe in all lowliness of 
heart and purity of devotion. We may know for 
certain that we shall be heard, not because we use 
many words, but on account of the purity of our 
hearts and our tears of sorrow. Our prayer, there- 
fore, should be short and pure, unless by some inspir- 
ation of divine grace it be prolonged. All prayer 
made by the community in common, however, should 
be short ; and when the prior (that is, the superior) 

has given the sign, let all rise together. 

52 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XXI 
The Deans of the Monastery 

Ir the community be large let brethren of good 
repute and holy lives be chosen from amongst them 
and appointed deans. These shall carefully watch 
over their deaneries in all things relating to the com- 
mandments of God and the injunctions of the abbot. 
Deans are to be chosen on whom the abbot may 
safely rely to share his burdens, and the choice is 
not to be determined by their order (in the com- 
munity) but by the worthiness of their lives and their 
proved learning. And if perchance any one of these 
deans, being puffed up by pride, be found blame- 
worthy, and after being thrice corrected will not 
amend, then let him be put out of office and another 
more worthy be substituted. We direct the same in 

the case of the Provost. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT ;3 

CHAPTER XXII 
How the Monks are to sleep 

ALL shall sleep in separate beds and each shall 
receive, according to the appointment of his abbot, 
bedclothes, fitted to the condition of his life. If it 
be possible let them all sleep in a common dormi- 
tory, but if their great number will not allow this 
they may sleep in tens or twenties, with seniors to 
have charge of them. Let a candle be constantly 
burning in the room until morning, and let the 
monks sleep clothed and girt with girdles or cords ; 
but they are not to have knives by their sides in their 
beds, lest perchance they be injured whilst sleeping. 
In this way the monks shall always be ready to rise 
quickly when the signal is given and hasten each one 
to come before his brother to the Divine Office, and 
yet with all gravity and modesty. 

'The younger brethren are not to have their beds 

:4 THE RULE OP ST. BENEDICT 

next to each other, but amongst those of the elders. 
When they rise for the Divine Office let them gently 
encourage one another, because of the excuses made 

by those that are drowsy. 

- CHAPTER XXIII 
Of Excommunication for Offences 

Ir any brother be found stubborn, disobedient, 
proud, murmuring, or in any way acting contrary to 
the Holy Rule, or contemning the orders of his 
seniors, let him, according to the precept of our Lord, 
be secretly admonished by those seniors, once or 
twice. If he will not amend let him be publicly 
reproved before all. But if even then he does not 
correct his faults, let him, if he understand the nature 
of the punishment, be subject to excommunication. 
But if he be obstinate he is to undergo corporal 

punishment. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 55 

CHAPTER XXIV 

What the manner of Excommunication should be 

Tue mode of excommunication or punishment 
should be proportioned to the fault, and the gravity 
of the fault shall depend on the judgment of the 
abbot. If any brother be detected in small faults 
let him be excluded from eating at table with the rest. 
The punishment of one thus separated from the com- 
mon table shall be of this kind: in the oratory he 
shall not intone either psalm or antiphon; neither 
shall he read any lesson until he has made satisfaction. 
He shall take his portion of food alone, after the 
brethren have had their meal, and in such quantity 
and at such time as the abbot shall think fit. So 
that if, for example, the brethren take their meal at 
the sixth hour let him take his at the ninth; if the 
brethren take theirs at the ninth, let him have his in 
the evening, till such time as by due satisfaction he 

obtain pardon. 

£6 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XXV 
Of Graver Faults 

Ler the brother who is guilty of some graver 
fault be excluded both from the common table and 
from the oratory. None of the brethren shall talk 
to him or consort with him. Let him be alone at 
the work which is set him; let him remain in penance 
and sorrow, and keep before his mind that terrible 
sentence of the apostle where he says, Such a one is 
delivered over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that 
his spirit may be saved im the day of our Lord.9* Let 
him take his food alone, in such quantity and at such 
time as the abbot shall think fit. Let no one bless 
him as he passes by, nor ask a blessing on the food 

that is given him, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 57 

CHAPTER XXVI 

Of such as keep company with the Excommunicated 
without the Abbo? s order 
Ir any brother shall presume, without the abbot’s 
order, to have intercourse in any way with an 
excommunicated brother, to talk with him or send 
him any message, let him suffer the same penalty of 

excommunication. 

CHAPTER XXVII 
What care the Abbot should have of the Excommunicated 

Let the abbot take every possible care of the 
offending brethren, for They that are well need not 
the physician, but they that are sick)® Like a wise 
‘physician, therefore, he ought to make use of every 
remedy ; he should send some of the older and wiser 
brethren as comforters, to console, as it were, in secret 

their wayward brother, and win him to make humble 

58 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

satisfaction. And let them comfort him that he be 
not overwhelmed by too great sorrow, but as the 
apostle saith, Let charity be confirmed in him and let 
all pray for him 

The abbot ought to take the greatest care and to 
use all prudence and industry to lose none of the 
sheep entrusted to him. Let him know that he hath 
undertaken the care of souls that are sick, and not act 
the tyrant over such as are well. Let him fear the 
reproach of the prophet in which God speaks thus, 
What ye saw to be fat that ye took to yourselves, and what 
was diseased that ye threw away.' Let him copy the 
loving example of the Good Shepherd, who, leaving 
ninety-nine sheep in the mountains, went to seek the 
one that had gone astray, and on whose infirmity He 
took such compassion that He deigned to lay it on 
His shoulders and carry it back to the flock.168 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 59 

CHAPTER XXVIII 
Of those who, being often correctea, do not amena 

Ir any brother does not amend after being often 
corrected for any fault, and even excommunicated, let 
a sharper punishment be administered to him, that 
is, let him be corrected by stripes. And if even after 
this he shall not correct himself, or being puffed up 
by pride (which God forbid) shall attempt to defend 
his doings, then let the abbot act like a wise physi- 
cian. Ifafter applying the fomentations and ointments 
of exhortation, the medicine of the Holy Scriptures 
and the final cautery of excommunication and scourg- 
ing, he find that his labours have had no effect, then let 
him try what is more than all this, his own prayer 
and those of the brethren for him, that the Lord, who 
can do all things, may work the cure of the sick 
brother. If he be not healed by this means then 

let the abbot use the severing knife, according to that 

60 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

saying of the apostle, Put away the evil one from 
among you 5,19 and again, If the jaithless one depart, 
let him depart, Y? lest one diseased sheep should infect 
the whole flock. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

Whether Brethren who leave their Monastery must be received back 

Ir the brother, who through his own bad conduct 
leaves or is expelled from the monastery, shall desire 
to return, he must first promise full amendment ot 
the fault for which he left it. He may then be 
received back to the lowest place, that by this his 
humility may be tried. If he shall again leave he 
may he received back till the third time, but he shall 
know that after this all possibility of returning will be 
denied to him. 

THE BU OF ST BENEDICT £5 
THAPTER XXX 
Biene yumnz ibis: g^ 32 e reta - 
feum met mu sime x. eee eget to $e 
imde wy muinzbée 1o 15 Thus te fanis 
a ase wap are Chien youths, wy whe cannot 
sdiesttené. Hae aeterne: mí the pemdisy vf seco 

p by 1igunux Zasting mm 
CUTRCCEGE Dy ELATI SET. 

CHAPTER XXE 

Mass maus F mae tee rupe ví tte Monastery wy: ee 

Haa oe af He comumurnity je ches as ls nf 
ie meme, Win a wae, smaiut- 1m Character, 
(dempemin netz rest uic, muy ae RUE gear 
mec, uum inen. and mur 2 dew, oor waste, 
Gott oe view fam Goi and & a 2 Fates tie 
cnmunusit Let dum foe fuc charge ee 
Aime; Gio motamg wiiieur the 2UDU-. onde; mew 

62 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

what is commanded, and not make the brethren sad. 
If any of them shall perchance ask something un- 
reasonable he must not vex him by contemptuously 
rejecting his request, but humbly and reasonably 
refuse what he wrongly asks. 

Let him look after his own soul, mindful of the 
Apostolic principle, that they that ministered well, shall 
purchase to themselves a good degree"1 Let him take 
every care of the sick, of children, of guests, and of the 
poor, knowing that without doubt he shall have to 
render an account of all these on the judgment day. 

Let him look upon all the vessels and goods of the 
monastery as if they were the consecrated chalices of 
the altar. He must not think anything can be neg- 
lected; he must not be covetous, nor a_ prodigal 
wasting the goods of the monastery ; but let him do 
everything with forethought and according to the 
direction of his abbot. 

Above all things let him have humility and give 

a gentle answer to those to whom he can give nothing 

THE RULE OF ST. SENEDICT 63 

else, for it is written, 4 good word is above the best 
gif]? Let him take charge of all the abbot shall 
commit to him, but let him not meddle with any- 
thing which is forbidden him. Let him provide the 
brethren with their appointed allowance of food 
without impatience or delay, so that they be not 
driven to offend, being mindful of the divine word 
which declares the punishment he deserves Who shall 
scandalize one of these little ones. It were better for him 
that a millstone should be hanged about his eck, and that 
he should be drowned in the depth of the sea. If the 
community be large let him be given helpers, by 
whose aid he may without worry perform the office 
committed to him. What is given let it be given, 
and what is asked for let it be asked at suitable times, 
so that no one be troubled or distressed in the House 

of God, 

64 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XXXII 
Concerning the Iron Tools or other Goods of the Monastery 

Ler the abbot appoint brethren, of whose life and 
moral conduct he is sure, to keep the iron tools, the 
clothes, or other property of the monastery. To 
these he shall allot the various things to be kept and 
collected, as he shall deem expedient. ‘The abbot 
shall hold a list of these things that, as the brethren 
succeed each other in their appointed work, he may 
know what he gives and what he receives back. If 
any one shall treat the property of the monastery in 
a slovenly or careless way let him be corrected ; if 
he does not amend let him be subjected to regular 

discipline. 

CHAPTER XXXIII 
Ought Monks to have anything of their own? 

Aszove all others, let this vice be extirpated in the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 6; 

monastery. No one, without leave of the abbot, 
shall presume to give, or receive, or keep as his own, 
anything whatever : neither book, nor tablets, nor pen : 
nothing at all. For monks are men who can claim 
no dominion even over their own bodies or wills. 
All that is necessary, however, they may hope from 
the Father of the monastery ; but they shall keep 
nothing which the abbot has not given or allowed. 
All things are to be common to all, as it is written, 
Neither did any one say or think that aught was his 
owz.l* Hence if any one shall be found given to 
this most wicked vice let him be admonished once 
or twice, and if he do not amend let him be 

subjected to correction. 

CHAPTER XXXIV 
Whether all ought to receive necessary things uniformly 

Ir is written, Distribution was made to every one, 
according as he had need."° By this we do not mean 

5 

66 "THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

that there is to be a personal preference (which God 
forbid), but a consideration for infirmities. In this 
wise let him who needs less thank God and be not 
distressed, and let him who requires more be humili- 
ated because of his infirmity, and not puffed up by 
the mercy that is shown him : so all the members 
shall be in peace. Above all things let not the pest 
of murmuring, for whatever cause, by any word or 
sign, be manifested. If any one shall be found faulty 
in this let him be subjected to the most severe 

punishment. 

CHAPTER XXXV 
Of the Weekly Servers in the Kitchen 

Tue brethren are so to serve each other that no 
one be excused from the work of the kitchen unless 
on the score of health, or because he is occupied in 
some matter of great utility, for thence great reward 

is obtained and charity is exercised. Let the weaker 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 65 

brethren, however, have help that they may not do 
their work in sadness ; and let all generally be helped 
according to the circumstances of the community or 
the position of the place (i.¢. kitchen). If the com- 
munity be large the cellarer may be eased from the 
service of the kitchen, and any others who (as we 
have said) are engaged in matters of greater utility. 
Let the rest serve one another in charity. On 
Saturday, he who ends his weekly service must clean 
up everything. He must wash the towels with which 
the brethren wipe their hands and feet ; and he who 
finishes his service, and he who enters on it, are to 
wash the feet of all. He shall give back to the 
cellarer all the vessels used in his ministry, cleaned 
and unbroken, and the cellarer shall hand them to 
the one entering on his office, that he may know 
what he gives and what he receives. 

An hour before the meal these weekly servers 
may receive a draught ot water and a piece of bread 

over and above the appointed allowance, so that they 

68 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

may serve the brethren at meal time without mur- 
muring or too great fatigue. On solemn days, 
however, let them wait till after Mass. Immediately 
after Lauds on Sunday both the incoming and out- 
going servers for the week shall cast themselves on 
their knees in the presence of all and ask their 
prayers. Let him who finishes his week say this 
verse, Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, who didst help me 
and consoled me 519 and when this has been said three 
times let him receive a blessing. He who enters on 
his office shall then follow, and say, O God, incline 
unto mine aid; O Lord, make haste to help me ;\7 and 
this also shall be repeated thrice by all, and having 

received his blessing let him enter on his service. 

CHAPTER XXXVI 
Of the Sick Brethren 

Berors all things and above all things special care 

must be taken of the sick, so that in very deed they be 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 69 

looked after as if it were Christ Himself who was 
served. He Himself has said, I was sick, and ye visited 
Me ; and what ye did to one of these, My least brethren, ye 
did to Me.1"8 

But let the sick themselves bear in mind that they 
are served for the honour of God, and should not 
grieve their brethren who serve them by their super- 
fluous demands. These, nevertheless, must be borne 
with patience, since from such a more abundant re- 
ward is obtained. Let the abbot, therefore, take 
the greatest care that the sick suffer no neglect. 

For them let a separate cell be set apart with an 
attendant who is God-fearing, diligent and pains- 
taking. Let baths be granted to the sick as often as 
it shall be expedient, but to those in health, and 
especially to the young, they shall be seldom permitted. 
Also for the recovery of their strength the use of meat 
may be allowed to the sick and those of very weak 
health. As soon, however, as they shall mend they 

must all in the accustomed manner abstain from flesh 

70 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

meat. Let the abbot take special care that the sick 
be not neglected by the cellarer or the attendants, 
because he is responsible for what is done amiss by 

his disciples. 

CHAPTER XXXVII 
(6! REPRE old Men and Children 

ArrHovGH human nature itself inclines us to show 
pity and consideration to age, to the old, that is, 
and to children, still it is proper that the authority 
of the Rule should provide for them. Let their 
weakness be always taken into account, and let the 
full rigour of the Rule as regards food be in no wise 
maintained in their regard. There is to be a kind 
consideration for them, and permission is to be given 

them to anticipate the regular hours, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 7: 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 
The Weekly Reader 

Tuere ought always to be reading whilst the 
brethren eat at table. Yet no one shall presume to 
read there from any book taken up at haphazard ; but 
whoever is appointed to read for the whole week is 
to enter on his office on theSunday. Let the brother 
when beginning his service after Mass and Com- 
munion ask all to pray for him, that God may 
preserve him from the spirit of pride. And let the 
following verse be thrice repeated by all in the 
oratory, he, the reader, first beginning: O Lord, 
Thou wilt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy 
praise"? then, having received a blessing, let the 
reader enter upon his office. The greatest silence 
shall be kept, so that no whispering, nor noise, save 
the voice of the reader alone, be heard there. 

Whatever is required for eating and drinking the 

brethren shall minister to each other so that no one 

72 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

need ask for anything. Yet should anything be 
wanted it ought to be demanded by sign rather than 
by word. Let no one ask any question there about 
what is being read or about anything else, lest occa- 
sion be given to the evil one ; unless, perhaps, the 
prior shall wish to say something briefly for the 
purpose of edification. ‘The brother who is reader 
for the week may take a mess of potage before be- 
ginning to read, on account of Holy Communion, and 
lest perchance it may be too long for him to fast. 
He shall eat afterwards with the weekly servers and 
kitchen helpers. "The brethren, however, are not all 
to read or sing in course, but only such as may edify 

the hearers. 

CHAPTER XXXIX 
Of the amount of Food 

We believe that it is enough to satisfy just re- 

quirement if in the daily meals, at both the sixth and 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 73 

ninth hours, there be at all seasons of the year two 
cooked dishes, so that he who cannot eat of the one 
may make his meal of the other. "Therefore two 
dishes of cooked food must suffice for all the brethren, 
and if there be any fruit or young vegetables these 
may be added to the meal as a third dish. Let a 
pound weight of bread suffice for each day, whether 
there be one mealor two, that is, for both dinner and 
supper. If there is to be supper a third of the pound 
is to be kept back by the cellarer and given to the 
brethren at that meal. 

If, however, the community has been occupied in 
any great labour it shall be at the will, and in the 
power of the abbot, if he think fit, to increase the 
allowance, so long as every care be taken to guard 
against excess, and that no monk be incapacitated 
by surfeiting. For nothing is more contrary to the 
Christian spirit than gluttony, as our Lord declares, 
Take heed to yourselves lest perhaps your hearts be over- 

charged with surfeiting.|9? And the same quantity 

74 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

shall not be given to young children, but a lesser 
amount than to those older; frugality being main- 
tained in everything. All, save the very weak and 
sick, are to abstain wholly from eating the flesh ot 

quadrupeds. 

CHAPTER XL 
Of the measure of Drink 

Everr one hath his proper gift from God, one thus, 
another thus®1 For this reason the amount of other 
people’s food cannot be determined without some 
misgiving. Still, having regard to the weak state ot 
the sick, we think that a pint of wine a day is 
sufficient for any one. But let those to whom God 
gives the gift of abstinence know that they shall re- 
ceive their proper reward. If either local circum- 
stances, the amount of labour, or the heat of summer 
require more, it can be allowed at the will of the 
prior, care being taken in all things that gluttony 

and drunkenness creep not in. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 7; 

Although we read that * wine is not the drink of 
monks at all," yet, since in our days they cannot be 
persuaded of this, let us at least agree not to drink to 
satiety, but sparingly, Because wine maketh even the wise 
to fall away 182 

CHAPTER XLI 

The hours at which the Brethren are to take their Meals 188 

From the holy feast of Easter until Whitsuntide 
the brethren shall have their first meal at the sixth 
hour and their supper at night. But from Whitsun- 
tide, throughout the summer, if the monks have not 
to work in the fields, nor are oppressed by any great 
heat, let them fast on Wednesdays and Fridays till 
None ; on the other days they may dine at the sixth 
hour. Dinner at the sixth hour shall be the rule at 
the discretion of the abbot, if they have work in the 
fields, or the heat of the summer be great. Let the 
abbot so temper and arránge everything that souls 

76 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

may be saved, and that what the brethren do may be 
done without just complaint. 

From September the thirteenth till the beginning of 
Lent the brethren shall always take their meal at the 
ninth hour. During Lent, however, until Easter 
their meal shall be at eventide ; but this evening meal 
shall be so arranged that whilst eating they shall not 
need lamps, and all things be finished in daylight. 
Indeed, at all times of the year let the hour of meals, 
whether of dinner or supper, be so arranged that all 

things be done by daylight. 

CHAPTER XLII 
That no one shall speak after Compline 

Monks should practise silence at all times, but 
especially during the night hours. On all days, 
therefore, whether it be a fast day or otherwise (this 
shall be the practice). If it be not a fast day, as soon 

as they shall have risen from supper let all sit together 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 77 

whilst one of them read the Col/ations, or Lives of 
the Fathers, or some other book to edify the hearers. 
He shall not, however, read the Heptateuch, or Books of 
Kings, for at that hour it will not profit weakunderstand- 
ings to listen to this part of Scripture ; at other times, 
however, they may be read. If it be a fast day let 
the brethren, when Evensong is over, and after a 
brief interval, come to the reading of the Col/ations, as 
we have said. Four or five pages are to be read, or 
as many as time will allow, that during the reading 
all may come together, even such as have had some 
work given them to do. When all, therefore, are 
gathered together let them say Compline, and on 
coming out from Compline no one shall be permitted 
to speak at all. If any one shall be found breaking 
this rule of silence he shall be punished severely, unless 
the needs of a guest require it, or the abbot shall 
order something of some one. But even this shall 

be done with the greatest gravity and moderation. 

728. THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XLIII 
Of those who come late to the Divine Office or to the Table 

As soon as the signal for the Divine Office shall be 
heard each one must lay aside whatever work he may 
be engaged upon and hasten to it, with all speed, but 
still with gravity, so as not to cause any light be- 
haviour. Nothing, therefore, shall be put before 
the Divine Office. If any one shall come to Matins 
after the Géria of the ninety-fourth Psalm, which on 
this account we wish to be said slowly and leisurely, 
he shall not take his place in the choir, but go last of 
all, or to some place apart which the abbot may 
appoint for those that so fail in his sight, and of 
all the brethren, until the Divine Office be ended 
and he shall have done penance and made public 
satisfaction. 

We have judged it fitting that these should stand 
last, or in some place apart, in order that, being seen 

by all, for very shame they may amend. For if they 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 79 

remain outside the oratory some one will, perhaps, 
return to sleep, or at least sit outside by himself, or 
setting himself to idle talk give an occasion to the 
evil one. Let sucha one, therefore, come inside, so 
that he may not lose all, but make amends during the 
rest of the Office. At the day Hours one who does 
. not come to the “ Work of God” till after the verse 
(Deus in adjutorium), and the G/oria of the first Psalm 
sald after the verse, shall stand last, according to the 
rule laid down above. He is not to presume to join 
the choir of singers until he has made satisfaction, 
unless, indeed, the abbot, by his permission, allow 
him to do so; but even then on the condition that 
he shall afterwards satisfy for his omission. 

He who does not come to table before the verse, 
so that all may say it, and praying together sit down to 
table at the same time, must be corrected once or 
twice if this be through his own fault or bad habit. 
If he do not after this amend he is not to be 

allowed to share in the common table, but he is to 

80 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

be separated from the company of all the rest and eat 
alone. Until he makes satisfaction and mend his 
ways let his portion of wine be taken away from him. 
He is to undergo the same punishment who is not 
present at the verse which is said after meals. Let no 
one presume to take food or drink before or after the 
regular time ; but if something is offered to any one 
by the prior, and he refuse it, and afterwards wishes 
to have what he had rejected, or some other thing, 
let him get neither this nor anything else till he 

makes proper satisfaction. 

CHAPTER XLIV 

How those who are Excommunicated are to make satisfaction 

He who has been excluded from the oratory and 
the table for grievous offences is to prostrate himself 
before the door of the oratory, in silence, at the time 
when the Divine Office is being celebrated ; with his 
face to the ground let him lie at the feet of all who 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 81i 

leave the place. This he shall continue to do until 
the abbot shall judge that he has made satisfaction. 
Then, when the abbot ordains, let him cast himself 
first at the feet of the abbot and then at those of the 
brethren, that they may pray for him. 

Afterwards, if the abbot shall so direct, let him be 
received into the choir and into the place he shall 
appoint him. Even so he may not presume to intone 
a psalm or to read a lesson, or to do anything else in 
the oratory, unless the abbot again orders it. More- 
over, after each Hour, when the Divine Office is 
ended, let him cast himself on the ground in his 
place, and in this way make satisfaction until such 
time as the abbot tells him to cease. Those who 
are excluded from the table only shall make satisfac- 
tion in the oratory, as long as the abbot shall direct, 
and shall continue to do this till he blesses them and 

declares it to be sufficient. 

82 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER XLV 
Of those who blunder in the Oratory 

Ir any one, whilst reciting a psalm, responsory, 
antiphon or lesson, make any mistake, and do not at 
once make humble satisfaction for it before all, let 
him be subjected to greater punishment, as being one 
who is unwilling to correct by humility what he has 
done amiss through negligence. For such a fault let 

children be whipped. 

CHAPTER XLVI 
Of such as offend in other «vays 

Ir any one whilst engaged in any work, either in 
the kitchen, in the cellar, in serving others, in the 
bakehouse, in the garden, or in any other occupation 
ot place, shall do anything amiss, break or lose any- 
thing, or offend in any way whatsoever, and do not 

come at once to the abbot and community of his 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 85 

own accord to confess his offence and make satisfac- 
tion, if afterwards it shall become known by another 
he shall be more severely punished. If, however, it 
be a secret sin let him manifest it only to the abbot, 
or to his spiritual seniors, who know how to heal 
their own wounds and not to disclose and make 

public those of others. 

CHAPTER XLVII 
On letting the hour of Divine Office be known 

Let the duty of giving warning of the time of the 
Divine Office, both night and day, be that of the 
abbot. Either he himself shall give the signal or he 
shallassign this task to some careful brother, so that 
all things be done at their fixed time. After the 
abbot those appointed are to intone the psalms and 
antiphons in turns. No one, however, shall presume 
either to sing or read except such as can do so to the 

edification of the hearers. Let him to whom the 

84 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

abbot shall enjoin this duty do it with humility, 

gravity and fear. 

CHAPTER XLVIII 
Of daily manual labour 

IpnLENEss is an enemy of the soul. Because this is 
so the brethren ought to be occupied at specified 
times in manual labour, and at other fixed hours in 
holy reading. We therefore think that both these 
may be arranged for as follows: from Easter to the 
first of October, on coming out from Prime, let the 
brethren labour till about the fourth hour. From 
the fourth till close upon the sixth hour!® let them 
employ themselves in reading. On rising from table 
after the sixth hour let them rest on their beds in 
strict silence ; but if any one shall wish to read, let 
him do so in such a way as not to disturb any one 
else. 

Let None be said somewhat before the time, about 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 8; 

the middle of the eighth hour,18¢ and after this all 
shall work at what they have to do till evening. If, 
however, the nature of the place or poverty require 
them to labour at gathering in the harvest, let them 
not grieve at that, for then are they truly monks 
when they live by the labour of their hands, as our 
Fathers and the Apostles did. Let everything, how- 
ever, be done with moderation for the sake of the 
faint-hearted. 

From the first of October till the beginning of 
Lent let the brethren be occupied in reading till the 
end of the second hour. At that time Tierce shall 
be said, after which they shall labour at the work 
enjoined them till None. At the first signal for 
the Hour of None all shall cease to work, so as to be 
ready when the second signal is given. After their 
meal they shall be employed in reading or on the 
psalms. 

On the days of Lent, from the morning till the end 

of the third 18° hour, the brethren are to have time for 

$6 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

reading, after which let them work at what is set them 
to do till the close of the tenth hour.1® During these 
Lenten days let each one have some book from the 
library which he shall read through carefully. These 
books are to be given out at the beginning of Lent. 

It is of much import that one or two seniors be 
appointed to go about the monastery at such times as 
the brethren are free to read, in order to see that no 
one is slothful, given to idleness or foolish talking 
instead of reading, and so not only makes no profit 
himself but also distracts others. If any such be found 
(which God forbid) let him be corrected once or 
twice, and if he amend not let him be subjected to 
regular discipline of such a character that the rest 
may take warning. Moreover one brother shall not 
associate with another at unsuitable hours. 

On Sunday also, all, save those who are assigned to 
various offices, shall have time for reading. If, how- 
ever, any one be so negligent and slothful as to be 

unwilling or unable to read or meditate, he must 

THE RULE OF.ST. BENEDICT . 87 

have some work given him, so as not to be idle. For 
weak brethren, or those of delicate constitutions, 
some work or craft shall be found to keep them from 
idleness, and yet not such as to crush them by the 
heavy labour or to drive them away. ‘The weakness 
of such brethren must be taken into consideration by 
the abbot. 

CHAPTER XLIX 
The observance of Lent 

Tue mode of a monk’s life ought at all times to 
favour that of Lenten observance. Since few, how- 
ever, are capable of this we exhort every one in these 
days of Lent to guard their lives in all purity, and 
during this holy season to wash away every negligence 
of other times. This we shall worthily accomplish if 
we restrain ourselves from every vice, and give our- 
selves to tearful prayer, to reading, to heartfelt sorrow 

and to abstinence. In these days of Lent, therefore, 

88 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

let us of our own accord add something to our usual 
yoke of service, such as private prayer, abstinence from 
food and drink. Let every one of his own will with 
joy of the Holy Ghost offer to God something above 
the allotted measure, that is, let him deny his body 
in food, drink, sleep, talking or laughter, and with 
spiritual joy await the holy feast of Easter. On this 
condition, however, that each one inform his abbot 
what it is that he is offering, for what is done with- 
out leave of the spiritual Father will be reckoned pre- 
sumption and vain-glory, and merit no reward. All 
things, therefore, must be done with the approval of 
the abbot. 

CHAPTER L 

Of the Brethren who work at a distance from the Oratory or are 

on a journey 

Tuose brethren who work at a distance and cannot 

come to the oratory at the appointed hours, and the 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 89 

abbot judges that this is so, shall say the Divine 
Office where they are working, kneeling in the fear 
of God. In the same way, those who are sent on a 
journey shall not omit the customary hours, but keep 
them as best they may, and fail not to accomplish 

this duty of their service. 

CHAPTER LI 
Of Brethren who go only a short distance 

Tue brother who is sent on an errand and expects 
to return to his monastery the same day shall not 
presume to eat outside his house, even though he 
be asked to do so by any one, unless he be so 
ordered by his abbot. If he do otherwise let him be 

excommunicated. 

go THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER LII 

Concerning the Oratory of the Monastery 

Lzr the Oratory be what its name signifies, and 
let nothing else be done or discussed there. "When 
the * Work of God” is ended let all depart in strict 
silence, in the reverence of God, so that the brother 
who may wish to pray privately may not be hindered 
by the misconduct of another. If any brother wish 
to pray privately let him go into the Oratory, without 
ostentation, and say his prayers, not with a loud voice, 
but with tears and an earnest heart. Therefore, as 
has been said, no one is allowed to remain in the 
Oratory after the Divine Office is ended, unless for 
the purpose of prayer, lest some other brother be 
hindered by him. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 9i 

CHAPTER LIII 
On the reception of Guests 

Ler all guests who come be received as Christ 
would be, because He; will say, J was a stranger, and 
ye took Mein. And let due honour be shown to 
all, especially to those who are of the household of 
the Faith, and to pilgrims. As soon, therefore, as a 
guest is announced let him be met by the prior or 
the brethren, with all marks of charity. And let 
them first pray together, that so they may associate 
in peace. The kiss of peace, however, is not to be 
given till after prayer,on account of the deceptions 
practised by the devil. And in the salutation itself 
let true humility be shown to all guests coming and 
going. By bowed head, or body prostrate on the 
ground, all shall adore Christ in them, Who, indeed, is 
received in their persons. 

Let guests, after their reception, be conducted to 

prayer, and then the prior, or any one he may order, 

32 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

shall sit with them. Let the Divine Law be read in 
the presence of the guest for his edification, and after 
this let all courtesy be shown to him. For the guest's 
sake the prior may break his fast, unless it be a strict 
day when the fast may not be broken. The brethren, 
however, shall keep the accustomed fasts. Let the 
abbot pour water on the hands of the guests, and let 
him and all the community wash theirfeet. After this 
let them say the verse, We have received Thy mercy, O 
God, in the midst of Thy tempie.? — Let special care be 
taken of the poor and pilgrims, because in them 
Christ is more truly received, for the very awe of 
the rich secures respect for them. 

Let the kitchen of the abbot and the guests be 
apart, so that strangers, who are never absent from 
a monastery, coming in at irregular hours, may not 
disturb the community. Let two of the brethren, 
who can perform their duties well, take charge of 
this kitchen for a year at a time. When they need 
it they shall be given assistance, so that they may 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT . 93 

serve without murmuring. In like manner, when 
they have lighter work, let them labour where they 
are told. And, indeed, not only in their regard, but 
also in respect to all the other officers of the monas- 
tery let this consideration be always shown; when 
they need help let them have it, and when, on the 
other hand, they are free they shall do what they are 
ordered. Also, let the charge of the guest-place be 
assigned to a ibrother whose soul the fear of God 
possesses. A sufficient number of beds are to be 
prepared there, and let the House of God be wisely 
ruled by wise men. 

No one, unless ordered, may associate with or 
speak to the guests. If any one shall meet or see 
them, after such humble salutation as we have above 
enjoined, having asked their blessing, let him pass on, 

saying he is not permitted to talk with any guest. 

94 THE: RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER LIV 

Whether a Monk may receive Letters or Presents 

Ir is by no means lawful, without the abbot’s per- 
mission, for any monk to receive or give letters, presents, 
and gifts of any kind to any one, whether parent or 
other, and not even to one of the brethren. If any- 
thing is sent to a monk from his parents he shall not 
venture to receive it unless the abbot be first told. 
If he order it to be accepted hel may appoint the 
person to whom it shall be given. And let not the 
brother, to whom perchance it was sent, be grieved, 
lest an opening be given to the devil. He who shall 
dare to do otherwise shall be subjected to regular 

discipline. 
CHAPTER LV 

Of the Clothes and Shoes of the Brethren 

Ler clothing suitable to the locality and the 

temperature be given to the brethren, for in cold 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 95 

regions more is needed, and less in warm. The de- 
termination of all these things is in the hands of the 
abbot. We believe, however, that in ordinary places 
it will be enough for each monk to have a cowl and 
tunic ; in winter the cowl being of thicker stuff, in 
summer of finer or old cloth. He should have also 
a scapular for working purposes, and shoes and stock- 
ings for the feet. 

Monks must not grumble at the colour or coarse- 
ness of these things; they shall be such as can be 
procured in the district where they live, or such as 
can be bought at the cheapest price. 

Let the abbot see to their dimensions, that they be 
not too short, but of the proper length for those who 
use them. When receiving new clothes the monks 
shall always give back the old ones at the same 
time, to be put away in the clothes-room for the 
poor. For it is sufficient that a monk have two 
tunics and two cowls, as well for night wear as for the 

convenience of washing. Anything beyond this is 

96 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

superfluous, and must be cut off. "Their shoes also, 
and whatever is worn out, they shall return on getting 
new things. ‘Those who are sent on a journey shall 
get hosen from the wardrobe, which, on their return, 
when washed, they shall restore. Let their cowls 
and tunics on such occasions be somewhat better than 
those in ordinary use. ‘These they shall receive from 
the wardrobe when starting and restore on their 
return. 

A mattres, blanket, coverlet and pillow are to 
suffice for bedding. ‘The beds shall be frequently 
searched by the abbot to guard against the vice of 
hoarding. And if any one be found in possession of 
something not allowed by the abbot let him be 
subjected to the severest punishment. And to up- 
root this vice of appropriation let all that is necessary 
be furnished by the abbot, that is, cowl, tunic, shoes, 
stockings, girdle, knife, pen, needle, handkerchief and 
tablets. By this every pretext of necessity will be 

taken away. The abbot, however, should always 

THE CRULE OF.ST. BENEDICT - 97 

bear in mind that sentence in the Acts of the 
Apostles, And distribution was made to every one accord- 
ing as he had need°8 He should, therefore, consider 
the infirmities of such as need something, and not 
regard the ill-will of the envious. In all his decisions 

let him ponder upon the retribution of God. 

CHAPTER LVI 
The Abbot's Table 
Tue abbot shall always take his meals with the 
guests and strangers. But when there are few guests, 
he may invite any of the brethren he may choose. 
Let him see, however, that one or two of the seniors 
be always left with the community, for the sake of 

discipline. 
CHAPTER LVII 

Of the Artificers of the Monastery 

Ler such craftsmen as be in the monastery ply 

7 

98 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

their trade in all lowliness of mind, if the abbot 
allow it. But if any be puffed up by his skill in his 
craft, and think the monastery indebted to him for it, 
such a one shall be shifted from his handicraft, and not 
attempt it again till such time as, having learnt a low 
opinion of himself, the abbot shall bid him resume. 
If aught of the fruit of their labours be sold let them 
that have the handling of the affair see to it that they 
do not dare to practise any fraud therein. 

Let them remember Ananias and Saphira,P?* lest 
they, or any who practise any fraud in regard to the 
possessions of the monastery, suffer the death of their 
souls as did they of their bodies. In settling the 
prices, however, do not let the vice of greed creep in, 
but let the things be sold somewhat cheaper than they 
can be by laymen, that in all things God may be ~ 
glorified. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 99 

CHAPTER LVIII 

The manner of receiving the Brethren to Religion 

Any one on first coming to the religious life 
should not find the entrance made easy, but as the 
apostle saith, Try the spirits, if they be of God If, 
however, the newcomer continues to knock, and for 
four or five days shows a patient bearing, both of the 
harshness shown him and of the difficulty made about 
admitting him, and persist in his petition he shall 
then be allowed to enter the guest-place for a few 
days. After that let him be in the noviciate, where 
he shall meditate and eat and sleep. 

And let a senior, such as has the skill of winning 
souls, be appointed to watch carefully over him, to 
discover whether he truly seeks God and is eager for 
the Divine Office, for obedience and humiliations. 
Let all the rigour and austerity of our journey to God 
be put clearly before him. If he promise to continue 

in a steadfast perseverance, at the end of two months 

100. THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

the entire Rule shall be read to him, and let him be 
told, * See the law under which you wish to fight, 
if you can observe it enter upon the life; if you can- 
not you are free to depart." 

If he still persevere let him be brought back to the 
noviciate and again tried in all patience. And after 
the lapse of six months let the Rule be read to him 
again, that he may fully know the kind of life he is 
enteringupon. [f he yet persevere, after four months 
the Rule shall be read to him once more. If after 
due deliberation he shall then promise to keep all the 
law and to do whatever is commanded of him, let 
him be received into the community, knowing that 
he is now under the law of the Rule, so that he can 
henceforth neither leave the monastery nor withdraw 
his neck from the yoke of the Rule which after 
so long a deliberation he was free to have taken 
or refused. 

When he is to be admitted into the community let 

him in the oratory, and in the presence of all, promise 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT ro: 

before God and His saints stability, amendment 
of manners and obedience, in order that if at any 
time he shall act otherwise he may know that he shall 
be condemned by Him Whom he mocketh. He shall 
draw up the form of his promise in the name of the 
saints, whose relics are reposing there, and of the 
abbot there present. Let him write out this form 
himself, or at least, if he is uneducated another at his 
request must write it for him, and to this the novice 
himself shall set his mark and with his own hand lay 
it upon the altar. 

After he has placed it there let the novice imme- 
diately begin the verse, Uphold me, O Lord, acccording 
to Thy word, and I shall live, and let me not be confounded 
in my expectation.°6 'This verse the community shall 
repeat three times, adding at the end, G/ory Ze to the 
Father, etc. Then the brother novice shall cast 
himself at the feet of all, asking their prayers, and 
from that time he shall be counted as one of the com- 

munity. If he has any property he must first either 

2 
Religion 

102 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

give it to the poor, or by formal gift make it over 
to the monastery without any reservation for himself, 
since he must know that he has henceforth no power 
even over his own body. Let him, therefore, forth- 
with be divested in the oratory of his own garments 
and be clothed in those of the monastery. The 
clothes he has taken off, however, are to be kept in 
the wardrobe, so that if (which God forbid) he should, 
by the persuasion of the devil, resolve to leave the 
monastery he may be stripped of his monastic dress 
and expelled. The form of profession which the 
abbot took from him at the altar he shall not receive 

back, but it shall be kept in the monastery. 

CHAPTER LIX 
Of the sons of nobles or of the poor who are offered to God 

Ir any nobleman shall offer his son to God in the 
monastery, let the parents, if the child himself be 

under age, make the petition for him, and together 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT . 103 

with the oblation wrap the formal promise and the 
hand of the boy in the altar cloth and thus dedicate 
him to God. With regard to any property let the 
parents promise in the document under oath that 
they will never either give or furnish him with the 
means of obtaining anything whatever, either them- 
selves or by any other person or by any means. Or, 
if they will not do this, and desire to give some alms 
to the monastery, as a free gift, let them hand over 
to the place what they wish, reserving, if they please, 
the income for themselves. Let all these matters be 
so managed that the child have no expectations by 
which he may be deceived and perish (which God 
forbid), as by experience we have learnt is sometimes 
the case. In the same way let those who are poorer 
act. But such as have nothing whatever shall simply 
make the promise and offer their son before witnesses 

with the oblation. 

104. THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

CHAPTER LX 
Of Priests who wish to dwell in the Monastery 

Ir any one in the ranks of the priesthood shall ask 
to be received into a monastery let him not obtain 
permission too quickly. If, however, he persist in 
his request he shall understand that he will have to 
keep the Rule in all rigour, and that no mitigation 
will be allowed to him, according to what is written, 
Friend, for what art thou come? Nevertheless let him 
be allowed to stand next after the abbot, to give the 
blessing or to say Mass, provided the abbot order 
him. If not, he may not presume to do aught, 
knowing that he is subject to the discipline of regular 
life, and is specially obliged to set an example of 
humility to all. If perchance his position in the 
monastery shall have been given him because of his 
Orders, or for any other reason, he should remember 
that his proper place is what he has by the time of his 

entry to the monastery, not that which is given 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 105 

him out of respect for the priesthood. But if any 
clerics manifest the same desire to be admitted into 
the monastery let them be put into a middle rank, 
but only if they give promise of observance of the 

Rule and of their stability therein. 

CHAPTER LXI 

Of Monks who are strangers, how they are to be received 

Ir any stranger monk, coming from a distant place, 
desire to dwell in the monastery as a guest and, con- 
tent with the customs he there finds, does not trouble 
the house by superfluous wants, but is simply con- 
tent with what he finds, let him be received for as 
long a time as he desires to remain. And if he 
reasonably and with loving humility blames some- 
thing, or points out anything amiss, let the abbot 
prudently consider it, lest perchance the Lord shall 
have sent him there for that purpose. If, also, after 

a time he shall wish to make his stay permanent, such 

106 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

a desire should not be refused, particularly since dur- 
ing the time he has lived as a guest his manner of 
life could be known. 

If in that period he shall have been found trouble- 
some or vicious, not only should he not be incorporated 
with the community, but he should even be told 
frankly to leave, lest others be corrupted by his ill 
doing. But if he does not deserve to be sent away, 
not only if he shall ask, shall he be received into the 
ranks of the community, but he should even be 
induced to stay, that others may be taught by his 
example, because in every place we serve a common 
Lord, and fight under the same King. 

And if the abbot shall find such a monk deserving 
he may even put him into a somewhat higher rank. 
And the abbot may raise above the rank of his entry 
into religion, not only any monk, but also any of the 
foresaid priests or clerics, if he shall consider that 
their lives deserve it. Let the abbot, however, 

beware never to receive permanently any monk of a 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 107 

known monastery without the consent of his own 
abbot, or without letters of commendation from 
him, for it is written, What thou wilt not have done 

to thyself, do not to another." 

CHAPTER LXII 
The Priests of the Monastery 

Ir any abbot desire to have a priest or deacon 
ordained let him choose from his monks one who is 
worthy to fill the office of priesthood. Let the monk, 
however, who is ordained beware of haughtiness and 
pride, and let him not presume to do anything except 
what is ordered by the abbot, remembering that he 
is now much more subject to regular discipline. Let 
him not make his priesthood an excuse for forgetting 
obedience and the rigour of the Rule, rather he 
should strive on account of it to draw more and more 
towards God. 

He shall, moreover, always keep the place he had 

108 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

when he came to the monastery, except in his service 
at the altar, or if on account of the holiness of his life, 
by the wish of the community and the will of the 
abbot, he be moved up to a higher place. Even 
then let him understand that he must keep the rules 
prescribed for him by the deans or provosts, and if 
he presume to act otherwise he shall be judged not as 
a priest but as a rebel. If after frequent warnings he 
shall not amend his ways, even the bishop shall be 
brought in to witness to the fact. And if after this 
he does not amend, and his faults become notorious, 
let him be expelled from the monastery, if his 
contempt be such that he will not submit and obey 
the Rule. 

CHAPTER LXIII 
The order of the Community 

Tue brethren shall take their places according to 

the date of their conversion, the merit of their lives, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 109 

or the appointment of their abbot. And the abbot 
must not disturb the flock committed to him, nor, as 
it were, by any arbitrary use of his power, ordain 
anything unjustly. But let him always remember 
that he will have to render an account to God of all 
his judgments and of all his works. 

Wherefore in the order he shall appoint, or in that 
which they hold amongst themselves, let the brethren 
receive the Pax, approach Communion, intone a 
psalm and stand in choir. In all places, without 
exception, order shall not be decided by age, for this 
shall not be a prejudice to any one, since Samuel 
and Daniel, though children, were judges of the 
priests.8 With the exception therefore of those 
who, as we have said, for some weighty reason, the 
abbot shall advance, or for certain causes shall put in 
a lower place, let all the rest remain in the order of 
their conversion. For example, one who shall come 
to the monastery at the second hour of the day shall 

know that he is junior to him who has come at the 

110 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

first hour, no matter what his age or dignity may be. 
In regard to children, let them be kept by all 
under discipline in every way. 

Let the juniors, therefore, honour their seniors, 
and the seniors love the juniors. In addressing each 
other in person no one shall call another by his mere 
name, but let the senior call the junior, Brother, 
and the junior call the senior, Father. But, because 
the abbot is held to take the place of Christ, he shall 
be called Sir and oet, not out of consideration for 
himself, but for the honour and love of Christ. He, 
however, should remember and so conduct himself 
as to be worthy of such an honour. 

Wherever the brethren meet each other the junior 
shall ask a blessing from the senior. When a senior 
passes by let the junior rise and make place for him 
to sit down ; neither shall the junior presume to sit 
unless the senior bid him so to do, in order to fulfil 
what is written, J” honour preventing one another.199 

Little children or youths shall keep their respective 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 111 

places in the oratory and at table, under discipline. 
Outside watch shall be kept over them, everywhere 

indeed, till they come to an age of understanding. 

CHAPTER LXIV 
The Election of the Abbot 

In the election of an abbot let the following points 
be always borne in mind: that he be made abbot 
whom the whole community, in the fear of God, 
make choice of, or a part of it, however small, acting 
with greater wisdom. Let him who is created abbot 
be chosen because of his virtuous life and his wisdom, 
even if he be the last in the community. And 
although the whole community (which God forbid) 
shall unanimously choose one who supports them in 
their evil practices, and their vicious lives become 
known to the bishop (to whose diocese the monastery 
belongs), or to the abbots or Christians of the neigh- 
bourhood, they shall annul the choice of these bad 

112 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

men and appoint a worthy steward of God’s House, 
knowing that for this they shall receive a good reward, 
provided they do it with pure intention and through 
zeal of God, just as, on the other hand, they sin if 
they neglect to do it. 

Let him who has been created abbot ever reflect 
upon the weighty burden he has taken up and re- 
member unto Whom he shall give an account of his 
stewardship. Let him know also that it is better for 
him to profit others than to rule over them. He 
must therefore be learned in the Divine Law that he 
may know when to dring forth mew things and ojd.299 
He must be chaste, sober, merciful, and always exalt 
mercy above justice, that he may obtain mercy. He 
shall hate vice and love the brethren. Even in his 
correction he shall act with prudence and not try too 
much, lest whilst too violently scouring off the rust 
the vessel itself be broken. Let him always bear in 
mind his own frailty, and remember that the bruised 

reed must not be broken. 201 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 173 

In saying this we do not propose that he should 
allow vices to spring up, but, as we have declared 
before, seek to root them up prudently and with 
charity, in the way he shall think proper in each case. 
Let him aim at being loved rather than feared. He 
must not be worried nor anxious, neither should 
he be too exacting or obstinate, or jealous, or over- 
suspicious, for then he will never be at rest. Even 
in what he orders, whether it relates to God or to 
worldly matters, let him be prudent and considerate. 
In all that he enjoins he should be discreet and 
moderate, meditating on the prudence of holy Jacob, 
who says, If I shall cause my Mocks to be over-driven, 
they will all die in one day.°? Wherefore adopting these 
and like principles of discretion, the mother of virtues, 
let him so temper all things that the strong may have 
their scope and the weak be not scared. And espe- 
cially let him keep the present Rule in all things, so 
that when he shall have well administered it he may 

hear from our Lord what the good servant heard who 

8 

114. THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

gave corn to his fellow-servants in due season: Amen ; 

I say to you, over all his goods will he place him.208 

CHAPTER LXV 
The Provost of the Monaster» 

Ír often happens that by the appointment of a 
provost grave scandals arise in monasteries. Some 
there are who, puffed up by the evil spirit of pride, 
and esteeming themselves to be like abbots, take on 
themselves to act the tyrant, to foster scandals and 
premote discord in the community. This is spe- 
cially the case in places where the provost is appointed 
by the same priests or abbots who appoint the abbot 
of the monastery. How foolish this custom is may 
easily be seen. From the very commencement of the 
appointment a pretext for pride is given to the pro- 
vost, since his imagination suggests to him that he is 
now released from the power of his abbot, for (as it 

seems to say) “You are appointed by those who 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 115 

created the abbot.” Hence arise envy, quarrels, 
detractions, rivalries and disorders. And whilst the 
abbot and the provost are at variance it must of 
necessity follow that their souls are endangered by 
the quarrel, and that those under them, by taking sides, 
are going to destruction. The guilt of this danger 
chiefly weighs on those who were the authors of such 
appointments. 

Therefore we foresee that for the preservation of 
peace and charity it is expedient that the ordering 
of his monastery depend on the will of the abbot. 
And, as we have before arranged, if it be possible, let 
all the work of the monastery be managed by deans, 
as we have directed, in order that where many are 
entrusted with the work no one may become proud. 

But if the circumstances of the place require a 
provost, or the community shall with reason and 
humility ask for one, and the abbot shall think it 
expedient, with the advice of the brethren who have 

the fear of God, let him nominate whomsoever he 
Se 

116 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

shall himself choose as provost. Let this provost, 
moreover, reverently do whatever shall be enjoined 
him by his abbot, never acting against his will or 
directions, because the higher he is raised above the 
others the more careful he must be to keep the pre- 
cepts of the Rule. If this provost shall be found 
viciously inclined, or carried away by the haughtiness of 
pride, or a proved despiser of the Holy Rule, let him 
be warned four times ; if he does not amend let him 
fall under the punishment of regular discipline. If 
even then he be not corrected he shall be deposed 
from his position of provost, and another who is 
worthy shall be put in his place. If after this he 
shall not be quiet and obedient in the community 
let him even be put out of the monastery. The 
abbot nevertheless shall bear in mind that he will 
have to give an account of all his judgments to God, 
lest perchance his soul may burn with the flame of 

envy and jealousy. 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 117 

CHAPTER LXVI 
The Porter of the Monastery 

Ler there be stationed at the gate of the monas- 
tery some wise old man who knows how to give and 
receive an answer, and whose age will not allow him 
to wander from his post. This porter should have 
his cell near the door, that those who arrive may 
always find him there to give an answer. 

As soon as any one shall knock, or some poor man 
shall call for help, let him reply, Thanks be to God, or 
invoke a blessing. And let him in the meekness of 
God’s fear hasten to reply with zealous charity. If 
the porter stands in need of help let him have a junior 
brother with him. The monastery, however, itself 
ought, if possible, to be so constructed as to contain 
within it all necessaries, that is water, mill, garden and 
[places for] the various crafts which are exercised within 

a monastery, so that there be no occasion for monks to 

118 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

wander abroad, since this is in no wise expedient for 
their souls. We wish this Rule to be read frequently 
in the community so that no brother may plead 

ignorance as an cxcuse. 

CHAPTER LXVII 

Of Brethren sent on a journey 

Wuen brethren are about to be sent on a journey 
let them commend themselves to the prayers of all 
the brethren and of the abbot, and at the closing 
prayer of the Divine Office let a commemoration be 
made of all the absent brethren. When they come 
back from a journey, on the day of their return, at 
all the Canonical Hours when the Divine Office is 
finished, the brethren shall prostrate themselves on 
the ground and beg the prayers of all for any faults 
they may have fallen into on the road, by the sight 
or hearing of evil things, or by idle discourse. And 

let no one dare to relate to another what he shall 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 119 

have seen or heard outside the monastery, because 
this is most detrimental. If any one shall presume 
to do this he must be subjected to the punishment 
prescribed in the Rule. In like manner shall he be 
punished who shall presume to break the enclosure 
of the monastery, or go anywhere, or do anything, 

however trifling, without the abbot's permission. 
8» P 

CHAPTER LXVIII 
When a Brother is ordered to do impossibilities 

Ir anything hard or impossible be enjoined on a 
brother let him receive the injunctions of him who 
orders him in all mildness and obedience. If he shall 
see that the burden altogether exceedeth the measure 
of his strength let him patiently and at the proper 
time state, without show of pride, resistance or con- 
tradiction, the reason of this impossibility. If after 
his suggestion the will of the prior shall still remain 

unchanged, let the young monk know that it is best 

120 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

for him ; and trusting in God's help, through love of 
Him, let him obey. 

CHAPTER LXIX 
That in the Monastery no one presume to defend another 

SpEcIAL care must be taken that under no pretext 
one monk presume to defend or uphold another in a 
monastery, even though they may be very near akin. 
In no way whatsoever let monks dare to do this, 
because from it an occasion of the gravest scandal may 
arise. If any one shall transgress in this way he shall 

be severely punished. 

CHAPTER LXX 
That no one presume to strike another 

In the monastery every occasion of presumption 
should be avoided. We ordain that no one shall be 
allowed to excommunicate or strike any of his brethren 

unless the abbot has given him authority to do so, 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 121 

Those who offend in this matter shall be reprehended 
before all, that the rest may be inspired with fear. 
But over children, till they are fifteen years old, let all 
exercise strict discipline and care, yet this also must 
be done with moderation and discretion. He, how- 
ever, who shall presume to do so to those above this 
age, without the abbot’s order, or shall be severe to 
children beyond discretion, shall be subjected to regular 
discipline, since it is written, What thou wouldst not 

have done to thyself, do not thou to another.?04 

CHAPTER LXXI 
That the Brethren be obedient to each other 

Tur excellent virtue of obedience is to be shown by 
all, not to the abbot only, but to the brethren who shall 
also mutually obey each other, knowing that by this 
path of obedience they shall go to God. The com- 
mands of the abbot, or other superiors constituted by 

him, having the first place (for to these we do not 

122 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

allow any private orders to be preferred) the juniors 
shall obey their seniors with all charity and diligence. 
If any one be found contentious let him be punished. 

If a brother be rebuked for even the least thing by 
the abbot, or by any prior (£2. superior), or if he 
shall perceive that the mind of any superior is, how- 
ever slightly, moved against him, or in anger with 
him, let him without delay prostrate himself at his 
feet, and remain offering satisfaction until the feeling 
be removed and he receive a blessing. If any one be 
found too proud to do this let him be expelled from 

the monastery. 

CHAPTER LXXII 
Of the good xeal Monks should have 

As there is an evil and bitter emulation which 
separates from God and leads to hell, so there is a 
good spirit of emulation which frees from vices and 
leads to God and life everlasting. Let monks therefore 

‘practise this emulation with most fervent love; that 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 1:23 

is to say, let them in honour prevent one another,2 let 
them bear most patiently with each other’s infirmities, 
whether of body or of manner. Let them contend 
with one another in their obedience. Let no one 
follow what he thinks most profitable to himself, but 
rather what is best for another. Let them show 
brotherly charity with a chaste love. Let them fear 
God and love their abbot with sincere and humble 
affection, and set nothing whatever before Christ, 

Who can bring us unto eternal life. 

CHAPTER LXXIII 
That all perfection is not contained in this Rule 

We have written this Rule, that, by its observance 
in monasteries, we may show that we have in some 
measure uprightness of manners or the beginning ot 
religious Jife. But for such as hasten onward to the 
perfection of holy life there are the teachings of the 

Holy Fathers, the observance whereof leads a man to 

124 THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

the heights of perfection. For what page or what 
passage of the divinely inspired books of the Old and the 
New 'l'estament is not a most perfect rule for man's 
life? Or what book is there of the Holy Catholic 
Fathers that doth not proclaim this, that by a direct 
course we may come to our Creator? Also, what else 
are the Co//ations of the Fathers, their Institutes, 
their Lives, and the Rule of our Holy Father St. Basil, 
but examples of the virtues, of the good living and 
obedience of monks? But to us who are slothful, 
and lead bad and negligent lives, they are matter for 
shame and confusion. 

Do thou, therefore, whosoever thou art who hasten- 
eth forward to the heavenly country, accomplish first, 
by the help of Christ, this little Rule written for 
beginners, and then at length shalt thou come, under 
God's guidance, to the lofty heights of doctrine and 

virtue, which we have spoken of above. 

NOTES 

1 The beginning of this Prologue suggests that St. Benedict 
had before him in writing the Latin translation of St. Basil’s 
Admonitio ad filium spiritualem, which commences with the 
words ‘* Audi fili admonitionem patris tui, et inclina aurem 
tuam." The invitation in the Prologue to the Rule is 
considerably longer than that of St. Basil's tract. 

? 1 Rom. xiii. 2. INDSCXiv. 293. 

3 Ps. xciv. 8, 13 Ps, cxiii, 1. 

* Apoc. ii. 7. 14 1 Cor. xv. 1o. 

5 Ps, xxxill. 12. ab Cor XA 7. 

$ Joan. xii. 35. 16 Matth. vii. 24 seg. 
7 Ps, xxxiii. 13. 17 Rom. ii. 4. 

8 Ps; xxxiii. 14, 15. 18 Ezech. xviii. 23. 

9 Isai. Ixv. 24. 19 Matth. vii. 13. 

10 Eph. vi. 14, 15. 22 Cor, 1.7. 

1 Ps. xiv. 4. 

21 The Rule is written for monks who live together in 
community life under an abbot. This method of life St, 
Benedict considers the best to attain the end of all religious 
life, the realization of the supernatural and the closer union oi 
the soul with God. For this reason he calls those who tead 
the cenobital or community life the fortissimum genus. 

22 Rom. viii. 15. 9 Ps, xxxix th ^ ZI +f 

128 

125 

24 Tsai. i. 2. 

?5 1 Cor. ix. 27. 
Ps-xlix. 16, 17. 
27 Matth. vii. 3. 
28 1 Cor. xii. 13. 
29 Eph. vi. 9. 

30 2 Tim. iv. 2. 

8 

31 1 Reg. ii. 11, 12. 

32 Prov. xxiii. 13. 
33 Prov. xxiii. 14. 
34 Matth. vi. 33. 
35 Ps, xxxili. I9. 
36 Eccl. xxxii. 24. 
37 Deut. vi. 5. 

38 Luc. x. 27. 

39 Luc. xviii. 20 
40 Matth. xix. 18, 
42 Exod. xx. x5. 
£ Deut. vi. 21. 

43 Marc. x. 19. 

44 1 Pet. il. 17. 

4 Tob. iv. 16. 

48 Luc. ix. 23. 

41 y Cor. ix. 27. 
48 2 Pet. ii. 13. 

49 Joel i. 14. 

50 Tob. iv. 7. 

51 Ts, lviii. 7. 

52 Matth, xxv. 36. 

NOTES 

53 Tob. i. 21. 

54 Ts, i, 17. 

55 1 'Thes. v. 14. 
56 Jac. i. 27. 

57 Matth. x. 38. 
58 Matth. v. 22. 
59 Eph. iv. 26. 
UI SES RECS 

61 Rom. xii. 18, 
€ y Pet. iv. 8. 
63 Matth. v. 33-37. 
Si PsXiv 3: 

So Te Desv Lop 
66 y Cor. vi. 7. 
87 Luc. vi. 27. 
Shr Pets Alters. 

69 Matth. v. 10. 
70 Tob. iv. 14. 

T re Pim eilis59 
PE cel xs xia 7s 
19 Prov. eXX. Dg. 
74 Rom. xii. 11, 
15 «GOD XU TO. 
78 Sap. 4. TI. 
MPs, Ixxii. 28. 
8 oTa Cotenivang: 
79" Os» xil. 9. 

90 Joby xxxi. 14s 
81 Matth. x. 28. 

e2g2855295 288 

8 8 

98 

99 

100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
10 

Phil?i: 23: 
Matth. xxiv. 42. 
Deut. iv. 9. 
Prov. v. 21. 

Ps. cxxxvi. 9. 
Eccl. viii. 11. 
Ps, xxxiii. 13. 
Prov.) x: 19: 
Matth. xii. 36. 
EccL xxi. 23. 
Luc. xi. 28. 
Col. iv. 2. 
Ps;v1- 7; 

Gal. v. 16. 

Eccl. xviii. 30. 
Matth. xxiii. 30. 
Matth. vi. 1. 
Eccl. vi. 37. 

I Tim. v. 22. 
Levit. xix. 17. 
James iii. 14-16. 
2 Tim. ii. 24. 
Ps, €xxx. 1, 
Levit. xix. 32. 
I Line v.d. 
Matth. v. 44. 
Eph. iv. 26. 
Ps, li, ro. 

1 Cor, ii. 9. 

NOTES 

in 

Ps. xvii. 45. 

I1? Luc. x. 16. 

113 
114 
115 
116 

138 
139 

Matth. vii. 14. 
Jo. v. 30. 
Luc.-x. 16. 

2 Cor. ix. 7. 
Ps. xxxviii, 2, 3. 
Prov. xviii. 21. 
Luc. xiv. 11. 
Ps, cxxE 33 2; 
Ps. vii. 10. 

Ps. xciii. 11. 
Ps. cxxxviii. 3. 
Ps. lxxv. 11. 
Ps. xvii. 24. 
Eccl. xviii. 40. 
Matth. vi. 1o. 
Prov. xvi. 25. 
Psy lire2. 

Ps. xxxvii. 10. 
Eccl. xviii. 30. 
Psa lita. 

Ps, xlix. Z1. 
Jo. vi. 38. 
Phil. ii. 8 
Matth. xxiv. 13 
Ps. xxvi. 14. 
Ps.exlili. (22; 
Rom. viii. 37. 

127 

128 NOTES 

140 Ps, Ixv. 10, t1. 149 Ps. cxviii. 7. 
M1 ps: Ixvict2. 10 Prov. x. 19. 
12202 COREXI.E26; bl Ps, cxxxix. I2 
LDUDSWOCXORVIS SA 162 Eccl. xxi. 23. 
144 Ps, cv. 1. 153 Eccl. x. 14. 

1 ps xxxl.-5, 154 Luc, xviii. 13. 
146 Ps" xxii. 22, 23. I5 Ps, cxviii. 107. 
147 Ps. xxi. 7. 156 Ps, Ixix. 2. 

M$ Ps, ]xxxvii. 16. 187 Ps, |. 17. 

158 The number of twelve psalms is said to have been 
revealed to the Fathers of the desert when they were 
uncertain what number to say for the night office. (Cf. 
Cass. Coll. Lib. ii. c, $). 

159 Ps. cxviii. 164. Yn y Tim. iii. 15. 
10 Ps. cxviii. 62. 12 Ecc]. xviii. 17. 
SITES Toa uu 173 Matth. xviii. 6, 
162 Ps, xlvi. 8. V4 Acts iv. 32. 

i0 Ds dXX Vlil. 175 Acts iv. 35. 

I6 1. Gor. v5. 16 Ps, ]xxxv. 18. 
165 Matth. ix. 12. 17 Ps, lxix. 2. 

166 2 Cor. ii. 8. 18 Matth. xxv. 36-40. 
167 Ezech. xxxiv, 3. ES Ds»: 

165 Luc. xv, 4. 190 Luc. Xxi. 34. 
16 y Cor. v. 13. 18 i Cor, vii. 7. 
I? i Cor, vii. 15. Ui d9 db On 

183 Tt may be useful here to say something about the hours 
named in the Rule. The division of time, according to the 
Romans, was into twelve hours for the day and twelve for the 
night. The length of the hour, however, varied according to 

NOTES . 129 

the seasons of the year, the division of day and night being 
different : in winter the night hours were longer than theday 
hours, in summer they were shorter. 'Thatis, in winter, each 
hour of the night was roughly eighty minutes, and each 
hour of the day forty minutes. In saying, therefore, that 
the night office was to begin at the eighth hour, from 
November to Easter, St. Benedict probably intended to 
indicate our 3 a.m. (Cap. viii. Lauds was always to begin 
*tabout the break of day " In the summer months this 
would be about 3.30 to 4, aad Matins would be during that 
time, probably about 2.30-3 a.m. 

In the same way the midday meal in the susamer time was 
to be at the sixth hour of the day, or midday. From Sep- 
tember 13 to the beginning of Lent the dinner was to be 
at the ninth hour, or from 1.20-2 o'clock, and during Lent 
the one meal was to be taken in the evening, at such a time 
as *£ all be done by daylight." This, allowing for an inter- 
val after the meal, and for Compline, would put the single 
meal at about our 5 o'clock (Cap. xli.). 

184 The fourth hour would have been in summer about 
9.20 a.m. 

18 The sixth hour would have been about midday. 

186 None would thus be said about 3.20 p.m. 

187 In the winter months the end of the second hour would 
correspond to our 9.20 a.m. 

188 j.¢, 1.20 p.m. 192 Ps, xlvii, 10. 
16. 10 p.m. 183 Acts iv. 35. 
10072. 2.40 p.m, 193 Acts v. I—IO. 

191 Matth, xxv. 35. 195 1 Jo, iv. 1. 

130 NOTES 

196 Ps. cxviii. 116. 201 Is. xlii. 3. 

19? Matth. vii. 12. 2 Gen. xxxiii. 13. 
198 1 Reg. vii. 15, cf Dan. 299 Matth. xxiv. 47. 
xiii. 51, segg. 204 Tob. iv. 16; 

19 Rom. xii. 10. 25 Rom. xii 19: 

200 Matth. xiii. 52. 

Printed in Great Britain by 
Butler & Tanner Ltd., 
Frome and London 

TELE 

MEDIEVAL LIBRARY 

Under the General Editorship of 
SIR ISRAEL GOLLANCZ, Lirt.D., F.B.A. 

Post 8vo, Brown Boards, 5s. net, unless otherwise stated. 
S 

t. THE BOOK OF THE DUKE OF TRUE LOVERS 
By Curistine pr Pisan; a French romance of the 15th century. 
Translated into prose and verse with an introduction by Arick 
Kemp-Wetcn, Laurence Binyon and E. R. D. Macracan. With 
6 photogravure plates after illuminations in the original MS. 
IInd Impression. 

z. THE TUMBLER OF OUR LADY & OTHER MIRACLES 
Mainly from a collection made by Gautier pe Coinci, a monk of 
St. Médard near Soissons; French, 13th century. ‘Translated in 
prose with an introduction by Atice Kemp-Wetcu. With 7 
photogravure plates after contemporary MSS. JJnd Impression. 

3. THE CHATELAINE OF VERGI 
Anonymous; a French love-poem of the 13th century. Translated 
into prose by Arice Kemp-Wetcu. With an introduction by Prof. 
L. BnaupiN and the original text in an Appendix. With 5 photo- 
gravure plates after an ivory casket of the 14th century now in the 
British Museum. 7174 Impression. 

THE BABEES’ BOOK: MEDIEVAL MANNERS for the 
YOUNG. From the Old English texts of Dr. Furnivall ; 14th 
and 15th centuries. Done into modern prose and verse with an in- 
troduction and notes by Epiru RicksgT. With 6 photogravure plates 
after illuminations in contemporary MSS. IInd Impression. 

IIl. 

12. 

D 

14. 

THE MEDIEVAL LIBRARY 

THE CELL OF SELF-KNOWLEDGE 

By Ricuarp or Sr. Vicror, WarrzR Hitron, Marcery Kemp?, etc. ; 
7 English mystical treatises of the 14th cent. Edited with intro- 
duction and notes by Epmunp G. Garpner, M.A. With coloured 
collotype frontispiece. IInd Impression. 

ANCIENT ENGLISH CHRISTMAS CAROLS 
TrapiTionaL ; 1400-1700. Collected and arranged by Epiru 
Rickert with intro., notes and glossary. With 8 photogravure 
plates after missals of the 15th and 16th cents. — Price 7s. 6d. net. 
IV th Impression. 

EIGHT TROBADOR POETS 

Containing Berrran ve Born, Bernarr DE VENTADORN, GUIRAUT | 

pe BorneLy, ÁRNAUT DaniEL, etc.; Provengal, 11th-13th centuries. 
Selected and translated in prose with intros. and notes by Barrara 

Smytue. With a coloured frontispiece and decorative initials. 

IInd Impression. 

CLIGES 

By Curétizen pz Troyes; a French romance of the 13th century. 
Translated in prose by L. J. GagpiNER, M.A. With photogravure 

frontispiece. 

PEARL 

An English poem of the 14th century. Translated and edited by | 

Sir Israzt GorraNcz, Litt. D., F.B.A. With textual and explana- 

tory notes, glossary, photogravure frontispiece after Hotman Hunt | 

and 6 illustrations after the original MS. With the O/ympia of | 

Boccaccio in an Appendix. Price 75. 6d. net. 

EARLY LIVES OF CHARLEMAGNE 

By Ecixnanp and Tue Monk or Sr. Garr.; German, 9th century. 
Translated from the Latin and edited with introduction and notes by 
Prof. A. J.Granr. With photogravure frontispiece. [Jud Impression. 

THE CHRONICLE OF JOCELIN OF BRAKELOND 
By the Same; a picture of English social and monastic life in the 
12th century. ‘Translated from the Latin and edited with notes 
by L.C. Janz, M.A. With an introduction by Carpinat Gasquet 
and a photogravure frontispiece. I/Ird Impression. 

16. 

17, 

18. 

20. 

2l. 

22. 

24. 

THE MEDIEVAL LIBRARY 

THE VISION OF PIERS THE PLOWMAN 

By Wirttam Lancianp ; English, 14th century. Done into modern 
metrical English with introduction and notes by Prof. W. W. Sxzar. 
With frontispiece after contemporary MS. JV th Impression. 

THE PLAYS OF ROSWITHA 

By the Same; German, roth century. ‘Translated from the Latin 
by CurisropHEeR Sr. Joun. With an introduction by CarpinaL 
Gasquet and a frontispiece after ALprecur Durer. 

THE NUN’S RULE or THE ANCREN RIWLE 
Anonymous; English, 13th century. ‘Translated from the Latin 
by James Morton. With an introduction by CarpinaL Gasquet 
and a frontispiece of the seal of Bishop Poore. IInd Impression. 

MEDIEVAL LORE 

From BanrHoLoMAEus ÁNGLICUS; English, 13th century. Selected 
and modernised by Rozznr Srzzrs from the 14th century English 
translation from the original Latin by Jonw Trevisa. With an 
introduction by Witt1am Morris and a photogravure frontispiece. 
IInd Impression. 

THE SONG OF ROLAND 

Anonymous and TrapirionaL; French, 11th century. Translated 
from the Old French by jzssiz Crostanp. With a photogravure 
reproduction of a page from the Oxford MS. Revised Edition. 

ASSER’S LIFE OF KING ALFRED 

By Asser; English, gth century. Translated from the Latin with 
an introduction and notes by L. C. Janz, M.A. With a photo- 
gravure reproduction of King Alfred’s Jewel. IInd Impression. 

"THE LOVE OF BOOKS: the PHILOBIBLON of RICHARD 

de BURY. By the Same; English, 14th century. Translated 
with notes from the Latin by E. C. Tuomas and edited by Sir 
Isnagr Gorrawcz, Litt.D., F.B.A. With photogravure frontispiece 
of the Seal of Richard de Bury. IJnd Impression. 

25. 

27. 

28. 

THE MEDIEVAL LIBRARY 

THE RULE OF ST. BENEDICT 

By the Same; Italian, 6th century. Translated with an intro- 
duction from the Latin by Carpinat Gasourr. With photo- 
gravure of St. Benedict after Sassoferrato. JJud Impression. 

WINE, WOMEN AND SONG: MEDIEVAL LATIN 
STUDENTS’ SONGS. Anonymous and TrapirionaL ; mainly 
I2th century. Translated from the Latin into English verse, and 
with essay, by Jouw AppiNGTON Symonps. 11Ir4 Impression. 

BEOWULF 

TrapitionaL; Anglo-Saxon, 7th century and earlier. Translated | 
into English verse, with preface, notes, etc., by D. H, Cnawronp. | 

With a photogravure reproduction of a page from the MS. in the 
British Museum. 

RAOUL DE CAMBRAI 

An old French feudal epic, 12th or 13th century. "Translated into | 
prose with an introduction by Jzssis Cmosrawp. With photo- | 

gravure reproduction of the opening lines of the MS. 

Od 

CHATTO & WINDUS 
97 €? 99 ST. MARTIN'S LANE 
LONDON, W.C.2 

| 
| 
| 

Bans 

Mn 
| 3 2400 00594 3141 

GTU Library 
2400 Ridge Road 
Berkeley, CA 94709 
Por renewals call (510) 649-2500 
All items are subject to recall