LIBRARY OF 

WELLESLEY COLLEGE 

PURCHASED FROM 

Sv.'pet Fnnd 

TRANSLATIONS OF CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 

General Editors: W. J. SPARROW-SIMPSON, D.D., 

W. K. LOWTHER CLARKE, B.D. 

SERIES I 

GREEK TEXTS 

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

■ n^ iiwrti I 

msr-m^m^Bm 

ttamam 

TRSN5lAnO¥5 OF CHRT^TIM 
LITERATURE . ^ER[E5 I 

GREEK TEXT5 

:1 

DIONYSIUS 

THE AREOPAGITE 

ON THE 

DIVINE NAMES 

AND THE 

MYSTICALTHEOLOGY 

Bu C E ROLT. 

SOCIETY FOR. PROMOTING 
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. London 
kij The Macmilian Companu .lle\v\5rk 

J 1920 

Printed in Great Britain by 
Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, 

BRUNSWICK ST., STAMFORD ST., S.E. I. 
AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 

BR 

3/JS^/3 

ino 

PREFACE 

The translations of which the present volume consists are 
the work of a scholar who died at the age of thirty-seven. 
It has been felt that since the translator did not live to 
write a preface his work should be introduced by a few 
prefatory words. My excuse for accepting that office is 
that I probably knew the lamented writer as well as any one 
living. He was deprived of both his parents while very 
young, left almost friendless, and entrusted to my care from 
the age of fourteen. He had already shown promise of 
unusual ability. I sent him to King's College School, where 
in the opinion of its distinguished Head, the Rev. Dr. 
Bourne, he could have done anything if only he had been 
given the health. At Oxford he was awarded the Liddon 
Studentship. 

Nothing can show more clearly what was thought of him 
by competent judges in Oxford than the following letter 
written by the Professor of Latin, A. C. Clark : 

" He was one of the best scholars who passed through 
my hands at Queen's College, and I know no one who 
made greater progress after coming into residence. In 
those early days he had wonderful powers of work. I was 
seldom so delighted as when he earned the great dis- 
tinction of being 'mentioned' for the Hertford University 
Scholarship in Latin. At the time everything seemed to 
be within his grasp. But most unfortunately his health 
failed shortly afterwards, and he was never able to do him- 
self justice. Still, of recent years he wrote a remarkable 
book, full of fine thought, brilliantly expressed, which was 
much admired by good judges. I well remember, teo, his 
Latin sermon preached at St. Mary's not long ago. ft was 

vi PREFACE 

delivered with feeling and fire, and seemed to me an admir- 
able performance. I am sure that he would have gained 
distinction in the Church, if he had Hved. 

" He seemed to me a fme and noble character, free from 
all mortal taint." 

He was a singularly refined and religious character, 
combining the acuteness of a philosophic mind with the 
fervour of a mystic. He therefore possessed undoubted 
qualifications for a study of Dionysius, with whose neo- 
riatonic ideas and mystical tendencies he was in the 
warmest sympathy. 

The Introduction, containing a masterly exposition of 
Dionysian principles, is entirely the translator's work, and, 
within the limits which he set himself, may be called 
complete. Rolt's fervid and enthusiastic disposition led him 
to expound Dionysius with increasing admiration as his 
studies continued. He laid his original introduction aside, 
because to his maturer judgment it seemed insufficiently 
appreciative. 

In its final form the Introduction is beyond all question 
a very able and remarkable piece of work. There are, how- 
ever, several instances where the writer's enthusiasm and 
personal opinions have led him to unguarded language, 
or disabled him from realizing the dangers to which the 
Areopagite's teaching tends. He does indeed distinctly 
admit that Dionysius has his dangers, and says in one place 
definitely that the study of him is for the few : but the 
bearing of the whole theory of the Supra-Personal Deity 
on the Person of Christ and the Christian doctrine of the 
Atonement requires to be more thoroughly defined than is 
done in the exceedingly able pages of Rolt's Introduction. 
It is not the business of an editor to express his own views, 
but yet it seems only reasonable that he should call the 
reader's attention to questionable expositions, or to dogmatic 
statements which seem erroneous. In four or five places 
the editor has ventured to do this : with what efiect the 
reader must decide. The Introduction of course appears 
exactly as the Author left it. The few additional remarks 
are bracketed as notes by themselves. 

PREFACE vii 

It is only right to add that the translator laboured under 
certain disadvantages. The original text of Dionysius is 
perplexing and confused, and no modern critical edition 
has as yet been produced. Rolt was frequently in doubt 
what the Author had really written. 

But, beside the drawback incidental to any student of 
Dionysius, there was the fact of the translator's solitary 
position at Watermillock, a village rectory among the Lakes, 
shut off from access to libraries, and from acquaintance 
with former writers on his subject. This is a defect of 
which the translator was well aware, and of which he patheti- 
cally complained. Friends endeavoured to some extent to 
supply him with the necessary books, but the lack of 
reference to the literature of the subject will not escape the 
reader of these pages. He was always an independent 
thinker rather than a person of historical investigation. 

Hence it is that one branch of his subject was almost 
omitted ; namely, the influence of Dionysius on the history 
of Christian thought. This aspect is far too important to 
be left out. Indeed Dionysius cannot be critically valued 
without it. An attempt therefore has been n'ade to supply 
this omission in a separate Essay, in order to place the reader 
in possession of the principal facts, both concerning the 
Areopagite's disciples and critics. 

W. J. S.-S. 

CONTENTS 

Preface 

By W. J. SPARROW-SiMrsoN, D.D. 

Introduction — 

i. the author 

2. his leading ideas : the nature of the 
godhead in itself. 

PACE 

V 

3- 

4- 

5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 

ITS RELATION TO CREATION . 
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 
CONTEMPLATION .... 
DIONYSIUS AND MODERN PHILOSOPHY 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF CONTEMPLATION 

THE SCRIPTURAL 
DOCTRINES 

BASIS OF DIONYSIUSS 

9. conclusion ...... 

10. bibliography . ... 

The Divine Names . . . . 
The Mystical Theology .... 

THE influence OF DIONYSIUS IN RELIGIOUS 
HISTORY (by W. J. SPARROW-SIMPSON, D.D.) 

4 

6 

20 

25 
30 

33 

40 
44 
47 

50 
191 

202 

Index 

221—223 

Vlll 

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

INTRODUCTION 

I. — The Author and His Influence in the 

Later Church 

The writings here translated are among the extant 
works of a theologian who professes to be St. Paul's 
Athenian convert Dionysius, and points his claim 
with a background of historical setting. But the 
claim collapses beneath a considerable weight of 
anachronisms, by far the chief of which is the later 
neo-Platonism in almost every paragraph. In fact, 
these writings appear to reflect, and even to quote, 
the doctrines of the Pagan philosopher Proclus, who 
began lecturing at Athens in A.D. 430. Moreover, it 
is probable that the Hierotheus, who figures so largely 
in them, is the Syrian mystic Stephen bar Sudaili : 
a later contemporary of the same thinker. The 
Dionysian writings m.ay therefore be placed near 
the very end of the fifth century. 

The true name of their author is entirely unknown. 
He was probably a monk, possibly a bishop, certainly 
an ecclesiastic of some sort. His home is believed 
to have been Syria, where speculative theology was 
daring and untrammelled, and his works are the chief 
among the very few surviving specimens of an im- 
portant school. The pious fraud by which he fathered 
them upon the Areopagite need not be branded with 
the harsh name of " forgery," for such a practice was 

I 

2 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

in his day permitted and even considered laudable. 
Nor does it rob them of their value, any more than 
certain parts of the prophecies ascribed to Isaiah are 
worthless because they are by another hand. If the 
Dionysian writings were historical documents the 
matter would be otherwise, just as the Gospel Nar- 
rative would lose nearly all its value if it" were a later 
fabrication. But they arc not historical documents. 
Their scope is with the workings of man's mind and 
iSpirit in a region that does not change, and their 
findings are equally valid or invalid whatever be their 
date. And yet even historically they have an interest 
which docs not depend on their authorship. For, in 
any case, they spring from a certain reputable school 
within the Christian Church, and they were accepted 
Iby the Church at large. And thus their bold path 
'of contemplation and philosophy is at least permis- 
sible to Christians. This path is not for all men, but 
some are impelled to seek it; and if it is denied 
them within the Christian pale, they will go and 
look for it elscwherc. Nietzsche is but one of those 
who have thus disastrously wandered afar in search 
of that which is actually to be found within the fold. 
Had he but studied the Dionysian writings he might 
have remained a Christian. At the present time 
these works have an added interest in the fact that, 
since neo-Platonism has strong affinities with the 
ancient philosophies of India, and may even owe 
something directly to that source through the sojourn 
of Plotinus in the Punjab, such writings as these 
may help the Church to meet with discriminating 
sympathy certain Indian teachings which are now 
becoming too familiar in the West to be altogether 
ignored. The bearings of this matter on the mis- 
sionary problem are obvious. 

The first mention of "Dionysius" (to give him by 
courtesy the name he takes upon himself) is in the 

INFLUENCE ON LATER CHURCH 3 

year 533, when, at a council held in Constantinople,! 
Severus, Patriarch of Antioch, appealed to thesd 
writings in support of Monophysite teaching. In 
spite of this unpromising beginning they soon ac- 
quired a great reputation; indeed, they presumably 
possessed some authority already when this first 
recorded appeal to them was made. They were 
widely read in the Eastern Church, being elucidated 
by the Commentary oC St. Maximus in the seventh 
century and the Paraphrase of the learned Greek 
scholar, Pachvmeres, in the thirteenth or fourteenth. 
Through Erigena's Latin translation in the ninth 
century they penetrated to the Western Church, and 
were so eagerly welcomed in this country that (in 
the words of the old chronicler), " The Mystical 
Divinity ran across England like deer." They are 
often quoted with reverence by St. Thomas Aquinas, 
and were, indeed, the chief of the literary forces 
moulding the mystical theology of Christendom. 
Ruysbroeck slaked his thirst at their deep well, and 
so they provided a far greater than their author with 
stimulus and an articulate philosophy. Were this 
their only service they would have the highest claims 
on our gratitude. 

But they have an intrinsic value of their own in 
spite of their obvious defects. And if their influence 
has too often led to certain spiritual excesses, yet 
this influence would not have been felt at all had 
they not met a deep spiritual want. It arose not 
merely on account of their reputed authorship but 
also because the hungering heart of man found here 
some hidden manna. This manna, garnished though 
it be in all these writincfs with strange and often 
untranslatable terms from, the Pagan Mysteries and 
from later neo-Platonism, is yet in itself a plain and 
nourishing spiritual meat. Let us now try to discover 
its quality from, the two treatises before us. 

ct" 

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

II. — His Leading Ideas: The Nature of the 

Godhead in Itself 

The basis of their teaching is the doctrine oi the 
Super-Essential Godhead (vTieQovoiog OeaQx^a). We 

I must, therefore, at the very outset fix the meaning 
of this term. Now the word "Essence" or " Bein 
{ovoia) means almost invariably an individual exist 
ence, more especially a person, since such is the 
highest type that individual existence can in this 
world assume. And, in fact, like the English word 
" Being," it may without qualification be used to 
mean an angel. Since, then, the highest connotation 
of the term "Essence" or "Being" is a person, it 
follows that by " Super-Essence" is intendecl " Supra- 
Personality." And hence the doctrine of the Super- 

I Essential Godhead simply means that God is, in His 

'ultimate Nature, Supra-Personal. 

Now an individual person is one who distinguishes 
himself from the rest of the world. I am a person 
because I can say : " I am I and I am not you." 
Personality thus consists in the faculty of knowing 
oneself to be one individual among others. And 
thus, by its very nature. Personality is (on one side 
of its being, at least) a finite thing. The very essence 
of my personal state lies in the fact that I am not 
the whole universe but a member thereof 

God, on the other hand, is Supra-Personal because 
He is infinite. He is not one Being among others, 
but in His ultimate nature dwells on a plane where 
there is nothing whatever beside Himself. The only 
kind of consciousness we may attribute to Him is 

/what can but be described as an Universal Con- 

' sciousness. He does not distinguish Himself from 
us ; for were we caught up on to that level we should 
be wholly transformed into Him. And yet we dis- 

NATURE OF THE GODHEAD 5 

tinguish between ourselves and Him because from 
our lower plane of finite Being we look up and see 
that ultimate level beyond us. 

The Super-Essential Godhead is, in fact, precisely 
that which modern philosophy describes as the Ab- 
solute. Behind the diversities of this woHd there 
must be an Ultimate Unity. And this Ultimate 
Unity must contain in an undifferentiated condition 
all the riches of consciousness, life, and existence 
which are dispersed in broken fragments throughout 
the world. Yet It is not a particular Consciousness 
or a particular Existence. It is certainly not Uncon- 
scious, Dead or, in the ordinary sense, non-Existent, 
for all these terms imply something below instead of 
above the states to which they are opposed. 

Nevertheless It is not, in Its Ultimate Nature, 
conscious (as we understand the term) for conscious- 
ness implies a state in which the thinking Subject is 
aware of himself and so becomes an Object of his 
own perception. And this is impossible in the ulti- 
mate Nature of the Undifferentiated Godhead where 
there is no distinction between thinking Subject and' 
Object of thought, simply because there is at that 
level no distinction of any kind whatever. Similarly 
the Godhead does not, in the ordinary sense, live (for 
life is a process and hence implies distinctions) nor 
does It even (in our sense) exist, for Existence is 
contrasted with non-Existence and thus implies rela- 
tionship and distinctions. Consciousness, Life, and 
Existence, as we know them, are finite states, and 
the Infinite Godhead is beyond them. We cannot 
even, strictly speaking, attribute to It Unity, for 
Unity is distinguished from Plurality. We must 
instead describe It as a Super-Unity which is neither ^ 
One nor Many and yet contains in an undifferenti- ' 
ated state that Numerical Principle which we can 
only grasp in its partial forms as Unity and Plurality. 

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

III. — The Relation of the Godhead to 

Creation 

This principle of Plurality which is thus transceiid- 
ently contained in Its Undifferentiated Nature com- 
pels It to an eternal act of Creation. For all things 
pre-exist in It fused and yet distinct, as (shall we say ?) 
in a single sensation of hunger there are indivisiby 
felt the several needs for the different elements of 
food which are wanted respectively to nourish the 
various kinds of bodily tissues, or as a single emotion 
contains beforehand the different separate words 
which issue forth to express it. Even so the Ulti- 
mate Godhead, brimful with Its Super-Unity, must 
overflow into multiplicity, must pass from Indifference 
into Differentiation and must issue out of its Super- 
Essential state to fashion a world of Being. 

Now since the Godhead thus pours Itself out on 
to the plane of Being (which plane itself" 'exists 
through nothing but this outpouring), it follows that 
the Godhead comes into relation with this plane : 
or rather (inasmuch as the act is timeless) stands in 
some relation to it. If the Godhead acts creatively, 
then It is related to the world and sphere of creation : 
eternally to the sphere of creation (which otherwise 
could not exist), and thus potentially to the world 
even before the world was made. Hence the God- 
head, while in Its ultimate Nature It is beyond all 
i differentiations and relationships, and dwells in a 
region where there is nothing outside of Itself, yet 
on another side of Its Nature (so to speak) touches 
and embraces a region of differentiations and rela- 
tionships, is therefore Itself related to that region, 
and so in a sense belongs to it. Ultimately the 
Godhead is undifferentiated and unrelated, but in Its 
eternal created activity It is manifested under the 

RELATION TO CREATION 7 

I 

form of Differentiation and Relationship. It belongs 

concurrently to two worlds : that of Ultimate Realit) 
and that of Manifested Appearance. Hence, there- 
fore, the possibility not only of Creation but als<5 
Revelation {excpavoig). Just as the Godhead creates 
all things by virtue of that Aspect of Its Nature 
which is (as it were) turned towards them, so It is 
revealed to us by virtue of the same Aspect turned 
towards our minds which form part of the creation. 
Hence all the Scriptural Names of God, and this 
very Name "God" itself, though they apply to the 
whole Nature of the Godhead and not merely to 
some particular elemicnt or function thereof, yet 
cannot express that Nature in Its Ultimate Super- 
essence but only as manifested in Its relative activity. 
Dionysius, in fact, definitely teaches that doctrine 
which, when revived independently ofrecent yearsby 
Dr. Bradley was regarded as a startling blasphemy : 
that God is but an x^ppearance^ of the Absolute. 
And this is, after all, merely a bold way of stating' 
the orthodox truism that the Ultimate Godhead is 
inconiprehensible : a truism which Theology accepts 
as an axiom and then is prone to ignore. The 
various Names of God are thus mere inadequate 
symbols of That Which transcends all thought and 
existence. But they are undifferentiated titles because 
they are symbols which seek (though unsuccessfully) 
to express the undifferentiated Super-Essence. Though 
the terms "God," "King," "Good," "Existent," etc., 
have all different connotations, yet they all denote 
the sam.e undifferentiated Deity. There are, however, 
some Names which denote not the undifferentiated \ 
Godhead, but certain eternally differentiated Elements 
in Its Manifestation. These are the Names of the 
Three Persons in the Blessed Trinity. Whereas the 
terms "God," "King," "Good," "Existent," etc., 

^ Appearance and Reality (2nd ed.), pp. 445 ff. 

8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

denote (though they cannot express it) the same 
ReaHty : the term " Father " denotes som.ething 
different from that of " Son," and both of these 
from that of " Holy Ghost." The whole Manifested 
Godhead is ''God," "King," "Creator," "Saviour," 
"Lord," "Eternal," "Living," etc., but only One 
Persona of the Godhead is Father, or Son, or Holy 
Ghost. The undifferentiated titles differ from each 
other merely through our feeble grasp of the Mani- 
festation, and coalesce as our apprehension of it 
grows ; the differentiated titles [diaKeKQiueva or 
diaxoL08Lg) represent actual distinctions in the eternal 
Manifestation Itself. Thus the Absolute Godhead 
is the Super-Essence ; the eternally Manifested God- 
head is the Trinity. As to the reasons of this 
Dionysius deprecates all inquiry. He does not, for 
instance, suggest that Relationship in this its simplest 
form cannot but exist within that side of the God- 
head which embraces and enters into this relative 
world. Here, as elsewhere, his purpose in spite of 
his philosophical language, is in the deepest sense 
purely practical, and mere speculations are left on 
one side. He accepts the Eternal Distinctions of the 
Trinity because They have been revealed ; on the 
other hand, he sees that they must belong to 
the sphere of Manifestation or They could not be 
revealed. 

It was said above that the Ultimate Godhead is 
Supra-Personal, and that it is Supra-Personal be- 
cause personality consists in the faculty of knowing 
oneself to be one individual among others. xAre 
the PersoncB of the Trinity then, personal, since They 
are distinguished One from Another? No, They are 
not personal, because, being the infinite Manifesta- 
tion of the Godhead, They are Super-Essential, and 
Dionysius describes Them by that title. And if it 
be urged that in one place he joins the same title 

RELATION TO CREATION 9 

to our Lord's individual Human Name and speaks 
of " the Super-Essential Jesus," this is because the 
Personality of our Lord (and our own personality 
also through our union with Him) passes up into 
a region transcending personality, and hence wdiile 
the Humanity of Jesus is Personal His Godhead is 
Supra-Personal. This is implied in a passage from 
Hierotheus (quoted with approval by Dionysius him- 
self) which teaches that the Deity of Jesus is of anl 
universal character belonging through Him to all 
redeemed mankind. 

The teaching of Dionysius on the Trinity is, so 
far as it goes, substantially the same as that of St. 
Augustine or St. Thomas Aquinas; only it is ex- 
pressed in more exact, if at first sight somewhat 
fantastic, terms. St. Augustine,^ for instance, teaches 
that the inner Differentiations of the Trinity belong 

^ [Augustine says indeed that the Father and the Son exist, non 
seciindiim substantiani^ sed seainduvi relaiivum [De Trin. v. 6). 
But Augustine's argument is, that while no attrilnite of God is acci- 
dental, yet all attributes are not said with reference to His substance. 
Certain attributes of God are neither accidental nor substantial, but 
relative. This applies to Divine Fatherhood and Sonship. For the 
Father is what He i-; in relation to the Son, and similarly the Son to 
the Father. But these are relations of " Beings," and are relations 
which are "eternal and unchangeable." Augustine does not affum a 
supra-personal reality of God behind the Tiinity of manifestation. For 
Augustine the Father and the Son ai-e ultimate realities. " But if the 
Father, in that He is called the Father, were so called in relation 
to Himself, not to the Son ; and the Son, in that He is called the 
Son, were so called in relation to Himself, not to the Father; then 
both the one would be called Father, and the other Son, according 
to substance. But because the Father is not called the Faiher except 
in that He has a Son, and the Son is not called Son except in that He 
has a Father, these things are not said according to substance ; because 
each of them is not so called in relation to Himself, but the terms are 
used reciprocally and in relation each to the other ; nor yet according 
to accident, because both the being called the Father, and the being 
called the Son, is eternal and unchangeable to them. Wherefore, 
although to be the Father and to be the Son is different, yet their 
substance is not different ; because they are so ca'led, not according 
to substance, but according to relation, which relation, however, is not 
accident, because it is not changeable." — Aug., De Trin. v. 6. — Ed.] 

B 

10 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

solely to the realm of eternal Manifestation when he 
sa}'s that They exist secuiidnin Relativuni and not 
seaindinn Siibstantiani} Also he teaches the Supra- 
Personality of the Trinity when he says that neither the 
inidivided Trinity nor any of Its Three Persons is a 
particular individuality ;"^ and St. Thomas teaches the 
same thing when he says that the Human Soul of 
Jesus does not comprehend or contain the Word 
since the Human Soul is finite {i.e. a particular 
individuality) while the Word is Infinite.^ 

Thus while in the Undifferentiated Godhead the 
"Persons" of the Trinity ultimately transcend Them- 
selves and. point (as it were) to a region where They 
are merged, yet in that side of Its Nature which 
looks towards the universe They shine eternally forth 
and are the effulgence of those "Supernal Rays" 
through Which all light is given us, and whence all 
energy streams into the act of creation. For by 
Their interaction They circulate that Super-PIssencc 
Which Each of Them perfectly possesses, and so 
It passes forth from Them into a universe of Being. 

Now the Godhead, while It is beyond all particular 
Being, yet contains and is the ultimate Reality of 
all particular Being; for Tt contains beforehand all 
the particular creatures after a manner in which they 
are ultimately identical with It, as seems to be im- 
plied by the phrase that all things exist in It fused 
and yet distinct. Thus although It is not a particular 
, being, It in a transcendent manner contains and is 
jParticularity. Again It is beyond all universal Being, 
(for universals are apprehended by the intellect, 

^ De 7 rill. v. 6. 

^ See De Trin. viii. 4. "Not this and that Good, but the very 
Good . . . Not a good Personality {animus) but good Goodness " ; 
and vii. 11, where he condemns those who s.ny the word persona is 
employed "in the sense of a particular man such as Abraham, Isaac, 
or Jacob, or anybody else who can be pointed out as being present." 

^ Sm.'una, Pars III. Q. x. Art. i. 

RELATION TO CREATION ii 

whereas the Godhead is incomprehensible and there- 
fore is described as "formless." Nevertheless It con- 
tains and is the Ultimate Reality of all universals, 
for, even before the world was made, It eternally 
embraced and embraces all things and all the uni- 
versal laws of their existence. Thus after a tran- 
scendent manner It contains and is Universality. 
And hence in Its transcendent Nature Universality 
and l^articularity are contained as one and the same 
undifferentiated Fact. 

But in this world of Being the particular and the 
universal aspect of things must be mutually distin- 
guished. Otherwise there could, on the one hand, be 
no things, and on the other, no bond of unity between 
them. Hence, w^hen the Super-Essence overflows in\ 
the act of creation, It runs, as it were, into the two \ 
main streams of Universal and Particular Being. 
Neither of these two streams has any independent or 
concrete existence. Taken separately, they are mere 
potentialities : two separate aspects, as it v/ere, of the 
creative impulse, implying an eternal possibility of 
creation and an eternal tendency towards it, and yet 
not jn themselves creative because not in themselves, 
strictly speaking, existent. Nevertheless these two 
streams differ each from each, and one of them has a 
deo^ree of reality which does not belong to the other. 
Mere universal Being, says Dionysius, does not 
possess full or concrete existence ; at the same time, 
since it is Bemo; or Existence, he does not call it 
non-existent. Mere Particularity, on the other hand, 
he practically identifies with Non-entity, for the 
obvious reason that non-existence itself is a universal 
category (as applying to all existent things), and, 
therefore, cannot belong to th.at which has no 
universal element at all. Thus the universal stream 
is an abstract ideal and possesses an abstract exist- 
ence, the particular stream is an abortive impulse and 

12 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

possesses no actual existence whatever. The one is 
the formal law of the existence universe, the other its 
rough material. 

Thus these two emanating streams of potentiality 
have, from before all time, eternally welled forth and 
passed away, the universal into emptiness and the 
particular into nothingness, or rather, through 
nothingness back at once into the Super-Essence in 
a ceaseless revolution which, until the appointed 
moment arrives for Time and the temporal world to 
begin, leaves no trace outside Its Super-Essential 
Source and Dwelling and Goal. It is possible 
(though one cannot say more), that Dionysius is 
thinking especially of the difference between these 
two streams when he describes the various motions of 
the Godhead. The Particular stream of Emanation 
may be in his mind when he speaks of the circular 
movement, since the particular existences remain 
within the Super-Essence, until the moment of their 
temporal creation : the Universal stream may be that 
of which he is thinking when he speaks of the direct 
and spiral movements, since both of these indicate 
an advance and would therefore be appropriate to 
express the out-raying tendency of that emanating 
Influence which, even before the particular creatures 
were made, had a kind of existence for thought as 
the other stream had not. 

This Universal stream consists of currents or 
Emanations, Very Being, Very Life, etc. (avroelrai, 
avTot,cor}, k.t.I.), and of these currents some are more 
universal than others ; Very Being is, obviously, the 
most universal of all. And since the Super-Essence 
transcends and so absorbs all Universality, it follows 
that the more universal the Emanations are the 
higher is their nature. This stream, in fact, runs, as 
it were, in the channel which our thought naturally 
traces ; for thought cannot but seek for universals, 

RELATION TO CREATION 13 

and the abstract and bloodless tendency of nnere 
Philosophy comes from an undue exaltation of 
thought over life. From this defect, however, Dio- 
nysius is free. For, while he holds that the highest 
Emanation is the most universal, he also holds (as 
was seen) that the Emanations are in themselves the 
mere background of existence and are not fully 
existent. And he expressly says that while the 
Emanations become more and more universal the 
higher we ascend towards their Source, the creatures 
become more and more individual and particular the 
higher they rise in the scale. The reason is, of course, 
that the Super-Essence transcends and absorbs all 
Particularity as well as all Universality ; and hence 
it is that particular things become particularized by 
partaking of It, just as universals become universalized 
by a similar process. But of this more anon. 

This Universal stream of Emanations thus eternally 
possesses a kind of existence, but it is an empty 
existence, like the emptiness of mere light if there 
were no objects to fill it and be made visible. The 
light in such a case would still be streaming forth 
from the sun and could not do otherwise, and there- 
fore it would not be an utter void ; but it would be 
untenanted by any particular colour or shape. 
Suppose, however, that the hght could be blotted out. 
There would now remain the utter void of absolute 
darkness. Such darkness cannot exist while the sun 
IS shining in the cloudless heavens ; nevertheless the 
very notion of light cannot but be contrasted in our 
minds with that of darkness which is its absence ; and 
so we conceive the light to be a positive thing which 
fills the darkness even as water fills a void. When 
the bowl is full of water, the void does not exist ; and 
yet, since it would exist if the bowl could be wholly 
emptied, we can regard this non-existent void as the 
receptacle of the water. 

14 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Even so the Emanations of Very Being, etc., fill, as 
it were, a void which does not and cannot exist, since 
it is, and must be, saturated with them, and yet it is, 
by the very laws of our thinking, contrasted with 
them and would, in a manner, exist if the Emana- 
tions could cease to flow from the Super-Essence. 
They, streaming eternally (as they must) from that 
overflowing Source, permeate the whole boundless 
region of the world that is to be ; a region be}ond 
Time and Space. That region is thus their receptacle. 
The receptacle, if emptied of them (though this is 
impossible), w^ould contain nothing, and be nothing 
whatsoever. Hence, it is called Not-Being, or the 
Non-Existent (to fxi] ov). 

So the two Streams flow timelessly without begin- 
ning and without end, and cross, but do not mingle : 
the Universal Stream perpetually advancing and the 
Particular Stream circling round and slipping through 
it, as it were, into the void of Nothingness (as a thing 
by its very nature invisible, would be in darkness 
even while surrounded by the light) and so returning 
into the Super-Essence without leaving a trace behind 
it. This activity, though it must be expressed thus 
in terms of Time, is really timeless and therefore 
simultaneous. Eor the Streams are not something 
other than the Super-Essence. They are simply 
distant aspects of It. They are the Super-Essence in 
Its creative activity. As the river flowing out of a 
lake consists of the water which belongs to the lake, 
or as the light and heat flowing from the sun are the 
same light and heat that are in the sun, so the 
emanating Streams are the same Power that exists 
in the Super-Essence, though now acting (or striving 
to act) at a distance. Or perhaps we may compare 
the Super-Essence to a mountain of rich ore, the 
inward depths of which are hidden beyond sight and 
touch. The outer surface, however, is touched and 

RELATION TO CREATION 15 

seen, and this corresponds to the Persons of the 
Trinity ; while the same mountain viewed at a 
distance is the Stream of Universal Emanation 
And though the view becomes dim.mer and dimmer 
the farther aw^ay you go, j-et it is ahvays the same 
mountain itself that is being viewed. The Particular 
Stream, on the other hand, is like the same mountain 
when invisible at night, for the mountain still sends 
forth its vibrations, but these are lost in the darkness. 
Or we may compare the Super-Essence to a 
magnet and the Persons of the Trinity to its tangible 
surface, and the two emanating Streams to the positive 
and negative magnetism which are simply the essence 
of the magnet present (so to speak) at a distance. 
Even so (but in a manner which is truer because 
non-spatial) the Super-Essence is in the emanating 
streams outside the Super-Essential plane and thus 
interpenetrates regions which are remote from Itself. 
It is both immanent in the world as its Principle 
of ]]ein2f and outside it as transcending: all catecrories 
of Being. This contradiction is implied in the ver}^ 
word " Emanation " (nooodog) which means an act by 
which the Super-Essence goes forth from Itself. 
And, in fact, Dionysius more than once definitely 
says that the Super-Essence actually passes outside 
of Itself even while It remains all the time wholly 
within itself. This he expresses in one place by say-ij 
ing that the act of Creation is an ecstasy of Divine! 
LoY^e. This thought is vital to his doctrine, and must? 
be remembered whenever in the present attempt to 
expound him, the Super-Essence is spoken of as 
" outside " the creatures. The Super-P2ssence is not, 
strictly speaking, external to anything. But It is 
'outside" the creatures because (as existing simul- 
taneously on two planes) It is "outside" Itself. And^' 
therefore, although the entire plane of creation is 
interpenetrated by It, yet in Its ultimate Nature It is 

i6 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

beyond that plane and so "outside" it. Finite 
creatures tliough filled (according to their measure) 
with Its Presence, yet must, in so far as they are 
finite, look up to It as That which is Other than 
Ithemselves. And, in this sense of being Other than 
they are. It must be described as "outside" them, 
even though (as their Principle of Being) It is within 
'them. 

Thus the two emanating streams, though they pass 
outside of the Super-Essence, yet actually are the 
Super-Essence Itself. And, in fact, the very term 
Emanation {nQoodog) like the collateral term Differ- 
entiation (didxQioig) may even be applied not only 
to the two Streams but also to the Persons of the 
Trinity ; not only to the Magnets radiating Energy, 
so to speak, but also to its actual Surface. 

This matter needs a few words of explanation. 
There is in the undifferentiated (vTTEQrjvcojiisvf]) 
Super-Essence a Differentiation between the Three 
Divine " Persons," which Dionysius compares to the 
distinction between different flames in the same 
I indivisible brightness. And Each "Person" is an 
IjEmanation because Each is a Principle of outgoing 
^creative Energy. There is also a Differentiation 
Detween the various qualities and forces of the crea- 
tive Energy, rather as (if we may further work out 
the simile of Dionysius) the light seen afar through 
certain atmospheric conditions is differentiated into 
various colours. And each quality or force is an 
Emanation, for it is an outgoing current of creative 
Energy. Or, by a slightly different use of language, 
the entire creative process in which they flow forth 
may be called not merely a collection of emanations 
but simply " the Emanation." Thus an Emanation 
may mean, (i) a Person of the Trinity ; (2) a current 
of the Universal Stream (e.g., Very Being, or Very 
Life, etc.); (3) a current of the Particular Stream (z.e. 

RELATION TO CREATION 17 

a particular force) ; (4) the entire process whereby the 
two Streams flow forth. This sounds confusing, but 
the difficulty vanishes if we classify these various 
meanings under two heads, viz. : (i) an Emanating 
l^'inciple {i.e. a "Person" of the Trinity), and (2) an 
Emanating Act (whether regarded as a whole or in 
detail). This classification covers all its uses. 

These two heads, in fact, correspond exactly to the 
two main uses of the word " Differentiation " as 
applying respectively to the Super-Essential sphere 
and to the sphere of Being. And here Dionysius 
certainly does cause needless difficulty by employing 
the same word " Differentiation " with these two dis- 
tinct meanings in the same passage. The Persons of 
the Trinity are differentiated, but the Energy stream- 
ing from them is undifferentiated in the sense that it! 
comes indivisibly from them all. In another sense, I 
however, it is differentiated because it splits up into 
separate currents and forces. Each of these currents 
comes from the Undivided Trinity, and yet each 
current is distinct from the others. Dionysius 
expresses this truth by saying that the Godhead 
enters Undividedly into Differentiation, or becomes 
differentiated without loss of Undifference (fivcofievojQ 
diaKQLverai). 

Let us follow this creative process and see whither 
it leads. The Super-Essence, as It transcends both 
Non-Existence and Existence, also transcends both 
Time and Eternity. But from afar It is seen or felt 
as Existence and as Eternity. That is to say 
Existence and Eternity are two emanating modes 
or qualities of the Universal Stream. The Particular I 
Stream, on the other hand, is Time-non-existent as I 
yet and struggling to come to the birth but unable i 
to do so until it gain permanence through min- 
gling with Eternity. At a certain point, however 
(preordained in the Super-Essence wherein Tunc 

i8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

slumbered), the two streams not only cross but actually 
mingle, and thus Time and the temporal world begin. 
The Particular stream no longer sinks wholly through 
the Universal, but is in part supported by it. Hence 
the world of things arises like a substance hitherto 
invisible but now becoming visible, and so, by this 
change, springing out of darkness into light. 

Now, when the Particular stream begins to mingle 
with the Universal, it naturally mingles first with that 
current of it which, being most universal, ranks the 
highest and so is nearest the Source. It is only along 
that current that it can advance to the others which 
are further away. And that current is Being (avto- 
sTvai). Thus the world-process begins (as Dionysius 
iiad learnt from Genesis and from the teaching of 
Plato) as the level of dead solid matter, to v/hich 
he gives the name of " merely existent " (ovoLOjdijg). 
Thence, by participating more and more in the 
Universal stream, it advances to the production of 
plant and animal and man, being by the process 
enriched with more and more qualities as Life 
{avToCco?]), Wisdom (avrooo(pLa), and the other 
currents of the Universal stream begin to permeate 
it one by one. 

Thus the separate indiviciuals, according to the 
various laws (?.6yot) of their genera and species, are 
created in this world of Time. And each thing, 
while it exists in the world, has two sides to its exist- 
ence : one, outside its created being (according to the 
sense of the word "outside" explained above), in the 
Super-Essence wherein all things are One Thing (as 
all points meet at infinity or as according to the neo- 
Platonic simile used by Dionysius, the radii of a circle 
meet at the centre), and the other within its own 
created being on this lower plane where all things are 
separate from each other (as all points in space are 
separate or as the radii of the circle are separate 

RELATION TO CREATION 19 

at the circumference). This paradox is of the very 
utmost importance. 

The v^arious kinds of existences being now created 
in this world of time, we can regard them as ranged 
in an ascendincf scale between Nothinq;ness and the 
Super-Essence, each rank of being subsuming the 
qualities of those that lie below it. Thus we get 
the following system in ascending order : Existence, 
Life, Sensation, Reason, Spirit. And it is to this 
scale that Dionysius alludes when he speaks of the 
extremities and the intermediate parts of the creation, 
meaning by the extremities the highest and the lowest 
orders, and by the intermediate parts the remainder. 

The diminution of Being which we find in glancing 
down the ladder is, Dionysius tells us, no defect in 
the ss'stem of creation. It is right that a stone should 
be but a stone and a tree no more than a tree. Each 
thing, being itself however lowly, is fulfilling the laws 
of its kind which pre-exist (after a transcendent 
manner) in the undifferentiated Super- Essence. If, 
however, there is a diminution of Being where such 
diminution has no place, then trouble begins to arise. 
This is, in fact, the origin and nature of evil/ For as 
we ascend the scale of Being, fresh laws at each stage 
counteract the laws of the stage below, the law of life 
by which the blood circulates and living things grow 
upwards counteracting the mere law of inert gravita- 
tion, and again, the laws of morality counteracting 
the animal passions. And where this counter-action 
fails, disaster follows. A hindered circulation means 
ill-health, and a hindered self-control means sini 
Whereas a stone is merely lifeless, a corpse is no| 
only lifeless but dead ; and whereas a brute i: 
un-moral, a brutal man is wicked, or immoral. What' 
in the one case is the absence from a thing of that 
which has no proper place in it, is in the other case 
the failure of the thing's proper virtues. 

20 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

IV. — The Problem of Evil 

At wearisome length Dionysius discusses the 
problem of evil and shows that nothing is inherently 
bad. For existence is in itself good (as coming 
ultimately from the Super-Essence), and all things 
are therefore good in so far as they exist. Since evil 
is ultimately non-existent, a totally evil thing would 
be simply non-existent, and thus the evil in the 
world, wherever it becomes complete, annihilates itself 
and that wherein it lodges. VVe may illustrate this 
thought by the nature of zero in mathematics, which 
is non-entity (since, added to numbers, it makes no 
difference) and yet has an annihilating force (since it 
reduces to zero all numbers that are multiplied by it). 
Even so evil is nothing and yet manifests itself in the 
annihilation of the things it qualifies. That which we 
call evil in the world is merely a tendency of things 
towards nothingness. Thus sickness is a tendency 
towards death, and death is simply the cessation of 
physical vitality. And sin is a tendency towards 
spiritual death, which is the cessation of spiritual 
vitality. But, since the ground of the soul is inde- 
structible, a complete cessation of its being is 
impossible ; and hence even the devils are not 
inherently bad. Were they such they would cease 
ipso facto to exist. 

Dionysius here touches incidentally on a mystical 
doctrine which, as developed by later writers, after- 
wards attained the greatest importance. This doctrine 
of a timeless self is the postulate, perhaps, of all 
Christian mysticism. The boldest expression of it is 
to be found in Eckhart and his disciple Tauler, who 
both say that even the lost souls in hell retain 
unaltered the ultimate nobility of their being. And 
lest this doctrine should be thought to trifle with 

THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 21 

^rave matters, be it remembered that the sinfulness 
and gravity of sin are simply due to this indestructible 
nobility of our being. Man cannot become non-moral, 
and hence his capacity for wickedness. The soul is 
potentially divine, and therefore may be actually 
Satanic. The very devils in hell cannot destroy the 
image of the Godhead within them, and it is this 
image that sin defiles. 

It follows from the ultimate non-entity of evil that, 
in so far as it exists, it can only do so through being 
mingled with some element of good. To take an 
illustration given by Dionysius himself, where there is 
disease there is vitality, for when life ceases the sick- 
ness disappears in death. The ugliness of evil lies 
precisely in the fact that it always, somehow or other, 
consists in the corruption of something inherently 
good. 

It is, however, this ugliness of things that Dionysius | 
fails to emphasize, and herein lies the great weakness I 
of his teaching. Not only does he, with the misguided 
zeal of an apologist, gloze deliberately over certain 
particular cruelties of the Creation and accept them 
as finite forms of good, but also he tends to explain 
away the very nature of evil in itself. He tends to be 
misled by his own true theories. For it is true that 
evil is ultimately non-existent. St. Augustine taught 
this when he said : " Sin is nought " ; ^ so did Julian 
of Norwich, who " saw not sin^' because she believes 
" it hath no manner of substance nor any part of 
being." '^ The fault of Dionysius is the natural failure 
of liis mental type to grasp the mere facts of the 
actual world as mere facts. He is so dazzled with 
his vision of ultimate Reality that he does not feel 
with any intensity the partial realities of this finite 
universe. Hence, though his theory of evil is, in the 

^ Com. on St. John i. 13. Cf. Cojif. vii. 18 ; xii. 1 1. 
2 Revelations of Divine Love, xxvii. 

22 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

main, true, he does not quite grasp the true appUcation 
of his theory to this world of actual facts. 

For this world is by its very nature finite. And 
hence, if the evil in it is (as Dionysius rightly says) 
but partial, it must also be remembered (as he for a 
moment forgets) that its very existence is but partial. 
And, therefore, though evil is ultimately non-existent, 
yet the bad qualities of things may, so far as this 
present world is concerned, have as much reality, or 
at least as much actuality, as their good qualities. 
And when we say that evil is ultimately non-existent 

! we merely mean that evil oiigJit to have no actuality 
here, not that it has none. Dionysius calls evil a 
lapse and failure of the creature's proper virtues. 

iBut a lapse or failure has in it something positive, as 
he in the same breath both admits by using the word 
and also tries to explain away. It is as positive as 
the virtues from which it lapses. The absence of 
light from the centre of a wooden block is nothing, 
for the light has no proper place there, but the 
absence of light from the air, where light should be, 
is darkness and is a visible shadow. St. Augustine 
has crystallized this truth in his famous epigram, 
quoted above in part, which runs in full as follows : 
" Sin is naught, and men are naughtes when they 
sin." The void left by the want of a good thing has 
a content consisting in the want. Probably had 
Dionysius seen m.ore of the world's misery and sin he 
would have had a stronger sense of this fact. And 
in that case he would have given more prominence 
than he gives, in his extant writings at least, to the 
Cross of Christ. 

Two things should, however, be borne in mind. 
In the first place he is writing for intellectual 
Christians in whom he can take for granted both an 
understanding of metaphysics and a horror of sin. 
To such readers the non-existence of evil could not 

THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 23 

have the same meaning as it would to the world 
outside. For the same reason he (like other Christian 
teachers after him) speaks of God's transcendent Non- 
Existence without fearinc: lest his words should be 
interpreted as atheism. In fact, to guard against 
misinterpretation he utters the express warning that 
mysteries can only be taught to the Initiated.^ 

In the second place throughout his whole treatment 
of evil, he is no doubt writing with an eye on the 
dualistic heresy of the Manichees, which was prevalent 
in his day. Hence the occasional indiscretion of the 
zeal with which he seeks to block every loop-hole 
looking: towards dualism. The result is a one-sided 
emphasis in his teaching rather than positive error. 
H e rightly denies a dnnli'm nf ultiniritr rrnlitirr'^'-Tiirt 
he tends to ignore, rather than to deny, the obvious 
dualism of actual facts. 

l)efore proceeding to the Method of Contemplation 
which crowns and vitalizes the entire speculative 
system of Dionysius, it will be well to bring together 
in one paragraph the various meanings he gives to 
Non-Existence. 

(t) The Super-Essence transcends the distinction 
betw^een the Aristotelian " Matter " and " Form " ; but 
in this world the two are distinct from each other. 
And whereas, in this v/orld, Form without "Matter" 
has an abstract existence for thought, "Matter " with- 
out Form has none. Thus mere "Matter" is 
non-existent. And hence things both before their 
creation and after their destruction are non-existent, 
for their " 1^, latter" has then no " form." (2) Similarly 
Good without evil exists as the highest Manifestation 
or " Form " of the Godhead, but evil without Good 
is formless and therefore non-existent. (This does 
not mean that " Matter " or the world-stuff is evil, but 
that neither it nor evil is anything at all.) And since 
1 Div. Norn. i. 8, ad fin. ; My St. Theol. i. 2. 

24 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

evil is ultimately altogether non-existent, all things 
are non-existent in so far as they are evil. (3) Finally, 
the Super-Essence is, in a transcendent manner, Non- 
Existent as being beyond Existence. And hence the 
paradox that the destructive force of evil and the 
higher impulse towards the Godhead both have 
the same negative principle of a discontent with the 
existent world — the dangerous, yet true, doctrine 
(taught, among others, by St. Augustine ^ and Dante -) 
that evil is a mistaken quest for Good. 

The principle of this classification is quite simple. 
It lies in the fact that Bei?ig is the most universal of 
the Emanations or Forms, and that all things there- 
fore exist only in so far as they possess Form. Hence 
the want of all " form " is non-entity and makes 
things which are without any form to be non-existent ; 
that want of proper " form " which we call evil is a 
tendency to non-entity and makes evil things to be 
so far non-existent ; the want of complete substantial 
or spiritual " form " makes merely existent things {t. c. 
lifeless things) to be " un-existent " ; and the tran- 
scendence of all " Form " makes the Super-Essence to 
be in a special sense " Non-Existent." 

The theory of evil, as given above, is worked out in 
a manner sufficiently startling. 

We naturally divide existent things into good and 
bad and do not think of non-existent things as being 
things at all. Dionysius, with apparent perv^ersity, 
says all things are good, and then proceeds to divide 
them into " Existent " and " Non-Existent " ! The 
reason is this : All things have two sides to their 
being : the one in the Super-Essence and the other 
in themselves. In the Super-Essence they are eter- 
nally good, even before their creation. But in them- 
seh^es (i. e. in their created essence) they were wholly 
non-existent before their temporal creation, and after 

^ Conf. ii. 6, 12-14. Farad, v. 10-12. 

CONTEMPLATION 25 

it are partially non-existent in so far as they are 
tainted with evil. 

V. — Contemplation 

So far this doctrine of a dual state belonging to all 
things may seem an unprofitable speculation. We 
now come to the point where its true value will be 
seen. For it underlies a profound theory of Person- ; 
ality and a rich method of Contemplation. This part i 
of the subject is difficult, and will need close attention. 

The process of Creation advances from the simple 
to the complex as Life is added to mere Being, and 
Consciousness to Life, and Rationality to Conscious- 
ness. But from this point there begins a new phase 
in the process. Man, having as it were floated into 
the world down the Universal stream of Emanation, 
now enters into his spirit, and so plunges beneath the 
stream, and there below its surface finds an under- 
current which begins to sweep him in a contrary 
direction towards the Source. By the downward 
movement his personality has been produced, by this 
upward movement it will be transformed. 

So man presses on towards God, and the method 
of his journey is a concentration of all his spiritual 
powers. By this method he gathers himself together i 
away froin Q]ii-^v^arrl ]-l-ii'ncTc; in|n thp rpntre_^of his 

being. And thus ^""^ gradually Kor^m>^g unjfieH and 

simplified, lil-''" 1-^1^ Anorplc; vvhngp (creation Dion\'suis 
"^s able to place at the very commencement of the 
developing temporal order precisely because their 
' nature is of this utterly simple and concentrate^, 
kind. And, because the process of advance is one 

of spiritual rr.nnf>r»f^afi'on^ Qnrl mr>ypg ^^\^la,^fm*L^-t^nrn 

from external things into the hidden depths of the 

''^oul, LheiefOie rnan mUst cast away tPe. scpara te 

forms ' of those-eTements which he thus draws from 

26 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the circumference into the centre of his personal 
spirit. Having sucked the nourishment from the 
various fruits growing severally in their different 
proper zones by the margin of the stream up which 
he presses, he assimilates those vitalizing elements 
into his own tissues (finding each food suited in turn 
to his advancing strength) and casts the rind away 
as a thing no longer needed. And this rejection of 
the husk in which the nourishing fruit had grown 
is the process described by Dionysius as the Via 
Negativa. 

Let us consider this matter more in detail. 

The first stage of Religion is anthropomorphic. 
God is conceived of as a magnified Man with an out- 
ward form. This notion contains some low degree of 
truth, but it must be spiritualized. And^jn^ca sti-ng 
away the materiali^tifl^jJ£tails of the conception we 
begin to enter ona Via Negativa. All educated 
Christians enter on this path, though very few are 
given the task of pursuing it to the end. So first 
the notion of an outward material form is cast away 
and then \\\ej[\o,\\c>x\ of^^ange. God is now repfarded 
^^ _and ^mm;^f^prig.l Beings possessing all 

U:>ip qnaljtipc; c^^ Pp^^nnnlffy anH^JMJTPrnpariftp^ of 

^Sensation and Perception in an eternal and spiritual 
manner. .This is a conception of God built up, 
largely, by the Discursive Reason and appealing to 
that side of our nature. But the Intuitive Reason 
seeks to pierce beyond this shimmering cloud into 
the hidden Light which shines through it. For the 
mind demands an Absolute Unity beyond this variety 
of Attributes. And such a Unity, being an axiom 
or postulate, lies in a region behind the deductions 
of the Discursive Reason. For all deduction depends 
upon axioms, and axioms themselves cannot be 
deduced. 

Thus the human spirit has travelled far, but still 

CONTEMPLATION 27 

it is unsatisfied. From the simple unity of its own 
being it gazes up at the Simple Unity of the Un- 
created Light which still shines above it and beyond 
it. The Light is One Thing and the human spirit 
is another. All elements of difference in the human 
spirit and in the Uncreated Light have disappeared, 
but there still remains the primary distinction between 
Contemplating Subject and Contemplated Object. 
The human self and the Uncreated Light stand in 
the mutual relationships of " Me " and " Thee." That 
which says "Me" is not the Being Which is addressed 
as "Thee"; and the Being addressed as "Thee" is 
not that which says "Me." The two stand over 
against one another. 

This relationship must now be transcended by a 
process leading to ecstasy. The human spirit must 
seek to go forth out of itself [i.e. out of its created 
being) into the Uncreated Object of its contempla- 
tion and so to be utterly merged. So it ceases to 
desire even its own being in itself. Casting selfhood 
away, it strives to gain its true being and selfhood by 
losing them in the Super-Essence. Laying its intel- 
lectual activity to rest it obtains, by a higher spiritual 
activity, a momentary glimpse into the depths of the 
Super-Essence, and perceives that There the distinc- 
tion between " Me " and " Thee " is not^'^It sees into 
the hidden recesses of an un plumbed Mystery in 
which its own individual being and all things are 
ultimately transcended, engulphed and transformed 
into one indivisible Light. It stands just within 
the borders of this Mystery and feels the process of 
transformation already beginning within itself. And, 
though the movements of the process are only just 
commenced, yet it feels by a hidden instinct the ulti- 
mate Goal whither they must lead. For, as Ruys- 
broeck says : " To such men it is revealed that they 
are That which they contemplate." 

28 

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

This transcendent spiritual activity is called Un- 
knowing, jPnr when wp l;nn\\i^i thing- we ran trace 
_Qut the lines of difiereiicg^ which liLpaicilu Jf'Trom 
other tlTtlTL^s, ur wtrteETg^^*'^^^ r^uR pp^t of it fram 

All IrnnwjpHcrp^ in f;^r1- rnn^i^f-Q in nr at 

Kno^ 

st includes, the powerof separating "-This " from 

i^gij;Jl__j]'T7l ill llif^ '^rTpprrF.qqpnrp there arp nO lines 

difference to trace, and there is no " This " or 

lat." Or rather, to put it differently, " This " and 
at," being now transcended, are simply one and 
thel same thing. While the human spirit is yet im- 
peiffect, it looks up and sees the Super-Essence far 
bevond it. At this stasre it still feels itself as *'this" 
an i still perceives the Super-Essence as " That." But 

en it begins to enter on the stage of spiritual 
Rj^flection (to use the techical term borrowed by 
ionysius from the Mysteries) it penetrates the 
Super-Essence and darkly perceives that There the 
distinction ultimately vanishes. It sees a point where 
" this " is transfigured into " That," and " That " is 
wholly " this." And, indeed, already "That" begins 
to pour Itself totally into "this " through the act 
whereby " this " has plunged itself into " That." 

Thus the ultimate goal of the "ego" now seen afar 
by Unknowing and attainable, perhaps, hereafter, is 
to be merged. And yet it will never be lost. Even | 
the last dizzy leap into Absorption will be performed 
in a true sense by the soul itself and within the soul ^ 
itself. The statement of Dionysius that in the Super- 
Essence all things are " fused and yet distinct," when 
combined with the doctrine of human immortality, 
means nothing else. For it means that the immortality 
of the human soul is of an individual kind ; and so 
the self, in one sense, persists even while, in another 
sense, it is merged. This is the most astounding 
paradox of all ! And Dionysius states the apparent 
contradiction without seeking to explain it simply 

CONTEMPLATION ' 29 

because, here as elsewhere, he is not much concerned 
with theory but is merely struggling to express in 
words an overwhelming spiritual experience. The 
explanation, however (if such it may be called) can 
easily be deduced from his theory of existence and 
of personality. 

AH things have two sides to their existence : one 
in the Super-Essence, the other in themselves. Thus 
a human personality is (in William Law's words) an 
" outbirth" from the Godhead. And having at last 
made its journey Home, it must still possess these 
two sides to its existence. And hence, whereas on 
the one side it is merged, on the other it is not. Its 
very being consists of this almost incredible paradox. 
And personality is a paradox because the whole 
world is a paradox, and the whole world is fulfilled 
in personality. 

For this principle of a twofold existence underlies 
all things, and is a reflection of the Super-Essential 
Nature. As the Super-Essence has an eternal ten- 
dency to pass out of Itself by emanation, so the 
creatures have a tendency to pass out of themselves 
by spiritual activity. As the Super-Essence creates 
the world and our human souls by a species of Divine 
" ecstasy," so the human soul must return by an 
answering "ecstasy" to the Super-Essence. On both 
sides there is the same principle of Self-Transcend- 
ence. The very nature of Reality is such that it must 
have its being outside itself. 

And this principle of self-transcendence or ecstasy 
underlies not only the solitary quest of the individual 
soul for God, but also the mutual relations of the 
various individuals with each other. In all their 
social activities of loving fellowship the creatures 
seek and find themselves in one another and so j 
outside of themselves. It is the very essence of ' 
Reality that it is not self-sufficing or self-contained, j 

30 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Not only do the creatures in which the Super-Essence 
overflows possess, by an answering mystery, their 
true being in the Super-Essence, but, as a result of 
this, they possess their true being in each other; for 
in the Super-Essence each has its place as an element 
in One single and indivisible Reality. We have 
here, in fact, the great antinomy of the One and the 
Many, or the Universal and the Particulars, not solved 
indeed, but pronounced to be insoluble and therefore 
ultimate. It penetrates into a region beyond the in- 
tellect, and that is why the intellect is finally baffled 
by it. 

The Dionysian theory that one side of our being is 
outside ourselves in the Super-Essence will be found 
incidentally to reconcile Pragmatism and Idealism 
together. For Dionysius teaches that on one side of 
our being we actually develop in Time. And, if this 
is so, we do as the Pragmatists assert literally inake 
Reality. But the other side of our being is timeless 
and eternally perfect outside ourselves. And if this 
is so, then Reality, as Idealists tell us, is something 
utterly beyond all change. Perhaps this paradox is 
intended in Wordsworth's noble line : — 

So build we up the being that we are.^ 

VI. — Dionysius and Modern Philosophy 

Let us now consider the bearings of the Dionysian 
theory on certain other currents of modern philosophy. 

According to Dr. McTaggart each human soul 
possesses, behind its temporal nature, a timeless self 
and each one of these timeless selves is an eternal 

^ Excursion, iv. , about 70 Hnes from the end. With " the being that 
we are," cf. Prelude, xiv. 113-115 : — 

" The highest bb'ss 
That flesh can know is theirs — the consciousness 
Of whom they are." 

MODERN PHILOSOPHY 31 

differentiation of the Absolute.^ Now if these time- 
less selves are finite, then none embraces the whole 
system. And, if that is so, in what does the Spiritual 
Unity of the whole consist? If, on the other hand, 
they are infinite, then each one must embrace the 
whole System ; and, if so, how can they remain dis- 
tinct ? Having the same context, they must coalesce 
even as (according to Orthodox Theology) the " Per- 
sons " of the Trinity coalesce in the Unity behind 
the plane of Manifestation.^ Dr. McTaggart's philo- 
sophical scheme is noble, but it seems open to this 
metaphysical attack, and psychologically it appears 
to be defective as it leaves no room for worship, 
which is a prime need of the human soul. The 
Dionysian theory seems to meet the difficulty ; for 
since our ultimate being is outside ourselves in the 
Super-Essence, one side of our Being is supra-per- 
sonal. Our finite selves are, on that side, merged 
together in One Infinite "Self" (if It may be thus 
inadequately described) ; and this Infinite Self (so to 
call It) embraces, and is the Spiritual Unity of the 
whole System. And this Infinite Self, seen from 
afar, is and must be the Object of all worship until 
at last worship shall be swallowed up in the com- 
pleteness of Unknowing. 

The paradox that our true existence is (in a sense) 
outside ourselves is the paradox of all life. We live 
by breath and food, and so our life is in these things 
outside our individual bodies. Our life is in the air 
and in our nourishment before we assimilate it as 
our own. More astonishing still, Bergson has shown 
that our perceptions are outside us in the things we 
perceive.^ When I perceive an object a living cur- 
rent passes from the object through my eyes by the 

^ Studies in Hegelian Cosmology, especially in chaps, ii. and iii. 
^ St. Thomas Aquinas, Stitiinia, Pars I. Q. XL. Art, iii. 
'^ Matiere et Menioire, chap, i. 

32 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

afferent nerves to the brain, and thence by the efferent 
nerves once more to the object from which it started, 
causing a mere sensation in me (/. e. in my body) but 
causing me also by that sensation to have a per- 
ception outside me {i.e. outside my body) in the 
thing I look at. And all who gaze upon the same 
object have their perceptions outside themselves in 
that same object which yet is indivisibly one. Even 
so are we to find at last that we all have our true 
selfhoods in the One Super-Essence outside us, and 
yet each shall all the time have a feeling in himself 
of his own particular being without which the Super- 
Essence could not be his. 

The doctrine of Unknowing must not be con- 
founded with Herbert Spencer's doctrine of the 
Unknowable. The actual terms may be similar : 
the meanings are at opposite poles. For Herbert 
Spencer could conceive only of an intellectual ap- 
prehension, which being gone, nothing remained : 
Dionysius was familiar with a spiritual apprehen- 
sion which soars beyond the intellect. Hence Her- 
bert Spencer preaches ignorance concerning ultimate 
things; Dionysius (like Bergson in modern times) ^ 
a transcendence of knowledge. The one means a 
state below the understanding and the other a state 
above it. The one teaches that Ultimate Reality is, 
and must always be, beyond our reach ; the other 
that the Ultimate Reality at last becomes so near 
as utterly to sweep away (in a sense) the distinction 
which separates us from It. That this is the mean- 
ing of Unknowing is plain from the whole trend of 
the Dionysian teaching, and is definitely stated, for 
instance, in the passage about the statue or in others 
which say that the Divine Darkness is dark through 
excess of light. It is even possible that the word 
*' Unknowing" was (with this positive meaning) a 

^ See Evolution Creatrice^ towards the end. 

PSYCHOLOGY OF CONTEMPLATION 33 

technical term of the Mysteries or of later Greek 
Philosophy, and that this is the real explanation 
and interpretation of the inscription on the Athenian 
altar : " To the Unknown God." 1 

VIL— The Psychology of Contemplation 

Be this as it may, Dionysius is unquestionably 
speaking of a psychological state to which he himself 
has been occasionally led. It must, however, be 
carefully distinguished from another psychological 
state, apparently the same and yet really quite dif- 
ferent, of which there is also evidence in other writers. 

Amiel speaks of a mental condition in which the 
self lies dormant, dissolved, as it were, and absorbed 
into an undifferentiated state of being; and it is well 
known that a man's individuality may become merged 
in the impersonal existence of a crowd. The con- 
trast between such a state and Unknowing consists 
wholly in the difference of spiritual values and spiritual 
intensity. Amiel felt the psychic experience men- 
tioned above to be enervating. And the danger is 
fairly obvious. For this psychic state comes not 
through spiritual effort but through spiritual indo- 
lence. And the repose of spiritual attainment must 
be a strenuous repose. 

The same psychic material may take either of two 
opposite forms, for the highest experiences and the 
lowest are both made of the same spiritual stuff 
That is why great sinners make great saints and 
why our Lord preferred disreputable people to the 
respectable righteous. A storm of passion may pro- 
duce a Sonata of Beethoven or it may produce an 
act of murder. All depends on the quality and 
direction of the storm. So in the present instance. 
There is a higher merging of the self and a lower 

^ Acts xvii. 23. Cf. Norden's Agnosias Theos. 

34 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

merging of it. The one is above the level of per- 
sonality, the other beneath it; the one is religious 
the other hedonistic ; the one results from spiritual 
concentration and the other from spiritual dissipation. 

Apparently our souls are crystallizations, as it were, 
out of an undifferentiated psychic ocean. So our 
personalities are formed, which we must keep in- 
violate. To melt back, though but for a time, into 
that ocean would be to surrender our heritage and 
to incur great loss. This is the objection to mere 
psychic trances. But some have been called on to 
advance by the intensification of their spiritual powers 
until they have for a moment reached a very different 
Ocean, which, with its fervent heat, has burst the 
hard outer case of their finite selfhood, and so they 
have been merged in that Vast Sea of Uncreated 
Light which has brought them no loss but only 
gain. 

Just as in early days some had special gifts of 
prophecy through the power of the Holy Ghost, but 
some through the power of Satan, and the test lay 
in the manifested results,^ so in the present instance. 
We cannot doubt that the experience is true and 
valid when we see its glory shining forth in the 
humble Saints of God. 

To illustrate this experience fully from the writings 
of the Saints would need a volume to itself. Let us 
take a very few examples from one or two writers of 
unquestioned orthodoxy. 

And first, for the theory of personality implied in 
it we may turn to Pascal, whose teaching amounts 
to very much the same thing as that of Dionysius. 
" Z^ ;;/^/," he says, ''est Jiaissable. . . . En tin inot, le 
Moi a deux qiialites : il est ijijtiste en soi^ en ce qu'il se 
fait centre du tont ; il est i7icoininode aux mitres, en 
ce quit les vent asse^'vir : car cJiaque Moi est rennenii 

^ I Cor. xii. 1-3 ; i John iv. 1-3. 

PSYCHOLOGY OF CONTEMPLATION 35 

et voudrait etrc le tyran de tons Ics autrcsy ^ Thus 
a self-centred Moi, or Personality, is wrong inherently 
and not only in its results. And it is inherently 
wrong because a personality has no right to be the 
centre of things. From this we may conclude 
(i) that God, as being the rightful Centre of all 
things, is not a Moi^ or Personality ; and (2) that the 
transcendence of our Moi, or Personality, is our highest 
duty. What, then, is the goal to which this tran- 
scendence will lead us? Pascal has a clear-cut 
answer : " // liy a que I Eire universel qui soil tel. • • • \ 
Le Bien Universel est en nons^ est nous menies et nUst\ 
pas nousy- This is exactly the Dionysian doctrint > * 
Each must enter into himself and so must find Some^ 
thing that is his true Self and yet is not his particulai 
self His true being is deep within his soul and yet\l 
in Something Other than his individuality which is 
within his soul and yet outside of him. We may 
compare St. Augustine's words : " I entered into the 
recesses of my being . . . and saw . . . above my i 
mind an Unchanging Light. ^ Where, then, did I 
find Thee except in Thyself above myself?"* ' 

Now for the actual experience of Unknowing and 
of the Negative Path that leads to it. The finest 
description of this, or at least of the aspiration after 
it, is to be found in the following passage from the 
Confessions of St. Augustine : ^ 

" Could one silence the clamorous appetites of the 
body ; silence his perceptions of the earth, the water, 
and the air ; could he silence the sky, and could his 
very soul be silent unto itself and, by ceasing to think 
of itself, transcend self-consciousness; could he 
silence all dreams and all revelations which the mind 
can image ; yea, could he entirely silence all^ lan- 
guage and all symbols and every transitory thing — 

1 Pensees, vi. 20 (ed. Havet). ^ lb. 26, xxiv. 39. 

3 Conf. vii. 16. * lb. x. 37. ^ /b. ix. 25 

36 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

— inasmuch as these all say to the hearer : ' We made 
not ourselves bul were made by the Eternal ' — if, after 
such words, they were forthwith to hold their peace, 
having drawn the mind's ear towards their Maker, 
and He were now to speak alone, not through them 
but by Himself, so that we might hear His word, not 
through human language, nor through the voice of 
an angel, nor through any utterance out of a cloud, 
nor through any misleading appearance, but might 
instead hear, without these things, the very Being 
Himself, Whose presence in them we love — might 
hear Him with our Spirit even as now we strain our 
intellect and reach, with the swift movement of 
thought, to an eternal Wisdom that remains un- 
moved beyond all things — if this movement were 
continued, and all other visions (being utterly unequal 
to the task) were to be done away, and this one vision 
were to seize the beholder, and were to swallow him 
up and plunge him in the abyss of its inward delights, 
so that his life for ever should be like that fleeting 
moment of consciousness for which we have been 
yearning, would not such a condition as this be an 
'Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord'?" 

This passage describes the Via Ncgativa in terms 
of aspiration drawn (we cannot doubt) from experi- 
ence. The soul must cast all things away : sense, 
perception, thought, and the very consciousness of 
self; and yet the process and its final result are of 
the most intense and positive kind. We are reminded 
of W^ordsworth's — 

" Thought was not ; in enjoyment it expired." ^ 

Perhaps more striking is the testimony of St 
Thomas a Kempis, since, having no taste for specu- 
lation, he is not likely to be misled by theories. In 

* ExcursioHy Book I. 

PSYCHOLOGY OF CONTEMPLATION 37 

the Imitation of CJirist ^ occurs the following passage : 
'' When shall I at full gather myself in Thee, that for 
Thy love I feel not myself, but Thee only, above all 
feeling and all manner, in a manner not known to 
all ? " 

Thus he speaks longingly of a state in which the 
individual human spirit is altogether merged and has 
no self-consciousness whatever, except the mere con- 
sciousness of its merging. It is conscious of God 
alone because, as an object of thought, it has gone 
out of its particular being and is merged and lost in 
Him. And the way in which St. Thomas describes 
this state and speaks of it as not known to all 
suggests that it was known to himself by personal 
experience. 

The clearest and profoundest analysis of the state, 
based also on the most vivid personal experience of 
it, is given by Ruysbroeck. The two following 
passages are examples. 

" The spirit for ever continues to burn in itself, for 
its love is eternal ; and it feels itself ever more and 
more to be burnt up in love, for it is drawn and trans- 
formed into the Unity of God, where the spirit burns 
in love. If it observes itself, it finds a distinction and 
an otherness between itself and God ; but where it is 
burnt up it is undifferentiated and without distinction, 
and therefore it feels nothing but unity ; for the flame 
of the Love of God consumes and devours all that it 
can enfold in its Self." "^ 

" And, after this, there follows the third way of 
feeling ; namely, that we feel ourselves to be one with 
God ; for, through the transformation in God, we feel 
ourselves to be swallowed up in the fathomless abyss 
of our eternal blessedness, wherein we can nevermore 
find any distinction between ourselves and God. 
And this is our highest feeling, which we cannot 

* Book III., chap, xxiii, * The Sparkling Stone, chap. iii. 

38 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

experience in any other way than in the immersion in 
love. And therefore, so soon as we are upHfted and 
drawn into our highest feehng, all our powers stand 
idle in an essential fruition; but our powers do not 
pass away into nothingness, for then we should lose 
our created being. And as long as we stand idle, 
with an inclined spirit and with open eyes, but without 
reflection, so long we can contemplate and have 
fruition. But, at the very moment in which we seek 
to prove and to comprehend what it is that we feel, 
we fall back into reason, and there we find a dis- 
tinction and an otherness between ourselves and God, 
and find God outside ourselves in incomprehensi- 
bility."! 

Nothing could be more lucid. The moi is merged 
in the Godhead and yet the ego still retains its in- 
dividuality un-merged, and the existence of the 
perfected spirit embraces these two opposite poles of 
fusion and distinction. 

The same doctrine is taught, though with less 
masterly clearness, by St. Bernard in the De Diligcndo 
Deo. There is, he says, a point of rapture where the 
human spirit " forgets itself . . . and passes wholly 
into God." Such a process is " to lose yourself, as it 
were, like one who has no existence, and to have no 
self-consciousness whatever, and to be emptied of 
yourself and almost annihilated." " As a little drop 
of water," he continues, " blended with a large 
quantity of wine, seems utterly to pass away from 
itself and assumes the flavour and colour of wine, and 
as iron when glowing with fire loses its original or 
proper form and becomes just like the fire; and as 
the air, drenched in the light of the sun, is so changed 
into the same shining brightness that it seems to be 
not so much the recipient of the brightness as the 
actual brightness itself: so all human sensibility in 

1 The Sparkling Stone, chap. x. 

PSYCHOLOGY OF CONTEMPLATION 39 

the saints must then, in some ineffable manner, melt 
and pass out of itself, and be lent into the will of 
God. . . . The substance (/.^. personality) will remain 
but in another form." ^ 

Of this transcendent experience St. Bernard bluntly \ 
says : " To experience this state is to be deified," and 
"Deification" is a technical term in the IVIystical 
Theology of both the Eastern and the Western 
Church. Though the word Oecooig was perhaps a 
Mystery term, yet it occurs, for instance, in the 
writings of St. Macarius, and there is therefore 
nothing strange or novel in the fact that Dionysius 
uses it. But he carefully distinguishes between this 
and cognate words ; and his fantastic and uncouth 
diction is (here as so often) due to a straining after 
rigid accuracy. The Super-Essence he calls the 
Originating Godhead, or rather, perhaps, the Origin 
of Godhead (OeaQxio), just as he calls it also "the 
Origin of Existence " {ovoLaQxla). From this Origin 
there issues eternally, in the Universal stream of 
Emanation, that which he calls Deity or Very 
Deity (0e6Tr]g or avToOsozrjg). This Deity, like 
Being, Life, etc., is an effluence radiating from the 
Super-Essential Godhead, and is a distant View of It 
as the dim visibility of a landscape is the landscape 
seen from afar, or as the effluent heat belongs to a 
fire. Purified souls, being raised up to the heights of 
contemplation, participate in this Effluence and so 
are deified (OeovvTm) and become in a derivative 
sense, divine (Oecodelg, Oeioi), or may even be called 
Gods (Osol), just as by participating in the Effluence 
or Emanation of Being all created things become in 
a derivative sense existent (ovoiojSfj, ovxa). The 
Super-Essential Godhead (Oean^ia) is beyond Deity 
as It is beyond Existence ; but the names " Deity " 
{Oeoxrig) or " Existent " [cov) may be symbolically or 

* De Dil- Deo, chap. x. 

40 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

inadequately applied to It, as a fire may be termed 
" warm " from its results though its actual tempera- 
ture is of an intenser kind than this would 
imply. And the name of " Godhead," which belongs 
to It more properly, is given It (says Dionysius) 
merely because it is the Source of our deification. 

I Thus instead of arguing from God's Divinity to man's 
potential divinity, Dionysius argues from the acquisi- 
tion of actual divinity by certain men to God's Supra- 
Divinity. This is only another way of saying that 

j God is but the highest Appearance or Manifestation 
of the Absolute, x^nd this (as was seen above) is 
only another way of stating the orthodox and obvious 
doctrine that all our notions of Ultimate Reality are 
inadequate. 

VIII. — The Scriptural Basis of Dionysius's 

Doctrines 

In the treatise " Concerning the Divine Names," 
Dionysius seeks to reconcile his daring conceptions 
with Scripture. Nor can he be said to fail. His 

\ argument, briefly, is that in Scripture we have a 

4 Revealed Religion and that things which are Revealed 

belong necessarily to the plane of Manifestation. 

jThus Revealed Religion interprets to us in terms of 
human thought things which, being Incomprehensible, 
are ultimately beyond thought. This is merely what 
St. Augustine teaches when he says ^ that the Pro- 
logue of St. John's Gospel reveals the mysteries of 

^ Com. on St. John, Tr. I. i : "For who can declare the Truth as 
it actually is? I venture to say, my brothers, perhaps John himself 
has not declared it as it actually is, but, even he, only according to his 
powers. For he was a man sptaking about God — one inspired, indeed, 
by God but still a man. Because he was inspired he has declared 
something of the Truth — had he not been inspired he could not have 
declared anything of it — but because he was a man (though an inspired 
one) he has not declared the whole Truth, but only what was possible 
for a man." 

SCRIPTURAL BASIS 41 

Eternity not as they actually are but as human 
thought can grasp them.^ The neo-Platonism of 
Dionysius does not invahclate Scripture any more 
than that of Plotinus invaHdates the writings of Plato. 
Dionysius merely says that there is an unplumbed^'. 
Mystery behind the words of Scripture and stream- ' 
ing through them, just as Plotinus and other neo- ; 
Platonists hold that there is an unplumbed Mystery l 
streaming through from behind Plato's categories of 
thought. And if it be urged that at least our Lord's 
teaching on the P'atherhood of God cannot be recon- 
ciled with the doctrine of a Supra-Personal Godhead, 
the answer is near at hand.^ For the Pagan Plotinus, 
whose doctrine is similar to that of Dionysius, gives 
this very name of " Father " to his Supra-Personal 
Absolute — or rather to that Aspect of It which comes 
into touch with the human soul.^ Moreover in the 
most rigidly orthodox Christian theology God the 

^ [What Augustine says is that St. John, because he was only human, 
has not declared the whole Truth concerning Deity. But this is very 
different from saying that what St. John has declared does not 
correspond with the eternal Reality. While Augustine holds that the 
Johannine Revelation is not complete, he certainly held tliat it was 
correct as far as it goes. Augustine had no conception of a Deity 
whom the qualities of self-consciousness and personality did not 
essentially represent. It is more than questionable whether Augustine 
would have accepted the statement that the Prologue of St. John's 
Gospel does not record the mysteries of lilternity '^ as they actually 
are.''' Augustine had a profound belief that God as lie is in Himself 
corresponds with God as He is revealed. — Ed.] 

'^ [The writer argues that Christ and Plotinus both employ the same 
expression, Father, to the Deity. But the use of the same expression 
will not prove much unless it is employed in the same meaning. No 
one can seriously contend that the Pagan Plotinus meant what Jesus 
Christ meant of the Fatherhood of God. Surely it is unqueslionalile 
that the Fatherhood of God meant for Jesus Christ what constituted 
God's supreme reality. It was employed in a sense which is entirely 
foreign to the metaphysical doctrine of a Supra-Personal Deity. The 
Semitic conception of the Godhead was not that of a neo-Platnnist 
metaphysician. — Ed.] 

^ e.g. Emu I. 6, 8 : "We have a country whence we came, an J we 
have a Father there." 

D 

42 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Father is not a Personality. St. xA.ugustine, for 
instance/ teaches that the " Persons " of the Trinity 
are Elements whose true nature is unknown to us.'^ 
They correspond however, he says, to certain elements 
in our individual personalities, and hence the human 

^ [What Augustine says is that we do not speak of three essences and 
three Gods, but of one essence and one God. Why then do we speak 
of three Persons and not of one Person ? 

" Why, therefore, do we not call these three together one Person, 
or one Essence and one God ; we say three Persons, while we do not 
say three Gods or three Essences ; unless it be because we wish some 
one word to serve for that meaning whereby the Trinity is understood, 
that we might not be altogether silent when asked, what three, while 
we confessed that they are three?" 

I. Augustine's distinction is between the genus and the species. 
Thus Abraham Isaac and Jacob are three specimens of one genus. 
What he contends is that this is not the case in the Deity. 2. The 
essence of the Deity is unfolded in these Three. And " there is 
nothing else of that Essence beside the Trinity." " In no way can any 
other person whatever exist out of the same essence " whereas in 
mankind there can be more than three. 3. Moreover the three 
specimens of the genus man, Abraham Isaac and Jacob, are more, 
collectively, than any one of them by himself. " But in God it is not 
so ; for the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit together is not a 
greater essence than the Father alone or the Son alone." What he 
means is that the Trinity is not to be explained by spacial metaphors 
{De Trin. vii. ii). 

Augustine then is not teaching that the Persons of the Trinity are 
Elements whose true nature is unknown to us. He certainly does 
teach that Personality in the Godhead must exist otherwise than 
what we find under human limitations. But Augustine's conception of 
Deity is not the Supra- Personal Absolute. To him the Trinity was 
not confined to the plane of Manifestation. We have only to remember 
how he regards Sabellianism to prove this. Moreover, who can doubt 
that Augustine's psychological conception of God as the Lover, the 
Beloved and the Eove which in itself is personal, represented to his 
mind the innermost reality and ultimate essence of the Deity? God is 
not for Augustine a supra-personal something in which both unity and 
trinity are transcended. The Trinity of Manifestation is for Augustine 
that which corresponds with and is identical with the very essential 
being of Deity. God is not merely Three as known to us but Three 
as He is in Himself apart from all self-revelation. — Ed.] 

2 De Trin. vii. ii : " Why ... do we speak of Three 'Persons' 
. . . except because we need some one term to explain the meaning of 
the word ' Trinity,' so as not to be entirely without an answer to the 
question : ' Three What ? ' when we confess God to be Three." 

SCRIPTURAL BASIS 43 

soul is created (he tells us) not in the image of one 
Person in the Godhead but in the image of the whole 
Trinity.^ Thus he by implication denies that God 
the Father is, in the ordinary sense of the word, a 
Personality. And the teaching of St. Thomas 
Aquinas is very similar.^ It may, perhaps, even be 
said that the germ of the most startling doctrines 
which Dionysius expounds may be actually found in 
Scripture. A state, for instance, which is not know- 
ledge and yet is not ignorance, is described by St. 
Paul when he says that Christians " know God or 
rather are known of Him." ^ This is the mental 
attitude of Unknowing. For the mind is quiescent 
and emptied of its own powers and so receives a 
knowledge the scope and activity of which is outside 
itself in God. And in speaking of an ecstatic experi-, 
ence which he himself had once attained St. Paul 
seems to suggest that he was, on that occasion, outside 
of himself in such a ma'nner as hardly, in the ordinary 
sense, to retain his own identity.'^ Moreover he 
suggests that the redeemed and perfected creation is 
at last to be actually merged in God (IVa ^ 6 0£og ra 
ndvxa ev TidoLv^). And the doctrine of Deification is 
certainl}', in the germ. Scriptural. For as Christ is 
the Son of God so are we to be Sons of God,^ and 
Christ is reported actually to have based His own 
claims to Deity on the potential Divinity of the 
human soul.' Moreover we are to reign with Him ^ 
and are, in a manner passing our present apprehen- 
sion, to be made like Him when we see Him as 
He is.« 

Now all the boldest statements of Dionysius about 

1 De Trin. vii. 12. 2 Su7nvia, Pars I. Q. xi.v. Art. \ii. 

' Gal. iv. 9. ''2 Cor. xii. 2-5. 

'•' I Cor. XV. 28. ^ New Testament, /rt'.nv'w. 

' John X. 34-36. ^ 2 Tnn. ii. 12 ; Kev. i. 6; v. 10; xx.6. 

^ I Jolm iii. 2. 

44 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the ultimate glory for which the human soul is 
destined are obviously true of Christ, and as applied 
to Him, they would be a mere commentary on the 
words " I and the Father are One." ^ Therefore if 
Christ came to impart His Life to us so that the 
^things which are His by Nature should be ours by- 
Grace, it follows that the teaching of Dionysius is in 
harmony with Scripture so long as it is made to rest 
on the Person and Work of Christ. And, though 
Dionysius does not emphasize the Cross as much as 
could be wished, yet he certainly holds that Christ is 
the Channel through which the power of attainment 
is communicated to us. It must not be forgotten 
that he is waiting as a Christian to Christians, and so 
assumes the Work of Christ as a revealed and 
experienced Fact. And since he holds that every 
individual person and thing has its pre-existent 
limits ordained in the Super-Essence, therefore he 
holds that the Human Soul of Christ has Its pre- 
existent place there as the Head of the whole 
creation. That is what he means by the phrase 
" Super-Essential Jesus," and that is what is taught 
in the quotation from Hierotheus already alluded 
to. No doubt the lost works of Dionysius dealt more 
fully wnth this subject, as indeed he hints himself. 
And if, through this scanty sense of the incredible 
evil which darkens and pollutes the world, he does 
not in the present treatise lay much emphasis upon 
the Saviour's Cross, yet he giv-es us definite teaching 
on the kindred Mystery of the Incarnation. 

IX. — Conclusion 

A few words on this matter and the present sketch 
is almost done. The Trinity (as was said) is Super- 

^ John X. 30. 

CONCLUSION 

45 

Essential or Supra-Personal. It is that Side of the 
Godhead which is turned towards the plane of 
Creation. Each " Person " possesses the whole Super- 
Essence and yet Each in a different manner. For 
the Father is originative and the other Two" Persons" 
derivative. The entire Super-Essence timelessly wells 
up in the Father and so passes on (as it were), time- 
less and entire, to the Son and Spirit. Thus the 
Second '* Person '* of the Trinity possesses eternally 
(like the other Two " Persons " in the Godhead) 
nothing but this Formless Radiance. But when the 
Second " Person " becomes Incarnate this Formless 
and Simple Radiance focuses Itself (shall we say ?) 
in the complex lens of a Human Individuality. Or 
perhaps Christ's Humanity should rather be compared 
to a prism which breaks that single white radiance 
into the iridescent colours of manifold human virtues. 
1 hence there streams forth a glory which seeks to 
kindle in our hearts an answering fire whereby being 
wholly consumed we may pass up out of our finite 
being to find within the Super-Essence our pre- 
determined Home. 

Such is, in outline, the teaching of this difficult 
writer who, though he tortured language to express 
the truth which struggled within him for utterance, 
yet has often been rashly condemned through being 
misunderstood. The charge of Pantheism that has 
been laid at his door is refuted by the very extrava- 
gance of the terms in which he asserts the Transcend- 
ence of the Godhead. For the title " Super-Essence " 
itself implies a Mystery which is indeed the ultimate 
Goal of the creatures but is not at present their actual 
plane of being. It implies a Height which, though it 
be their own, they yet can reach through nothing 
else than a complete self-renunciation. With greater 
show of reason Dionysius has been accused of 
hostility to civilization and external things. Yet here 

! 
46 DIONYSIUS jTHE AREOPAGITE 

again unjustly. For, ifidji his solitary hermitage he 
lived far from the haunts of men, yet he wrote an 
entire treatise on the institutional side of Religion ; 
and he describes with impassioned enthusiasm the 
visible beauties of Nature. And, in fact, in his 
treatment of evil, he goes out of his way to assert 
that the whole material world is good. Outwar.d 
things are assumed as the starting-point from which 
the human spirit must rise to another region of 
experience. Dionysius does not mean that they are 
all worthless ; he simply means that they are not 
ultimate. In the passage concerning the three move- 
ments of the soul he implies that the human faculties 
are valuable though they must finally be transcended. 
Even so Macarius tells us that " Revelation " is a 
mental state beyond " Perception " and beyond 
'' Enlightened Vision." ^ All our natural activities 
must first silt together the particles which form the 
block of marble before we can by the Via Negativa 
carve the image out of it. And if this process of 
rejection destroys the block's original shape, yet it 
needs the block to work upon, and it does not seek 
to grind the whole material into powder. All life, 
when rightly understood, is a kind of Via Negativa, 
and we must struggle after certain things and then 
deliberately cast them aside, as a musician must first 
master the laws of Counterpoint and then sometimes 
ignore them, or as the Religion of the Law is a 
preparation for the higher Religion of the Spirit. 
Dionysius, nurtured in philosophy, passed beyond 
Philosophy without obscurantism, as St. Paul, nurtured 
in the Law, passed beyond the Law without dis- 
obedience. Finite things are good, for they point us 
on to the Infinite ; but if we chain ourselves to them 
M they will become a hindrance to our journey, when 
'' they can no longer be a guide. And Dionysius 

1 Horn., vii. 5. 

CONCLUSION 47 

would have us not destroy them but merely break 
our chains. 

His doctrines are certainly dangerous. Perhaps 
that is a mark of their truth. For the Ultimate 
Truth of things is so self-contradictory that it is 
bound to be full of peril to minds like ours which can 
only apprehend one side of Reality at the time. 
Therefore it is not perhaps to be altogether desired 
that such doctrines should be very popular. They 
can only be spiritually discerned, through the 
intensest spiritual effort. Without this they will only 
too readily lead to blasphemous arrogance and selfish 
sloth. And yet the Via Negativa, for those who can 
scale its dizzy ascent, is after all but a higher altitude 
of that same royal road which, where it traverses 
more populous regions, we all recognize as the one 
true Pilgrim's Way. For it seeks to attain its goal 
through self-renunciation. And where else are th^ 
true principles of such a process to be found if it be 
not in the familiar virtues of Christian humility and 
Christian love? ' 

X.— Bibliography 

[The writings of the Areopagite consist of four im- 
portant treatises : De divinis Noviiiiibiis^ De niystica 
Theologia, De Ccclesti Hierarchia^ De ecclesiatica Hicr- 
arcliia ; some letters ; and a number of lost docu- 
ments referred to in the treatises. Little has been 
done as yet towards the provision of a critical text. 
The Syriac, Armenian and Arabic versions have 
not been investigated. Migne's text contains many 
manifest errors ; it is a reprint of the Venice edition 
of 1755-6. 

The ideas of Dionysius's system are discussed In all 
books on Mysticism, and a multitude of magazine 
articles, mainly in German, deal with isolated points 

48 DIONYSIUSJ THk AREOPAGITE 

in the actual treatises besi(|es the problem of author- 
ship. The brief list given below will suffice for the 
present purpose. 

The Dionysian Documents have been critically in- 
vestigated by Hipler, His work was followed by 
J. Draseke in an Essay entitled " Dionysiaca," in the 
Zeitsch'ift filr Wissenschaftliche TJieologie, 1887, pp. 
300-333. Also by Nirschl. and by Styglmayr. in the 
HistoriscJie JahrbucJi^ 1S95. Criticism on the author- 
ship has been continued by Hugo Koch, " Pseudo- 
Dionysius Areopagita," in the ForscJmngen ziir 
ChristlicJieii Litteratur-Jind DogniengescJiichtc, 1900. 
Ed. by Ehrhard and Kirsch. Hugo Koch's work is 
one of the best on the subject. 

Colet, J. (Dean), Tzvo Treatises on The Hierarchies 
of Dionysius^ with introduction and translation, by 
J. H. Lupton (London, 1869). 

Fowler, J., The Works of Dionysiiis, especially in 
Reference to Cliristian Art (London, 1872). J. 
Parker, English Translation (Oxford, 1897). 

Sharpe, A. B., Mysticism : Its True Nature and 
Valne (London, 1910). Contains a translation of 
the Mystical Theology and of the letters to Caius 
and Dorotheus. 

Inge, W. R., Christian Mysticism (London, 1899), 
pp. 104-122. 

Jones, Rufus M., Studies in Mystical Religion 
(London, 1909), Chap. IV. 

Gardner, Edmund G., Dante and the Mystics 
(London, 191 3), Chap. HI. 

For the general influence of Dionysius reference 
should be made to the following writers — 

Bach, Josef, Die Dogmengescliichte des Mittelalters, 
I Theil., 1874, pp. 6-15. 

Baur, F. C, Die Christliche Lehre von der Dreiei- 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 49 

nigkeit unci MenscJiwerdung Gottes, 1842, Bd. II., 
207-251. 

Dorner, Development of the; Doctrine of the Person 
of Christ, English translation, Div. ii., Vol. I., pp. 
i57ff. ■ 

Westcott, Essay on Dionysius the Areopagite in 
Religious TJiougkt in the West, 1891, pp. 142-193. 

Uebinger, J., Die Gotteslehre des Nikolaus Cusaiius, 
1888.— Ed.] 

THE DIVINE NAMES 

This Treatise contains thirteen chapters. The following 
is a brief summary of their contents. 

Chapter I. Introductory. The Purpose of the Treatise. 
Doctrine concerning (iod to be obtained from the 
Scriptures. But all the Names there given Him cannot 
represent Him who is Nameless. It is only Symbolical 
Theology. 

Chapter II. On the Divine Unity and Distinction. 

Chapter III. On the Approach to the Divine. 

Chapter IV. On Goodness as a Name of Deity, including 
a discussion on the Nature of Evil. 

Chapter V. On Deity as Being. The three degrees : 
Existence, Life, Intelligence. 

Chapter VI. On Deity as Life. 

Chapter VII. Deity considered as Wisdom, Reason, Truth. 

Chapter VIII. Deity considered as Power. 

Chapter IX. Deity considered as Great and as Small. 
Might be called, as Deity in relation to Space. 

Chapter X. Deity as Omnipotent : the Ancient of Days. 
God in relation to Time. 

Chapter XL On God and Peace. 

Chapter XII. On the Names Holy of holies. King of 
kings, Lord of lords, God of gods. 

Chapter XI 1 1. On the Divine Perfection and Unity. 

50 

THE DIVINE NAMES 51 

CHAPTER I 

Dionysius the Presbyter, to his fellow-Presbyter Timothy ^ 
What is the purpose of the discourse^ and what the 
traditio7i concertiing the Divine Names. 

I. Now, Blessed Timothy, the Outlines of Divinity'^ 
being ended, I will proceed, so far as in me lies, to an 
Exposition of the Divine Names. And here also leF* 
us set before our minds the scriptural rule that in 
speaking about God v\^e should declare the Truth, not 
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demon- 
stration of the power which the Spirit * stirred up in 
the Sacred Writers, whereby, in a manner surpassing 
speech and knowledge,'^ we embrace those truths 
which, in like manner, surpass them, in that Union 
which exceeds our faculty, and exercise of discursive, 
and of intuitive reason.^ We must not then dare to 
speak, or indeed to form any conception, of the 
hidden super-essential ^ Godhead, except those things 
that are revealed to us from the Holy Scriptures.'' 

^ The name of St. Paul's companion is intended to give colour to 
ihc writer's pseudonym. See Introduction, p, I ; cf. iii. 2. 

- This work is lost. ^ 2 Cor. ii. 4. 

* Tots acpdeyKTOts koI ayuwarois a^pQeyKTOis ical ayuuxTTws (rvpa'mdjXiOa. 
See Intr. on " Unknowing," p. 32. 

^ Kara tt]v KpelrTova rrjS KaO' T]fxas AoyiKqs Kal uoepas Svudfxcocs Kal 
ii/€pyeias. D. frequently distinguishes between the discursive and the 
inluiiive reason. Together they cover the whole of the intellect, cf. 
Wordsworth, Prelude, xiv. 119, 120: 

" Hence endless occupation for the soul. 
Whether discursive or intuitive." 
The former gives us deductions, the latter the axioms on which these 
are based. See Intr., p. 26. 

^ See Intr., p. 4. 

' D. is here contrasting tlie Affirmative Path of Knowing with the 
Negative Path of Unknowing. The former has a value as leading up 
to the latter ; but it is only safe so far as we keep within the bounds 
of Scripture. Unscriptural conceptions of God are false : Scriptural 
conceptions are true so far as they go ; but their literal meaning must 
be transcended. See Intr., p. 41 f. 

52 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

For a super-essential understanding of It is proper 
to Unknowing, which Heth in the Super-Essence 
Thereof surpassing Discourse, Intuition and Being ; 
acknowledging which truth let us lift up our eyes 
towards the steep height, so far as the effluent light 
of the Divine Scriptures grants its aid, and, as we 
strive to ascend unto those Supernal Rays, let us gird 
ourselves for the task with holiness and the reverent 
fear of God.'-* For, if we may safely trust the wise and 
infallible Scriptures, Divine things are revealed unto 
each created spirit in proportion to its powers, and 
in this measure is perception granted through the 
workings of the Divine goodness, the which in just 
care for our preservation divinely tempereth unto 
finite measure the infinitude of things which pass 
man's understanding. For even as things which are 
intellectually discerned ^ cannot be comprehended or 
perceived by means of those things which belong to 
the senses, nor simple and imageless things by means 
of t}^pes and images, nor the formless and intangible 
essence of unembodied things by means of those 
which have bodily form," by the same law of truth 
the boundless^ Super-Essence surpasses Essences, 
the Super-Intellectual Unity surpasses Intelligences, 

^ ;'. e. The Transcendent Truths which are beyond ordinary know- 
ledge. 

voTjTa. The word vovs — Mind in the sense not merely of abstract 
intellect but of the spiritual personality. Hence the word is often 
used to = an angel ; and votjtos is often used as = spiritual, instead of 
TTvevixariKSs, which D. does not employ. This use of vovs and its 
derivatives is ultimately due to the influence of Aristotle. (Cf. the 
use ot vovs in Plotinas. ) St. Thomas Aquinas regards intellectus 
as = "personality." But here the reference is perhaps rather to the 
province of abstract intellect. 

^ Apparently this is the same thought repeated in three different 
ways. The formless essence (o^op(/)ia) of a thing is simple and image- 
less — a Platonic idea — perceived by the mind ; things which have 
bodily form are, as it were, types and symbols perceived by the 
senses. 

• Or "indeterminate." 

THE DIVINE NAMES 53 

the One which is beyond thought surpasses the 
apprehension of thought, and the Good which is 
beyond utterance surpasses the reach of words.^ 
Yea, it is an Unity which is the unifying Sourcd^t* 
all unity and a Super-Essential Essence,^ a Mind 
beyond the reach of mind ^ and a Word beyond 
utterance, eluding Discourse, Intuition, Name, and 
every kind of being. It is the Universal Cause of 
existence while Itself existing not, for It is beyond 
all Being and such that It alone could give, with 
proper understanding thereof, a revelation of Itself. 
2. Now concerning this hidden Super-Essential 
Godhead we must not dare, as I have said, to speak, 
or even to form any conception Thereof, except those 
things which are divinely revealed to us from the 
Holy Scriptures. For as It hath lovingly taught us 
in the Scriptures concerning Itself ^ the understanding 
and contemplation of Its actual nature is not acces- 
sible to any being ; for such knowledge is super- 
essentially exalted above them all. And many of 
the Sacred Writers thou wilt find who have declared 
that It is not only invisible and incomprehensible, 
but also unsearchable and past finding out, since 
there is no trace of any that have penetrated the 
hidden depths of Its infinitude."* Not that the Good 
is wholly incommunicable to anything ; nay, rather, 
while dwelling alone by Itself, and having there 

1 Thus the three grades are : (i) the material world ; (2) the spiritual 
world of truths, personality, etc. ; (3) the Godhead which is, so to 
speak, supra-spiritual. 

2 i. e. A Supra-Personal Personality. See Intr., p. 4 f. 

3 vovs oLvo-qTos. Probably not "Irrational Mind" (as Dr. Inge 
translates it). Maxinius takes it passively, as translated above. 

* Ps. cxlv. 3 ; Matt. xi. 27 ; Rom. xi. 33 ; i Cor. ii. ii ; Eph. iii. S. 

^ COS ouK oVTOs Tx^'ows ovSevhs rwv iirl ttji' Kpv(plau aifTrjs atrfipiav 

5ie\r}Kvd6Tcov. Two interpretations of this passage are possil)le : (l) 

Those who have penetrated the hidden Depths cannot describe the 

Vision (cf. Dante, Par. xxxiii, 55-66) ; (2) Nobody has ever penetrated 

into the ultimate Depths of Deity. 

) 

54 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

firmly fixed Its super-essential Ray, It lovingly 
reveals Itself by illuminations corresponding to each 
separate creature's powers, and thus draws upwards 
holy minds into such contemplation, participation 
and resemblance ^ of Itself as they can attain — 
even them that holily and duly strive thereafter 
and do not seek with impotent presumption the 
Mystery beyond that heavenly revelation which is so 
granted as to fit their powers, nor yet through their 
lower propensity slip down the steep descent,- but 
with unwavering constancy press onwards toward the 
ray that casts its light upon them and, through the 
love responsive to these gracious illuminations, speed 
their temperate and holy flight on the wings of a 
godly reverence. 

3. In obedience to these divine behests which guide 
all the holy dispositions ^ of the heavenly hosts, we 
worship with reverent silence the unutterable Truths 
and, with the unfathomable'* and holy veneration of our 
mind, approach that Mystery of Godhead which ex- 
ceeds all Mind and Being. And we press upwards to 
those beams which in the Holy Scripture shine upon 
us ; wherefrom we gain the light which leads us unto 

1 Ocoipid, Koiuovia, o/xoiuxTts. These are three elements of one process. 
Resemblance is the final goal, cf. I John iii. 2. D. defines 
Deification as "a process whereby we are made like unto God 
{acpo/j-oiwais) and are united unto Him {'^vwais) so far as these things 
maybe." {£cr/. Hier. I. 4. Migne, p. 376, A.) 

^ Two kinds of danger: (i) spiritual presumption; (2) the tempta- 
tions of our earthly nature. In dealing with the first D. warns us 
against leaving the Affirmative Path until we are ready. The Negative 
Path goes on where the Affamative Path stops. St. John of the Cross 
and other spiritual writers insist that, though contemplation is a higher 
acti\ ity than meditation through images, yet not all are called to it, 
and that it is disastrous prematurely to abandon meditation. S. John 
of the Cross, in the Dark Night of the Soul, explains the signs which 
will show when the time has come for the transition. Note the spiritual 
snnity of D. His Unknowing is not a blank. 

^ TO.S oKas . . . rS}V vTrepovpauicov ra^ecvu aylas SiaKOcrixr^acLS. 

^ A depth opens up in ihe heart of man corresponding to the depth 
of the Godhead. Deep answers unto deep. Cf i Cor. ii. m, n. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 55 

the Divine praises,^ being supernaturally enlightened 
by them and conformed unto that sacred hymnody, 
even so as to behold the Divine enlightenments the 
which through them are given in such wise as fits our 
powers, and so as to praise the bounteous Origin of 
all holy illumination in accordance with that Doctrine, 
as concerning Itself, wherewith It hath instructed us 
in the Holy Scriptures. Thus do we learn ^ that It is 
the Cause and Origin and Being and Life of all crea- 
tion.^ And It is unto them that fall away from It a 
Voice that doth recall them and a Power by which 
they rise ; and to them that have stumbled into a^ 
corruption of the Divine image within them, It is a 
Power of Renewal and Reform ; and It is a sacred 
Grounding to them that feel the shock of unholy 
assault, and a Security to them that stand : an upward 
Guidance to them that are being drawn unto It, and a 
Principle of Illumination^ to them that are being 
enlightened : a Principle of Perfection to them that 
are being perfected ; ^ a principle of Deity to them 
that are being deified ; ^ and of Simplicity to them 
that are being brought unto simplicity ; "^ and of Unity 

^ vphs Tovs eeapx^KOvs vfivovs. Either (i) "leads us to declare the 
Divine praises" ; or (2) "leads us to apprehend the Divine praises as 
sung by angels," etc. 

^ In the whole of this passage God is spoken of as at the same time 
Efficient, Formal and Final Cause of the soul's activity. D. teaches 
that God is present in all things, but not equally in all. Cf. Intr., 
p. 14. 

3 Gen. i. 

* Three stages may be traced here corresponding to Purgation, 
llluminaiion and Union. I have tried to indicate the transitions from 
one stage t) the next by the punctuation. 

^ Twv reXov/xeuuu reXerapxia. "Perfect" {t€A€ios) and the words 
connected with it were technical terms in the Greek Mysteries. Possibly 
there are traces of this technical use in St. Paul's Epistles {c^. I Cor. 
ii. 6 ; Phil. iii. 15). 

^ Taif deovjuevcov Qcapx^o- See Intr., p. 39. 

' The soul must turn away from the complex world of sense and 
have only one desire — the desire for God. Thus it becomes concentrated 
as it were, and so is in a simple and unified state. Cf. Malt. vi. 22. 
See Intr., p. 25. 

56 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

to them that are being brought unto unity. Yea, in 
a super-essential manner, above the category of 
origin, It is the Origin of all origin, and the good and 
bounteous Communication (so far as such may be ^) of 
hidden mysteries ; and, in a word, It is the life of all 
things that live and the Being of all that are, the 
Origin and Cause of all life and being through Its 
bounty which both brings them into existence and 
maintains them. 

4. These mysteries we learn from the Divine 
Scriptures, and thou wilt find that in well-nigh all the 
utterances of the vSacred Writers the Divine Names 
refer in a Symbolical Revelation ^ to Its beneficent 
Emanations.^ Wherefore, in almost all consideration 
of Divine things we see the Supreme Godhead cele- 
brated with holy praises as One and an Unity, 
through the simplicity and unity of Its supernatural 
indivisibility, from whence (as from an unifying 
power) we attain to unity, and through the* supernal 
conjunction of our diverse and separate qualities are 
knit together each into a Godlike Oneness, and all 
together into a mutual Godly union.^ And It is 
called the Trinity because Its supernatural fecundity 
is revealed in a Threefold Personality,^ wherefrom 
all Fatherhood in heaven and on earth exists and 
draws Its name. And It is called the Universal 
Cause ^ since all things came into being through Its 

^ i. e. So far as we are capable of receiving this communication. 

^ iK(paVT0piK'2s Kal V/J.Vr]TLKWS. 

^ i. e. God's differentiated activities. Since the ultimate Godhead is 
'ineffable, Scripture can only hint at Its Nature by speaking of Its 
manifestations in the relative sphere. See Intr., p. 8. 

■* God is ineffable and transcends unity, see Intr., p. 5. But, since 
His presence in man produces an unity in each individual (and in 
human society), Scripture calls Him "One." 

^ The ineffable Godhead transcends our conception of the Trinity. 
But we call Him a Trinity because we experience His trinal working — 
as our ultimate Home, as an Individual Personality Who was once 
Incarnate, and as a Power within our hearts. See Intr., p. 7. 

^ God is not a First Cause, for a cause is one event in a temporal 

THE DIVINE NAMES -7 

bounty, whence all being springs ; and It is called 
Wise and Fair because all things which keep their 
own nature uncorrupted are full of all Divine 
harmony and holy Beauty;^ and especially It is 
called Benevolent'^ because, in one of Its Persons, It 
verily and wholly shared in our human lot, calling 
unto Itself and uplifting the low estate of man, 
wherefrom, in an ineffable manner, the simple Being 
of Jesus assumed a compound state,^ and the Eternal- 
h.ath taken a temporal existence, and He who super- 
naturally transcends all the order of all the natural 
world was born in our Human Nature without any 
change or confusion of His ultimate properties. And 
in all the other Divine enlightenments which the 
occult Tradition of our inspired teachers hath, by 
mystic Interpretation, accordant with the Scriptures, 
bestowed upon us, we also have been initiated : appre- 
hending these things in the present life (according to 
our powers), through the sacred veils of that loving 
kindness which in the Scriptures and the Hierarchical 
Traditions,* enwrappeth spiritual truths in terms 
drawn from the world of sense, and super-essential 
truths in terins drawn from Being, clothing with 
shapes and forms things which are shapeless and 
formless, and by a variety of separable symbols, 

series, and God is beyond Time and beyond the whole creation. Vet 
in so far as He acts on the relative plane He may, by virtue of this 
manifestation of Himself in the creation, be spoken of as a Cause. 

^ J-ieauty is a sacrament and only truly itself when it points to some- 
thing beyond itself. That is why "Art for Art's sake" degrades art. 
Beauty reveals God, but God is more than Beauty. Hence Beauty has 
its true being o//fsidc' itstU in Him. Cf. Intr., p. 31. 

- Love is the most perfect manifestation of God. Vet God is in a 
sense beyond even love as we know it. For love, as we know it, 
implies the distinction between "me" and "thee," and God is 
ultimaiely beyond such distinction. See Tntr., p. 35. 

^ 0 airX'jvs ^l-qaovs ffuveTedri. Cf Myst. Theol. HI., "Super Essential 

J?) 
esus. 

* lepapX'""'''^ ■"■"P'^Soo-fcoj', i.e. Ecclesin-ticnl Tradition. 
E 

58 DiONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

fashioning manifold attributes of the imageless and 
supernatural Simplicity. \ But hereafter, when we are 
corruptible and immortal and attain the blessed lot of 
being like unto Christ, then (as the Scripture saith), 
we shall be for ever with the Lord,^ fulfilled with His 
visible Theophany in holy contemplations, the which 
shall shine about us with radiant beams of glory 
(even as once of old it shone around the Disciples at 
the Divine Transfiguration) ; and so shall we, with our 
mind made passionless and spiritual, participate in a 
spiritual illumination from Him, and in an union 
transcending our mental faculties, and there, amidst 
the blinding blissful impulsions of His dazzling rays, 
we shall, in a diviner manner than at present, be like 
unto the heavenly Intelligences.^ For, as the in- 
fallible Scripture saith, we shall be equal to the angels 
and shall be the Sons of God, being Sons of the 
Resurrection.^ Biit atpreseiit we employ (so far as 
in us lies), appropriate symbols for things Divine ; 
j' and then from these we press on upwards according 
to our powers to behold in simple unity the Truth per- 
ceived by spiritual contemplations, and leaving behind 
us all human notions of godlike things, we still the 
activities of our minds, and reach (so far as this may 
be) into the Super-Essential Ray,'^ wherein all kinds 
of knowledge so have their pre-existent limits (in a 
transcendently inexpressible manner), that we cannot 
conceive nor utter It, nor in any wise contemplate 
the same, seeing that It surpasseth all things, and 
wholly exceeds our knowledge, and super-essentially 
contains beforehand (all conjoined within Itself) the 
bounds of all natural sciences and forces (while yet 

1 I Thess. iv. i6. 

- eu deioTepa /j.iix7)(Tei ruv virepovpaviwv vowv — z. e, the angels. 
^ Luke XX. 36. 

* Meditation leads on to Contemplation ; and the higher kind ol 
Contemplation is performed by the J7a Negativa. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 59 

Its force is not circumscribed by any), and so pos- 
sesses, beyond the celestial Intelligences,^ Its firmly 
fixed abode. For if all the branches of knowledge 
belong to things that have being, and if their limits 
have reference to the existing world, then that which 
is beyond all Being must also be transcendent above 
all knowledge."^ 

5. But if It is greater than all Reason and all 
knowledge, and hath Its firm abode altogether be- 
yond Mind and Being, and circumscribes, compacts, 
embraces and anticipates all things^ while Itself is 
altogether beyond the grasp of them all, and cannot 
be reached by any perception, imagination, conjec- 
ture, name, discourse, apprehension, or understanding, 
how then is our Discourse concerning the Divine 
Names to be accomplished, since we see that the 
Super-Essential Godhead is unutterable and name- 
less? Now, as we said when setting forth our Out- 
lines of Divinity, the One, the Unknowable, the 
Super-Essential, the Absolute Good (I mean the 
Trinal Unity of Persons possessing the same Deity 
and Goodness), 'tis impossible to describe or to con- 
ceive in Its ultimate Nature ; nay, even the angelical 
communions of the heavenly Powers Therewith which 
we describe as either Impulsions or Derivations ^ 
from the Unknowable and blinding Goodness are 
themselves beyond utterance and knowledge, and 
belong to none but those angels who, in a manner 
beyond angelic knowledge, have been counted worthy 

^ i. e. The Angels. I have throughout translated virepovpavios 
"celestial" instead of " super-celestial." Presumably the meaning is 
' beyond the material sky," or " celestial in a transcendent sense." 

2 The whole of this passage shows that there is a positive element in 
Unknowing. 

^ "KOLVi-wv . . . irpoXTjirTiKT] — i.e. contains them eternally before their 
creation. 

"* as e^Te iiri^oXas etre irapaSoxas Xf'^ (ftdvai — i. e. according as we 
describe the act from above or below. God sends the impulse, the 
ngels receive it. 

6o DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

thereof. And godlike Minds, ^ angelically ^ entering 
(according to their powers) unto such states of union 
and being deified and united, through the ceasing of 
their natural activities, unto the Light Which sur- 
passeth Deity, can find no more fitting method to 
celebrate its praises than to deny It every manner 
of Attribute.^ For by a true and supernatural illu- 
mination from their blessed union Therewith, they 
learn that It is the Cause of all things and yet Itself 
is nothing, because It super-essentially transcends 
them all. Thus, as for the Super-Essence of the 
Supreme Godhead (if we would define the Tran- 
scendence of its Transcendent Goodness*) it is not 
lawful to any lover of that Truth which is above all 
truth to celebrate It as Reason or Power or Mind or 
Life or Being, but rather as most utterly surpassing 
all condition, movement, life, imagination, conjecture, 
name, discourse, thought, conception, being, rest, 
dwelling, union,^ limit, infinity, everything that exists. 
And yet since, as the Subsistence^ of goodness. It, 
by the very fact of Its existence, is the Cause of all 
things, in celebrating the bountiful Providence of the 
I SupremeGodhead we must draw upon the whole 
* creation.! For It is both the central Force of all 
1 things, an^ also their final Purpose, and is Itself 
before them all, and they all subsist in It ; and 

^ 01 OeoeiSch . . . foes — i. e. human minds. 

2 a.yy€\oiJ.iiJ.r)Tws. "In a manner which imitates the angels." 
Cf. Wordsworth, Prelude, xiv. io8, I02 : " Like angels stopped upon 
the wing by sound of harmony from heaven's remotest spheres." 

' This shows that the Via Negativa is based on an experience and 
not on a mere speculation. 

* 0 Tt TToxe i(TTiv 7} tT/s virepayaOoTrjTOS virepvirap^is. 

^ " Union " (eVoxrts). This word has more than one meaning in D. , 
and hence occasional ambiguity. It may = (i) Unity {i. e. that which 
makes an individual thing to be one thing) ; (2) Mental or Spiritual 
intercourse ; (3) Physical intercourse ; (4) Sense perception. Here it 
= either (i) or (2), probably (i). 

^ ayaSSTrjTos uirap^is — i. e. the ultimate Essence in which goodness 
consists. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 6i 

through the fact of Its existence the world is brought \ 
into being and maintained ; and It is that which all 
things desire — those which have intuitive or discur- 
sive Reason seeking It through knowledge, the next 
rank of beings through perception, and the rest 
through vital movement or the property of mere 
existence belonging to their state.^ Conscious of 
this, the Sacred Writers celebrate It by every Name J 
while yet they call It Nameless.2 - ^^ 

6. For instance, they call It Nameless when they 
say that the Supreme Godhead Itself, in one of the 
mystical visions whereby It was symbolically mani- 
fested, rebuked him who said : " What is thy name ? " ^ 
and, as though bidding him not seek by any means 
of any Name to acquire a knowledge of God, made 
the answer: "Why askest thou thus after My Name 
seeing it is secret?" Now is not the secret Name 
precisely that which is above all names ^ and nameless, 
and is fixed beyond every name that is named, not 
only in this world but also in that which is to come ? 
On the other hand, they attribute many names to It 
when, for instance, they speak of It as declaring : " I 
am that I am," ^ or " I am the Life," ^ or " the Light," "^ 
or " God," ^ or " the Truth," ^ and when the Inspired 
Writers themselves celebrate the Universal Cause 
with many titles drawn from the whole created 

^ Man — Animal — Vegetable — Inorganic Matter. For the thought 
of this whole passage, cf. Shelley, Adovais : " That Light whose 
smile kindles the universe." "The property of mere existence" = 
cvcriwdri kuI e/crt/cV eTTiTTjSeioTTjra. ovaia = an individual existence. Its 
highest meaning is a "personality," its lowest a "thing." ovaiuiZi^s 
refers generally to its lov\'est meaning and = " possessing mere 
existence," i.e. "belonging to the realm of inorganic matter." See 
Intr., p. 4. 

2 This shows that there is di positive element in D.'s Via Negaiiva. 

^ Judges xiii. 18. 

* I'hii. ii. 9 ; Eph. i. 21. ^ Ex. iii. 14. 

® John xiv. 6. ' John viii. 12. 

^ Gen. xxviii. 13. ° John xiv. 6. 

62 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

^nlverse, such as " Good," ^ and " Fair," ^ and " Wise," ^ 
as "Beloved," 4 as "God of Gods" and ''Lord of 
Lords'"^ and "Holy of Holies," ^ as " Eternal," ^ as 
"Existent"^ and as "Creator of Ages," ^ as "Giver 
of Life,"io as "Wisdom,"ii as " Mind,"i2 as " Word,"i3 
as " Knower," ^"^ as "possessing beforehand all the 
treasures of knowledge," ^^ as " Power," ^^ as " Ruler," ^^ 
as " King of kings," ^^ as " Ancient of Days ; " ^^ and 
as " Him that is the same and whose years shall 
not fail," 2^ as " Salvation," ^^ as "Righteousness,"^'^ as 
" Sanctification,"'^ as " Redemption, ""^^ as " Surpassing 
all things in greatness," ^"^ and yet as being in "the 
still small breeze." ^^ Moreover, they say that He 
dwells within our minds, and in our souls ^^ and 
bodies,^^ and in heaven and in earth,-^ and that, while 
remaining Himself, He is at one and the same time 
within the world around it and above it (yea, above 
the sky and above existence) ; and they call Him a 
Sun,^^ a Star,^^ and a Fire,^^ and Water,^- a Wind or 
Spirit,^^ a Dew,^^ a Cloud,^^ an Archetypal Stone,^^ 
and a Rock,^^ and All Creation,^^ Who yet (they 
declare) is no created thing. 

^ 7. Thus, then, the Universal and Transcendent 
Cause must both be nameless and also possess the 
names of all things in order that It may truly be 

1' an universal Dominion, the Centre of creation on 
which all things depend, as on their Cause and 

1 Matt. xix. 17. 2 Ps. xxvii. 4. ^ Rom. xvi, 27. 

^ Isa. V. I. ^ Ps. cxxxvi. 2, 3. ^ Isa. vi. 3. 

' Deut. xxxiii. 27. ^ Ex. iii. 14. ^ Gen. i. 1-8. 

^" Gen. i. 20 ; ii. 7 ; Job x. 12 ; John x. 10. ^^ Prov. viii. 

12 I Cor. ii. 16. i=^'johni. i. 1* Ps. xliv. 21. i^ c^l. ii. 3. 
^^ Rev. xix. I. ^^ Rev. i. 5. ^^ Rev. xvii. 4. ^^ Dan. vii. , 

-" Ps. cii. 25. 2^ Ex. XV. 2. 22 jgj._ xxiii. 6. ^^ i Cor. i. 30. 
^^ Isa. xl. 15. -^ I Kings xix. 12. -^ John xiv. 17. 

2' I Cor. vi. 19. 2^ Isa. Ixvi= I. ^^ Ps. Ixxxiv. ii. 

^^ Rev. xxii. 16. ^^ Deut. iv. 24. ^- Ps. Ixxxiv. 6. 

^^ John iv. 24 ; Acts ii. 2. ^* Hosea xiv. 5. ^^ Ex. xiii. 21. 
2^ Ps. cxviii. 22. 2^ Ps. xxxi. 2, 3. ^^ i Cor. xv. 28. \ 

THE DIVINE NAMES 63 

Origin and Goal ; and that, according to the Scrip- 
tures, It may be all in all, and may be truly called 
the Creator of the world, originating and perfecting 
and maintaining all things ; their Defence and Dwell- 
ing, and the Attractive Force that draws them : and 
all this in one single, ceaseless, and transcendent act.^ 
For the Nameless Goodness is not only the cause 
of cohesion or life or perfection in such wise as to 
derive Its Name from this or that providential activity 
alone ; nay, rather does It contain all things before- 
hand within Itself, after a simple and uncircumscribed 
m.anner through the perfect excellence of Its one and 
all-creative Providence, and thus we draw from the 
whole creation Its appropriate praises and Its Names. 
8. Moreover, the sacred writers proclaim not only 
such titles as these (titles drawn from universal ^ or 
from particular ^ providences or providential activi- 
ties ^), but sometimes they have gained their images 
from certain heavenly visions ^ (which in the holy 
precincts or elsewhere have illuminated the Initiates 
or the Prophets), and, ascribing to the super-luminous 
nameless Goodness titles drawn from all manner of 
acts and functions, have clothed It in human (fiery 
or amber) shapes ^ or forms, and have spoken of Its 
Eyes,^ and Ears,^ and Hair,^ and Face,^^ and Hands,^^ 
and Wings,^^ and Feathers,^^ and Arms,^* and Back 
Parts,^^ and Feet ; ^^ and fashioned such mystical 

^ God is above Time. 

2 e.g. " I am that I am," " Good," "Fair." 

3 e.g. " Sun,'^ " Star," " Rock," etc. 

^ a-TT^ rwv . . . trpovoiav rj irpouoovjj.evcov. The first are the faculties 
of aciing or being revealed in a certain way ; the second are the results 
or manifestations of these faculties when in action. 

5 Thus the complete classification is : (i) Analogies drawn from the 
material world, [a) universal, {b) particular ; (2) psychic visions. 

6 Ezek. i. 26, 27. ' Ps. X. 5. ® James v. 4. 
9 Dan. vii. 9. ^^ Ps. xxxiii. 17. " Job x. 8. 

12 Ps. xci. 4. i=» Ibid. " Deut. xxxiii. 27. 

15 Ex. xxxiii. 23. " Ex. xxiv. 10. 

64 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

conceptions as its Crown,^ and Throne," and Cup,^ 
and Mixing Bowl,"^ etc., concerning which things we 
w^ill attempt to speak when we treat of Symbolical 
Divinity. At present, collecting from the Scriptures 
what concerns the matter in hand, and employing as 
our canon the rule we have described, and guiding 
our search thereby, let us proceed to an exposition of 
God's Intelligible^ Names; and as the Hierarchical 
Law directs us in all study of Divinity, let us ap- 
proach these godlike contemplations (for such indeed 
they arc ^) with our hearts predisposed unto the vision 
of God, and let us bring holy ears to the exposition 
of God's holy Names, implanting holy Truths in holy 
instruments according to the Divine command, and 
withholding these things from the mockery and 
laughter of the uninitiate, or, rather, seeking to re- 
deem those wicked men (if any such there be) from 
their enmity towards God. Thou, therefore, O good 
Timothy, must guard these truths according to the 
holy Ordinance, nor must thou utter or divulge the 
jieavenly mysteries unto the uninitiate."^ And for 
myself I pray God grant me worthily to declare the 
beneficent and manifold Names of the Unutterable 
and Nameless Godhead, and that He do not take 
away the word of Truth out of my mouth. 

1 Rev. xlv. 14. 2 Ezek, i. 26, 27. 

3 Ps. Ixxv. 8. 4 Piov. ix. 5. 

^ Twv uoriTwv Oewvvjxiwv — i. 6. the Names belonging to God when 
revealed in the relative sphere ; not those which belong to the uliimate 
Godhead as such. In fact, the Godhead, as such, is Nameless, See 
Intr. , p. 7. 

" Kvpiws eiTTUf — i. e. actually godlike because man is deified by them 

' See Afys/. 1 heol. I. 2 ; and cf. Matt. vii. 6. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 65 

CHAPTER II 

Coticcrniyto the Undifferencincr and the Differentiation in 
Divinity, and the Nature of Divine Uftijication and 
Differetiiiatioft } 

I. 'TiS the whole Being of the Supernal Godhead 
(saith the Scripture) that the Absolute Goodness hath 
defined and revealed.^ For in what other sense may we 
take the words of Holy Writ when it tells us how the 
Godhead spake concerning Itself, and said: ''Why 
asketh thou me concerning the good ? None is good 
save one, that is, God." ^ Now this matter we have 
discussed elsewhere, and have shown that all the 
Names proper to God are always applied in Scripture! 
not partially but to the whole, entire, full, complete 
Godhead, and that they all refer indivisibly, absolutely,, 
unreservedly, and wholly to all the wholeness of the 
whole and entire Godhead. Indeed (as we made 
mention in the Outlines of Divinity), if any one deny 
that such utterance refers to the whole Godhead, he 
blasphemeth and profanely dares to divide the Abso- 
lute and Supreme Unity. We must, then, take them 
as referring unto the entire Godhead. For not only 
did the goodly Word Himself say: " I am Good," ^ but 

^ irepl T/j/cD^evTjs KolX 5iaKeKpiiu4i'7]S deoAoyias nal t'is rj deia eyccais kuI 

- The point of this section is that God's Nature is not a sum total of 
separate Attributes. Therefore when we say that the Scriptural titles 
of God are only symbols and that the ultimate Godhead transcends 
them, we do not mean that they express only a part of His Nature (for 
His Nature has no parts), but that they dimly suggest His whole 
Nature. Hence, too, we cannot say that some of God's titles belong 
only to one separate Person of the Trinity and others only to the other 
Persons severally — e. g. The Trinity, and not the Father alone, is the 
Creator of the world. "The one world was made by the Father, 
through the Son, in the Holy Ghost" (St. Aug., Corn, on St. John, 
Tr. XX. 9). 

^ The title "Good" is applied to the whole Godhead. And if that 
title, then others too. Cf. Matt. xix. 17. 

•* Tohn X. II 

66 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

also one of the inspired prophets speaks of the Spirit 
as Good.i So, too, of the words " I Am that I Am." - 
If, instead of applying these to the whole Godhead, 
they wrest them to include only one part Thereof, 
how will they explain such passages as : " Thus saith 
He that is and was and is to come, the Almighty," ^ 
or : " Thou art the same," * or " The Spirit of Truth 
that is, and that proceedeth from the Father"?^ 
And if they deny that the whole Godhead is Life, 
how can that Sacred Word be true Which declared : 
" As the Father raiseth the dead and quickeneth 
them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will,"^ 
and also, " It is the Spirit that quickeneth "? ^ And 
as to the Dominion over the whole world belonging 
to the whole Godhead, it is impossible, methinks, to 
say (as far as concerns the Paternal and the Filial 
Godhead) how often in the Scriptures the Name of 
" Lord " is repeated as belonging both to the Father 
and to the Son : moreover the Spirit, too, is Lord.^ 
And the Names " Fair " and " VVise " are given to 
the whole Godhead ; and all the Names that belong 
to the whole Godhead (e.g. " Deifying Virtue " and 
" Cause ") Scripture introduces into all its praises of 
the Supreme Godhead comprehensively, as when it 
saith that "all things are from God," ^ and more in 
detail, as when it saith that " through Him are and to 
Him are all things created," ^^ that "all things subsist 
in Him," ^^ and that " Thou shalt send forth Thy Spirit 
and they shall be created."^^ And, to sum it all in brief, 

^ Ps. cxliii. lo. This is a further argument arising out of what has 
been said above. The point here is that we cannot Umit the title 
"Good "to one Person of the Trinity, (The notion that the Father 
is stern and the Son molhfies His sternness is false.) The rest of the 
section takes other titles and shows how they are common to all Three 
Persons of the Trinity. 

2 Ex. iii. 14. 3 ]^gy_ j_ ^_ 4 pg (,jj 27. 

^ John XV. 26. *^ John v. 21. "^ John vi. 63. 

^ 2 Cor. iii. 17. 9 i Chron. xxix. 14. i" Rom. xi. 36. 

^1 Jbid. 12 pg^ ^]^^ 20. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 67 

the Divine Word Himself declared : "I and the Father 
are one," ^ and " All things that the Father hath are 
mine," ^ and " All mine are thine, and thine are 
mine."^ And again, all that belongeth to the Father/ 
and to Himself He also ascribes in the Common 
Unity to the Divine Spirit, viz. the Divine operations, 
the worship, the originating and inexhaustible crea- 
tiveness and the ministration of the bountiful gifts. 
And, methinks, that none of those nurtured in the 
Divine Scriptures will, except through perversity, gain- 
say it, that the Divine Attributes in their true and 
Divine signification all belong to the entire Deity. 
And, therefore, having here briefly and partially (and 
more at large elsewhere) given from the Scriptures ■, 
the proof and definition of this matter, we intend that 
whatever title of God's Entire Nature we endeavour • 
to explain be understood as referring to the Godhead 
in Its entirety. 

2. And if any one say that we herein are intro- 
ducing a confusion of all distinctions in the Deity,* 
we for our part opine that such his argument is not 
sufficient even to persuade himself. For if he is one 
utterly at enmity with the Scriptures, he will also be 
altogether far from our Philosophy ; and if he recks 
not of the Holy Wisdom drawn from the Scriptures, 
how can he reckon aught of that method by which 
we would conduct him to an understanding of things 
Divine ? But if he taketh Scriptural Truth as his 
Standard, this is the very Rule and Light by which 
we will (so far as in us lies) proceed straight to our 
defence, and will declare that the Sacred Science 
sometimes employs a method of Undifference and 
sometimes one of Differentiation ; and that we must 
neither disjoin those things which are Undifferenced 

^ John X. 30. 2 John xvi. 15. ^ John xvii. lo. 

* /• e. That we are*Seeking to destroy the distinction between the 
Persons of the Trinity. 

68 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

nor confuse those which are Differentiated ; but follow- 
ing the Sacred Science to the best of our powers, 
we must lift up our eyes towards the Divine Rays ; 
for, receiving thence the Divine Revelations as a 
inoble Standard of Truth, we strive to preserve its 
treasure in ourselves without addition, diminution, 
or distortion, and in thus preserving the Scriptures, 
we also are preserved, and are moreover enabled by 
the same to the end that we may still preserve them 
and be by thrm preserved. 

3. Now Undifferenced Names belong to the entire 
Godhead ^ (as we showed more fully from the Scrip- 
tures in the Outlines of Divinity). To this class 
belong the following : " Super-Excellent," " Super- 
Divine," " Super-Essential," " Super-Vital," " Supra- 
Sapient," and thereto all those titles wherein the 
negative expresses excess ; moreover, all those titles 
which have a causal sense, such as " Good," " Fair," 
" Existent," " Lifegiving," " Wise," and whatever titles 
are ascribed to the Cause of all good things from 
Its bountiful gifts."^ The differentiated Names, on 
the other hand, are the Super-Essential names and 
connotations of "Father," "Son," and "Spirit." In 
these cases the titles cannot be interchanged, nor are 
they held in common. Again, besides this, the perfect 
and unchangeable subsistence of Jesus in our nature 
is differentiated, and so are all the mysteries of Love 
and Being therein displayed.^ 

^ The method ot UndifTerence apphes to the tilfimate Godhead, that 
of Differentiation to the emanating Godhead. The absokite and the 
relative planes of Being both belong to God. On the absolute plane 
all distinctions are transcended, and the Persons exist in a manner in 
which They would appear to us to be merged, but on the relative 
plane we see that They are eternally distinct. See Intr., p. 8. 

- Because we see things which are good, fair, existent, etc., we 
apply to God, iheir ultimate Cause, the titles "Good," "Fair," 
" Existent," etc. See p. 36, n. 6. 

3 /. e. Only the Second Person was Incarnnte, was crucified, etc. 
* Mysteries of Love and Being " — *iAav0pa'7rios ovaiwdr] ixvaT-qpia. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 69 

4. But needs must we, methinks, go deeper into the 
matter and thoroughly explain the difference between 
Undifference and Differentiation* as concerning God, 
in order that our whole Discourse may be made clear, 
and, being free from all doubtfulness and obscurity, 
may (to the best of our powers) give a distinct, plain, 
and orderly statement of the matter. For, as I said 
elsewhere, the Initiates of our Divine Tradition 
designate the Undifferenced Attributes of the Tran- 
scendently Ineffable and Unknowable Permanencej, 
as hidden, incommunicable Ultimates, but the bene:*!' 
ficent Differentiations of the Supreme Godhead, they] 
call Emanations^ and Manifestations ; and following 
the Holy Scripture they declare that some Attributes 
belong especially to Undifference, and some, on the, 
other hand, to Differentiation.^ For instance, they 
say concerning the Divine Unity, or Super-Essence, 
that the undivided Trinity holds in a common Unity 
without distinction Its Subsistence beyond Being, Its 
Godhead beyond Deity, Its Goodness beyond Excel- 

^ Trpo65ovs T€ Kol iK(pdvaeis, — sc. the Persons of the Tiinity. See 
Intr., p. 16. 

^ The received text reads : ^acri . . . koI ttjs elp7]fi^vr]s evuxr^oos 
Xhia KoL avdis rrjs Sm/cpifrews elvdi Tivas ISikos Koi evcocreis Ka\ SiaKpiaeis. 
This, as it stands, must be translated : " They say that certain quahties 
belong to the said Undifference, and that to Differentiation, on the' 
other hand, belong certain principles of Unity and principles of Differ- 
entiation." This would mean that the Persons of the Trinity, though 
distinct from Each Other, yet have a Common Unity, or else that Each 
has a Unity of Its Own making It distinct from the Other Persons. 

I have ventured, however, to emend the text by omitting the last six 
words and making the sentence end at €lyai. I believe the last six 
words have crept in from a marginal gloss or variant, which ran (I 
imagine) as follows: — dual tlvus IdiKas k.t.X. If the MS. belonged to 
a family having seventeen or eighteen letters to a column the eluai after 
Sm/cpiVecos would end a line, since there are 571 letters from the be- 
ginning of the chapter to the end of that word. Hence it would easily 
be confused with the elvai at the beginning of the gloss, which would 
thus creep into the text. And, since the added words amount to 
thirty-four letters, they would exactly till two lines, thus making the 
interpolation easier. For the meaning, see Intr., p. 6f. 

70 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

lence ; the Identity, surpassing all things, of Its 
transcendently Individual Nature; Its Oneness above 
Unity ; Its Namelessness and Multiplicity of Names ; 
Its Unknowableness and perfect Intelligibility ; Its 
universal Affirmation^ and universal Negation in a 
state above all Affirmation and Negation,^ and that 
It possesses the mutual Abiding and Indwelling (as 
it were) of Its indivisibly supreme Persons in an 
utterly Undiff'erentiated and Transcendent Unity, 
and yet without any confusion ^ even as the lights 
of lamps (to use visible and homely similes) being 
in one house and wholly interpenetrating one another, 
severally possess a clear and absolute distinction each 
from each, and are by their distinctions united into 
one, and in their unity are kept distinct. Even so 
do we see, when there are many lamps in a house, 
how that the lights of them all are unified into one 
undifferentiated light, so that there shineth forth from 
them one indivisible brightness; and no one, methinks, 
could separate the light of one particular lamp from 
the others, in isolation from the air which embraces 
them all, nor could he see one light without another, 
inasmuch as, without confusion, they yet are wholly 
commin""led. 

Yea, if any one takes out of the dwelling one of 
the burning lamps, all its own particular light will 
therewith depart from the place without either carry- 
ing off in itself aught of the other lights or bequeath- 
ing any of its own brightness to the rest. For, as 

^ Cf. Myst. Theol. I. 2. This universal Affirmation is not pantheism 
because evil, as such, is held to be non-existent. It is only all good- 
ness that is affirmed of God, though He surpasses it. God is present 
in all things, but not equally in all. 

2 " Yes " implies the possibility of "No," and " No " the possibility 
of "Yes." Thus "Yes" and "No" belong to the relative world. 
God's absolute existence is beyond such antithesis. See Intr., p. 4f 

^ The Persons, though fused, are yet not confused because the 
Godhead transcends unity. See Intr.., p. 5. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 71 

I said, the entire and complete union of the hghts 
one with another brought no confusion or commixture 
in any parts — and that though the Hght is hterally 
embodied in the air and streams from the material 
substance of fire. The Super-Essential Unity of God, 
however, exceedeth (so we declare) not only the 
unions of material bodies, but even those of Souls 
and of Intelligences, which these Godlike and celestial 
Luminaries in perfect mutual interpenetration super- 
naturally and without confusion possess, through 
a participation corresponding to their individual 
powers of participating in the All-Transcendent 
Unity.i 

5. There is, on the other hand, a Differentiation 
made in the Super-Essential Doctrine of God— not 
merely such as I have just mentioned (viz. that in 
the very Unity, Each of the Divine Persons possesses 
without confusion Its own distinct existence), but also 
that the Attributes of the Super-Essential Divine 
Generation are not interchangeable.^ The Father 
alone is the Source of the Super-Essential Godhead, 
and the Father is not a Son, nor is the Son a Father ; 
for the Divine Persons all preserve. Each without \ 
alloy. His own particular Attributes of praise. Such, J 
then, are the instances of Undifference and of 
Differentiation in the Ineffable Unity and Subsistence 
of God. And if the term " Differentiation " be also 
applied to the bounteous act of Emanation whereby 
the Divine Unity, brimming Itself with goodness in 
the excess of Its Undifferenced Unity thus enters 

1 Material things are merged by being united (<?.^. drops of water). 
Souls or angels being united through love (whereby they participate in 
God) are not merged but remain distinct even while being, as it were, 
fused into a single spiritual unity more perfect than the fusion of water 
with wine. The Persons of the Trinity are still more perfectly united 
and at the same time still more utterly distinct. 

2 Two kinds of Difterentiation : (i) Distinctness of Existence, 
(2) Difference of Functions. 

/ 

72 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

into Multiplicity,^ yet an undifferenced unity worketh 
even in those differentiated acts whereby, in ceaseless 
communications, It bestows Being, Life, and Wisdom, 
and those other gifts of the all-creative Goodness in 
respect of which (as we behold the communications 
and the participants thereof) we celebrate those 
things wherein the creatures supernaturally partici- 
pate. Yea, 'tis a common and undifferenced activity 
of the whole Godhead that It is wholly and entirely 
communicated unto each of them that share It and 
unto none merely in part ; ^ even as the centre of a 
circle is shared by all the radii which surround it in 
a ^circle ; ^ and as there are many impressions of a 
seal all sharing in the seal which is their archetype 
while yet this is entire, nor is it only a part thereof 
that belongeth unto any of them. But the Incom- 
municable All-creative Godhead transcends all such 
symbols in that It is beyond Apprehension nor hath 
It any other mode of communion such as to join It 
unto the participants."* 

Perhaps, however, some one will say : " The seal is 
not entire and the same in all the printed copies." 
I answer that this is not due to the seal itself (for it 
gives itself wholly and identically to each), but the 
difference of the substances which share it makes the 
impressions of the one, entire, identical archetype to 
be different. For instance, if they are soft, plastic, 
and smooth, and have no print already, and are 
neither hard and resistent, nor yet melting and 
unstable, the imprint will be clear, plain, and per- 

^ D. means that the Undifferentiated Godhead is actually present 
in all these creative activities. It is multiplied (as it were) in Its 
energies, and yet It remains indivisible. See Intr, , p. 17. 

- D. liere touches on the fundamental difference between spiritual 
and material things. Cf. Shelley: "True love has this different from 
gold or clay that to divide is not to take away." 

^ Plotinus uses the same illustration [Eiin. iv. i). 

* D. is always on his guard against Pantheism. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 73 

manent ; but if the aforesaid fitness should in auc^ht 
be lacking, then the material will not take the 
impression and reproduce it distinctly, and other such 
results will follow as an unsuitable material must 
bring about. 

6. Again, it is by a Differentiated act of God's 
benevolence that the Super-Essential Word should 
wholly and completely take Human Substance of 
human flesh and do and suffer all those things which, 
in a special and particular manner, belong to the 
action of His Divine Humanity. In these acts the 
Father and the Spirit have no share, except of course 
that they all share in the loving generosity of the 
Divine counsels and in all that transcendent Divine 
working of unutterable mysteries which were per- 
formed in Human Nature by Him Who as God and 
as the Word of God is Immutable.^ So do we strive 
to differentiate the Divine Attributes, according as 
these Attributes are Undifferenced or Differentiated.^ 

7. Now all the grounds of these Unifications, and 
Differentiations in the Divine Nature which the 
Scriptures have revealed to us, we have explained in 
the Outlines of Divinity, to the best of our abilities, 
treating separately of each. The latter class we have 
philosophically unravelled and unfolded, and so have 
sought to guide the holy and unspotted mind to con- 
template the shining truths of Scripture, while the 
former class we have endeavoured (in accordance 
with Divine Tradition) to apprehend as Mysteries in 
a manner beyond the activities of our minds.^ For 

^ Redemption is a work performed l)y the whole Trinity through the 
Second Person. (So, too, is Creation. Cf. p. 65, n. 2). 

^ /. e. We strive to distinguish the two planes of Being in God. 
Cf. Athan. Creed: "Neither confounding the Persons," etc. 

^ Undifference belongs to the ultimate (Jodhead, Differentiation to 
the distinction between the Three Persons of the Trinity. The former 
is the sphere of ^^ystical Theology, the latter is that of Dogmatic 
Theology. The former implies the P7a Negativa the latter the Via 
Affiymativa. 

74 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

all Divine things, even those that are revealed to us, 
are only known by their Communications. Their 
ultimate nature, which they possess in their own 
original being, is beyond Mind and beyond all Being 
and Knowledge.^ For instance, if we call the Super- 
Essential Mystery by the Name of " God,'' or " Life," 
or " Being," or " Light," or " Word," we conceive of 
nothing else than the powers that stream Therefrom 
to us bestowing Godhead, Being, Life or Wisdom ; ^ 
while that Mystery Itself we strive to apprehend by 
casting aside all the activities of our mind, since 
we behold no Deification,^ or Life, or Being, which 
exactly resembles the altogether and utterly Tran- 
scendent Cause of all things. Again, that the Father 
is Originating Godhead while Jesus and the Spirit 
are (so to speak) Divine Off-shoots of the Paternal 
Godhead, and, as it were. Blossoms and Super-Essential 
Shinings Thereof we learn from Holy Scripture ; but 
how these things are so we cannot say, nor yet 
conceive. 

8. Just so far can the powers of our minds attain 
as to see that all spiritual paternity and sonship is a 
gift bestowed from the all-transcendent Archetypal 
Fatherhood and Sonship both upon us and also upon 
the celestial Powers : whereby Godlike Minds receive- 

^ Even the Differentiations finally lead us up into the Undifferenced 
Godhead Where they transcend themselves. (Cf. p. 70, n. 3 and the 
passage in ii. 4 about the torches.) Into that region we cannot track 
them. But on the other side they flow out into creative activity, and 
thus are, in some degree, revealed. 

2 These terms may be thus classified : — 

Sphere of Activity. Mature of Form under which Giver 

■' (jift. IS manifested. 

(i) Grace Godhead . "God" 

(ii) Nature 

(i) Material existence . . . Being . "Being"] 

(2) Vegetable and animal existence . Life . "Life" |-"Word." 

(3) Human existence . . . Wisdom . " Light " J 

^ The doctrine of "Deification" is not a mere speculation. It 
embodies an experienced fact. See Intr., p. 43. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 75 

the states and names of Gods, and Sons of Gods, and 
Fathers of Gods, such paternity and sonship being 
perfected in a spiritual manner (/. e. incorporeally, 
immaterially, and invisibly) because the Divine Spirit 
setteth above all invisible Immateriality and Deifica- 
tion, and the Father and the Son, supernaturally 
transcend all spiritual fatherhood and sonship.^ For 
there is no exact similitude between the creatures \ 
and the Creative Originals ; '^ for the creatures possess 
only such images of the Creative Originals as arc 
possible to them, while the Originals Themselves 
transcend and exceed the creatures by the very 
nature of Their own Originalit}-. / To employ human 
examples, we say that pleasant or painful conditions 
produce in us feelings of pleasure or pain while yet 
they possess not these feelings themselves ; and we 
do not say that the fire which warms and burns is 
itself burnt or warmed. Even so if any one says that 
Very Life lives, or that Very Light is enlightened, he 
will be wrong (according to my view) unless, perchance, 
he were to use these terms in a different sense from 
the ordinary one to mean that the qualities of created 
things pre-exist, after a superlative manner as touching 
their true Being in the Creative Originals,^ 

9. Even the plainest article of Divinity, namely the j 

^ The act by which one spirit or soul imparts spiritual life to another 
is a manifestation in time of a Mystery which is eternally perfect in the 
Trinity, and would be impossible were it not ultimately rooted in that 
Mystery. Just as all life draws its existence from the Divine i- 7//' r.r?- 
vitality, so all spiritual paternity draws its existence from the Divine 
siipra-paternity. , 

- TO airia — /. e. The Persons of the Godhead. 

^ So St. Augustine constantly teaches that God acts _^ not in the 
manner which we call activity, but by causing the creatiire itself to 
perform the action. Thus he explains (jod's rest on the Seventh Day 
to mean not that God Himself rested but that the creation now rested 
in Him. Aristotle and his disciple, St. Thomas, teach that God 
moves all things simply through lieing desired by them. So God 
causes action witliout Himself acting (somewhat as fire causes warmth 
without feeling it). Cf. p. 87, n. i. 

76 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Incarnation and Birth of Jesus in Human Form, 
cannot be expressed by any Language or known by 
any Mind — not even by the first of the most exalted 
I angels. That He took man's substance is a mysterious 
truth, the which we have received ; but we know not 
how from the V^irgin's seed He was formed in another 
manner than is natural, nor how His dry feet 
supporting the solid weight of His material body He 
walked upon the unstable substance of the water, nor 
understand we any of the other things which belong 
to the Supernatural Nature of Jesus. Of these things 
I have spoken enough elsewhere ; and our renowned 
Teacher hath wonderfully -^ declared, in his Elements 
of Divinity^ what he hath either learnt directly from 
the Sacred Writers, or else hath discovered from his 
cunning research concerning Scriptural truths through 
the much toil and labour which he bestowed thereon, 
or else hath had revealed unto him by some diviner 
inspiration wherein he received not only true spiritual 
notions but also true spiritual motions} and by the 
kinship of his mind with them (if I may so express 
it) was perfected to attain without any other teacher 
to a mystical communion with these verities and a 
belief therein.^ And to put before them in briefest 
compass the many blessed speculations of his 
ingenious mind thus speaketh he concerning Jesus 
in his compilation of the Elements of Divinity. 

lo. From the ELEMENTS OF Divinity, by S. 
Hicrotheus. 

The Universal Cause which filleth all things is the 
Deity of Jesus, whereof the parts are in such wise 
tempered to the whole that It is neither whole nor 
part, and yet is at the same time whole and also part, 

■■ vTrep(pvu>s. The proper meaning of virepcpvi'is in the Dionysian 
writings appears to be "supernatural." 
" 01) i^iovov i-LaSwv aWa koI iradcou to 0e7a. 
■' irphs TTjj' aSiSaKThy avToov Koi /xvaTiiajp airoreAeadels evwaiv Kal 

IVKTril'. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 77 

containing in Its all-embracing unity both part and 
whole, and being transcendent and antecedent to 
both.^ This Deity is perfect in those Beings that 
are imperfect as a Fount of Perfection ; ^ It is Perfec- 
tionless ^ in those that are perfect as transcending | 
and anticipating their Perfection ; It is the Form 
producing Form in the formless, as a Fount of every 
form ; and it is Formless in the Forms, as being 
beyond all form ; It is the Being that pervades all 
beings at once though not affected by them ; * and It 
is Super-Essential, as transcending every being ; It 
sets all bounds of Authority and Order, and yet It 
has Its seal beyond all Authority and Order.^ It is 
the Measure of the Universe ; ^ and it is Eternity, 
and above Eternity and before Eternity.'^ It is an 

^ Being beyond Unity the Godhead is, of course, beyond the 
categories of whole and part. The Godhead is not a Whole because 
It is indivisible, nor a Part because there is nothing, on the ultimate 
plane, outside It. Yet It is a Whole because It includes the true 
existence of all things, and is Partitive because It contains the prin- 
ciple of separate Individuality whereby Christ possesses a Human Soul 
distinct from all other human souls, and whereby, too, we possess 
distinct and separate souls. 

- God is in us even before we are in Him. Cf. Luke xvii. 21. 
Cf. St. Aug., "Thou wast within ; I was without." Also cf. c. i. 3 ; 
c. iii. i : " P'or the Trinity," etc. See Intr. , p. 6 on the use of the word 
"outside." 

^ Perfection implies an object or purpose achieved. Hence it implies 
a distinction between self and not self. The Godhead is beyond such 
a distinction. Compared with imperfection, It is perfect ; compared 
with perfection, It is perfectionless (dreAi^s), or, rather, beyond 
Perfection (vTrepreAi^s) and before it {irporeXcios), just as compared 
with impersonal things It is personal, and compared with personality 
It is non-personal, or, rather, supra-personal, 

^ Cf. p. 75, n. 3. 

^ Cf. St. Paul on the Law and the Spirit. The Law is deposited, 
as it were, by the Spirit : and yet the Law cramps the Spirit, and the 
Spirit must break loose from this bondage. 

^ L e. It gives the universe its bounds and distinctions. 

' Eternity, in the sense of " Very Eternity " (ouToaicor), is an Emana- 
tion of the Godhead — a distinct view of Its transcendent state (cf. Intr., 
p. 17). It is the Divine Rest taken in the abstract, as Very Life is 

78 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Abundance in those Beings that lack, and a Super- 
Abundance in those that abound ; unutterable, 
ineffable ; beyond Mind, beyond Life, beyond Being ; 
It supernaturally possesses the supernatural and 
super-essentially possesses the super-essential.^ And 
since that Supra-Divine Being hath in loving kindness 
come down from thence unto the Natural Estate, and 
verily took substance and assumed the name of Man 
(we must speak with reverence of those things which 
we utter beyond human thought and language), even 
in this act He possesses His Supernatural and Super- 
Essential Existence — not only in that He hath 
without change or confusion of Attributes shared 
in our human lot while remaining unaffected by that 
unutterable Self-Emptying as regards the fullness of 
His Godhead, but also because (most wonderful of all 
wonders !) He passed in His Supernatural and Super- 
Essential state through conditions of Nature and 
Being, and receiving from us all things that are ours, 
exalted them far above us.^ 

II. So much for these matters. Now let us 
proceed to the object of our discussion and endeavour 
to explain the Common and Undifferenced Names 
belonging to God's Differentiated Being.^ And, that 
the subject of our investigation may be clearly de- 
fined beforehand, we give the name of Divine Differen- 

perhaps the Divine Motion taken in the abstract. The Godhead in- 
cludes both Rest and Motion by transcending them. 

1 Behind Nature are certain higher supernaiural possibilities (which 
are manifested, e.g., in the Miracles of Christ and His Disciples), and 
beyond our personalities there is a mystery which is greater than our 
finite selves, and yet, in a sense, is our true selves. The Godhead 
possesses in Itself the supernatural possibilities of Nature and the 
supra-personal possibilities of our personalities. 

'^ i, e. Christ did not merely keep His Godhead parallel, as it were, 
with His Manhood, but brought It into His Manhood and so exalted 
the Manhood. 

^ /. e. Let us explain what are the Names which belong indivisibly to 
all Three Persons of the Trinity. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 79 

tiation (as was said) to the beneficent Emanations of 
the Supreme Godhead.^ For bestowing upon all 
things and supernally infusing Its Communications 
unto the goodly Universe, It becomes differentiated 
without loss of Undifference ; ^ and multiplied with- 
out loss of Unity ; from Its Oneness it becomes 
manifold while yet remaining within Itself. For 
example, since God is super-essentially Existent and 
bestows existence upon all things that are, and brings 
the world into being, that single Existence of His is 
said to become manifold through bringing forth the 
many existences from Itself, while_ yet He remains 
One in the act of Self-Multiplication ; Undifferenced 
throughout the process of Emanation, and Full in the 
emptying process of Differentiation ; Super-Essen- 
tially transcending the Being of all things, and 
guiding the whole world onwards by an indivisible 
act, and pouring forth without diminution His in- 
defectible bounties. Yea, being One and communi- 
cating of His Unity both unto every part of the 
world and also unto the whole, both unto that which 
is one and unto that which is many. He is One in 
an unchangeable and super-essential manner, being 
neither an unit in the multiplicity of things nor yet 
the sum total of such units. Indeed, He is not an 
unity in this sense, and doth not participate in unity 
nor possess it ; ^ but He is an Unity in a manner far 

^ The word " Emanation" is here used in its very widest sense as 
including (i) the Persons of the Trinity, (2) Their creative activity as 
manifested in the Universal and the Particular stream of energy. See 
Intr., p. 17. The Differentiated Being of the Trinity underlies all the 
Differentiations of the creative process. The Trinity is differentiated 
on the plane of Eternity ; then It emanates or energizes on the temporal 
plane, and thus It is manifested in all the differentiations of the universe, 
(especially in deified souls). 

- God is indi visibly present in each separate deified soul (see supra, 
p. 71), the sentence beginning : "And if the term 'Differentiation ' be 
also applied to the bounteous act," etc. 

^ These two phrases well ejcpress the meaning of the title "Beyond 

8o DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

different from this, above all unity which is in the 
world ; yea, He is an Indivisible Plurality, insatiable 
yet brim-full, producing, perfecting, and maintaining 
all unity and plurality. Moreover, since many, 
through Deification from Him, are made Gods ^ (so 
far as the Godlike capacity of each allows), there thus 
appears to be what is called a Differentiation ^ and a 
Reduplication of the One God, yet none the less He 
is the primal God, the Supra-Divine and Super- 
Essentially One God, who dwells Indivisibly within 
the separate and individual things, being an Un- 
differenced Unity in Himself and without any com- 
mixture or multiplication through His contact with 
the Many.^ And supernaturally perceiving this, thus 
speaketh (by inspiration, in his holy writings) that 
Guide unto Divine illumination by whom both we 
and our teacher are led, that mighty man in things 
Divine, that Luminary of the world. For though 
(saith he) there be that are called gods, whether in 
heaven or in earth (as there be gods many and lords 
many). But to us there is but one God, the Father, 
of whom are all things, and we in Him, and one Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him. 
For in divine things the undifferenced Unities are of 
more might than the Differentiations * and hold the 
foremost place and retain their state of Undifference 
even after the One has, without departing from Its 
oneness, entered into Differentiation. These Differ- 
entiations or beneficent Emanations of the whole 

Unity " {vTT^p-qvoojxfvri), which I have generally translated, like TjvwfievT], 
as " Undifferenced." 

^ Trj e| avTov 6ew(Tei . . . decoy iroWuiv yiyuofxfuocy. See Intr., p. 43. 

2 C'f. p. 71, n. I. 

^ The fullness of God's Unity is manifested, (i) in all the multiplicity 
of the material world, (2) after a higher manner in the deified souls of 
men and in angels. 

* Each deified soul is a differentiation of God (cf. p. 71, n. i); yet 
the Unity of God transcends them all, even after Go^ has thus poured 
Himself into them. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 8i 

Godhead — whereby Its Undififerenced Nature is 
shared in common ^ — we shall (so far as in us lies) 
endeavour to describe from the Divine Names which 
reveal them in the Scriptures, having now made this 
clear beforehand (as hath been said) : that every Name 
of the Divine beneficent Activity unto whichever of 
the Divine Persons it is applied, must be taken as 
belonging, without distinction, to the whole entirety 
of the Godhead."'^ 

CHAPTER III 

IV/uit is ihc powef ^IJPraycr? Also coiicernini^ iJie Blessed 
Hierotheus mid concerning Reverence and the Wj-itiiig of 
Divinity. 

I. And first of all, if it like thee, let us consider the 
highest Name, even *' Goodness," by which all the 
Emanations of God are conjointly revealed.^ And 
let us begin with an invocation of the Trinity, the 
Which, as It surpasseth Goodness, and is the Source 
of all goodness, cloth reveal all conjoined together Its 
own good providences.* For we must first lift up our 
minds in prayer unto the Primal Goodness, and by 
drawing nearer Thereunto, we must thus be initiated 
into the mystery of those good gifts which are rooted 
in Its being. For the Trinity is nigh unto all things, 
and yet not all things are nigh unto It.^ And when 
we call upon It with holy prayers and unspotted 

^ /. e. These active Manifestations whereby God enters into each part 
of the universe, yet without loss of Unity. 

- See the beginning of this chapter. 

^ All God's activities are good. 

* The particular activities of God exist as one Act in Ilim, cf. ji. 79, 
n. 2. So St. Thomas (following Aristotle) calls Mim Actus Purus. 

^ Cf. p. 77, n, I. 

^2 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

mind and with our souls prepared for union with 
God, then are we also nigh Thereto ; for It is not in 
space, so as to be absent from any spot, or to move 
from one position to another.^ Nay, to speak of It 
as omnipresent doth not express Its all-transcendent 
all-embracing Infinitude.^ Let us then press on in 
prayer, looking upwards to the Divine benignant 
Rays, even as if a resplendent cord were hanging 
from the height of heaven unto this world below, and 
we, by seizing it with alternate hands in one advance, 
appeared to pull it down ; but in very truth 
instead of drawing down the rope (the same being 
already nigh us above and below), we were ourselves 
being drawn upwards to the higher Refulgence of the 
resplendent Rays. Or even as, having embarked on 
a ship and clinging to the cables, the which being 
stretched out from some rock unto us, presented 
themselves (as it were) for us to lay hold upon them, 
we should not be drawing the rock towards ourselves, 
but should, in very truth, be drawing ourselves and 
the vessel towards the rock ; as also, conversely, if 
any one standing upon the vessel pushes away the 
rock that is on the shore, he will not affect the rock 
(which stands immovable) but will separate himself 
therefrom, and the more he pushes it so much the 
more will he be staving himself away. Hence, before 
every endeavour, more especially if the subject be 
Divinity, must we begin with prayer : not as though 
we would pull down to ourselves that Power which is 

^ This is profouiid. Spatial metaphors are always dangerous, though 
unavoidable, in Theology. In space if A is touching B then B must be 
touching A. In the spiritual world this is not so. God is near me (or 
rather in me), and yet I may be far from God because I may be far from 
my 0W71 true sef. I must seek my true self where it is, in God. It is 
the paradox of Personality that my true self is outside my self and I can 
only gain it by casting aside this counterfeit "self." Cf. p. 77, n. i, 
and Inir., p. 15. 

^ Even tlie word "omnipresent" suggests that God is in space, 
whereas really His existence is non-spatial. 

THE DIVINE NAMES Ss 

nig"h both everywhere and nowhere, but that, by these 
remembrances and invocations of God, we may 
commend and unite ourselves Thereunto. 

2. Now perhaps there is need of an explanation 
why, when our renowned teacher Hierotheus hath 
compiled ^ his wonderful Elements of Divinity, we 
have composed other Tractates of Divinity, and now 
are writing this present as if his work were not 
sufficient. Now if he had professed to deal in an 
ordered system with all questions of Divinity, and had 
gone through the whole sum of Divinity with an 
exposition of every branch, we should not have gone 
so far in madness or folly as to suppose that we 
could touch these problems with a diviner insight 
than he, nor would we have cared to waste our time 
in a vain repetition of those same truths ; more 
especially since it would be an injury to a teacher 
whom we love were we thus to claim for ourselves 
the famous speculations and expositions of a man 
who, next to Paul the Divine, hath been our chief 
preceptor. But since, in his lofty " Instructions on 
Divinity," he gave us comprehensive and pregnant 
definitions fitted to our understanding, and to that o{ 
such amongst us as were teachers of the newly 
initiated souls, and bade us unravel and explain with 
whatever powers of reason we possessed, the compre- 
hensive and compact skeins of thought spun by his 
mighty intellect ; and since thou hast thyself often- 
times urged us so to do, and hast remitted his 
treatise to us as too sublime for comprehension, 
therefore we, while setting him apart (as a teacher of 
advanced and perfect spirits) for those above the 
commonalty, and as a kind of second Scriptures 
worthy to follow the Inspired Writings, will yet 
teach Divine Truths, according to our capacity, unto 
those who are our peers. For if solid food is suited 

84 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

only to the perfect, what degree of perfection would 
it need to give this food to others ? Wherefore we 
are right in saying that the direct study of the 
spiritual ^ Scriptures and the comprehensive teaching 
of them need advanced capacities, while the under- 
standing and the learning of the matter which 
contribute thereto is suited to the inferior Initiators 
and Initiates.^ . We have, however, carefully observed 
the principle : Whatsoever things our Divine Pre- 
ceptor has throughly dealt with and made clearly 
manifest we have never in any wise ventured thereon, 
for fear of repetition, nor given the same explanation 
of the passage whereof he treated. For^ even among 
our inspired Hierarchs (when, as thou knowest, we 
with him and many of our holy brethren met together 
to behold that mortal body. Source of Life, which 
received the Incarnate God,'* and James, the brother 
of God, was there, and Peter, the chief and highest 
of the Sacred Writers, and then, having beheld it, all 
the Hierarchs there present celebrated, according to 
the power of each, the omnipotent goodness of the 
Divine weakness) : on that occasion, I say, he sur- 
passed all the Initiates next to the Divine Writers, 

* Or "intelligible" {votjtuv). Cf. p. 52, n. i. The Scriptures are 
expressed in symbolic terms which our minds can grasp. Hierotheus 
was inspired to penetrate to the ultimate truth enshrined in these 
syml^ols. Thus he was able not only to assimilate this solid food himself 
but also to give it to others. Apparently Hiei'otheus passed through 
certain extraordinary psychic experiences, which are described in his 
writings. These particular experiences D. has not himself passed 
through. But he believes that his own teaching may clear the ground, 
and so be a preliminary to such flights. He is chiefly explaining 
principles, but these principles may lead the way to a true experience. 
St. Paul and other Scriptural writers experienced such extraordinary 
psychic states, though they do not speak of them in the extravagant 
terms apparently used by Hierotheus. Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 2-4. 

2 Toy vcpeifxeuois KaBiepoDTals Kal Upu^fxevois. 

^ sc. It would be an impiety to do so, for he is almost equal to the 
Sciiptural Writers, as he showed when he met with them to view the 
body of the B. V. M. 

* Cf. p T, n I. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 85 

yea, he was wholly transported, was wholly outside of 
himself, and was so moved by a communion with 
those Mysteries he was celebrating, that all who 
heard him and saw him and knew him (or rather 
knew him not) deemed him to be rapt of God and 
endued with utterance Divine. But why should I 
tell thee of the divine things that were uttered in that 
place ? For, unless I have forgotten who I am, I 
know that I have often heard from thee certain 
fragments of those enraptured praises ; so earnest 
hast thou been with all thy soul to follow heavenly 
things. 

3. But, to say nothing of those mystical ex- 
periences (since they cannot be told unto the world, 
and since thou knowest them well), when it behoved 
us to communicate these things unto the world and 
to bring all whom we might unto that holy knowledge 
we possessed, how he surpassed nearly all the holy 
teachers in the time he devoted to the task, in pure- 
ness of mind, in exactness of exposition, and in all 
other holy qualities, to such a degree that we could 
not attempt to gaze upon such spiritual radiance. 
For we are conscious in ourselves and well aware 
that we cannot sufficiently perceive those Divine 
I'ruths which are granted to man's perception, nor 
can we declare and utter those elements of Divine 
Knowledge which are given unto man to speak. We 
fall very short of that understanding which the 
Divine men possessed concerning heavenly truths, 
and verily, from excess of reverence, we should not 
have ventured to listen, or give utterance to any 
truths of Divine philosophy, were it not that we are 
convinced in our mind that such knowledge of Divine 
Truth as is possible must not be disregarded. This 
conviction was wrought within us, not only by the 
natural impulse of our minds, which yearn and strive 
for such vision of supernatural things as may be 

86 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

attained, but also by the holy ordinance of Divine 
Law itself, which, while it bids us not to busy ourselves 
in things beyond us because such things are both 
beyond our merits and also unattainable,^ yet 
earnestly exhorts us to learn all things within our 
reach, which are granted and allowed us, and also 
generously to impart these treasures unto others.'^ 
In obedience to these behests we, ceasing not through 
weariness or want of courage in such search for 
Divine Truth as is possible, yea, and not daring to 
leave without assistance those who possess not a 
greater power of contemplation than ourselves, have 
set ourselves to the task of composition, in no vain 
attempt to introduce fresh teaching, but only seeking 
by more minute and detailed investigations to make 
more clear and plain that which the true Hierotheus 
hath said in brief. 

CHAPTER IV 

Conccniino; "Good,'' " U<^ht:' "Beautiful:' "Desire:;' 
" Ecstasy :' "Jealousy." Also that Evil is neither existent 
nor sprung from a?tytki?tg existent nor inherent in existent 
tilings. 

I. Now let US consider the name of " Good " which 
the Sacred Writers apply to the Supra-Divine God- 
head in a transcendent manner, calling the Supreme 
Divine Existence Itself "Goodness" (as it seems to 
me) in a sense that separates It from the whoje 
creation, and meaning, by this term, to indicate that 
the Good, under the form of Good-Being,^. extends 
Its goodness by the very fact of Its existence unto all 

* Ecclus. iii. 21 ; P<. cxxxi. i. "2 Tim. ii. 2. 

^ cos ouiTiwSes a'y.xfljf. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 8^ 

things.^ For as our sun, through no choice or deH- 
beration, \5ut by the very fact of its existence, gives 
Hght to all those things which have any inherent 
power of sharing its illumination, even so the Goodl 
(which is above the sun, as the transcendent archetype 
by the very mode of its existence is above its faded 
image) sends forth upon all things according to theirW 
receptive powers, the rays of Its undivided Goodness. I ^ 
Through these all Spiritual Beings and faculties and I 
activities (whether perceived or percipient^) began ; I 
through these they exist and possess a life incapable 
of failure or diminution, and are untainted by any 
corruption or death or materiality or birth, being 
separate above all instability and flux and restless- 
ness of change. And whereas they are bodiless and 
immaterial they are perceived by our minds, and 
whereas they are minds themselves, they possess a 
supernatural perception and receive an illumination 
(after their own manner) concerning the hidden 
nature of things,-^ from whence they pass on their 
own knowledge to other kindred spirits. Their rest 
is in the Divine Goodness, wherein they are grounded, 
and This Goodness maintains them and protects 
them and feasts them with Its good things. Through 
desiring this they possess their being and their 
blessedness, and, being conformed thereto (according 

^ God's activity cannot be distinguished from Himself. Cf. p. 8i, 
n. 4. God acts simply by being what He is — by being Good. This 
fits in with the doctrine that He creates the world as being the Object 

of its desire. He attracts it into existence. j 

^ " al VQ-r\ToX Kai pofpal irciaai Kal ohaiai Koi Svudueis Kal evepyeiai. 
Angels and men are percipient Essences; their powers when quiescent 
or dormant on the one hand and active on the other are respectively 
percipient faculties and activities. But angels and men with their 
faculties and activities can also be perceived. Cf. next sentence. 

^ This doctrine may be based on some psychic experience enjoyed by 
D. or recounted to him. George Fox received an experience of this 
kind in which he had an intuitive knowledge concerning the hidden 
properties of plants. See his Diary near the beginning. 

SS DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

to their powers), they are goodly, and, as the Divine 
Law commands, pass on to those that are below 
them, of the gifts which have come unto them from 
the Good. 

2. Hence have they their celestial orders, their 
self-unities, their mutual indwellings, their distinct 
Differences, the faculties which raise the lower unto 
the higher ranks, the providences of the higher for 
those beneath them ; their preservation of the pro- 
perties belonging to each faculty, their unchanging 
introversions,^ their constancy and elevation in their 
search for the Good, and all the other qualities which 
we have described in our book concerning the Pro- 
perties and Orders of the Angels.- Moreover all 
things appertaining to the Celestial Hierarchy, the 
angelic Purifications, the Illuminations and the at- 
tainments which perfect them in all angelic perfection 
and come from the all-creative and originating Good- 
ness, from whence it was given to them to possess 
their created goodness, and to manifest the Secret 
Goodness in themselves, and so to be (as it were) 
the angelic Evangelists of the Divine Silence and 
to stand forth as shining lights revealing Him that 
;|is within the shrine. And next those sacred and 
'' holy Minds, men's souls and all the excellences that 
belong to souls derive their being from the Super- 
i Excellent Goodness. So do they possess intelli- 
gence; so do they preserve their living being ^ 
immortal ; so is it they exist at all, and can, by 
straining towards the living angelic powers, through 

^ Lit. "Revolutions." {al . . . irepl eavTus ajj-erd-rrTUTOi cvueXl^eis.) 
In Dante s Pa radi so the souls of the Redeemed all move with a circular 
motion. This symbolizes an activity of spiritual concentration. Cf. 
iv. S, 9. 

^ The Celestial Hierarchy is among D.'s extant works. It is 
referred to by Dante and was the chief source of mediaeval angelology. 

^ tV ovcthoSt] (cDiiu — i.e. life as such, mere life, the life which they 
share with animals and plants. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 89 

their good guidance mount towards the Bounteous 
Origin of all things ; so can they (according to their 
measure) participate in the illuminations which 
stream from above and share the bounteous gift 
(as far as their power extends) and attain all the 
other privileges which we have recounted in our book, 
Concerrrhig the Soul. Yea, and the same is true, 
if it must needs be said, concerning even the irrational 
souls, or living creatures, which cleave the air, or 
tread the earth, or crawl upon the ground, and those 
which live among the waters or possess an amphibi- 
ous life, and all that live buried and covered in the 
earth — in a word all that possess a sensitive soul 
or life. All these are endowed with soul and life 
because the Good exists. And all plants derive 
from the Good that life which crfves them nourish- 
ment and motion, and even whatsoever has no life 
or soul exists through the Good, and thus came into *] 
the estate of being. ^ 

3. Now if the Good is above all things (as indeed 
It is) Its Formless Nature produces all-form ; and 
in It alone Not-Bein^ is an excess of Beinc^,^ and 
Lifelcssness an excess of Life and Its Mindless state 
is an excess of Wisdom,'^ and all the Attributes of 

^ The existence of the whole creation — angels, men, animals, and 
vegetables, dead matter — is in the Good. It has not, in the ordinary 
sense, made them, but they are grounded in It and draw their existence 
from it and would not exist but for it. They exist not through any 
particuUr activity It exerts but solely because It Is. 

^ " Being" implies finite relations; for one thing must be dist'n- 
guished from another. If a thing is itself, it is not something else ; 
this thing is not that. The Good is beyond this distinction, for nothing 
(on the ultimate plane) is outside It. See Intr., p. 5. 

' This apparently profitless speculation really suggests profound 
spiritual mysteries. Love is the one rtality and love is self-realization 
through self-sacrifice. We must lose our life to find it. We must, 
through the excess of spiritual life within us, seek to be (as it were) 
lifeless, so that this excess of life may still lie ours. And such was the 
Incarnate Life of Christ and such is the Life of God in eternity. So 
too the wisdom of Chiist is, from a worldly point of view, foolishness. , 

G 

eio DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the Good we express in a transcendent manner by 
negative images.^ And if it is reverent so to say, 
even that which is not desires the all-transcendent 
Good and struggles itself, by its denial of all things, 
to find its rest in the Good which verily transcends 
all being. 

4. Nay, even the foundation and the bound- 
aries of the heavens (as we forgot to say while 

For worldly wisdom = self-seeking, but the Wisdom of Christ = self- 
abandonment. In fact Heavenly Wisdom = Love. Cf. i Cor. i. 25 ; 
iii. 18, 19. 

^ That which Is Not = Evil {vide infra in this chapter). Cf. Inlr. , 
p. 20. Tiie Good is Non-Existent as being beyond existence ; evil is 
non-existent as being contrary to it. Thus evil is by its very nature 
trying as it were to be Good. 

Tnis also looks like a barren paradox and yet it may contain a spiritual 
truth. Evil is, in the words of Goethe, "the spirit that denies": It 
is destructive, e.g. injustice, cruelty, immorality, etc., undermine or 
overwhelm civilization and so destroy it. But the Good supersedes 
civihzation and so in a sense destroys it. Cf. the eschatological teach- 
ing of Christ. Civilization, art, morality, etc., are good so iar as they 
go, but imperfect. Being halfway, as it were, between Good and 
evil, and being of necessity neither wholly the one nor wholly the 
other, they must disappear wherever the one or the other completely 
triumphs. Christ's teaching on Marriage illustrates this. Marriage 
is sacred, and divorce is wrong, because it seeks to abolish Marriage. 
And yet Marriage is finally abolished in heaven. St. Paul's antithesis 
of Law and Spirit is another example. The Law is good and yet is 
not the Good. Sin is contrary to the Law, but the Spirit is contrary 
to the Law in another sense and so supersedes it. So too with art. A 
modern vandal is indifferent to beauty because he is below it, a 
Mediaeval Saint became sometimes indifferent to beauty by rising to a 
super-sensuous plane above it. Greek idolatry is a higher thing than 
Calvinism, but the Christianity of the New Testament is a higher 
thing than Greek idolatry. The Saints sometimes employ negatives 
in one sense and those who are not saints employ the same negatives 
in another ; whence disaster. Much of Nietzsche's language [e. g. 
the phrase "Beyond Good and Evil") might have been used by a 
Medieval Christian Mystic; but Nietzsche did not generally mean 
what the Christian Mystic would have meant by it. Soijk too with 
pain. All pain is in itself bad, being a negation of our personality. 
And yet a self-abnegation springing from Love which bravely bears 
pain is the highest kind of Good. " The devil . . . put it into the heart 
of Judas to betray" Christ, and yet the Passion was in accordance with 
" the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God." 

THE DIVINE NAMES 91 

thinking of other matters) owe their origin to 
the Good, Such is this universe, which lessens not 
nor grows, and such the noiseless movements (if 
noiseless they be)^ of the vast heavenly revolution, 
and such the starry orders whose light is fixed as 
an ornament of heaven, and such the various wander- 
ings of certain stars — especially the repeated and 
returning orbits of those two luminaries to which 
the Scripture giveth the name of " Great," ^ whereby 
we reckon our days and nights and months and 
years ; which define the round of time and temporal 
events and give them measurement, sequence, and ^ 
cohesion. And what shall I say concerning the j 
sun's rays considered in themselves? From the/ 
Good comes the light which is an image of Good- 
ness ; wherefore the Good is described by the name 
of '* Light," being the archetype thereof which is 
revealed in that image. For as the Goodness of the 
all-transcendent Godhead reaches from the highest 
and most perfect forms of being unto the lowest, 1 
and still is beyond them all, remaining superior to ' 
those above and retaining those below in its embrace, 
and so gives light to all things that can receive It, 
and creates and vitalizes and maintains and perfects 
them, and is the Measure ^ of the Universe and its 
Eternity,* its Numerical Principle,^ its Order, its 

^ ei ovTcc xph (payaL. D. is alluding to the ancient belief in the 
Music of the Spheres. 

^ Gen. i. 16. 

^ lj.4rpov. All things have their pre-existent limits in the Super- 
Essence. 

* alwv — i.e. The Permanent Principle underlying its temporal process. 
This and the next phrase explain what is meant by the words "the 
Measure of the universe." The Good sets bounds to the world 
(i) temporally, because Eternity is the Fount of Time, (2) spatially, 
because Transcendent Unity is the Fount of Number. All temporal 
things are permanent in God ; and all diversities are one in Him. 

^ All number has its roots in the Good. Elsewhere D. says that 
the Good being beyond Unity, is a Multiplicity as well as an Unity. 
Cf. Intr., p. 5. 

\ 

> 

92 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Embracing Power, its Cause and its End : ^ even so 
this great, all-bright and ever-shining sun, which is 
the visible image of the Divine Goodness, faintly re- 
echoing' the activity of the Good, illumines all things 
that can receive its light while retaining the utter 
simplicity of light, and expands above and below 
throughout the visible world the beams of its 
"own radiance. And if there is aught that does not 
share them, this is not due to any weakness or 
deficiency in its distribution of the light, but is due 
to the unreceptiveness of those creatures which do 
not attain sufficient singleness to participate therein. 
For verily the light passeth over many such sub- 
stances and enlightens those which are beyond them, 
and there is no visible thing unto which the light 
reacheth not in the exceeding greatness of its proper 
radiance.- Yea, and it contributes to the birth of 
material bodies and brings them unto life, and 
nourishes them that they may grow, and perfects 
and purifies and renews them. And the light is the 
measure and the numerical principle of seasons and 
of days and of all our earthly Time ; for 'tis the 
selfsame light (though then without a form) which, 
Moses the Divine declares, marked even that first 
period of three days which was at the beginning of 
time. And like as Goodness draweth all things to 
Itself, and is the great Attractive Power which unites 
things that are sundered ^ (being as It is : the God- 
head and the Supreme Fount and Producer of Unity) ; 

^ Here we get once more the Aristotelian classification of causes. 
The Good is : — 

(i) Formal Cause (i) immanent in the world (Order — Ta|ts) ; 
(2) containing the world (Embracing Power — TrepioxTj). 

(ii) Efficient Cause (Cause — alria). 

fiii) Final Cause (End — reAos). 

^ The light permeates water but it does not permeate a stone. It 
passes over the stone and permeates the water beyond it. 

^ apxifTuvdycoyos eari tuv €(fK€5acr/j.euccv. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 93 

and like as all things desire It as their beginning, 
their cohesive power and end ; and like as 'tis the 
Good (as saith the Scripture) from which all things 
were made and are (having been brought into exist- 
ence thence as from a Perfect Cause) ; and like as in 
the Good all things subsist, being kept and controlled 
in an almighty Receptacle ; ^ and like as unto the 
Good all things are turned (as unto the proper End 
of each) ; and like as after the Good all things do | 
yearn — those that have mind and reason seeking It 
by knowledge, those that have perception seeking. 
It by perception, those that have no perception seek- ■ 
ing It by the natural movement of their vital instinct, 
and those that are without life and have mere 
existence seeking It by their aptitude for that bare 
participation whence this mere existence is theirs ^ — 
even so doth the light (being as it were Its visible 
image) draw together all things and attract them 
unto Itself: those that can see, those that have 
motion, those that receive Its light and warmth, 
those that are merely held in being by Its rays ; ^ 
whence the sun is so called because it summeth^ all 
things and uniteth the scattered elements of the world. 
All material things desire the sun, for they desire 
either to see or to move and to receive light and 
warmth and to be maintained in existence by the 
light. I say not (as was feigned by the ancient 
myth) that the sun is the God and Creator of this 
Universe, and therefore takes the visible world 
under his special care ; but I say that the "invisible 
things of God from the creation of the world 
are clearly seen, being understood by the things 

^ ws iu TTaVTOKparopiKCf irvO/jLeui. 
- (i) Man, (2) Animal, (3) Vegetable, (4) Matter. 
^ This seems to imply that matter itself could not exist without the 
influence of the light. Perhaps this belief rests on Gen. i. I, 2. 
■* 7j\io5 oTi iravra aoWrj iroiu. With the ;zai/ etymology of. iv .5. 

94 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

that are made, even His eternal power and God- 
head." 1 

5. But these things are dealt with in the" Symbolic 
Divinity." Here I desire to declare what is the 
spiritual meaning of the name " Light " as belonging 
to the Good.^ The Good God is called Spiritual Light 
because He tills every heavenly mind with spiritual 
light, and drives all ignorance and error from all 
souls where they have gained a lodgment,, and giveth 
them all a share of holy light and purges their 
spiritual eyes from the mist of ignorance that sur- 
rounds them, and stirs and opens the eyes which 
are fast shut and weighed down with darkness, and 
gives them first a moderate illumination, then (when 
they taste the Light and desire It more) He giveth 
Himself in greater measure and shineth in more 
abundance on them " because they have loved much," 
yand ever He constraineth them according to their 

powers of looking upwards. 

6. And so that Good which is above all light is 
called a Spiritual Light because It is an Originating 
Beam and an Overflowing Radiance, illuminating 
with its fullness every Mind above the world, around 
it, or within it,^ and renewing all their spiritual 
powers, embracing them all by Its transcendent com- 
pass and exceeding them all by Its transcendent 
elevation. And It contains within Itself, in a simple 
form, the entire ultimate principle of light ; ^ and is 

^ Rom. i. 20. The sun is not personal or supra- personal. But its 
impersonal activity is an emblem, as it were, of God's supra- personal 
activity. 

2 Two worlds: (i) Nature, (2) Grace. God is revealed in both; 
the former was apparently the subject o[ the Sy/udo/ic Divinity; the 
latter is that of the present treatise, 

^ i.e. Men and different orders of angels. 

•* Material light is diffused in space and hence is divisible. _ The 
Spiritual Light is indivisible, being totally present to each illuminated 
mind. Hence the Spiritual Light is simple in a way that the material 
light is not. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 95 

the Transcendent Archetype of Light ; and, while 
bearing the Hght in its womb, It exceeds it in quaUty 
and precedes it in time ; and so conjoineth together 
all spiritual and rational beings, uniting them in one.^ 
For as ignorance leadeth wanderers astray from one 
another, so doth the presence of Spiritual Light join 
and unite together those that are being illuminated, 
and perfects them and converts them toward that 
which truly Is — yea, converts them from their mani- 
fgld false opinions and unites their different percep- 
tions, or rather fancies, into one true, pure and coherent 
knowledge, and filleth them with one unifying light. 

7. This Good is described by the Sacred Writers 
as Beautiful and as Beauty, as Love or Beloved, and 
by all other Divine titles which befit Its beautifying 
and gracious fairness. Now there is a distinction 
between the titles " Beautiful " and " Beauty " applied 
to the all-embracing Cause. For we universally dis- 
tinguish these two titles as meaning respectively the 
qualities shared and the objects which share therein. 
We give the name of " Beautiful " to that which 
shares in the quality of beauty, and we give the 
name of "Beauty" to that common quality by which 
all beautiful things are beautiful. But the Super- 
Essential Beautiful is called " Beauty " because of that 
quality which It imparts to all things severally ac- 
cording to their nature,^ and because It is the Cause" 
of the harmony and splendour in all things, flashing 
forth upon them all, like light, the beautifying com- 
munications of Its originating ray ; and because It 
summons all things to fare unto Itself (from whence 
It hath the name of "Fairness"^), and because It 

^ All our spiritual and mental powers are due to the same Spiritual 
Light working in each one of us. Cf. Wordsworth: "Those mys- 
teries of Being which have made and shall continue evermore to make 
of the whole human race one brotherhood." 

2 Cf. ii. S. 

^ ws TvavTa TTphs eouTo Ka\ovv {odfu Kot KaWos Aeyerai). Cf. iv. 4. 

96 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

draws all things together in a state of mutual inter- 
penetration. And it is called " Beautiful " because 
\l It is All-Beautiful and more than Beautiful, and is 
B eternally, unvaryingly, unchangeably Beautiful ; in- 
capable of birth or death or growth or decay ; and 
not beautiful in one part and foul in another ; nor yet 
at one time and not at another ; nor yet beautiful in 
relation to one thing but not to another ; nor yet 
beautiful in one place and not in another (as if It 
were beautiful for some but were not beautiful for 
others); nay, on the contrary. It is, in Itself and by 
Itself, uniquely and eternally beautiful, and from 
beforehand It contains in a transcendent manner the 
originating beauty of everything that is beautiful. 
For in the simple and supernatural nature belonging 
to the world of beautiful things,^ all beauty an<d all 
that is beautiful hath its unique and pre-existent 
Cause. From this Beautiful all things possess their 
existence, each kind being beautiful in its own manner, 
and the Beautiful causes the harmonies and sympa- 
thies and communities of all things. And by the 
Beautiful all things are united together and the Beau- 
tiful is the beginning of all things, as being the 
Creative Cause which moves the world and holds all 
things in existence by their yearning for their own 
Beauty. And It is the Goal of all things, and their 
Beloved, as being their Final Cause (for 'tis the desire 
of the Beautiful that brings them all into existence), 
and It is their Exemplar- from which they derive 
their definite limits; and hence the Beautiful is the 

^ The ultimate nature of all beautiful things is a simple and super- 
natural Element common to them all and manifested in them all. The 
law of life is that it has its true and ultimate being outside it. The 
true beauty of all beautiful things is outside them in God. Hence all 
great art (even when not directly religious) tends towards the Super- 
natural or has a kind of supernatural atmosphere. 

2 irapa^ay/j.aTiKov — t'.e. the ultimate Law of their being, the Jciea 
or Type. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 97 

fsame as the Good, inasmuch as all things, in all 
causation, desire the Beautiful and Good ; nor is there 
anything in the world but hath a share in the Beau- 
tiful and Good. Moreover our Discourse will dare 
to aver that even the Non-Existent ^ shares in the 
Beautiful and Good, for Non-Existence ^ is itself 
beautiful and good when, by the Negation of all, . 
Attributes, it is ascribed Super-Essentially to God. 
This One Good and Beautiful is in Its oneness the 
Cause of all the many beautiful and good things. 
Hence comes the bare existence of all things, and 
hence their unions,^ their differentiations, their identi- 
ties, their differences,* their similarities, their dissimi- 
larities, their communions of opposite things,^ the 
unconfused distinctions of their interpenetrating 
elements ; ^ the providences of the Superiors,' the 
interdependence of the Co-ordinates, the responses . 
of the Inferiors,^ the states of permanence wherein 
all keep their own identity. And hence again the 
intercommunion of all things according to the power 
of each ; their harmonies and sympathies (which do 
not merge them) and the co-ordinations of the whole 

^ rh UT] tv — i.e. that mere nothingness which is manifested either 
as (i) formless "matter" or (2) evil. See Intr., p. 20. 

- Evil is non-existent in one sense. The Good is Non-Existent in 
another. Cf. p. 90, n. i. 

^ €Vci>aeLS, SiaKpiaeis, ravTorriTes, erepoTTjres. 

* Hence parts are united into wholes and wholes articulated into 
parts, and hence each thing is identical with iiself and distinct from 
ever>'thing else. 

^ e.g. Moisture interpenetrates the solid earth, 

" e.g. In a piece of wet ground the water u water and the earth is 
earth, 

^ al irpovoiai rccv vireprepccu. Lit, "the providences," etc., ^..C- 
the influence of the light without which, D. holds, the material world 
could not exist. Or this and the following may refer to different ranks 
of angels, or to angels and men. 

^ al iina-Tpocpairwu KaraScecTTep-xu. Lit. "the conversions," etc. 
e.g. jNIatter ^^according to his theory) responds to the influence of the 
light. And men are influenced by angels, and the lower angels by the 
higher. 

98 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

universe ; ^ the mixture of elements therein and the 
indestructible ligaments of things ; the ceaseless suc- 
cession of the recreative process in Minds and Souls 
and in Bodies ; for all have rest and movement in 
That Which, above all rest and all movement, grounds 
each one in its own natural laws and moves each one 
to its own proper movement.^ 

8. And the Heavenly Minds are spoken of as 
moving (i) in a circular manner, when they are 
united to the beginningless and endless illuminations 
of the Beautiful and Good ; ^ (2) straight forward, 
when they advance to the providential guidance of 
those beneath them, and unerringly accomplish their 
designs ;^ and (3) with spiral motion, because, even 
while providentially guiding their inferiors, they 
remain immutably in their self-identity,^ turning un- 
ceasingly around the Beautiful and Good whence all 
identity is sprung. 

9. And the soul hath (i) a circular movement — 
viz. an introversion ^ fronx things without and the 
unified concentration ^ of its spiritual powers — which 
gives it a kind of fixed devolution, and, turning it 
from the multiplicity without, draws it together first 
into itself,^ and then (after it has reached this unified 
condition) unites it to those powers which are a 

^ The point of this section is that besides the particular and partial 
harmonies already mentioned, there is a universal harmony uniting the 
whole world in one system. 

^ In the two following sections the difference between angelic and 
human activity is that the angels confer spiritual enlightenment and 
men receive it. Angels are in a state of attainment and men are 
passing through a process of attainment. 

^ Vide supra on Introversion (p. 88, n. i). 

■* They are united to God in the centre of their being, by ceaselessly 
entering into themselves. They help us by going forth, as it were, 
from themselves. 

^ Their true self-identity is rooted in God. See Intr. , pp. 31 f. 

* 7; eis kavrriv elcro^os. 

' In souls being unified and simplified. See Intr., p. 25. 

^ Cf. St. Aug. " ascendat per se supra se." 

THE DIVINE NAMES 99 

perfect Unit^^^and thus leads it on unto the Beautiful \ 
and Good Which is beyond all things, and is One j 
and is the Same, without beginning or end. (2) And 
the soul moves with a spiral motion whensoever 
(according to its capacity) it is enlightened with 
truths of Divine Knowledge, not in the special unity' 
of its being- but by the process of its discursive j 
reason and by mingled and alternative activities.^! 
(3) And it moves straight forward when it does not I 
enter into itself to feel the stirrings of its spiritual j 
unity (for this, as I said, is the circular motion), I 
but goes forth unto the things around it and feels | 
an influence coming even from the outward world, 
as from a rich abundance of cunnin<7 tokens, 
drawing it unto the simple unity of contemplative 
acts.^ 

10. These three motions, and also the similar 
motions we perceive in this material world and (far 
anterior to these) the individual permanence, rest and 

^ z. e. To the Angels and the perfected Saints. There is a somewhat 
similar thought in Wordsworth's Prelude : "To hold fit converse with 
the spiritual world / and with the generations of mankind / spread over 
time past, present, and to come / age after age till time shall be no more." 
This thought in Wordsworth and in D. is an experience and not a 
speculation. 

^ This spiritual unity was by later Mystical writers called the apex of 
the soul, or the ground, or the spark. Another name is syiUei-esis 
or syuderesis. 

^ There is an element of intuition in all discursive reasoning because 
all argument is based on certain axioms which are beyond proof {e.g. 
the law of universal causation). In fact tlie validity of our laws of 
thought is an axiom and therefore perceived by intuition. In the 
present passage D. means something deeper. He means that formal 
Dogmatic Theology advances round a central core of spiritual experi- 
ence by which it must constantly be verified, Pectus facit theolpgitm. 
Whenever theology even attempts to be purely deductive it goes wrong 
{e.g. Calvinism). If it is not rooted in intuition it will be rooted in 
fancies, 

* In D,'s classification Introversion and Sensation are both unmixed 
movements, for each leads to a kind of perception. Discursive reason- 
ing is a mixed movement because it does not lead to a direct perception 
and yet it must contain an element of perception. 

loo DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

grounding of each Kind^ have their Efficient, Formal, 
and Final Cause in the Beautiful and Good ; Which 
is above all rest and motion ; through Which all rest 
and motion come ; and from Which, and in Which, 
and unto Which, and for the sake of Which thev are. 
For from It and through It are all Being and life of 
spirit and of soul ; and hence in the realm of nature 
magnitudes both small, co-equal and great ; hence all 
the measured order and the proportions of things, 
which, by their different harmonies, commingle into 
wholes made up of co-existent parts ; hence this 
universe, w^iich is both One and Many; the conjunc- 
tions of parts together ; the unities underlying all 
multiplicity, and the perfections of the individual 
wholes ; hence Quality, Quantity, Magnitude and 
Infinitude; hence fusions^ and differentiations, hence 
all infinity and all limitation ; all boundaries, ranks, 
transcendences,^ elements and forms, hence all Being, 
all Power, all Activity, all Condition,^ all Perception, 
all Reason, all Intuition, all Apprehension, all Under- 
jstanding, All Communion^ — in a word, all that is 
•'comes from the Beautiful and Good, hath its very 
existence in the Beautiful and Good, and turns to- 
, wards the Beautiful and Good. Yea, all that exists 
and that comes into being, exists and comes into 
being because of the Beautiful and Good ; and unto 
this Object all things gaze and by It are moved and 
are conserved, and for the sake of It, because of It 
and in It, existeth every originating Principle — be 

^ i. e. The types of things existent in the permanent spiritual world 
before the things were created in this transitory material world; the 
Platonic Ideas. There was also a Jewish belief in such a pre-existence 
of things. Cf. Rev. iv. 1 1 (R. V.). 

" (TvyKpicTeis. 

"* virepoxai. e^is. 

^ 'iycocns. The word is here used in the most comprehensive manner 
to include physical communion, sense-perception, and spiritual com- 
munion of souls with one another and with God. 

THE DIVINE NAMES loi 

this Exemplar,^ or be it Final or Efficient or Formal 
or Material Cause — in a word, all Beginning, all Con- 
servation, and all Ending, or (to sum it up) all things 
that have being are derived from the Beautiful and i 
Good. Yea, and all things that have no substantial 1 
being^ super-essentially exist in the Beautiful and 
Good : this is the transcendent Beginning and the 
transcendent Goal of the univ^erse. For, as Holy 
Scripture saith : " Of Him, and through Him, and to 
Him, are all things : to whom be glory for ever. 
Amen."^ And hence all things must desire and yearn 
for and must love the Beautiful and the Good. Yea, _ 
and because of It and for Its sake the inferior thingfs 
yearn for the superior under the mode of attraction, 
and those of the same rank have a yearning towards 
their peers under the mode of mutual communion ; 
and the superior have a yearning towards their in- 
feriors under the mode of providential kindness ; and 
each hath a yearning towards itself under the mode 
of cohesion,* and all things are moved by a longing 
for the Beautiful and Good, to accomplish every' 
outward work and form every act of will. And 
true reasoning will also dare to affirm that even the 
Creator of all things Himself yearneth after all 
things, createth all things, perfecteth all things, con- 
serveth all things, attracteth all things, through 

^ The exemplar is the formal cause before this is actualized in the 
object embodying it. The principle in an oak tree constituting it an 
oak is the formal cause. But before there were any oak trees this 
principle existed as an exemplar. The final cause is the beneficent 
purpose the oak tree serves. In the Aristotelian classification exemplar 
and final cause would be classed together as final cause. 

^ This means either (i) that actually non-existent things {e.g. the 
flowers of next year which have not yet appeared, or those of Inst year, 
which are now dead) have an eternal place in God ; or else (2) that evil 
things have their true being, under a different form, in Him. 

^ Rom. xt. 36. 

* In the whole of this passage D. is thinking primarily of Angels and 
men, or at least of sentient creatures. But he would see analogies 
of such activity in the inanimate material world. 

102 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

\ \ nothing but excess of Goodness. Yea, and the 
Divine Yearning is naught else than a Good Yearn- 
ing towards the Good for the mere sake of the Good. 
For the Yearning which createth all the goodness of 
the world, being pre-existent abundantly in the Good 
Creator, allowed Him not to remain unfruitful in 
Himself, but moved Him to exert the abundance of 
His powers in the production of the universe.^ 

II. And let no man think we are contradicting the 
Scripture when we solemnly proclaim the title of 
"Yearning." For 'tis, methinks, unreasonable and 
foolish to consider the phrases rather than the mean- 
ing ; and such is not the way of them that wish for 
insight into things Divine, but rather of them that 
receive the empty sounds without letting them pass 
beyond their ears, and shut them out, not wishing to 
know what such and such a phrase intends, nor how 
they ought to explain it in other terms expressing 
the same sense more clearly. Such men are under 
the dominion of senseless elements and lines, and of 
uncomprehended syllables and phrases which pene- 
trate not into the perception of their souls, but make 
a dumb noise outside about their lips and hearing : 

^ els TO irpaKTiKeveaOai Kara, rrjv airdvrwv yevvr]TiKT]y vfrepPoKt'jP. 
Desire = want. And want in us = imperfection ; but in God it = that 
excess of perfection, whereby God is " Perfectionless." Thus the words 
"super-excellence," "super-unity," etc., are not meaningless super- 
latives. They imply an impulse towards motion within the Divine 
Stillness, a Thirst in the Divine Fullness. Cf. Julian of Norwich : 
Revelations, ch. xxxi. "... There is a property in God of thirst and 
longing." The categories of Greek Philosophy are static. The super- 
latives of D. imply something dynamic, though the static element 
remains. In much modern philosophy (the Pragmatists and also 
Jiergson) dynamic conceptions are prominent ; but the tendency here is 
for the static to disappear instead of being subsumed as it is in D. The 
result, or the cause, is that Grace is lost sight of and only Nature 
is perceived. Really Absolutism and Pragmatism are not mutually 
exclusive ; for Rest and Motion co-exist as transcended elements in 
(iod. This is the paradox of perfect Love which is both at rest and in 
motion, both satisfied and unsatisfied. Cf. Julian of Norwich : " I had 
Him and I wanted Him" {Revelations^ ch. x.). 

THE DIVINE NAMES 103 

holding it unlawful to explain the number "four" by 
calling it "twice two," or a straight line by calling it 
a " direct line " or the " Motherland " by calling it the 
" Fatherland," or so to interchange any other of those 
terms which under varieties of language possess all 
the same signification. Need is there to understand _ 

that in proper truth wje^o but use the elements and 

syllables and phrases and written terms and words as 
an aid to our senses; inasmuch as when our soul is 
moved by spiritual energies unto spiritual things, our 
senses, together with the thing which they perceive, 
are all superfluous ; even as the spiritual faculties ar^ 
also such when the soul, becoming Godlike,^ meets ii 
the blind embraces of an incomprehensible union the 
Rays of the unapproachable Light. ^ Now when 
the mind, through the things of sense, feels an eager 
stirring to mount towards spiritual contemplations,^ 
it values most of all those aids from its perceptions 
which have the plainest form, the clearest words, the 
things most distinctly seen, because, when the objects 
of sense are in confusion, then the senses themselves 
cannot present their message truly to the mind. But 
that we may not seem, in saying this, to be setting 
aside Holy Scripture, let those who blame the title 
of " Yearning " hear what the Scripture saith : 
" Yearn for her and she shall keep thee ; exalt her and 
she shall promote thee ; she shall bring thee to honour 
when thou dost embrace her." '^ And there are many 

2 This clause can only have been written by one for whom Unknow- 
ing was a personal experience. The previous clause shows how there 
is a negative element even in the Method of Affirmation. Sense-per- 
ception must first give way to spiritual intuition, just as this must finally 
give way to Unknowing. (Cf. St. John of the Cross's Dar/; Nigh/, on 
three kinds of night.) All progress is a transcendence and so, in a 
sense, a Via Negativa. Cf. St. Aug., Transcendc mundum ei sape 
animum, transcende animuni ei sape Deum. 

^ This shows that the Via Negativa starts from something positive. 
It is a transcendence, not a mere negati(in. * Prov. iv. 6, J>i 

104 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

other such Scriptural passages which speak of this 
yearning. 

12. Nay, some of our writers about lioly things 
have thought the title of " Yearning " diviner than 
that of " Love." Ignatius the Divine writes : " He 
whom I yearn for is crucified." ^ And in the '* Intro- 
ductions ' of Scripture^ thou wilt find some one 
sa)'ing concerning the Divine Wisdom : " I yearned 
for her beauty." Let us not, therefore, shrink from this 
title of "Yearning," nor be perturbed and affrighted 
by aught that any man may say about it. For 
methinks the Sacred Writers regard the titles " Love " 
and " Yearning " as of one meaning ; but preferred, 
when speaking of Yearning in a heavenly sense, to 
qualify it with the world " real " ^ because of the incon- 
venient pre-notion of such men. For whereas the 
title of " Real Yearning" is employed not merely by 
ourselves but even by the Scriptures, mankind (not 
grasping the unity intended when \' earning is ascribed 
to God) fell by their own propensity into the notion 

^ 6 i/j.hs ''Epctis iaravpciDTai. Ignatius Ep. ad Rom. § 6. But possibly 
St. Ignatius means : " My earthly affections are crucified," St. Ignatius 
wrote just before being martyred, at the beginning of the second century. 
This reference would alone be sufficient to make the authenticity of the 
Dionysian writings improbable. 

[It is perhaps impossible to determine whether Ignatius meant by the 
words " my Love is crucified " to refer to Jesus or to him'self. The latter 
is supported by Zahn and by Lightfoot, the former by Origen, 
Prologue to Commentary on Canticles. " Nee puto quod culpari possit, 
si quis Deum, sicut Joannis, charitatur, ita ipse amorem nominit. 
Denejire memini, aliquem sanctorum dixisse Ignatium nomine de 
Christo : Mens autem amor crucifixus est : nee reprehendi eum per hoc 
dignum judico." Much further evidence is given in Jacobson's 
Apostolic Fathers (p. 2>ll)^ Jacobson himself supports it, observing 
that the Greek commemoration of Ignatius takes the words in this 
sense. Whether Dionysius followed Origen or not, his exposition is 
very interesting and is quite pos-ibly the true. See also the translator's 
note on tpcos. Ed.] 

" ^v Tcus Trpo€i(ray(i}ya7s tS>v Xoyiwv. Apparently this was a title 
of the books ascribed to Solomon. The present reference is Wisdom 
viii. 2. 

^ Tots Oeiois fjLaWov avaOelpai rhu tvrws tpuna. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 105 

of a partial, physical and divided quality, which is 
not true Yearning but a vain image of Real Yearning, 
or rather a lapse therefrom.^ For mankind at large 
cannot grasp the simplicity of the one Divine Yearning, 
and hence, because of the offence it gives to most 
men, it is used concerning the Divine Wisdom to 
lead and raise them up to the knowledge of the Real 
Yearning until they are set free from all offence 
thereat ; and often on the other hand when it was 
possible that base minds should suppose that which 
is not convenient, the word that is held in greater 
reverence is used concerning ourselves.^ " Thy love," 
says some one, " came upon me like as the love of 
women. "^ To those who listen aright to Holy Scrip- 
ture, the word " Love " is used by the Sacred Writers 
in Divine Revelation with the same meaning as the 
word " Yearning." It means a faculty of unifying 
and conjoining and of producing a special commingling 
together "* in the Beautiful and Good : a faculty which 
pre-exists for the sake of the Beautiful and Good, and 
is diffused from this Origin and to this End, and holds 
together things of the same order by a mutual con- 
nection, and moves the highest to take thought for 
those below and fixes the inferior in a state which 
seeks the higher. 

13. And the Divine Yearning brings ecstasy, not 
allowing them that are touched thereby to belong 
unto themselves but only to the objects of their 
affection. This principle is shown by superior things 

^ Earthly desire is below static conditions, the Divine Desire is above 
them. 

- i. e. The word cpws is sometimes used concerning God to stimulate 
our minds by its unexpectedness and so to make us penetrate beyond 
the word to the mystery hinted at by it. On the other hand ayaTTTj or 
aydTrrjcris is sometimes used concerning human relationships to prevent 
any degrading associations from entering in. 

^ 2 Sam. i. 26. 

* Kai iffTL TovTo dwdixcws ivoTToiou ical (TuvSeTiicTis ua'. Stcifj e^SvTwi 
cruyKpaTiKris. 

H 

io6 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

through their providential care for their inferiors, and 
by those which are co-ordinate through the mutual 
bond uniting them, and by the inferior through their 
diviner tendency towards the highest. And hence 
the great Paul, constrained by the Divine Yearning, 
and having received a share in its ecstatic power, 
says, with inspired utterance, " I live, and yet not I but 
Christ liveth in me": true Sweetheart that he was 
and (as he says himself) being beside himself unto 
God, and not possessing his own life but possessing 
and loving the life of Him for Whom he yearned. 
And we must dare to affirm (for 'tis the truth) that 
|the Creator of the Universe Himself, in His Beautiful 
and Good Yearning towards the Universe, is through 
the excessive yearning of His Goodness, transported 
outside of Himself in His providential activities 
towards all things that have being, and is touched 
by the sweet spell of Goodness, Love and Yearning, 
and so is drawn from His transcendent throne above 
Ifi all things, to dwell within the heart of all things, 
jj through a super-essential and ecstatic power whereby 
He yet stays within Himself.^ Hence Doctors call 
Him " jealous," because He is vehement in His Good 
Yearning towards the world, and because He stirs men 
up to a zealous search of yearning desire for Him, and 
thus shows Himself zealous inasmuch as zeal is always 
felt concerning things which are desired, and inasmuch 
as He hath a zeal concerning the creatures for which 
He careth. In short, both the Yearning and its Object 
belong to the Beautiful and the Good, and have 
therein their pre-existent roots and because of it 
exist and come into being. 

14. But why speak the Sacred Writers of God 
sometimes as Yearning and Love, sometimes as the 

^ This finely suggests that the " Selfhood" of God is selfless. Vide 
Intr., p. 9. Note also the combination of rest and motion alluded 
to here. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 107 

Object of these emotions ? In the one case He is the 
Cause and Producer and Begetter of the thing signified, 
in the other He is the Thing signified Itself. Now the 
reason why He is Himself on the one hand moved by 
the quality signified, and on the other causes motion 
by it,^ is that He moves and leads onward Himself 
unto Himself.- Therefore on the one hand they call 
Him the Object of Love and Yearning as being 
Beautiful and Good, and on the other they call Him 
Yearning and Love as being a Motive-Power leading- 
all things to Himself, Who is the only ultimate Beauti- 
ful and Good — yea, as being His own Self-Revelation 
and the Bounteous Emanation of His own Tran- 
scendent Unity, a Motion of Yearning simple, self- 
moved, self-acting, pre-existent in the Good, and 
overflowing from the Good into creation, and once 
again returning to the Good. And herein the 
Divine Yearning showeth especially its beginningless 
and endless nature, revolving in a perpetual circle for 
the Good, from the Good, in the Good, and to the Good, 
with unerring revolution, never varying its centre or 
direction, perpetually advancing and remaining and 
returning to Itself. This by Divine inspiration our 
renowned Initiator hath declared in his Hymns of 
Yearfiing, which it will not be amiss to quote and thus 
to bring unto a holy consummation our Discourse 
concerning^ this matter. 

15. Words of the most holy Hierotheus from the 
Hymns of Yearnmg. " Yearning (be it in God or 
Angel, or Spirit, or Animal Life, or Nature) must be 

■^ Yearning is a moven^.ent in the soul ; the Object of Yearning causes 
such movement in the souh 

^ Cf. St. Thomas Aquinas : Detis j/iovet sicitt desideratum a Se Ipso. 
Cf. Spenser: "He loved Himself because Himself was fair." Cf. 
Plato's Doctrine of epojs. This Yearning is eternally fulfilled in the 
Trinity. Cf. Dante: "O somma luce che sola in Te sidi / sola T' 
intendi e da Te intelletta / cd intcndente 'I'e ami ed arridi." It is 
struggling towards actualization in this world. 

io8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

conceived of as an uniting and commingling power 
which moveth the higher things to a care for those 
below them, moveth co-equals to a mutual communion, 
and finally moveth the inferiors to turn towards their 
superiors in virtue and position." 

1 6. Words of the same, from the same Hymns of 
Yeajviing. " Forasmuch as we have set down in 
order the manifold yearnings springing from the One, 
and have duly explained what are the powers of 
knowledge and of action belonging to the yearnings 
springing from the One, and have duly explained 
what are the powers of knowledge and of action 
proper to the Yearnings within ^ the world and 
above ^ it (wherein, as hath been already explained, 
the higher place belongeth unto those ranks and 
orders of Yearning which are spiritually felt and 
perceived, and highest amongst these are the Divine 
Yearnings in the very core of the Spirit towards those 
Beauties which have their veritable Being Yonder),^ 
let us now yet further resume and compact them all 
together into the one and concentrated Yearning 
which is the Father of them all, and let us collect 
together into two kinds their general desiderative 

^ /. e. The social instinct in men and animals, and the impulse of 
mutual attraction in the inanimate world. 

^ The manifold yearnings of the spirit for Truth, Beauty, Spiritual 
Love, etc. 

^ i.e. Of the two classes just alluded to the second is the higher ; 
and of those yearnings which belong to this class the most transcendent 
are the highest. Religion is higher than secular life, and the highest 
element in Religion is other-worldly. 

The received text reads — 

"The Divine Yearnings in the very core," etc., ol avrouor^roL koI 
6€7oi Twv ovTcos e/cel KaKws epuTcou. I have ventured to amend epwrccv 
to epcDTGs. If the MS from which the received text is derived belonged 
to a family having seventeen or eighteen letters to a line then this 
word would probably come at the end of a line (since there are 
260 letters to the end of it, from the beginning of the section), and 
would have the 6v- of uvtws just above it and the -ou- of avrovSriToi just 
above that, and ipwrwu at the end of the line next but one above that. 
This would make the corruption of epwres into 4pwTwv very natural. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 109 

powers, over which the entire mastery and primacy 
is in that Incomprehensible Causation of all yearning 
which Cometh from Beyond them all, and whereunto 
the universal yearning of all creatures presseth 
upwards according to the nature of each." 

17. Words of the same, from the same Hymns of 
Yearning. " Let us once more collect these powers 
into one and declare that^there is but One Simple 
Power Which of Itself moveth all things to be 
mingled in an unity, starting from the Good and 
going unto the lowest of the creatures and thence 
again returning through all stages in due order unto 
the Good, and thus revolving from Itself, and through 
Itself and upon Itself^ and towards Itself, in an 
unceasing orbit." y 

18. Now some one, perhaps, will say: "If the 

^ "That which is not "= formless matter. Plotinus (^;/«. i. 8. 3) 
defines the Non-Existent as the world of sense- perception. It is, as it 
were, the stuff of which all things perceived by the senses are made. 
This stuff cannot exist without some kind of " form," and therefore, if 
entirely bereft of all " form," would simply disappear into nothingness. 
Thus, apart from that element of "form" which it derives from the 
Good, it is sheer Non-Entity. 

Each individual thing consists of "matter" and "form" — i.e. of 
this indeterminate "stuff" and of the particular qualities belonging to 
that thing. Remove those qualities and the thing is destroyed : e.g. 
remove the colours, shape, etc., of a tree, and the tree becomes non- 
existent. It crumbles into dust, and thus the "stuff" takes on a new 
form. If, as M. I.e Bon maintains, material particles sometimes lose 
their material qualities and are changed into energy, in such a case the 
"stuff" lakes on yet another kind of form. The individual thing, in 
every case, becomes non-existent when it loses its " form," or the sum 
total of its individual qualities, but the "stuff" persists because it at 
once assumes another "form." 

Hence this "stuff," being non-existent /^r se, draws its existence 
from the Good Which is the Source of all "form." And thus the 
existence of this non-existent stuff is ultimately contained in the Good. 

D. tries to prove that evil is non-existent by showing that there 
is nothing that can have produced it. Good cannot have produced it 
because a thing cannot produce its own opposite ; evil cannot have 
produced itself because evil is always destructive and never productive. 
All things that exist are produced by the Good or the desire for the 
Good — which comes to the same thing. 

no DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Beautiful and Good is an Object of Yearning and 
desire and love to all (for even that which is not longs- 
for It, as was said,^ and strives to find its rest therein, 
and thus It creates a form even in formless thincjs and 
thus is said super-essentially to contain^ and does so 
contain, the non-existent) - — if this is so, how is it that 
the company of the devils desires not the Beautiful 
and Good, but, being inclined towards matter and 
fallen far from the fixed angelic state of desire for the 
Good, becomes a cause of all evils to itself and to all 
other beings which we describe as becoming evil ? 
How is it that the devils, having been produced 
wholly out of the Good, are not good in disposition ? 
Or how is it that, if produced good from out of the 
Good, they became changed ? ^ What made them 

^ The "matter" or stufi of which the universe is made, exists 
ultimately in the Good, but evil does not. All force exists ultimately 
in the Good, but the warping of it, or the lawlessness of it (which is 
the evil of it), does not exist in the Good. P^orce, or energy, as such is 
a relative embodiment of the Absolute : evil as such is a conlradiction 
of the Absolute. 

^ /. e. There is an element of good in evil things enabling them to 
cohere and so to exist. In this passage *' Non- Existent " is used in 
three senses: (i) "Matter," or force, cannot exist without some form 
(which is its complement) and therefore is technically called non- 
existent. (2) Evil cannot exist at all on the ultimate plane of Being, 
nor in this world without an admixture of good (which is its contrary) 
and therefore is in an absolute sense non-existent. (3) The Good is 
beyond all existence and therefore is by transcendence Non-Existent. 

^ The Good is beyond this world and beyond the stuff, or force, of 
which this world, is made. 

Evil, on the other hand, is below this world and the stuff composing 
it. Get rid of the limitations in this world [sc. the difference between 
one quality and another) and you have an energy or force possessing 
all the particular qualities of things fused in one. Get rid of the 
limitations inherent in this (/. e. intensify it to infinity) and you have 
the Goofl. On the other hand, destroy some particular object {e.^. a 
tree), and that object, being now actually non-existent, has still a 
potential existence in the world-stuff. Destroy that potential existence 
and you have absolute non-existence, which is Evil. 

Thus the three grades may be tabulated as follows : 

(i) Transcendent Non-Existence (= the Good). 

(ii) Actual Non-Existence ( = the woild stuff, force or energy, of 

THE DIVINE NAMES in 

evil, and indeed what is the nature of evil ? FroiTi" 
what origin did it arise and in what thing doth it lie ij 
Why did He that is Good will to produce it? Anc 
how, having so willed, was He able so to do?^ Anc 
if evil comes from some other cause, what other cause 
can anything have excepting the Good ? How, i 
there is a Providence, doth evil exist, or arise at all, o 
escape destruction ? And why doth anything in th( 
world desire it instead of Good ? " 

19. Thus perhaps will such bewildered discourse 
speak. Now we will bid the questioner look towards) 
the truth of things, and in the first place we willi 
venture thus to answer: "Evil cometh not of the|| 
Good ; and if it comelh therefrom it is not evil. For i 
even as fire cannot cool us, so Good cannot produce- 
the things which are not good. And if all things that 
have being come from the Good (for it is natural to 
the Good to produce and preserve the creatures, and 
natural to evil to corrupt and to destroy them) then 
nothing in the world cometh of evil. Then evil can- 

whicli material particles are a form. Modern science teaches that 
atoms have no actual existence. Thus the atomic theory has worked 
round to something very much like D.'s theory of the non-existent 
world stuff). 

(iii) Absolute Non-Existence (= Evil). 

The three grades might be expressed by a numerical symbol as 
follows : If finite numbers represent the various lorms of existence, the 
Infinity (which contradicts the laws of finite numbers) = the Good: 
Unity (which is a mere abstraction and cannot exist apart from multi- 
plicity since every finite unit is divisible into parts) = the world stuff: 
Zero (which annihilates all finite numbers that are multiplied by it) =^ 
Evil. 

1 The argument in the rest of the section is as follows : 

Evil exists, for there is a radical difference between virtue and vice, 
l-.vil is, in fact, not merely negative, but positive : not merely 
destructive, but also productive. And hence it is necessary to the 
perfection of the world. To which D. replies in tlie next section 
that evil does not exist giia evil, nor is it positive or productive c/ua 
evil. It exists and is positive and productive solely through an 
admixture of the Good. (We might illustrate this by the fact that 
Zero, multiplied by Infinity, produces finite number.) 

112 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

not even in any wise exist, if it act as evil upon itself. 
And unless it do so act, evil is not wholly evil, but 
hath some portion of the Good whereby it can exist at 
all. And if the things that have being desire the 
Beautiful and Good and accomplish all their acts for 
the sake of that which seemeth good, and if all that 
they intend hath the Good as its Motive and its Aim 
(for nothing looks unto the nature of evil to guide it 
in its actions), what place is left for evil among things 
that have being, or how can it have any being at all 
bereft of such good purpose ? And if all things that 
have being come of the Good and the Good is Beyond 
things that have being, then, whereas that which 
exists not yet hath being in the Good ; evil con- 
trariwise hath none (otherwise it were not wholly evil 
or Non-E7is ; for that which is wholly Non-Ens can 
be but naught except this be spoken Super-Essentially 
of the Good). So the Good must have Its seat far 
above and before that which hath mere being and 
that which hath not ; but evil hath no place either 
amongst things that have being or things that have 
not, yea it is farther removed than the Non-Existent 
from the Good and hath less being than it. ' Then ' 
(saith one perchance) ' whence cometh evil ? For if ' 
(saith he) ' evil is not, virtue and vice must needs be 
the same both in their whole entirety and in their 
corresponding particulars,' — /. e. even that which 
fighteth against virtue cannot be evil. And yet 
temperance is the opposite of debauchery, and right- 
eousness of wickedness. And I mean not only the 
righteous and the unrighteous man, or the temperate 
and intemperate man ; I mean that, even before the 
external distinction appeared between the virtuous 
man and his opposite, the ultimate distinction between 
the virtues and the vices hath existed long beforehand 
in the soul itself, and the passions war against the 
reason, and hence we must assumQ something evil 

THE DIVINE NAMES 113 

which is contrary to goodness. For goodness is not 
contrary to itself, but, being come from One Beginning 
and being the offspring of One Cause, it rejoices in 
fellowship, unity, and concord. Even the lesser Good 
is not contrary to the greater, for that which is less 
hot or cold is not contrary to that which is more so. 
Wherefore evil lieth in the things that have being and 
possesseth being and is opposed and contrary to good- 
ness. And if evil is the destruction of things which 
have being, that depriveth it not of its own being. It 
itself still hath being and giveth being to its offspring. 
Yea, is not the destruction of one thing often the 
birth of another ? And thus it will be found that evil 
maketh contribution unto the fullness of the world, 
and through its presence, saveth the universe from 
imperfection." 

20. The true answer whereunto will be that evil 
(qna evil) causes no existence or birth, but only 
debases and corrupts, so far as its power extends, the 
substance of things that have being. And if any one 
says that it is productive, and that by the destruction 
of one thing it giveth birth to somewhat else, the true 
answer is that it doth not so (/tea destructive. Qua 
destructive and evil it only destroys and debases ; but 
it taketh upon it the form of birth and essence through 
the action of the Good. Thus evil will be found to 
be a destructive force in itself, but a productive force 
through the action of the Good. Qua evil it neither 
hath being nor confers it ; through the action of the 
Good, it hath being (yea, a good being) and confers 
being on good things. Or rather (since we cannot 
call the same thing both good and bad in the same 
relations, nor are the destruction and birth of the 
same thing the same function or faculty, whether pro- 
ductive or destructive, working in the same relations). 
Evil in itself hath neither being, goodness, productive- 
ness, nor power of creating things which have being 

114 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

and goodness ; the Good, on the other hand, wherever 
It becomes perfectly present, creates perfect, universal 
and untainted manifestations of goodness ; while the 
things which have a lesser share therein are imperfect 
manifestations of goodness and mixed with other 
elements through lack of the Good. In fine, evil is 
not in any wise good, nor the maker of good ; but 
every thing must be good only in proportion as it 
approacheth more or less unto the Good, since the 
perfect Goodness penetrating all things reacheth not 
only to the wholly good beings around It, but 
extendeth even unto the lowest things, being entirely 
present unto some, and in a lower measure to others, 
and unto others in lowest measure, according as 
each one is capable of participating therein.^ Some 
creatures participate wholly in the Good, others are 
lacking in It less or more, and others possess a still 
fainter participation therein, while to others the Good 
is present as but the faintest echo. For if the Good 
were not present only in a manner proportioned unto 
each, then the divinest and most honourable things 
would be no higher than the lowest ! And how, pray, 
could all things have a uniform share in the Good, 
since not all are equally fit to share entirely therein ? 
But in truth the exceeding greatness of the power of 
the Good is shown by this — that It giveth power even 
to the things which lack It, yea even unto that very 
lack itself, inasmuch as even here is to be found some 
kind of participation in It.^ And, if we must needs 

^ D. is no pantheist. According to Pantheism God is equally 
present in all things. Thus Pantheism is a debased form uf the 
Immanence doctrine, as Calvinism is a debased form of the Tran- 
scendence doctrine. In the one case we get Immanence without 
1 Transcendence : in the other Transcendence without Immanence. D. 
I holds a Transcendent Immanence (cf. Bradley, Appearance and Reality, 
rebutting cliarge of Pantheism). 

2 e. g. The cruelty of Nature seems to show Intelligence ; and 
Intelligence per se is a good thing, 

THE DIVINE NAMES 115 

boldly speak the truth, even the things that fight 
against It possess through Its power their being and 
their capability to fight. Or rather, to speak shortly, 
all creatures in so far as they have being are good and 
come from the Good, and in so far as they are deprived 
of the Good, neither are good nor have they bcing.^ 
For in the case of other qualities, such as heat or cold, 
the things v/hich have been warmed have their being 
even w^hen they lose their warmth, and many of the 
creatures there are w^hich have no life or mind; and 
in like manner God transcendeth all being and so is 
Super-Essential ; - and generally, in all other cases, 
though the quality be gone or hath never been 
present, the creatures yet have being and can subsist ; 
but that which is utterly bereft of the Good never had,' 
nor hath, nor ever shall have, no nor can have any sort 
of being whatever. For instance, the depraved sinner, 
though bereft of the Good by his brutish desire, is in 
this respect unreal and desires unrealities ; but still he 
hath a share in the Good in so far as there is in him a 
distorted reflection of true Love and Communion.^ 
And anger hath a share in the Good, in so far as it is 
a movement which seeks to remedy apparent evils, 
converting them to that which appears to be fair. 
And even he that desires the basest life, yet in so far 
as he feels desire at all and feels desire for life, and 
intends what he thinks the best kind of life, so far 
participates in the Good. And if you wholly destroy 
the Good, there v/ill be neither being, life, desire, nor 
motion, or any other thing. Hence the birth of fresh 

^ All evil things contain the seed of their own decay, and so tend to 
non-existence. The arrogance and cruelty of the Germans has been 
their weakness, as discipline and self-sacrifice has been their strength. 

^ God exists without Essence, as an object can exist without this 
particular quality or that. 

^ D. is thinking especially of carnal sin. Such sin is a depraved 
form of that which, in its true purity, is a mystery, symbolizing the 
Unitive Life. 

ii6 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

life out of destruction is not the function of evil but is 
the presence of Good in a lesser form, even as disease 
is a disorder, yet not the destruction of all order, for if 
this happen the disease itself will not exist.^ But the 
disease remains and exists. Its essence is order 
reduced to a Diininiu^n ; and in this it consists. For 
that which is utterly without the Good hath neither 
being nor place amongst the things that are in being ; 
but that which is of mixed nature owes to the Good 
its place among things in being, and hath this place 
amongst them and hath being just so far as it partici- 
pates in the Good. Or rather all things in being will 
; have their being more or less in proportion as they 
ji participate in the Good. For so far as mpre Being is 
■ concerned, that which hath not being in any respect 
will not exist at all ; that which hath being in one 
respect but not in another doth not exist in so far as 
it hath fallen away from the everlasting Being ; while 
in so far as it hath a share of being, to that extent it 
exists ; and thus both an element of existence and an 
element of non-existence in it are kept and preserved. 
So too with evil. That which is utterly fallen from 
Good can have no place either in the things which are 
more good or in the things which are less so. ■ That 
which is good in one respect but not in another is at 
war with some particular good but not with the whole 
of the Good. It also is preserved by the admixture 
of the Good, and thus the Good giveth existence to 
the lack of Itself through some element of Itself being 
present there. | For if the Good be entirely removed, 
there will not remain aught at all, either good or 
mixed or absolutely bad. For if evil is imperfect 
Goodness, the perfect absence of the Good will 
remove both the perfect and the imperfect Good, and 
evil will only exist and appear because, while it is evil 
in relation to one kind of good (being the^contrary 

^ A diseased body siill lives. Death ends the disease. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 117 

thereof), yet it depends for its existence on another 
kind of good and, to that extent, is good itself. For 
things of the same kind cannot ^ be wholly contra- 
dictory to one another in the same respects.^ Hence 
^ evil is Non-Existent.J^ 

21. Neither inhereth evil in existent creatures.^ 
For if all creatures are from the Good, and the Good 
is in them all and embraces them all, either evil can 
have no place amongst the creatures, or else it must 
have a place in the Good.^ Now it cannot inhere in 
the Good, any more than cold can inhere in fire ; just 
so the quality of becoming evil cannot inhere in that 
which turns even evil into good. And if evil doth 
inhere in the Good, what will the mode of its inher- 
ence be? If you say: It cometh of the Good, I 
answer : That is absurd and impossible. For (as 
the infallible Scriptures say), a good tree cannot bring 
forth evil fruit, nor yet is the converse possible. But 
if it cometh not of the Good, it is plainly from another 
origin and cause. Either evil must come from the 
Good, or the Good from evil, or else (if this is 
impossible) both the Good and evil must be from 
another origin or cause. For no duality can be an 
origin : some unity must be the origin of all duality.! 
And yet it is absurd to suppose that two entirely 

^ Exuberant vitality is per se a good thing and the more exuberant 
the better, though, like all good things, it is dangerous, and unless 
properly directed is disastrous. 

2 If good and evil are both existent, they are, to that extent, both of 
the same kind ; which is impossible. 

^ So far D. has been showing that evil is not an itUimate principle, 
being neither (i) identical with the Good, nor (2)self-subsistent. Now 
he argues that it is not a necessary element in any created thing : 
neither in their existence as such, nor in any particular kind of 
creature. 

* D. rambles characteristically, but the general argument is plain. 
All existence is from the Good. Hence, if evil is inherent in the 
nature of existence, evil is from the Good. Thus D. meets ngain and 
])roceeds to lay the ghost of a theory which he has already elaborately 
slain in the previous section. 

ii8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

opposite things can owe their birth and their being 
to the same thing. This would make the origin itself 
not a simple unity but divided, double, self-contra- 
dictory and discordant. Nor again is it possible that 
the world should have two contradictory origins, 
existing in each other and in the whole and mutually 
at strife. For,^ were this assumed, God ^ cannot be 
free from pain, nor without a feeling of ill, since there 
would be something causing Him trouble, yea, all 
things must in that case be in a state of disorder and 
perpetual strife ; whereas the Good imparts a principle 
of harmony to all things and is called by the Sacred 
Writers Peace and the Bestower of Peace. And hence 
it is that all good things display a mutual attraction 
and harmony, and are the offspring of one Life and 
are disposed in fellowship towards one Good, and are 
kindly, of like nature, and benignant to one another. 
And so evil is not in God,^ and is not divine. Nor 
jcometh it of God. For either He is not good, or else~ 
He worketh goodness and bringeth good things unto 

^ Having just given a metapliysical argument for the non-existence 
of evil, D. now gives an argument drawn from the actual nature of the 
universe and of God's creative activity. 

Tliis argument is not so satisfactory as the metaphysical one, for, 
under all the harmony of the world, there is perpetual strife, and the 
Cross of Christ reveals God as suffering pain. " Christ is in an agony 
and will be till the end of the world " {Pascal). 

The metaphysical argument is sound because metaphysics deal with 
ultimate ideals, and evil is ultimately or ideally non-existent. The 
argument from actual facts is unsound because evil is actually existent. 
Much wrong thinking on the subject of evil is due to a confusion of 
ideal with actual non-existence. D. here seems to fall into this 
mistake. 

2 D. here uses the name " God " because he is thinking of the 
Absolute or the Good, not in Its ultimate Nature, but in Its emanating 
or creative activity, in which the Personal Differentiations of the 
Trinity appear. See II. 7. 

^ i. e. Evil does not arise through the passage of the Good from 
Super-Essence into Essence. It is not in the Good through the Good 
submitting to the conditions of existence (D. has already shown that 
evil has no place in the ultimate Super-Essential Nature of the Good). 

THE DIVINE NAMES 119 

existence. Nor acts He thus only at some times and 
not at others, or only in the case of some thincfs but 
not of all. For were He to act thus, He must suffer 
a change and alteration, and that in respect of the 
divinest quality of all — causality. And if the Good 
is in God as His very substance, God must, in chang- 
ing from the Good, sometimes exist and sometimes 
not exist. Doubtless if you feign that He hath the 
Good by mere participation therein, and derives It 
from another, in that case He will, forsooth, sometimes 
possess It and sometimes not possess It.^ Evil, there- 
fore, doth not come from God, nor is it in God either 
absolutely or temporally.^ 

22. Neither inhereth evil in the angels.^ For if the 
good angel declares the Divine Goodness, he is in [ 
a secondary manner and by participation that which 
the Subject of his message is in a primary and causal 
manner.'* And thus the angel is an image of God, 
a manifestation of the invisible light, a burnished 
mirror, bright, untarnished, without spot or blemish, 
receiving (if it is reverent to say so) all the beauty 
of the Absolute Divine Goodness, and (so far as may 
be) kindling in itself, with unallowed radiance, the 
Goodness of the Secret Silence. Hence evil inhereth 
not in the angels ; they are evil only in so far as they 
must punish sinners. But in this respect even those 
who chastise wrong-doers are evil, and so are the 
priests who exclude the profane man from the Divine 

^ This is a feduciio ad absurdum. D. considers it obvious that God 
possesses the Good as His Substance and not by participation. The 
Persons of the Trinity are not products of the Absolute but Emanations 
or Differentiations of It. 

^ The argument is as follows : No evil is from God. All existence 
is from God. Therefore no existence is evil. 

■^ Having shown that existence as such is not inherently evil, D. now 
takes various forms of existence and shows that none of them is, as 
such, inherently evil. 

* Cf. Old Testament title, " Sons of God," and D. on Deification. 
Cf. also " I have said, Ye are Gods." 

120 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Mysteries. But, indeed, 'tis not the suffering of the 
punishment that is evil but the being worthy thereof; 
nor yet is a just exclusion from the sacrifices ev-il, 
but to be guilty and unholy and unfit for those pure 
mysteries is evil. 

23. Nor are the devils naturally evil. For, were 
they such, they would not have sprung from the 
Good, nor have a place amongst existent creatures, 
nor have fallen from Goodness (being by their very 
nature always evil). Moreover, are they evil with 
respect to themselves or to others.? If the former ^ 
they must also be self-destructive ; if the latter, how 
do they destroy, and what do they destroy ? ^ Do 
they destroy Essence, or Faculty, or Activity?^ If 
Essence, then, first, they cannot destroy it contrary 
to its own nature ; for they cannot destroy things 
which by their nature are indestructible, but only 
the things which are capable of destruction. And, 
secondly, destruction itself is not evil in every case 
and under all circumstances. Nor can any existent 
thing be destroyed so far as its being and nature act ; 
for its destruction is due to a failure of its natural 
order, whereby the principle of harmony and symmetry 
grows weak and so cannot remain unchanged.* But 

^ /. e. If totally and essentially by very nature evil with respect to 
themselves. In so far as they continue to exist they are good with 
respect to themselves. 

2 Evil is the contrary of the Good. Hence since the Good is by Its 
very nature productive, evil must be destructive. Hence the devils, if 
essentially evil, must be essentially destructive. Now they are not 
essentially self-destructive, for, were they such, they could not exist, 
j Therefore, if essentially evil, they must under all circumstances be 
destructive of other things. 

' The essence o^ {e. g.) an apple-tree is self-identity ; its faculty is its 
latent power of producing leaves, apples, etc. ; its activity is the actual 
production of the leaves, apples, etc. 

^ ( I ) The devils do not destroy all things {e. g. they do not annihilate 
the human soul). Therefore they are not essentially evil. Evil passions 
are good things misdirected. (2) Often the destruction of a thing is 
beneficial [e.g. the falling of the faded leaf). In fact, nothing could be 

THE DIVINE NAMES i^i 

the weakness is not complete ; for, were it complete, 
it would have annihilated both the process of destruc- 
tion and the object which suffers it : and such a 
destruction as this must be self-destructive. Hence 
such a quality is not._eyil but imperfect good ; for 
that which is wholly destitute of the Good can have 
no place among things that have being.^ And the 
same is true of destruction when it works upon a 
faculty or activity. Moreover, how can the devils be 
evil since they are sprung from God ? For the Good 
produceth and createth good things. But it may be 
said that they are called evil not in so far as they 
exist (for they are from the Good and had a good 
existence given them), but in so far as they do not 
exist, having been unable (as the Scripture saith) to 
keep their original state. For in what, pra}% do we 
consider the wickedness of the devils to consist except 
their ceasing from the quality and activity of divine 
virtues? Otherwise, if the devils are naturally evil, 
they must be always evil. But_evil is unstable.^ 
Hence if they are always in the same condition, they 
are not evil ; for to remain always the same is a 
property of the Good. But if they are not always 
evil, then they are not evil by their natural constitu- 
tion, but only through a lack of angelic virtues.^ 
Hence they are not utterly without the Good, seeing 
that they exist and live and form intuitions and have 

dcstro)ed if it had not grown feeble and so become worliiy to be 
destroyed. (D. here, in his zeal to explain evil away, countenances the 
base doctrine that might is light. What is wrong with the whole 
system of the universe is that its underlying law is the survival of the 
fittest. The enlightened conscience of liumanity rebels against this 
law.) 

1 The weakness is an imperfect good, and therefore the process of 
destruction which co-operates with the weakness is an impcricct grod. 

- The Good is permanent. Hence its ct-ntrary muse be unstable. 

^ Evil is essentially a negative and self-contradictory thing. Its 
very permanence would be opposed to its own nature and would be due 
to an element of the Good within it. 

1^2 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

within them any movement of desire at all ; but they 
are called evil because they fail in the exercise o_f 
their natural activity. The evil in them is therefore 
a warping, a declension from their right condition ; a 
failure, an imperfection, an impotence, and a weakness, 
loss and lapse of that power which would preserve 
their perfection in them. Moreover what is the evil 
in the devils ? Brutish wrath, blind desire, headstrong 
fancy. But these qualities, even though they exist 
in the devils, are not wholly, invariably, and essentially 
evil. For in other living creatures, not the possession 
of these qualities but their loss is destructive of the 
creature and hence is evil ; while their possession 
preserves the creature and enables the creature pos- 
jsessing them to exist. Hence the devils are not evil 
in so far as they fulfil their nature, but in so far as 
'jthey do not. Nor hath the Good bestowed complete 
upon them been changed ; rather have they fallen 
from the completeness of that gift. i\nd we maintain 
that the angelic gifts bestowed upon them have never 
themselves suffered change, but are unblemished in 
their perfect brightness, even if the devils themselves 
do not perceive it through blinding their faculties of 
spiritual perception.^ Thus, so far as their existence 
is concerned, they possess it from the Good, and are 
naturally good, and desire the Beautiful and Good 
in desiring existence, life, and intuition, which are 
existent things. And they are called evil through 
the deprivation and the loss whereby they have 
lapsed from their proper virtues. And hence they 
are evil in so far as they do not exist ; and in desiring 
i^evil they desire that which is non-existent. 
^ 24. But perhaps some one will say that human 

^ There is a timeless ground in all personalities, and this ground is 
good. Eckhart and Tauler say that even the souls in hell possess 
eternally the divine root of their true being. Ruysbroeck says, this 
divine root does not of itself make us blessed, but merely makes us 
exist. 

\ 

THE DIVINE NAMES 123 

souls are the seat of evil. Now if the reason alleged 
is that they have contact with evil temptations when 
they take forethought to preserve themselves there- 
from, this is not evil but good and cometh from the 
Good that turns even evil into good. But if we mean 
the depravation which souls undergo, in what do they 
undergo depravation except in the deficiency of good 
qualities and activities and in the failure and fall 
therefrom due to their own weakness ? Even so we 
say that the air is darkened around us by a deficiency 
and absence of the light ; while yet the light itself is 
always light and illuminates the darkness. Hence' 
the evil inhereth not in the devils or in us, as evil, 
but only as a deficiency and lack of the perfection of 
our proper virtues. 

25. Neither inhereth evil in the brute beasts. For 
if you take away the passions of anger, desire, etc. 
(which are not in their essential nature evil, although 
alleged to be so), the lion, having lost its savage 
wildness, will be a lion no longer ; and the dog, if it 
become gentle to all, will cease to be a dog, since 
the virtue of a dog is to watch and to allow its own 
masters to approach while driving strangers away. 
Wherefore 'tis not evil for a creature so to act as 
preserveth its nature undestroyed ; evil is the de- 
struction of its nature, the weakness and deficiency 
of its natural qualities, activities, and powers. And 
if all things which the process of generation produces 
have their goal of perfection in time, then even that 
which seemeth to be their imperfection is not wholly 
and entirely contrary to nature.^ 

26. Neither inhereth evil in nature as a whole. For 
if all natural laws together come from the universal 
system of Nature, there is nothing contrary to Nature.^ 

^ i. e. That which is imperfect in them is capable of being made 
perfect. 

' The sum total of natural laws comes from the ultimate unity of 

124 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

'Tis but when we consider the nature of particular 
things, that we find one part of Nature to be natural 
and another part to be unnatural. For one thing 
may be unnatural in one case, and another thing in 
another case ; and that which is natural in one is 
unnatural in another.^ Now the evil taint of a natural 
force is something unnatural. It is a lack of the 
thing's natural virtues. Hence, no natural force is 
evil : the evil of nature lies in a thing's inability to 
fulfil its natural functions. ^ 

27. Neither inhereth evil in our bodies. For ugli- 
less and disease are a deficiency in form and a want 

f'of order. But this is not wholly evil, being rather 
a lesser good. For were there a complete destruc- 
tion of beauty, form, and order, the very body must 
disappear. And that the body is not the cause of 
evil in the soul is plain in that evil can be nigh at 
hand even without a body, as it is in the devils. 
Evil in spirits' souls and bodies is a weakness and 
lapse in the condition of their natural virtues. 

28. Nor is the familiar notion true that " Evil 
inheres in matter qua matter." For matter, too, 
hath a share in order, beauty, and form. And if 
matter is without these things, and in itself hath no 
quality or form, how can it produce anything, since 
in that case it hath not of itself even the power of 
suffering any affection? Nay, how can matter be 

Nature, which comes from the Good. Thus the sum total of natural 
laws is not, as such, opposed to the ultimate unity of Nature, and 
therefore is not as such opposed to the Good. It is not essentially 
evil. 

^ Cf. Section 30. 

- The argument of the whole passage is that evil is not inherent in 
the essential nature of things as a whole or of any particular thing. It 
arises in particular things (accidentally, as it were) through their failure 
to fulfil their true nature. But what of this accident ? Is it inherent ? 
Perhaps we might answer, "Not inherent because capable of being 
eliminated." 

THE DIVINE NAMES 125 

evil ? For if it hath no being- whatever, it is neither 
good nor evil ; but if it hath a kind of being, tlien 
(since all things that have being come from the 
Good) matter must come from the Good. And 
thus either the Good produces evil (/. e. evil, since it 
comes from the Good, is good), or else the Good 
Itself is produced by evil [i.e. the Good, as coming 
thus from evil, is evil). Or else we are driven back 
again to two principles. But if so, these must be 
derived from some further single source beyond them. 
And if they say that matter is necessary for the 
whole world to fulfil its development, how can that 
be evil which depends for its existence upon the 
Good ? For evil abhors the very nature of the Good. 
And how can matter, if it is evil, produce and nourish 
Nature? For evil, ^//<^ evil, cannot produce or nourish 
anything, nor create or preserve it at all. And if 
they reply that matter causes not the evil in our 
souls, but that it yet draws them down towards evil, 
can that be true .'* For many of them have their 
gaze turned towards the Good. And how can that 
Be, if matter doth nothing except drag them down 
towards evil } Hence evil in our souls is not derived 
from matter but from a disordered and discordant 
motion. And if they say that this motion is always 
the consequence of matter ; and if the unstable 
medium of matter is necessary for things that are 
incapable of firm self-subsistence, then why is it that 
evil is thus necessary or that this necessary thing is 
evil ? 1 

29. Nor is the common saying true that Deprivation 
or Lack fights by its natural power against the Good. 
For a complete lack is utterly impotent ; and that 

^ Matter, it is argued, is evil because the discordant motion of the 
soul springs from matter. But, replies D., matter is necessary for 
certain kinds of existence. Hence it follows that evil is necessary. But 
this is impossible. 

126 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

which is partial hath its power, not in so far as it 
is a lack, but in so far as it is not a perfect lack. 
For when the lack of the Good is partial, evil is not 
as yet ; and when it becomes perfect, evil itself utterly 
vanishes. 

30. In fine, Good cometh from the One universal 
Cause ; and evil from many partial deficiencies. God 
knows evil under the form of good, and with Him 
the causes of evil things are faculties productive of 
good. And if evil is eternal, creative, and powerful, 
and if it hath being and activity, v/hence hath it 
these attributes ? Come they from the Good ? Or 
from the evil by the action of the Good ? Or from 
some other cause by the action of them both? All 
natural results arise from a definite cause; and if 
evil hath no cause or definite being, it is unnatural. 
For that which is contrary to Nature hath no place 
in Nature, even as unskilfulness hath no place in 
skilfulness. Is the soul, then, the cause of evils, even 
as fire is the cause of warmth? And doth the soul, 
then, fill with evil whatsoever things are near it? Or 
is the nature of the soul in itself good, while yet in 
its activities the soul is sometimes in one state, and 
sometimes in another ?i Now, if the very existence 
of the soul is naturally evil, whence is that existence 
derived ? From the Good Creative Cause of the 
whole world? If from this Origin, how can it be, 
in its essential nature, evil? For all things sprung 
from out this Origin are good. But if it is evil merely 
in its activities, even so this condition is not fixed. 
Otherwise {i.e. if it doth not itself also assume a 
good quality) what is the origin of the virtues ?2 

^ D. is here alluding to the mystical doctrine of the timeless self— 
the ultimate root of goodness in each individual which remains 
unchanged by the failures and sins of the temporal self. 

- D. is arguing with those who hold that evil is in some sense 
necessary to the existence of the world, and therefore has a permanent 
place in it. Sin is, they hold, a necessary self-realization of human 

THE DIVINE NAMES 127 

There remains but one alternative : Evil is a weak- 
ness and deficiency of Good, 

31. Good things have all one cause. If evil is 
opposed to the Good, then hath evil many causes. 
The efficient causes of evil results, however, are not 
any laws and faculties, but an impotence and weak- 
ness and an inharmonious mingling of discordant 
elements. Evil things are not immutable and un- 
changing but indeterminate and indefinite : the sport 
of alien influences which have no definite aim. The 
Good must be the beginning and the end even of all 
evil things. For the Good is the final Purpose of all) 
things, good and bad alike. For even when we act ; 
amiss we do so from a longing for the Good ; for no| 
one makes evil his definite object when performing 
any action. Hence evil hath no substantial being,l 
but only a shadow thereof; since the Good, and not 
itself, is the ultimate object for which it comes into, 
existence. 
I 32. Unto evil we can attribute but an accidental 
j kind of existence. It exists for the sake of some- 
' thing else, and is not self-originating. And hence 
our action appears to be right (for it hath Good as 
its object) while yet it is not really right (because 
we mistake for good that which is not good). 'Tis 
proven, then, that our purpose is different from our 
action. Thus evil is contrary to progress, purpose, 
nature, cause, principle, end, law, will, and being. 
Evil is, then, a lack, a deficiency, a weakness, a dis- 
proportion, an error, purposeless, unlovely, lifeless, 
unwise, unreasonable, imperfect, unreal, causeless, 
indeterminate, sterile, inert, powerless, disordered, 
incongruous, indefinite, dark, unsubstantial, and never 
in itself possessed of any existence whatever. How, 

souls which are in their ultimate essence sinless. D. replies that, if 
this is so, we cannot explain how goodness can ever be (as it is) a form 
of sel(-iealization for human souls. 

128 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

then, is it that an admixture of the Good bestows any 
power upon evil ? For that which is altogether desti- 
tute of Good is nothing and hath no power. And 
if the Good is Existent and is the Source of will, 
power, and action, how can Its opposite (being des- 
titute of existence, will, power, and activity), have any 
power against It? Only because evil things are not 
all entirely the same in all cases and in all relations.^ 
'^ In the case of a devil evil lieth in the being contrary 
to spiritual goodness ; in the soul it lieth in the being 
contrary to reason ; in the body it lieth in the being 
contrary to nature. 

33. How can evil things have any existence at all 
if there is a Providence? Only because evil (as such) 
hath no being, neither inhereth it in things that have 
being. And naught that hath being is independent 
of Providence ; for evil hath no being at all, except 
when mingled with the Good. And if no thing in 
the world is without a share in the Good, and evil is 
the deficiency of Good and no thing in the world is 
utterly destitute of Good, then the Divine Providence 
is in all things, and nothing that exists can be with- 
out It. Yea, even the evil effects that arise are turned 
by Providence to a kindly purpose, for the succour 
of themselves or others (either individually or in 
common), and thus it is that Providence cares indi- 
vidually for each particular thing in all the world. 
Therefore we shall pay no heed to the fond argument 
so often heard that " Providence shall lead us unto 
virtue even against our will." 'Tis not worthy of 
Providence to violate nature. Wherefore Its Provi- 
dential character is shown herein : that It preserves 
the nature of each individual, and, in making pro- 
vision for the free and independent, it hath respect 
unto their state, providing, both in general and in 

• '^ i. e. Evil things are not ejitirely bad, but are bad only in some 
partial aspect. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 129 

particular, according as the nature of those It cares 
for can receive Its providential benefactions, which 
are bestowed suitably on each by Its multiform and 
universal activity. 

34. Thus evil hath no beings, nor any inherence in 
things that have being. Evil is nowhere qua evil ; 
and it arises not through any power but through 
weakness. Even the devils derive their existence 
from the Good, and their mere existence is good. 
Their evil is the result of a fall from their proper 
virtues, and is a change with regard to their indi- 
vidual state, a weakness of their true angelical 
perfections. And they desire the Good in so far 
as they desire existence, life, and understanding; and 
in so far as they do not desire the Good, they desire 
that which hath no beins;-. And this is not desire, 
but an error of real desire. 

35. By "men who sin knowingly" Scripture means 
them that are weak in the exercised knowledge^ and 
performance of Good; and by "them that know the 
Divine Will and do it not," ^ it means them that have 
heard the truth and yet are weak in faith to trust the 
Good or in action to fulfil it.^ And some desire not 
to have understanding in order that they may do 
good, so great is the warping or the weakness 
of their will. And, in a word, evil (as we have 
often said) is weakness, impotence, and deficiency of \ 

^ Tz^pi Tr]v akrjcTTov tou ayaOov yvwatv. 

^ Luke xii. 47. 

^ In the previous section D. has maintained that all people ultimately 
desire the Good. Hence it follows that all sin is due to ignorance ; for 
could we all recognize that which we desire we would follow it. Ti)is 
raises the question : What, then, does Scripture mean \>y speaking of 
men who sin knowingly? To this D. replies that wilful sin is wilful 
ignorance. It is the failure to exercise the knowledge we possess : as 
when we know a fact which yet is not actually present to our minds. 
We know (having been taught it) the desirableness of the Good, but 
we can shut this desirableness out from our minds and refuse to dwell 
upon it. In such a case we refuse to ex rcise our knowledge. 

I30 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

knowledge (or, at least, of exercised knowledge), or 
of faith, desire, or activity as touching the Good. 
Now, it may be urged that weakness should not be 
punished, but on the contrary should be pardoned. 
This would be just were the power not within man's 
grasp ; but if the power is offered by the Good that 
giveth without stint (as saith the Scripture) that 
which is needful to each, we must not condone the 
wandering or defection, desertion, and fall from the 
proper virtues offered by the Good. But hereon let 
that suffice which we have already spoken (to the 
best of our abilities) in the treatise Concerning Justice 
and Divine fiidgnietit :^ a sacred exercise wherein 
the Truth of Scripture disallowed as lunatic babbling 
such nice arguments as despitefully and slanderously 
blaspheme God. Jn this present treatise we have, to 
the best of our abilities, celebrated the Good as truly 
Admirable, as the Beginning and the End of all 
things, as the Power that embraces them, as That 
Which gives form to non-existent things, as That 
which causes all good things and yet causes no evil 
things, as perfect Providence and Goodness surpass- 
ing all things that are and all that are not, and 
turning base things and the lack of Itself unto good, 
as That Which all must desire, yearn for, and love ; 
and as possessed of many other qualities jthe which 
a true argument hath, methinks, in this chapter 
expounded. , W v 

^ This treatise IS lost. '' '''■ ^ r ^ 

THE DIVINE NAMES 131 

CHAPTER V 

Concerning '■'■Existence'^ ajid also concernhig '''' Exemplars P 

I. Now must we proceed to the Name of " Being; " 
which is truly applied by the Divine Science to Him 
that truly Is. But this much we must say, that it is 
not the purpose of our discourse to reveal the Super- 
Essential Being in its Super-Essential Nature ^ (for 
this is unutterable, nor can we know It, or in anywise 
express It, and It is beyond even the Unity 2), but 
only to celebrate the Emanation of the Absolute 
Divine Essence into the universe of things. For the 
Name of " Good " revealing all the emanations of the 
universal Cause, extends both to the things which 

1 The ultimate Godhead is reached only by the Negative Path, and 
known only by Unknowing. The Affirmative Path of philosophical 
knowledge leads only to the differentiated manifestations of the God- 
head : e.g. the Trinity, in Its creative and redemptive activities, is 
known by the Affirmative Method, but behind these activities and the 
faculty for them lies an ultimate Mystery where the Persons transcend 
Themselves and are fused (though not confused). 

2 In spiritual Communion, the mind, -being joined with God, dis- 
tinguishes itself from Him as Self from Not-Self, Subject from Object. 
And this law was fulfilled even in the Human Soul of Christ, Who 
distinguished Himself from His Father. The Persons of the Trinity, 
though they lie deeper than this temporal world (being, in Their 
eternal emanative Desire, the Ground of its existence), were manifested 
through the Incarnation. Hence the distinction of Father, Son, and 
Spirit, revealed in the Human Soul of Christ, exists eternally in the 
Trinity. And those who reach the Unitive State, since they reach it 
only through the Spirit of Christ and are one spirit with Him, must in 
a lesser degree reveal the Personal Differentiations of the Trinity in 
their lives. But because the eternal Differentiations of the Trinity 
transcend Themselves in. the Super-Essence, therefore Their manifesta- 
tions in the Unitive State lead finally to a point beyond Union where.^ 
all distinctions are transcended. At that point the distinction between 
Self and Not-Self, Subject and Object, vanishes in the unknowable 
Mystery of the Divine Darkness. The Self has disappeared and been, 
in a sense, merged. But in another sense the Self remains. This is 
the paradox of Personality — that it seeks (and attains) annihilation in 
the Supra-personal plane, and yet on the relative plane retains its own 
particular being. This is the paradox of Love. See Intr., p. 28 f., and p. 8. 

132 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

are, and to the things which are not, and is beyond 
both categories.^ And the title of " Existent " ex- 
tends to all existent things and is beyond them. 
And the title " Life " extends to all living things 
and is beyond them. And the title of '* Wisdom " 
extends to the whole realm of Intuition, Reason, and 
Sense-Perception, and is beyond them all.^ 

2. These Names which reveal the Providence of 
God our Discourse would now consider. For we 
make no promise to express the Absolute Super- 
Essential Goodness and Being and Life and Wisdom 
of the Absolute Super-Essential Godhead which (as 
saith the Scripture) hath Its foundation in a 
secret place ^ beyond all Goodness, Godhead, Being, 
Wisdom, and Life ; but we are considering the be- 
nignant Providence which is revealed to us and are 
celebratinof It as Transcendent Goodness and Cause 
of all good things, and as Existent as Life and as 
Wisdom, and as productive Cause of Existence and 
of Life and the Giver of Wisdom, in those creatures 
which partake of Existence, Life, Intelligence, and 

1 i.e. Extends both to good things and to bad things and is beyond 
the opposition between good and bad. The Good extends to bad 
things l)ecause evil is a mere distortion of good, and no evil thing could 
exist but for an element of good holding it together : its existence, qua 
existence, is good. See ch. iv. 

The Good is beyond the opposition between good and evil because 
on the ultimate plane nothing exists outside It. It is beyond relation- 
ships. Hence also beyond Existence, Life, and Wisdom, since these 
(as we know them) imply relationships. 

2 Sense-perception is a direct apprehension of that which we 
actually touch, see, hear, taste, or smell ; Reason or Inference is an 
indirect apprehension of that which we do not actually touch, see, etc. 
Intuition is a direct apprehension of that which (by its very nature) we 
do not touch, see, etc. Sense perception, Reason, and Intuition are 
refractions from the perfect Light of Divine Wisdom ; but the Divine 
Wisdom is beyond them because God apprehends all things, not as 
existent outside Mimself, but as existent in Himself, under the form of 
a single Unify which is identical with His own Being. 

The Godhead is a Single Desire wherein all the souls eternally exist 
as fused and inseparable elements. ^ See Ps. xvii. 12. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 133 

Perception. We do not regard the Good as one 
thing, the Existent as another, and Life or Wisdom 
as another ; nor do we hold that there are many 
causes and different Godheads producing different 
effects and subordinate one to another ; but we hold 
that one God is the universal Source of the emana- 
tions,^ and the Possessor of all the Divine Names we 
declare ; and that the first Name expresses the per- 
fect Providence of the one God, and the other names 
express certain more general or more particular 
nipdes of His Providence.^ 

3. Now, some one may say : " How is it, since 
Existence transcends Life, and Life transcends 
Wisdom, that living things are higher than things 
which merely exist, and sentient things than 
those which merely live, and reasoning things than 
those which merely feel, and intelligences than those 
which have only reason ? ^ Why do the creatures 
rise in this order to the Presence of God and to a 
closer relationship with Him ? You would have 
expected those which participate in God's greater 
gifts to be the higher, and to surpass the rest." 
Now if intelligent beings were defined as having no 

^ i. e. Is the Source of Goodness, existence, li.'e, wisdom, etc. 

^ The title "Good" applies to all God's providential activity, for 
everything that He makes is got. d. And even evil is good depraved ; and 
exists as good in the Good (see p. 132, n. i). Or, rather, evil possesses 
not an existence but 3.fio7i-extste>ice in the Good. It is (according to D.) a 
kind of non-existent good. Hence the title "Existent" is not quite 
so general as the litle " Good." " Living" is a less general title still 
(since a stone, for instance, has no life), and "Wise " is yet less general 
(since a plant is not wise). Thus we get the following table of 
emanating activity : 

(i) Good (including and transcending existent and non-cxistcnt 
things, viz. "good," and "evil"). 

(2) Existent {existent things, viz. good). 

(3) Life (plants, animals, men, angels). 

(4) Wisdom (men and angels). 

^ Intuition is the faculty of the Intelligences or Angels, by which are 
meant, of course, angels and spiritual men ; Discursive Reason is that 
of natural men. 

134 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Existence or Life, the argument would be sound ; 
but since the divine Intelligences do exist in a manner 
surpassing other existences, and live in a manner sur- 
passing other living things, and understand and 
know in a manner beyond perception and reason, 
and in a manner beyond all existent things partici- 
pate in the Beautiful and Good, they have a nearer 
place to the Good in that they especially participate 
therein, and have from It received both more and 
greater gifts, even as creatures possessed of Reason 
are exalted, by the superiority of Reason, above those 
which have but Perception, and these are exalted 
through having Perception and others through having 
Life. And the truth, I think, is that the more any- 
thing participates in the One infinitely-bountiful God 
the more is it brought near to Him and made diviner 
than the rest.^ 

^ The more universal a Title is, the more truly it is applicable to 
God (see end of Section 2). Thus Existence is more applicable than 
Life, and Life than Wisdom, as involving in each case less that needs to 
be discarded. Thus Wisdom implies both a time-process and also a 
certain finite mode of consciousness, neither of which belong to the 
eternal and infinite God : Life implies a time-process though not a 
finite consciousness : Existence implies neither time-process nor finite 
consciousness. Thus we reach the highest conception of God by a 
process of abstraction in which we cast aside all particular elements (cf. 
St. Augustine on the Bonum bomim). 

This is the philosophical basis of the Via Negativa. But this 
abstraction is not mere abstraction nor this negation mere negation. 
Existence in God subsumes and so includes all that is real in Life ; and 
Life in Him subsumes all that is real in Wisdom. Hence the creatures, 
as they advance in the scale of creation, draw from Him more and 
more particular qualities and progress by becoming more concrete and 
individual instead of more abstract. All the rich variety of creation 
exists as a simple Unity in God, and the higher a creature stands in 
the scale, the more does it draw fresh forces from this simple Unity and 
convert them into its own multiplicity. D. would have understood 
Evolution very well. This passage exactly fits in with D's. psychological 
doctrine of the Via Negativa. That which is reached by the spiritual 
act of Contemplation explains the principles underlying the whole 
creative process, the growing diversity of the world-process and of human 
life. In God there is a rich Unity, and we must leave all diversity 
behind to reach It. Thus we shall have richness without diversity. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 135 

4. Having now dealt with this matter, let us con- 
sider the Good as that which really Is and gives 
their being to all things that exist. The Existent 
God is, by the nature of His power, super-essentially 
above all existence ; He is the substantial Cause and 
Creator of Being, Existence, Substance and Nature, 
the Beginning and the Measuring Principle of ages ; 
the Reality underlying time and the Eternity under- 
lying existences ; the time in which created things 
pass,^ the Existence of those that have any kind of 
existence, the Life-Process of those which in any 
way pass through that process. From Him that Is 
come Eternity, Essence, Being, Time, Life-Process, 
and that which passes through such Process, the 
things which inhere in existent things ^ and those 
which under any power whatever possess an inde- 
pendent subsistence. For God is not Existent in 
any ordinary sense, but in a simple and undefinable 
manner embracing and anticipating all existence in 
Himself. Hence He is called " King of the Ages," 
because in Him and around Him all Being is and 
subsists, and He neither was, nor will be, nor hath 
entered the life-process, nor is doing so, nor ever will, 
or rather He doth not even exist, but is the Essence 
of existence in things that exist ; and not only the 
things that exist but also their very existence comes 
from Him that Is before the ages. For He Himself is 
the Eternity of the ages and subsists before the ages. 

^ Eternity is a totum simiil. It may thus be symbolized by a point 
revolving round a centre at infinite speed. Time would be symbolized 
by a point revolving round a centre at a finite speed. Thus eternity is 
time made perfect. Time is thus subsumed in eternity as the incomplete 
in the complete. Hence time, like existence, life, etc., exists in Cjod 
as transcended. Hence the temporal-process is a manifestation of Him. 
This might lead to Pantheism, but 1). is saved from such a result by 
his hold on the complementary truth of Transcendence. All the 
properties, etc., of each thing exist outside that thing 3ls an element in 
the Transcendent Being of God. 

2 /. e. The qualities of things. 

136 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

5. Let us, then, repeat that all things and all ages 
derive their existence from the Pre-Existent. All 
Eternity and Time are from Him, and He who is 
Pre-Existent is the Beginning and the Cause of all 
Eternity and Time and of anything that hath any 
kind of being. All things participate in Him, nor 
doth He depart from anything that exists ; He is 
before all things, and all things have their main- 
tenance in Him ; and, in short, * if anything exists 
under any form whatever, 'tis in the Pre-Existent 
that it exists and is perceived and preserves its being. 
Antecedent^ to all Its other participated gifts is that 
of Being. Very Being is above Very Life, Very Wis- 
dom, Very Divine Similarity and all the other universal 
Qualities, wherein all creatures that participate must 
participate first of all in Being Itself; or rather, all 
those mere Universals wherein the creatures parti- 
cipate do themselves participate in very Being Itself. 
And there is no existent thing whose essence and 
eternal nature is not very Being.^ Hence God receives 
His Name from the most primary of His gifts when, 
as is meet, He is called in a special manner above all 
things, " He which Is." For, possessing in a trans- 
cendent manner Pre-Existence and Pre-Eminence, 
He caused beforehand all Existence (I mean Very 
Being) and in that Very Being caused all the par- 
ticular modes of existence. P^or all the principles 
of existent things derive from their participation in 
Being the fact that they are existent and that they 
are principles and that the former quality precedes 
the latter. And if it like thee to say that Very Life 
is the Universal Principle of living things as such, 
and Very Similarity of similar things as such, and 
Very Unity of unified things as such, and Very 

^ sc. Logically not temporally. 

- Cf. St. Augustine, " Homini bono tolie homineni, et Dev.m 
invenis. " Cf. Section 8. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 137 

Order of orderly things as such, and if it Hke thee 
to give the name of Universals to the Principles of 
all other things which (by participating in this quality 
or in that or in both or in many) are this, that, both 
or many thou wilt find that the first Quality in which 
they participate is Existence, and that their existence 
is the basis, (i) of their permanence, and (2) of their \ 
being the principles of this or that ; and also that only 
through their participation in Existence do they exist 
and enable things to participate in them. And if 
these Universals exist by participating in Existence, 
far more is this true of the things which participate 
in them. 

6. Thus the first gift which the— Absolute ,and j 

Transcendent Goodness bestows is that of mere ' 
Existence, and so It derives its first title from the 
chiefest of the participations in Its Being. From It 
and in It are very Being and the Principles of the 
world, and the world which springs from them and 
all things that in any way continue in existence. 
This attribute belongs to It in an incomprehensible 
and concentrated oneness. For all number pre- 
exists indivisiblv in the number One, and this number 
contains all things in itself under the form of unity. 
All number exists as unity in number One, and only , , 
when it goes forth from this number is it differenced 
and multiplied.^' All the radii of a circle are con- 
centrated into a single unity in the centre, and this 
point contains all the straight lines brought together 
within itself and unified to one another, and to the 
one starting-point from which they began. Even so 
are they a perfect unity in the centre itself, and, 
departing a little therefrom they are differenced a 
little, and departing further are differenced further, 
and, in fact, the nearer they are to the centre, so 

^ The number One, beintj infinitely divisible, contains the potenti- 
ality of all numbers. 

K 

138 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

much the more are they united to it and to one 
another, and the more they are separated from it the 
more they are separated from one another.^ I 

7. Moreover, in the Universal Nature of the world 
all the individual Laws of Nature are united in one 
Unity without confusion ; and in the soul the 
individual faculties which govern different parts of 
the body are united in one. And hence it is not 
strange that, w^hen we mount from obscure images to 
the Universal Cause, we should with supernatural 

i eyes behold all things (even those things which are 
mutually contrary) existing as a single Unity in the 
Universal Cause. For It is the beginning of all 
things, whence are derived Very Being, and all things 
that have any being, all Beginning and End, all Life, 
Immortality, Wisdom, Order, Harmony, Power, 
Preservation, Grounding, Distribution, Intelligence, 
Reason, Perception, Quality, Rest, Motion, Unity, 
Fusion, Attraction, Cohesion, Differentiation, Defini- 
tion, and all other Attributes which, by their mere 
existence, qualify all existent things. 

8. And from the same Universal Cause come those 
godlike and angelical Beings, which possess Intelli- 
gence and are apprehended by Intelligence ; and 
from It come our souls and the natural laws of the 
whole universe, and all the qualities which we speak 
of as existing in other objects or as existing merely 
in our thoughts. Yea, from It come the all-holy and 
most reverent Powers, which possess a real existence ^ 
and are grounded, as it were, in the fore-court of the 
Super-Essential Trinity, possessing from It and in It 
their existence and the godlike nature thereof; and, 
after them, those which are inferior to them, possessing 
their inferior existence from the same Source ; and 

1 Cf. Plotinus. 

^ sc. In contradistinction to the Godhead, which (being beyond 
essence) does not literally exist. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 139 

the lowest, possessing from It their lowest existence 
(/. e. lowest compared with the other angels, though 
compared with us it is above our world). And human 
souls and all other creatures possess by the same 
tenure their existence, and their blessedness, and exist 
and are blessed only because they possess their 
existence and their blessedness from the Pre-existent, 
and exist and are blessed in Him, and begin from 
Him and are maintained in Him and attain in Him 
their Final Goal. And the highest measure of 
existence He bestows upon the more exalted Beings, 
which the Scripture calls eternal ; ^ but also the mere 
existence of the world as a whole is perpetual ; and 
its very existence comes from the Pre-existent. He 
is not an Attribute of Being, but Being is an Attribute 
of Him ; He is not contained in Being, but Being is 
contained in Him ; He doth not possess Being, but 
Being possesses Him ; He is the Eternity, the Begin- 
ning, and the Measure of Existence, being anterior to 
Essence and essential Existence and Eternity, because 
He is the Creative Beginning, Middle, and End of all 
things. And hence the truly Pre-existent receives 
from the Holy Scripture manifold attributions drawn 
from every kind of existence ; and states of being 
and processes (whether past, present, or future) are 
properly attributed to Him ; for all these attributions, 
if their divine meaning be perceived, signify that He 
hath a Super-Essential Existence fulfilling all our 
categories, and is the Cause producing every mode of 
existence. For He is not This without being That ; 
nor doth He possess this mode of being without 
that. On the contrary He is all things as being the 
Cause of them all, and as holding together and 
anticipating in Himself all the beginnings and all the 
fulfilments of all things ; and He is above them all 
in tliat He, anterior to their existence, super-essentially 

^ 2 Cor. iv. 18, 

140 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

transcends them all. Hence all attributes may be 
jl affirmed at once of Him, and yet He is No Thing.^ 
He possesses all shape and form, and yet is formless 
and shapeless, containing beforehand incompre- 
hensibly and transcendently the beginning, middle, 
and end of all things, and shedding upon them a 
pure radiance of that one and undifferenced causality 
whence all their fairness comes. ^ For if our sun, 
while still remaining one luminary and shedding one 
unbroken light, acts on the essences and qualities of 
the things which we perceive, many and various 
though they be, renewing, nourishing, guarding, and 
perfecting them ; differencing them, unifying them, 
warming them and making them fruitful, causing 
them to grow, to change, to take root and to burst 
forth ; quickening them and giving them life, so that 
each one possesses in its own way a share in the 
same single sun — if the single sun contains beforehand 
in itself under the form of an unity the causes of all 
the things that participate in it ; much more doth 
this truth hold good with the Cause which produced 
the sun and all things ; and all the Exemplars ^ of 
existent things must pre-exist in It under the form of 
one Super-Essential Unity."^ For It produces Essences 
only by an outgoing from Essence. And we give 
^'' the name of " Exemplars " to those laws which, pre- 
existent in God ^ as an Unity, produce the essences 
of things : laws which are called in Divine Science 

^ Cf. Theol. Gertn. passim. Hence the soul possessing God is in a 
state of "having nothing and yet possessing all things." Cf. Dante, 
cio c he per I' universa si squaderna, etc. 

^ Cf. Section 5. , 

3 i. e. The Platonic ideas of things — their ultimate essences. Bat 
see below. 

* Cf. Blake. "Jerusalem," ^^//w. 

* i. e. If It produces the essences of things, It must first contain 
Essence. D. here uses the term " God " because he is thinking of the 
Absolute in Its emanating activity (wherein the Differentiations of 
the Trinity appear). 

THE DIVINE NAMES 141 

" Preordinations " or Divine and beneficent Volitions, 
laws which ordain things and create them, laws 
whereby the Super-Essential preordained and brought 
into being the whole universe. 

9. And whereas the philosopher Clement^ maintains 
that the title " Exemplar " may, in a sense, be applied 
to the more important types in the visible world, he 
employs not the terms of his discourse in their proper, 
perfect and simple meaning.^ But even if we grant 

1 This is apparently the Bishop of Rome {c. A, D. 95), writer of the 
well-known Epistle to the Corinthians, which is the earliest Christian 
writing outside the New Testament, and is published in Lightfoot's 
Apostolic Fathers. But no such passage as D. alludes to occurs in the 
Epistle, which is his one extant writing. 

^ Cf. St. Augustine, Co;>imeniary on St. John, Tr. XXL, § 2 : " Ubi 
demonstrat Filio Pater quod facit nisi in ipso Filio per quem facit? 
.... Si quid facit Pater per Filium facit ; si per sapientiam suam et 
virtutem suam facit ; non extra illi ostendit quod videat ... in ipso illi 
ostendit quod facit. ... (3) Quid videt Pater, vol potius quid videt 
Filius in Patre . . . et ipse." (The Son beholds all things in Plimself, 
and is Himself in the Father.) 

All things ultimately and timelessly exist in the Absolute. It is 
their Essence (or Super-Essence). Their creation from the Absolute 
into actual existence is performed by the Differentiated Persons of the 
Trinity : the Father working by the Spirit through the Son. Thus 
the Differentiated Persons (to which together is given the Name of 
God) being the 77ianifested Absolute, contain eternally those fused yet 
distinct essences of things which exist in the Absolute as a single yet 
manifold Essence. This Essence they, by their mutual operation, pour 
forth, so that while ultimately contained in (or, rather identified with) 
the Absolute, it is in this world of relationships distinct and separate 
from the Differentiated Persons Which together are God, being in 
fact, a created manifestation of the Absolute, as God is an Uncreated 
Manifestation Thereof. 

This created Essence of the world itself becomes differentiated into 
the separate creatures (water, earth, plants, animals, etc.), having this 
tendency because it contains within itself their separate generic forms 
which seek expression in the various particular things. Wherever we 
can trace a law or purpose it is due to the presence of a generic form. 
Thus vapour condenses into water in obedience to the generic form of 
water, and an oak-tree grows to its full stature in obedience to the 
generic form of the oak. So too with works of art. A cathedral is 
built in accordance with a plan or purpose, and this plan is the pre- 
existent generic form of the building ; whereas a fortuitous heap of 
stones does not (as such) manifest any plan, and therefore has no 
generic form. 

142 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the truth of his contention, we must remember the 
Scripture which saith : " I did not show these things 
unto thee that thou mightest follow after them," but 
that through such knowledge of these as is suited to 
our faculties we may be led up (so far as is possible) 
to the Universal Cause. We must then attribute unto 
It all things in one All-Transcendent Unity, inasmuch 
as, starting from Being, and setting in motion the 
creative Emanation and Goodness, and penetrating 
all things, and filling all things with Being from Itself, 
and rejoicing in all things, It anticipates all things 
in Itself, in one exceeding simplicity rejecting all 
reduplication ; and It embraces all things alike in 
the Transcendent Unity of Its infinitude, and is 
indivisibly shared by all (even as a sound, while 
remaining one and the same, is shared as one by 
several pairs of ears). 
r lo. Thus the Pre-existent is the Beginning and 
the End of all things : the Beginning as their Cause, 
the End as their Final Purpose. He bounds all 
things and yet is their boundless Infinitude, in a 
manner that transcends all the opposition between 
the Finite and the Infinite.^ For, as hath been often 

D. attributing to Clement (perhaps fictitiously) the view that generic 
forms can in themselves — i. e. in their created essence — be properly 
called Exemplars, maintains that this is not strictly accurate. Properly 
speaking, he says, they are Exemplars only as existent in God, and not 
as projected out from Him. If, by a licence, we call them Exemplars, 
yet we must not let our minds rest in them, but must pass on at once 
to find their true being in God. 

This apparent hair-splitting is really of the utmost practical impor- 
tance. D. is attacking the irreligious attitude in science, philosophy, 
and life. We must seek for all things (including our own personalities) 
not in themselves but in God. The great defect of Natural Science 
in the nineteenth century was its failure to do this. It was, perhaps, 
the defect of Gnosticism in earlier days, and is the pitfall of Occultism 
to-day. 

^ i. e. He gives each thing its distinctness while yet containing 
infinite possibilities of development for it. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 143 

said, He contains beforehand and did create all ^ 
things in One Act, being present unto all and every- 
where, both in the particular individual and in the 
Universal Whole, and going out unto all things while» 
yet remaining in Himself. He is both at rest and in 
motion,^ and yet is in neither state, nor hath He 
beginning, middle, or end ; He neither inheres in any 
individual thing, nor is He any individual thing. ^ We 
cannot apply to Him any attribute of eternal things 
nor of temporal things. He transcends both Time ^ 
and Eternity, and all things that are in either of 
them ; inasmuch as Very Eternity ^ and the world 
with its standard of measurement and the things 
which are measured by those standards have their 
being through Him and from Him. But concerning 
these matters let that suffice which hath been spoken 
more properly elsewhere. 

^ He is always yearning yet always satisfied. Cf. St. Augustine, 
Confessions, ad in. A reproduction of this state has been experienced 
by some of the Saints. Cf. Julian of Norwicli : "I had Him and I 
wanted Him." 

" He is the ultimate Reality of all beings, and is not one Being 
among others. 

^ Very Eternity perhaps corresponds to the aeternitas of St. Thomas 
and Eternity to his aevujfi (with which cf. Bergson's dur^e). Eternity 
is a totum simul without beginning or end, aevmn is a toUcm sijnul 
with beginning but no end. It is eternity reached through Time, or 
Time accelerated to the stillness of infinite motion and so chan>;ed 
into Eternity, as in human souls when finally clothed with perfected 
immortality. 

The Absolute, or Godhead, is beyond Very Eternity, because this 
latter is a medium of differentiated existence (for the differentiated 
Persons of the Trinity exist in it), whereas the Godhead is undifferenti- 
ated and beyond relationships. This world of Time springs out of 
Very Eternity and is rooted therein, being made by the differentiated 
Persons. 

144 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

CHAPTER VI 

Concerning " Zz/i?." 

1. Now must we celebrate Eternal Life as that 
whence cometh very Life and all life,^ which also 
endues every kind of living creature with its appropriate 
meed of Life. Now the Life of the immortal Angels 
and their immortality, and the very indestructibility of 
their perpetual motion, exists and is derived from It and 
for Its sake. Hence they are called Ever-living and 
Immortal, and yet again are denied to be immortal, 
because they are not the source of their own immor- 
tality and eternal life, but derive it from the creative 
Cause which produces and maintains all life. And, 
as, in thinking of the title "Existent," we said that It 
is an Eternity of very Being, so do we now say that 
the Supra-Vital or Divine Life is the Vitalizer and 
Creator of Life. And all life and vital movement 
comes from the Life which is beyond all Life and 
beyond every Principle of all Life. Thence have souls 
their indestructible quality, and all animals and plants 
possess their life as a far-off reflection of that Life. 
When this is taken away, as saith the Scripture, all 
life fades ; ^ and those which have faded, through 
being unable to participate therein, when they turn to 
It again revive once more. 

2. In the first place It gives to Very Life its vital 
quality, and to all life and every form thereof It gives 
the Existence appropriate to each. To the celestial 
forms of life it gives their immaterial, godlike, and 

^ The Godhead, though called Eternal Life, is really supra-vital, 
because life implies differentiations, and the Godhead as such is un- 
differentiated. This Supra- Vitality passes out through the Differenti- 
ated Persons of the Trinity into Very Life, whence life is derived to all 
the creatures. 

* Ps. cir. 29, 30. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 145 

unchangeable immortality and their unswerving- and 
unerring perpetuity of motion ; and, in the abundance 
of Its bounty, It overflows even into the life of the 
devils, for not even diabolic life derives its existence 
from any other source, but derives from This both its 
vital nature and its permanence. And, bestowing 
upon men such angelic life as their composite nature 
can receive, in an overflowing wealth of love It turns 
and calls us from our errors to Itself, and (still 
Diviner act) It hath promised to change our whole 
being (I mean our souls and the bodies linked 
therewith) to perfect Life and Immortality, which 
seemed to the ancients unnatural, but seems to me and 
thee and to the Truth a Divine and Supernatural 
thing : Supernatural, I say, as being above the visible 
; order of nature around us, not as being above the 
j Nature of Divine Life. For unto this Life (since it is 
the Nature of all forms of life,^and especially of those 
which are more Divine) no form of life is unnatural 
or supernatural. And therefore fond Simon's cap- 
tious arguments^ on this subject must find no entry 
into the company of God's servants or into thy 
blessed soul. For, in spite of his reputed wisdom, he 
forgot that no one of sound mind should set the 
superficial order of sense-perception against the In- 
visible Cause of all things.^ We must tell him that 
if there is aught " against Nature " 'tis his language. 
For naught can be contrary to the Ultimate Cause. 

3. From this Source all animals and plants receive 
their life and warmth. And wherever (under the 
form of intelligence, reason, sensation, nutrition, 
growth, or any mode whatsoever) you find life or the 

^ i. e. The ultimate Principle. 

~ Simon denied the Resurrection of the Body. Vide Irenceus, 
Origen, Hippolytus, Epiphanius. 

3 Physical life has behind it Eternal Life, by which it is in the true 
sense natural for it to be renewed and transformed. 

146 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Principle of life or the Essence of life, there you find 
that which lives and imparts life from the Life tran- 
scending all life, and indivisibly^ pre-exists therein as 
in its Cause. For the Supra-Vital and Primal Life is 
the Cause of all Life, and produces and fulfils it and 
individualizes it. And we must draw from all life the 
attributes we apply to It when we consider how It 
teems with all living things, and how under manifold 
forms It is beheld and praised in all Life and lacketh 
not Life or rather abounds therein, and indeed hath 
Very Life, and how It produces life in a Supra-Vital 
manner and is above all life ^ and therefore is 
described by whatsoever human terms may express 
that Life which is ineffable. 

CHAPTER VII 

Concerjiing " Wisdom^' " Mi7id^' " Reaso?!," " Truth,'' " Faith:' 

I, Now, if it like thee, let iis consider the Good and 
Eternal Life as Wise and as Very Wisdom, or rather 
as the Fount of all wisdom and as Transcending all 
wisdom and understanding. Not only is God so over- 
flowing with wisdom that there is no limit to His 
understanding, but He even transcends all Reason, 
Intelligence, and Wisdom.^ And this is supernatur- 
ally perceived by the truly divine man (who hath 

^ Since Eternal Life is undifferentiated, all things have in It a 
common or identical life, as all plants and animals have a common life 
in the air they breathe. 

^ See p. 144, n. I. 

^ All wisdom or knowledge implies the distinction between thinker 
and object of thought. The undifferentiated Godhead is beyond this 
distinction ; but (in a sense) it exists in the Persons of the Trinity and 
between them and the world, and hence from Them comes Absolute 
Wisdom, though the Godhead transcends it. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 147 

been as a luminary both to us and to our teacher) 
when he says : " The fooHshness of God is wiser than 
men." ^ And these words are true not only because 
all human thought is a kind of error when compared 
with the immovable permanence of the perfect 
thoughts which belong to God, but also because it is 
customary for writers on Divinity to apply negative 
terms to God in a sense contrary to the usual one. 
For instance, the Scripture calls the Light that shines 
on all things "Terrible,"and Him that hath many Titles 
and many Names "Ineffable" and "Nameless," and 
Him that is present to all things and to be discovered 
from them all "Incomprehensible" and "Unsearch- 
able." In the same manner, it is thought, the divine 
Apostle, on the present occasion, when he speaks of 
God's " foolishness," is using in a higher sense the ap- 
parent strangeness and absurdity implied in the word, 
so as to hint at the ineffable Truth which is before all 
Reason. But, as I have said elsewhere, we misinter- ; 
pret things above us by our own conceits and cling to 
the familiar notions of our senses, and, measuring 
Divine things by our human standards, we are led 
astray by the superficial meaning of the Divine and 
Ineffable Truth. Rather should we then consider 
that while the human Intellect hath a faculty of 
Intelligence, whereby it perceives intellectual truths, 
yet the act whereby the Intellect communes with the 
things that are be}'ond it transcends its intellectual 
nature. 2 This transcendent sense, therefore, must be 
given to our language about God, and not our human 
sense. We must be transported wholly out of our- 
selves and given unto God. For 'tis better to belong , 
unto God and not unto ourselves, since thus will the 1 

1 I Cor. i. 25. 

2 This is the Doctrine of Unknowing. 

Cf. "Through love, through hope, and faith's transcendent dower, 
We feel that we are mightier than we know." 

148 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Divine Bounties be bestowed, if we are united to 
God.i Speaking, then, in a transcendent manner of 
this " Foolish Wisdom," - which hath neither Reason 
nor Intelligence, let us say that It is the Cause of all 
Intelligence and Reason, and of all Wisdom and 
Understanding, and that all counsel belongs unto It, 
and from It comes all Knowledge and Understanding, 
and in It ''are hid all the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge."^ For it naturally follows from what 
hath already been said that the All-wise (and more 
than Wise) Cause is the Fount of Very Wisdom and 
of created wisdom both as a whole and in each 
individual instance.* 

2. From It the intelligible and intelligent powers of 
the Angelic Minds derive their blessed simple percep- 
tions, not collecting their knowledge of God in partial 
fragments or from partial activities of Sensation or of 
discursive Reason, nor yet being circumscribed by 
aught that is akin to these,^ but rather, being free 
from all taint of matter and multiplicity, they perceive 
the spiritual truths of Divine things in a single 
immaterial and spiritual intuition. And their intui- 
tive faculty and activity shines in its unalloyed and 
undefiled purity and possesses its Divine intuitions all 
together in an indivisible and immaterial manner, being 
by that Godlike unification made similar (as far as 
may be) to the Supra-Sapient Mind and Reason of 

1 The term "Go'l'" is rightly used here because the manifesled 
Absolute is meant. 

" I Cor. i. 25. 2 Col. ii. 3. 

•* (i) Very Wisdom = Wisdom in the abstract. 

(2) Wisdom as a whole = Wisdom embodied in the universe as a 

whole. 

(3) Wisdom in each individual instance = Wisdom as shown in 

the structure of some particular plant or animal, or part of 
a plant or animal. 

(i) Is an Emanation ; (2) and (3) are created. 
^ /. e. They are not limited by the material world, which, with its 
laws, is known through sensation an4 discursive reason. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 149 

God through the working of the Divine Wisdom.^ 
And human souls possess Reason, whereby they turn 
with a discursive motion round about the Truth of 
things, and, through the partial and manifold activities 
of their complex nature, are inferior to the Unified 
Intelligences: yet they too, through the concentration 
of their many faculties, are vouchsafed (so far as their 
nature allows) intuitions like unto those of the 
Angels. Nay, even our sense-perceptions themselves 
may be rightly described as an echo of that Wisdom ; 
even diabolic intelligence, qua intelligence, belongs 
thereto, though in so far as it is a distraught intelli- 
gence, not knowing how to obtain its true desire, nor 
wishing to obtain it, we must call it rather a declen- 
sion from Wisdom. Nov/ we have already said that 
the Divine Wisdom is the Beginning, the Cause, the 
Fount, the Perfecting Power, the Protector and the 
Goal of Very Wisdom and all created Wisdom, and of 
all Mind, Reason, and Sense-Perception. We must 
now ask in what sense God,^ W'ho is Supra-Sapient, 
can be spoken of as Wisdom, Mind, Reason, and 
Knowledge? How can He have an intellectual intui- 
tion of intelligible things when He possesses no 
intellectual activities? Or how can He know the 
things perceived by sense when His existence tran- 
scends all sense-perception ? And yet the Scripture 
says that He knoweth all things and that nothing 
escapes the Divine Knowledge. But, as I have often 
said, we must interpret Divine Things in a manner 

^ This speculation is, no doubt, based on experience. A concentra- 
tion of the spiritual faculties in the act of contemplation produces that 
unity of the soul of which all mystics often speak. The angels are 
conceived of as being always in such a state of contemplation. 

^ God is the Manifested Absolute. Plence qua Absolute He is 
supra-sapient, qtia Manifested He is wise (cf, ch. i, § i). The Persons 
of the Trinity possess one common Godhead (=the Absolute) which 
is supra-sapient, and in that Godhead. They arc One. Yet they are 
known by us only in their differentiation wherein Supra-Sapience is 
revealed as Wisdom. 

150 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

suitable to their nature. For the lack of Mind and 
^- Sensation must be predicated of God by excess and 
not by defect.^ And in the same way we attribute 
lack of Reason to Him that is above Reason, and 
Imperfectibility to Him that is above and before Per- 
fection ; and Intangible and Invisible Darkness we 
attribute to that Light which is Unapproachable 
because It so far exceeds the visible light. And thus 
the Mind of God embraces all things in an utterly 
transcendent knowledge and, in Its causal relation to 
all things, anticipates within Itself the knowledge of 
them all — knowing and creating angels before the 
angels were, and knowing all other things inwardly 
and (if I may so put it) from the very beginning, and 
thus bringing them into existence. And methinks 
this is taught by the Scripture when it saith " Who 
knoweth all things before their birth." ^ For the Mind 
of God gains not Its knowledge of things from those 
things; but of Itself and in Itself It possesses, and 
hath conceived beforehand in a causal manner, the 
cognizance and the knowledge and the being of them 
all. And It doth not perceive each class specifically,^ 
but in one embracing casuality It knows and main- 
tains all things — even as Light possesses beforehand^ 
in itself a causal knowledge of the darkness, not know-" 
ing the darkness in any other way than from the 

Light.* Thus the Divine Wisdom in knowing Itself 

\ 

^^ Via Negativa. It is not mere negation. 

^ Susannah 42. 

' "According to its idea," "according to the law of its species." 
We perceive that this is a rose and that is a horse because we have 
two separate notions in our minds — one the notion of a rose and the 
other that of a horse. But in the Divine Knowledge there is only 
one Notion wherein such specific notions are elements, as the activities 
of several nerves -are elements in one indivisible sensation of taste, or 
touch, or smell. 

* i. (f. Suppose the light were conscious, and knew its own nature, it 
would know that if it withheld its brightness there would be darkness 
(for the very nature of light is that it dispels, or at least prevents, 

THE DIVINE NAMES 151 

will know all things : will in that very Oneness know 
and produce material things immaterially, divisible 
things indivisibly, manifold things under the form of 
Unity. For if God, in the act of causation, imparts 
Existence to all things, in the same single act of caus- 
ation He will support all these His creatures the 
which are derived from Him and have in Him their 
forebeing, and He will not gain His knowledge of 
things from the things themselves, but He will bestow 
upon each kind the knowledge of itself and the know- 
ledge of the others. i\nd hence God doth not possess 
a private knowledge of Himself and as distinct there- 
from a knowledge embracing all the creatures in 
common ; for the Universal Cause, in knowing Itself, 
can scarcely help knowing the things that proceed 
from it and whereof It is the Cause. With this know- 
ledge, then, God knoweth all things, not through a 
mere understanding of the things but through an 
understanding of Himself. For the angels, too, are 
said by the Scripture to know the things upon earth 
not through a sense-perception of them (though they 
are such as may be perceived this way), but through 
a faculty and nature inherent in a Godlike Intelligence. 
3. Furthermore, we must ask how it is that we know 
God when He cannot be perceived by the mind or 
the senses and is not a particular Being. Perhaps 
'tis true to say that we know not God by His Nature 
(for this is unknowable and beyond the reach of all 
Reason and Intuition), yet by means of that ordering 
of all things which (being as it were projected out of 

darkness). On the other hand, the light could not directly know the 
darkness, because darkness cannot exist where there is light. The 
simile is capable of being applied to illustrate God's knowledge of the 
world, because the world is imperfect. It applies more fundamentally 
to God's knowledge of evil, and is so employed by St. Thomas Aquinas, 
who quotes this passage and says {Summa, xiv. lo) that, since evil is 
the lack of good, God knows evil things in the act by which He knows 
good things, as we know darkness through knowing light. 

-^t 

:52 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Him) possesses certain images and semblances of His 
Divine Exemplars, wc mount upwards (so far as our 
feet can tread that ordered path), advancing through 
the Negation and Transcendence of all things and 
through a conception of an Universal Cause, towards 
That Which is beyond all things.^ Hence God is 
known in all things and apart from all things ; and 
God is known through Knowledge and through Un- 
j knowing, and on the one hand He is reached by 
Intuition, Reason, Understanding, Apprehension, 
Perception, Conjecture, Appearance, Name, etc.; and 
yet, on the other hand, He cannot be grasped by 
I Intuition, Language, or Name, and He is not anything 
in the world nor is He known in anything. He is All 
^Things in all things and Nothing in any,^ and is 
nown from all things unto all men, and is not known 
"rqm any unto any man. 'Tis meet that we employ 
uch terms concerning God, and we get from all 
jhings (in proportion to their quality) notions of Him 
'ho is their Creator. And yet on the other hand, 
e Divinest Knowledge of God, the which is received' 
rough Unknowing, is obtained in that communion 
hich transcends the mind, when the mind, turning 
way from all things and then leaving even itself 
behind, is united to the Dazzling Rays, being from 
them and in them, illumined by the unsearchable 
depth of Wisdom.^ Nevertheless, as I said, we must 

^ God, being the Manifested Absolute, exists on two planes at once : 
that of Undifferentiation and that of Differentiation. On this second 
plane He moves out into creative activity. And thus He is both 
knowable and unknowable : knowable in so far as He passes outwards 
into such activity, unknowable in that His Being passes inwards into 
Undifferentiation. Thus He is known in His acts but not in His 
ultimate Nature. 

^ He is the Super-Essence of all things, wherein all things possess 
their true being outside of themselves [as our perceptions are outside 
of ourselves in the things we perceive. ( Vide Bergson, A/aiiere et 
Mhnoire. )]. 

'^ This is experience and not mere theor)\ 

THE DIVINE NAMES 15;^ 

draw this knowledge of Wisdom from all things ; for 
wisdom it is (as saith the Scripture) ^ that hath made 
all things and ever ordereth them all, and is the 
Cause of the indissoluble harmony and order of all 
things, perpetually fitting the end of one part unto 
the beginning of the second, and thus producing the 
one fair agreement and concord of the whole. 

4. And God is called " Word " or " Reason " 2 by the 
Holy Scriptures, not only because He is the Bestower 
of Reason and Mind and Wisdom, but also because 
He contains beforehand in His own Unity the causes 
of all things, and because He penetrates all things, 
" reaching " (as the Scripture saith) " unto the end of 
all things," ^ and more especially because the Divine 
Reason is more simple than all simplicity, and, in the 
transcendence of Its Super-Essential Being, is inde- 
pendent of all things.^ This Reason is the simple 
and verily existent Truth : that pure and infallible 
Omniscience round which divinely inspired Faith 
revolves. It is the permanent Ground of the faith- 
ful, w^hich builds them in the Truth and builds the 
Truth in them by an unwavering firmness, through 
which they possess a simple knowledge of the Truth 
of those things which they believe.^ For if Know- 
ledge unites the know'er and the objects of knowledge, 

^ Piov, viii. 

'■^ The reference is, of course, to the opening verses of St. John's 
Gospel. The present passage shows that by the term "God" D. 
means not one Differentiation of the Godhead singly (/. e. not God 
the Father), but all Three Differentiations together ; the undivided 
(though differentiated) Trinity. 

^ Wisdom viii. i. 

* God is called Reason: (i) because lie is the Giver of reason ; 
(2) because reason causes unity {e.g. it unifies our thoughts, making 
them coherent), and God in His creative activity causes unity and in 
His ultimate Godhead is Unity. 

^ The Divine Omniscience is: (i) the Object of our faith because 
we trust in it ; (2) the Ground of our faith because the development 
of our faith comes from it. Faith is a faint image of Divine Know- 
ledge, and is gradually perfected by being changed into knowledge. / 
L ^ 

154 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

and if ignorance is always a cause of change and of 
self-discrepancy in the ignorant, naught (as saith 
Holy Scripture) shall separate him that believeth in 
the Truth from the Foundation of true faith on which 
he shall possess the permanence of immovable and 
unchanging firmness. For surely knoweth he who 
is united to the Truth that it is well with him, even 
though the multitude reprove him as one out of his 
mind. Naturally they perceive not that he is but 
come out of an erring mind unto the Truth through 
right faith. But he verily knows that instead of 
being, as they say, distraught, he hath been relieved 
from the unstable ever-changing movements which 
tossed him hither and thither in the mazes of error, 
and hath been set at liberty through the simple 
immutable and unchanging Truth. Thus is it that 
the Teachers from whom we have learnt our know- 
ledge of Divine Wisdom die daily for the Truth, 
bearing their natural witness in every word and deed 
to the single Knowledge of the Truth which Chris- 
tians possess : yea, showing that It is more simple 
and divine than all other kinds of knowledge, or 
rather that it is the only true, one, simple Knowledge 
of God. 

CHAPTER VHI 

CoJice7-ning '■'■Power" "Righteousness/^ ^'- Salvation'^ 
" Rede?nptiofi" J and also concer7iing "Inequality." 

I. Now since the Sacred Writers speak of the 
Divine Truthfulness and Supra-Sapient Wisdom 
as Power, and as Righteousnes, and call It Salvation 
and Redemption, let us endeavour to unravel these 
Divine Names also. Now I do not think that any 
one nurtured in Holy Scripture can fail to know 

THE DIVINE NAMES 155 

that the Godhead transcends and exceeds every mode 
of Power however conceived. For often Scripture 
attributes the Dominion to the Godhead and thus 
distinguishes It even from the Celestial Powers.^ In 
what sense, then, do the Sacred Writers speak ^f It 
also as Power when It transcends all Power? Or in 
what sense can we take the title Power when applied 
to the Godhead ? 

2. We answer thus: God is Power because in 
His_g\yjri--Self He contains all power beforehand and 
exceeds it, and because He is the Cause of all power 
and produces all things by a power which may not be 
thwarted nor circumscribed, and because He is the 
Cause wherefrom Power exists whether in the whole 
system of the world or in any particular part.^ Yea, 
He is Infinitely Powerful not only in that all Power 
comes from Him, but also because He is above all 
power and is Very Power, and possesses that excess 
of Power which produces in infinite ways an infinite 
number of other existent powers; and because the 
infinitude of powers which is continually being multi- 
plied to infinity can never blunt that transcendently 
infinite^ activity of His Power whence all power 
comes ; and because of the unutterable, unknowable, 
inconceivable greatness of His all-transcendent Power 
which, through its excess of potency, gives strength 
to that which is weak and maintains and governs 
the lowest of its created copies, even as, in those 
things whose power strikes our senses, very brilliant 

^ The highest power our minds can conceive is that of the angels. 
But God has the dominion over them, and hence His power is of a yet 
higher kind such as we cannot conceive. 

^ Since the ultimate Godhead is undifferentiated God's power is 
conceived of as an undifferentiated or /f /<?;///«/ energy. 

^ The inexhaustible multiplication of things in this world, though it 
should go on for ever, is a series made up of separate units. God's 
inexhaustible energy is beyond this series because it is one indivisible 
act. The Undifferentiated transcends infinite divisibility. Cf. IX. 2. 

156 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPx\GITE 

illuminations can reach to eyes that are dim and as 
loud sounds can enter ears dull of hearing. (Of 
course that which is utterly incapable of hearing is 
not an ear, and that which cannot see at all is not 
an eye.^) 

3. Thus this distribution of God's Infinite Power 
j| permeates all things, and there is nothing in the 

world utterly bereft of all power. Some power it must 
have, be it in the form of Intuition, Reason, Percep- 
tion, Life, or Being. And indeed, if one may so 
express it, the very fact that power exists ^ is derived 
from the Super-Essential Power. 

4. From this Source come the Godlike Powers of 
the Angelic Orders ; from this Source they immutably 
possess their being and all the ceaseless and immortal 
motions of their spiritual life ; and their very stability 
and unfailing desire for the Good they have received 
from that infinitely good Power which Itself infuses 
into them this power and this existence, and makes 
them ceaselessly to desire existence, and gives them 
the very power to desire that ceaseless power which 
they possess. 

5. The effects of this Inexhaustible Power enter 
(into men and animals and plants and the entire 
\ Nature of the Universe, and fill all the unified 
, organizations with a force attractins: them to mutual 
! harmony and concord, and drawing separate in- 
dividuals into being, according to the natural laws 
and qualities of each, without confusion or merging 
of their properties. And the laws by which this 
Universe is ordered It preserves to fulfil their proper 
functions, and keeps the immortal lives of the in- 
dividual angels inviolate ; and the luminous stars of 

^ This is meant to meet the objection that if God's power is infinite 
tliere should be no decay or death. Thinc^s, says D., are sometimes 
incapable of responding, as a blind eye cannot respond to the light. 

^ i. e Power in the abstract. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 157 

heaven It keeps in all their ranks unchanged, and gives 
unto Eternity the power to be; and the temporal 
orbits It differentiates when they begin their circuits 
and brings together again when they return once 
more ; and It makes the power of fire unquenchable, 
and the liquid nature of water It makes perpetual ; 
and gives the atmosphere its fluidity, and founds the 
earth upon the Void and keeps its pregnant travail 
without ceasing. And It preserves the mutual 
harmony of the interpenetrating elements distinct 
and yet inseparable, and knits together the bond 
uniting soul and body, and stirs the powers by which 
the plants have nourishment and growth, and governs 
the faculties whereby each kind of creature maintains 
its being and makes firm the indissoluble permanence 
of the world, and bestows Deification ^ itself by giving 
a faculty for it unto those that are deified. And, in 
short, there is nothing in the world which is without 
the Almighty Power of God to support and to sur- 
round it. For that which hath no power at all hath 
no existence, no individuality, and no place whatever . 
in the world. \ 

6. But Elymas ^ the sorcerer raises this objection : 
"If God is Omnipotent" (quoth he) "what meaneth 
your Sacred Writer by saying that there are some 
things He cannot do } " And so he blames Paul the 
Divine for saying that God cannot deny Himself.^ 
Now, having stated his objection, I greatly fear that 
I shall be laughed at for my folly, in going about to 
pull down tottering houses built upon the sand by 
idle children, and in striving to aim my arrow at an 
inaccessible target when I endeavour to deal with this 

^ See Intr., p. 43. 

^ The name is introduced to support the fiction of authorship, and 
an objection, current no doubt in the writer's day (as in every age), is 
put into the mouth of one who belonged to the same time as St. Paul's 
Athenian convert. 

2 2 Tim. ii. i^. 

158 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

question of Divinity. ^ But thus I answer him .: The 
denial of the true Self is a declension from Truth. And 
Truth hath Being ; and therefore a declension from 
the Truth is a declension from Being. Now whereas 
Truth hath l^eing and denial of Truth is a declension 
from Being, God cannot fall from Being. We might say 
that He is not lacking in Being, that He cannot lack 
Power, that He knozvs not how to lack Knowledge. 
The wise Elymas, forsooth, did not perceive this ; and 
so is like an unskilled athlete, who (as often happens), 
thinking his adversary to be weak, through judging 
by his own estimation, misses him each time and 
manfully strikes at his shadow, and bravely beating 
the air with vain blows, fancies he hath gotten him a 
victory and boasts of his prowess through ignorance 
of the other's power.- But we striving to shoot our 
guard home to our teacher's mark celebrate the 
Supra-Potent God as Omnipotent, as Blessed and the 
only Potentate, as ruling by His might over Eternity, 
as indwelling every part of the universe, or rather 
as transcending and anticipating all things in His 
Super-Essential Power, as the One Who hath bestowed 
upon all things their capacity to exist, and their exist- 
ence through the rich outpouring of His transcendent 
and abundant Power. 

7. ^g^Jn^J^pd. is, called_"J^ighteousness'' because 
He gives to all things what is right, definIn~g~Pro^ 
p^ortion, Beauty, Order, Arrangement, and all E)is-_ 
positions of Place and Rank for each, in accord an ce 
with that place which is most truly right ; and 
because He causeth each to possess its independent 
activity. For the Divine Righteousness ordains all 
things, and sets their bounds and keeps all things 

^ He seems to mean two disiinct things: (i) The objection is 
childish and needs no answering ; (2) The whole question is beyond 
the reach of our understanding. 

2 This unskilled athlete is not very convincing. Presumably D. 
could not box ! 

THE DIVINE NAMES 159 

unconfused and distinct from one another, and gives \ 
to all things that which is suited to each according to 
the worth which each possesses.^ And if this is true, 
then all those who blame the Divine Righteousness 
stand (unwittingly) self-condemned of flagrant un- 
righteousness ; for they say that immortality should 
belong to mortal things and perfection to the im- 
perfect, and necessary or mechanical motion to those 
which possess free spiritual motion, and immutability 
to those which change, and the power of accomplish- 
ment to the weak, and that temporal things should be 
eternal, and that things which naturally move should be 
unchangeable, and that pleasures which are but for a 
season should last for ever ; and, in short, they would 
interchange the properties of all things. But they 
should know that the Divine Righteousness is found 
in this to be true Righteousness, that it gives to all 
the qualities which befit them, according to the worth 
of each, and that it preserves the nature of each in its 
proper order and power.^ 

I 8. But some one may say : '' It is not right to 
leave holy men unaided to be oppressed by the 
wicked." We must reply, that if those whom you 
call holy love the earthly things which are the objects 
^of material ambition, they have utterly fallen from 
the Desire for God. And I know not how they can 
be called holy where they do this wrong to the things 
which are truly Lovely and Divine, wickedly rejecting 
them for things unworthy of their ambition and their 
love. But if they long for the things that are real, 
then they who desire aught should rejoice when the 

^ Fide sup fa on Exemplars. 

- D. is least satisfactory when he becomes an apologist, and when 

— (like other apologists) he tries to explain away the obvious fact of evil 

and imperfection. Within certain limits what he says will hold. A 

rose fulfils its true function by being a rose, and not by trying to be 

\ an elephant. But to hold that whatever is, is best, is quietism. The 

variety of the world is good, but not its imperfections. 

i6o DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

object of their desire is obtained. Now are they not 
nearer to the angelic virtues when they strive, in their 
desire for Divine Things, to abandon their affection 
towards material things, and manfully to train them- 
selves unto this object in their struggles for the 
Beautiful ? Thus, 'tis true to say that it is more in 
accordance with Divine Righteousness not to lull into 
its destruction the manliness of the noblest characters 
through bestowing material goods upon them, nor to 
leave them without the aid of Divine corrections if 
any one attempt so to corrupt them. It is true Justice 
to strengthen them in their noble and loyal stability, 
and to bestow on them the things which befit their 
high condition.! 

9. This Divine Righteousness is also called the 
Salvation or Preservation of the world, because It 
preserves and keeps the particular being and place of 
each thing inviolate from the rest, and is the inviolate 
Cause of all the particular activity in the world. And 
pif any one speaks of Salvation as the saving Power 
v/hich plucks the world out of the influence of evil, 
we will also certainly accept this account of Salvation 
since Salvation hath so many forms. We shall only 
ask him to add, that the primary Salvation of the 
world is that which preserves all things in their 
proper places without change, conflict, or deteriora- 
tion, and keeps them all severally without strife or 
struggle obeying their proper laws, and banishes all 
inequality and interference from the world, and 
establishes the due capacities of each so that they 
fall not into their opposites nor suffer any trans- 
ferences.^ Indeed, it would be quite in keeping with 

^ True again within certain limits. The Saints are made perfect 
through suffering. But what of the innocent child victims of war 
atrocities ? 

^ Salvation is that which, when persons or things are in a right state, 
keeps them therein ; when they are in a wrong state, transfers them 
thence. The first meaning is positive and essential, the second negative 

THE DIVINE NAMES i6i 

the teaching of the Divine Science to say that this 
Salvation, working in that beneficence which pre- 
serves the world, redeems all things (according as 
each can receive this saving power) so that they fall 
not from their natural virtues. Hence the Sacred 
Writers call It Redemption, both because It allows 
not the things which truly exist ^ " to fall away into 
nothingness," - and also because, should ahything 
stumble into error or disorder and suffer a diminu- 
^n of the perfection of its proper virtues, It redeems 
even this thinq; from the weakness and the loss it 
suffers : filling up that which it lacks and supporting 
its feebleness with Fatherly Love ; raising it from its 
evil state, or rather setting it firmly in its right state ; 
completing once more the virtue it had lost, and 
ordering and arraying its disorder and disarray ; 
making it perfect and releasing it from all its defects. 
So much for this matter and for the Righteousness 
whereby the equality or proportion of all things is 
measured and given its bounds, and all inequality or 
disproportion (which arises from the loss of proportion 
in the individual things) is kept far away. For if one 
considers the inequality shown in the mutual differ- 
ences of all things ifi the world, this also is preserved 
by Righteousness which will not permit a complete 
mutual confusion and disturbance of all things, but 
keeps all things within the several forms naturally 
belonging to each.^ 

and incidental. The Scriptural view includes both sides, with the 
emphasis on the first. Protestantism (being in this as in other matters 
of a negative tendency) ignores the positive side to the great detriment 
of Religion. ^ i. e. All good things. 

2 Nothingness includes (i) mere non-entity ; (2) evil. (Perhaps 
both meanings are intended.) Salvation maintains all good things 
both in their being and in their excellence. If they fell away towards 
nothingness the result is first corrui)tion and then destruction. 

^ The wordtVoTTjs implies that a thing is identical in size, etc. (i) with 
other things ; (2) with its own true nature. It thus = ( i ) " equality " ; 
(2) "rightness." D. maintains that all things possess tlie latter 
though not the former. 

i62 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

CHAPTER IX 

Concernins^ ''Great,'' ''Small:' " Sained' " Differejit:' "Like,'' 
"Vnlikc," " Standi7ig:' "Motion," "Equality:" 

1. Now, since Greatness and Smallness are 
ascribed to the Universal Cause, and Sameness and 
Difference, and Similarity and Dissimilarity, and 
Rest and Motion, let us also consider these Titles of 
the Divine Glory so far as our minds can grasp them. 
Now Greatness is attributed in the Scriptures unto 
God, both in the great firmament and also in the thin 
air whose subtlety reveals the Divine Smallness.^ 
And Sameness is ascribed to Him when the Scripture 
saith, ** Thou art the same," and Difference when He 
is depicted by the same Scriptures as having many 
forms and qualities. And He is spoken of as Similar 
to the creatures, in so far as He is the Creator of 
things similar to Himself and of their similarity ; and 
as Dissimilar from them in so far as there is not His 
like. And He is spoken of as Standing and Immov- 
able and as Seated for ever, and yet as Moving and 
going forth into all things.- These and many similar 
Titles are given by the Scriptures unto God. 

2. Now God is called Great in His peculiar Great- 
ness which giveth of Itself to all things that are great 
and is poured upon all Magnitude from outside and 
stretches far beyond it ; embracing all Space, exceed- 
ing all Number, penetrating beyond all Infinity^ both 

^ Boundless space cannot contain God, yet He is wholly contained 
in a single point of that apparent nothingness which we call air. Cf. 
Section 3. 

^ Cf. St. Augustine, Confessions, i, Section r. 

The great paradox is that God combines perfect Rest and perfect 
Motion. Idealism has seized the first aspect, Pragmatism and Vitalism 
the second. A sense of both is present in the highest Mystical expe- 
rience and in the restful activity or strenuous repose of Love. 

3 Cf. 155, n. 3. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 163 

in Its exceeding fullness and creativ^e magnificence, 
and also in the bounties that weW forth from It, inas- 
much as these, being shared by all in that lavish 
outpouring, yet are totally undiminished and possess 
the same exceeding Fullness, nor are they lessened 
through their distribution, but rather overflow the 
more. This Greatness is Infinite, without Quantity 
and without Number.^ And the excess of Greatness 
reaches to this pitch through the Absolute Transcen- 
dent outpouring of the Incomprehensible Grandeur. 

3. And Smallness, or Rarit}^ is ascribed to God's 
Nature because He is outside all solidity and distance 
and penetrates all things without let or hindrance. 
Indeed, Smallness is the elementary Cause of all 
things ; for you will never find any part of the world 
but participates in that quality of Smallness. This, 
then, is the sense in which we must apply this quality 
to God. It is that which penetrates unhindered unto 
all things and through all things, energizing in them 
and reaching to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of 
joints and marrow ; and being a Discerner of the 
desires and the thoughts of the heart, or rather of all 
things, for there is no creature hid before God. ^ This 
Smallness is without Quantity or Quality;^ It is 
Irrepressible, Infinite, Unlimited, and, while com- 
prehending all things, is Itself Incomprehensible. 

^ It is a Quality, not a quantity. Vulgarity consists in mistaking 
quantity for quality. This has been the mistake of the modern world. 

^ Heb. iv. 12. We can conceive of the mind's search for God in 
two ways : as a journey, (i) outwards, to seek Him beyond the sky, (2) 
inwards, to seek Him in the heart. Fsalm xix. combines both ways. 
So does \he /^a7'ad/so. Dante passes outwards through the concentric 
spheres of space to the Empyrean which is beyond space and encloses 
it. There he sees the Empyrean as a point and his whole journey from 
sphere to sphere as a journey inwards instead of outwards. (Canto 
xxviii. 16.) The Mystics often speak of " seeing God in a Point." 
God is in all things as the source of their existence and natural life ; 
and in us as the Source of our existence and spiritual life. 

^ The Potentiality of all quality is without /d-r/Zc/z/ar quality. Cf 
p. 155, n. 2. 

i64 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

^ 4. And Sameness is attributed to God as a super- 
essentially Eternal and Unchangeable Quality, 
resting in Itself, always existing in the same condition, 
present to all things alike, firmly and inviolably fixed 
on Its own basis in the fair limits of the Super- 
Essential Sameness ; not subject to change, declension, 
deterioration or variation, but remaining Unalloyed, 
Immaterial, utterly Simple, Self-Sufficing, Incapable 
of growth or diminition, and without Birth, not in 
the sense of being as yet unborn or imperfect, nor 
in the sense of not having received birth from this 
source or that, nor yet in the sense of utter non- 
existence ; but in the sense of being wholly or utterly 
Birthless and Eternal and Perfect in Itself and always 
the Same, being self-defined in Its Singleness and 
Sameness, and causing a similar quality of Identity 
to shine forth from Itself upon all things that are 
capable of participating therein and yoking different 
things in harmony together. ^ For It is the boundless 
Richness and Cause of Identity, and contains before- 
hand in Itself all opposites under the form of Identity 
in that one unique Causation which transcends all 
identity." 

5. And Difference is ascribed to God because He 
is, in His providence, present to all things and 
becomes all things in all for the preservation of them 
all,^ while yet remaining in Himself nor ever going 
forth from His own proper Identity in that one 
ceaseless act wherein His life consists ; and thus with 
undeviating power He gives Himself for the Deifica- 

^ It causes eacli thing (i) to be a thing, (2) to co-exist harmoniously 
with other things. 

- It contains the potential existence of all things, however different 
from each other, as the air contains the potential life of all the various 
plants and animals. 

'' Since He is the Super-Essence of all things, their life is 2iltii)iately 
His Life — i. e. He is, in every case, the underlying Reality of their 
individual existence. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 165 

tlon of those that turn to Him.^ And the difference 
of God's various appearances from each other in the 
manifold visions of Him must be held to si^nifv 
something" other than that which was outwardly- 
shown. For just as, supposing we were in thought 
to represent the soul itself in bodily shape, and 
represent this indivisible substance as surrounded by 
bodily parts, we should, in such a case, give the 
surrounding parts a different meaning suited to the 
indivisible nature of the soul, and should interpret 
the head to mean the Intellect, the neck Opinion (as 
being betwixt reason and irrationality), the breast to 
mean Passion, the belly Animal Desire, and the legs 
and feet to mean the Vital Nature : thus using the 
names of bodily parts as symbols of immaterial 
faculties ; even so (and with much greater reason) 
must wc, when speaking of Him that is beyond all 
things, purge from false elements by sacred heavenly 
and mystical explanations the Difference of the 
Forms and Shapes ascribed to God. And, if thou 
wilt attribute unto the intangible and unimaged God, 
the imagery of our threefold bodily dimensions, the 
Divine Breadth is God's exceeding wide Emanation 
over all things. His Length is His Power exceeding 
the Universe, His Depth the Unknown Mystery 
which no creature can comprehend. Only we must 
have a care lest, in expounding these different forms 
and figures we unwittingly confound the incorporeal 
meaning of the Divine Names with the terms of the 
sensible symbols. ^ This matter 1 have dealt with in 
my Syuibolical Divinity: the point I now wish to 

^ Because He is the underlying Reality of our separate personalities, 
which have their true being outside themselves in Him, therefore in 
finding our true selves we find and possess His Being. Cf. St. Bernard : 
Ubi se mihi dedit me mihi reddidit. 

- i. e. We must not take metaphorical titles literally (much bad philo- 
sophy and much sentimentality and also brutality in Religion has come 
from taking anthropomorphic titles of God literally). 

i66 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

make clear is this : we must not suppose that 
Difference in God means any variation of His utterly 
unchanging Sameness. It means, instead, a multi- 
plicity of acts wherein His unity is undisturbed, and 
His all-creative fertility while passing into Emanations 
retains its uniformity in them. 

6. And if God be called Similar (even as He is 
called " Same," to signify that He is wholly and 
altogether like unto Himself in an indivisible Per- 
manence) this appellation of " Similar" we must not 
repudiate. But the Sacred Writers tell us that the 
All-Transcendent God is in Himself unlike any 
being, but that He nevertheless bestows a Divine 
Similitude upon those that turn to Him and strive to 
imitate those qualities which are beyond all definition 
and understanding. And 'tis the power of the Divine 
Similitude that turneth all created things towards 
their Cause. These things, then, must be considered 
similar to God by virtue of the Divine Image and 
Process of Similitude working in them ; and yet we 
must not say that God resembles them any more 
than we should say a man resembles his own portrait. 
For things which are co-ordinate may resemble one 
another, and the term " similarity " may be applied 
indifferently to either member of the pair ; they can 
both be similar to one another through a superior 
principle of Similarity which is common to them both. 
But in the case of the Cause and Its effects we cannot 
admit this interchange. For It doth not bestow the 
state of similarity only on these objects and on those ; 
but God is the Cause of this condition unto all that 
have the quality of Similarity,^ and is the Fount of 
Very Similarity ; - and all the Similarity in the world 

^ If anything derived this quality from some other source than God, 
that thing, instead of standing towards God in the relation of effect to 
Cause, would be co-ordinate with Him. But as it is, a// things stand 
towards God in the relation of effect to Cause. 

2 Vide supa on Very Existence, Very Life, Very Wisdom, etc. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 167 

possesses Its quality through having a trace of the 
Divine Similarity and thus accomphshes the Unifi- 
cation of the creatures. 

7. But what need is there to labour this point ? 
Scripture itself declares ^ that God is Dissimilar to 
the world, and not to be compared therewith. It 
says that He is different from all things, and (what is 
yet more strange) that there is nothing even similar 
to Him. And yet such language contradicts not the 
Similitude of things to Him. For the same things 
are both like unto God and unlike Him : like Him in 
so far as they can imitate Him that is beyond 
imitation, unlike Him in so far as the effects fall short 
of the Cause and are infinitely and incomparably 
inferior. 

8. Now what say we concerning the Divine attri- 
butes of " Standing " and " Sitting '' } Merely this — 
that God remains What He is in Himself and is 
firmly fixed in an immovable Sameness wherein His 
transcendent Being is fast rooted, and that He acts 
under the same modes and around the same Centre 
without changing ; and that He is wholly Self-Sub- 
sistent in His Stabilit}', possessing Very Immutability 
and an entire Immobility, and that He is all this in 
a Super-Essential manner.^ For He is the Cause of 
the stability and rest of all things : He who is beyond 
all Rest and Standing. And in Him all things have 
their consistency and are preserved, so as not to be 
shaken from the stability of their proper virtues. 

9. And what is meant, on the other hand, when 
the Sacred Writers say that the Immovable God 
moves and goes forth unto all things .'' Must we not 
understand this also in a manner befitting God ? 
Reverence bids us regard His motion to imply no 
change of place, variation, alteration, turning or 

^ Cf. e. g. Ps. Ixxxvi. 8. 

^ i. e. This stability is due to Undififerentiation. 

i68 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

locomotion, whether straightforward, circular, or com- 
pounded of both ; or whether belonging to mind, soul, 
or natural powers ; but to mean that God brings all 
things into being and sustains them,^ and exerts all 
manner of Providence over them, and is present to 
them all, holding them in His incomprehensible 
embrace, and exercising over them all His provi- 
dential Emanations and Activities. Nevertheless our 
reason must agree to attribute movements to the 
I mi mutable God in such a sense as befits Him. 
Straightness we must understand to mean Directness 
of aim and the unswerving Emanation of His 
energies, and the outbirth of all things from Him. 
,', His Spiral Movement must be taken to mean the 
ycombination of a persistent Emanation and a pro- 
ductive Stillness. And His Circular Movement must 
be taken to mean His Sameness, wherein He holds 
toijcther the intermediate orders and those at either 
extremity, so as to embrace each other, and the act 
whereby the things that have gone forth from Him 
return to Him again. 

lo. And if any one takes the Scriptural Title of 
" Same," or that of " Righteousness," as implying 
Equality, we must call God " Equal," not only because 
^^He is without parts and doth not swerve from His 
purpose, but also because He penetrates equally to 
i all things and through all, and is the Fount of Very 
Equality, whereby He worketh equally the uniform 
interpenetration of all things and the participation 
thereof possessed by things which (each according to 
its capacity) have an equal share therein, and the 
equal - power bestowed upon all according to their 
worth ; and because all Equality (perceived or exer- 
cised by the intellect, or possessed in the sphere of 

^ St. Augustine frequently explains God's activity to consist in His 
causing His creatures to act, while Himself resting. 
2 i. e. "Due," " right," cf. p. i6i, n. 3. 

THE DIVINE NAMES i6q 

reason, sensation, essence, nature, or will) is trans- 
cendently contained beforehand as an Unity in Him 
through that Power, exceeding all things, which 
brings all Equality into existence. 

C 

:hapter X 

Concerjiing '''■ Omnipote7it^'' ''' A?icie?it of Days''; and also 
concerning '"'' Eternity''' and'''' Time." 

1. Now 'tis time that our Discourse should 
celebrate God (Whose Names are many) as " Omni- 
potent " and " Ancient of Days." The former title is 
given Him because He is that All-Powerful Founda- 
tion of all things which maintains and embraces the 
Universe, founding and establishing and compacting 
it ; knitting the whole together in Himself without a 
rift, producing the Universe out of Himself as out of 
an all-powerful Root, and attracting all things back 
into Himself as unto an all-powerful Receptacle, 
holding them all together as their Omnipotent 
Foundation, and securing them all in this condition 
with an all-transcendent bond suffering them not to 
fall away from Himself, nor (by being removed from 
out of that perfect Resting Place) to come utterly to 
destruction. Moreover, the Supreme Godhead is 
called "Omnipotent" because It is potent over all 
things, and rules with unalloyed sovran ty over the 
world It governs ; and because It is the Object of 
desire and yearning for all, and casts on all Its 
voluntary yoke and sweet travail of Divine all- 
powerful and indestructible Desire for Its Goodness. 

2. And " Ancient of Days " is a title given to God 
because He is the Eternity^ of all things and their 

1 In the Super-Essence each thing has its ultimate and timeless 
being. 

- M " . 

.O 

i 

170 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Time,^ and is anterior ^ to Days and anterior to 
Eternity and Time. And the titles " Time," " Day," 
" Season," and " Eternity " must be applied to Him in 
a Divine sense, to mean One Who is utterly in- 
capable of all change and movement and, in His 
eternal motion, remains at rest ; ^ and Who is the 
Cause whence Eternity, Time, and Days are derived. 
Wherefore in the Sacred Theophanies revealed in 
mystic Visions He is described as Ancient and yet 
as Young : the former title signifying that He is the 
Primal Being, existent from the beginning, and the 
latter that He grows not old. Or both titles 
together teach that He goes forth from the Beginning 
through the entire process of the world unto the 
End. Or, as the Divine Initiator^ tells us, either 
term implies the Primal Being of God : the term 
"Ancient" signifying that He is First in point of 
Time, and the term '' Young" that He possesses the 
Primacy in point of Number, since Unity and the 
properties of Unity have a primacy over the more 
advanced numbers.^ 

3. Need is there, methinks, that we understand the 
sense in which Scripture speaketh of Time and 
lUernity. For where Scripture speaks of things as 
" eternal " it doth not always mean things that are 
absolutely Uncreated or verily Everlasting, Incor- 

^ In the Super-Essence each thing has the limit?; of its duiati >n 
predetermined. Or else D. means that in the Super-Essence the move- 
ment of Time has the impulse which generates it. 

2 Temporal precedence is metaphorically used to express meta- 
physical precedence. God cannot in the literal sense of the words, 
tempo) ally precede time. 

3 He transcends both Rest and Motion. 
* Presumably Hierotheus. 

^ He is the Source of all extension both in Time and in Space, 
Unitv underlies all counting (for 2, 3, 4, etc. =twice I, three limes I, 
four times i, etc.). Hence it is the Origin, as it were, of all number. 
And, being at the beginning of the arithmetical series (as youth is at the 
beginning of life) it is symbolized (according to D.) by youthfulness. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 171 

ruptible, Immortal, Invariable, and Immutable 
{e.g. " Be ye lift up, ye eternal doors," ^ and such- 
like passages). Often it gives the name of " Eternal " 
to anything very ancient ; and sometimes, again, it 
applies the term " Eternity " to the whole course 
of earthly Time, inasmuch as it is the property 
of Eternity to be ancient and invariable and to 
measure the whole of Being. The name " Time " it 
gives to that changing process which is shown in 
birth, death, and variation. And hence we who are 
here circumscribed by Time are, saith the Scripture, 
destined to share in Eternity when we reach that 
incorruptible Eternity which changes not. And 
sometimes the Scripture declares the glories of a 
Temporal Eternity and an Eternal Time, although 
we understand that in stricter exactness it describes 
and reveals Eternity as the home of things that are 
in Being, and Time as the homiC of things that are in 
Birth.^ We must not, therefore, think of the things 
which are called Eternal as being simply co-ordinate 
with the Everlasting God Who exists before Eternity ;^ 

^ Ps. xxiv, 7. 

^ We cannot help thinking of Eternity as an Endless Time, as we 
think of infinite number as an endless numerical process. But this is 
wrong. Eternity is timeless as infinite number is superior to all 
numerical process. According to Plato, Time is "incomplete life" 
and Eternity is " complete life." Thus Eternity fulfils Time and yet 
contradicts it, as infinite number fulfils and contradicts the properties of 
finite numbers. If Time be thought of as an infinite series of finite 
numbers Eternity is the sum of that series and not its process. But the 
name may be applied loosely to Lhe process, though this is generally to 
be avoided. According to St. Thomas, Eternity measures Rest, and 
Time measures Motion;: Eternity is a tohim siimil and Time is siicces- 
sivttin. The difference between them is not, he says, that Time has a 
beginning and an end whereas Eternity has neither, though he admits 
that each of the particular objects existing in Time began and will end. 
{Sinnma, Pars I. Q. x. Art. iv.) But this is, he says, not essential to 
the nature of time : it is o\\\y pei' accidens {ibid. Art. v.). Cf. Aristotle's 
distinction between " unlimited Time" and limited Time. 

^ He alludes to Angels and the perfected souls of men and to their 
celestial abode. 

172 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

but, strictly following the venerable Scriptures, we 
had better interpret the words " Eternal " and 
" Temporal " in their proper senses, and regard those 
things w^iich to some extent participate in Eternity 
and to some extent in Time as standing midway 
between things in Being and things in Birth. ^ And 
God we must celebrate as both Eternity and Time,- 
as the Cause of all Time and Eternity and as the 
Ancient of Days ; as before Time and above Time 
and producing all the variety of times and seasons ; 
and again, as existing before Eternal Ages, in that 

'^ St. Thomas speaks of aevwn as standing between Eternity and 
Time and participating in both. Time, he says, consists in succession, 
Aevtini does not but is c.ipable of it, Eternity does not and is incapable 
of it [Sit;n/?ia, Pars I. Q. X. Art. v.). Thus the heavenly bodies, he says, 
are changeless in essence, but capable of motion from place to place ; 
and the angels are changeless in nature, but capable of choice anil so 
of spiritual movement. Maximus's note on the present passage explains 
this to be D.'s meaning. 

There is in each one of us a timeless self. It is spoken of by all the 
Christian Mystics as the root of our being, or as the spark, or the 
Synteresis, etc. Our perfection consists in this ultimate reality, 
which is each man's self, shining through his whole being and 
transforming it. Hence man is at last lifted on to the eternal plane 
from that of time. The movements of his spirit will then be so 
intense that they will attain a toiimi sitnttl. We get a foretaste of 
this when, in the experience of deep spiritual joy, the successive parts 
of Time so coalesce (as it were) that an hour seems like a moment. 
Eternity is Rest and Time is Motion. Accelerate the motion in the 
individual soul, through the intensification of that soul's bliss to infinity. 
There is now in the soul an infinite motion. But Infiniie Motion is 
above succession, and therefore is itself a form of repose. Thus 
Motion has been changed into Rest, Time into Eternity. Mechanical 
Time, or dead Time (of which Aristotle speaks as mere movement or 
succession) is the Time measured by the clock ; developing or living 
Time (which is Plato's "incomplete life") is real Time, and this is 
Aei'iim, which partakes both of mechanical Time and of Eternity. 
The best treatment of the subject is probably to be found in Bergson's 
theory of ditree. (Cf. Von Hiigel's Eternal Life. ) 

The words "eternal," "everlasting," etc., being loosely employed, 
may refer to three different things : (i) endless mechanical Time, i. c. 
mere endless succession ; (2) Aeviun^ or developing and finally per- 
fected lining Time ; (3) True Timeless Eternity. 

- Vide pp. 169 n. i, 170 n. i. 

THE DIVINE NAMES I73 

He is before ^ Eternity and above Eternity and His 
Kingdom is the Kingdom of all the Eternal Ages. 
Amen. 

CHAPTER XI 

CoJiccrning'''' Peace'''' and zv hat is meant by " Very Being^' Itself, 
" Very Lije^^' ^^Very Foiuer,'^ a7td similar plu-ascs. 

I. Now let us praise with reverent hymns of peace 
the Divine Peace which is the Source of all mutual 
attraction. For this Quality it is that unites all 
things together and begets and produces the har- 
monies and agreements of all things. And hence it 
is that all things long for It, and that It draws their 
manifold separate parts into the unity of the whole 
and unites the battling elements of the world into 
concordant fellowship. So it is that, through partici- 
pation in the Divine Peace, the higher of the mutually 
Attractive Powers ^ are united in themselves and to 
each other and to the one Supreme Peace of the 
whole world ; and so the ranks beneath them are by 
them united both in themselves and to one another 
and unto that one perfect Principle and Cause of 
Universal Peace,^ which broods in undivided Unity 
upon the world, and (as it were with bolts which 
fasten the sundered parts together) giveth to all 
things their laws, their limits, and their cohesion ; nor 

^ Vide p. 170, n. 2. 

^ /. e. The Seraphim, 

^ The Divine Energy and Light streams through the medium of the 
higher orders to the lower. This is worked out in the Celestial 
Hierarchy of the same writer. We get the same thought in Dante's 
Paradiso, where the Primiwi A/obile, deriving its motion from an 
immediate contact with the Empyrean, passes them on to the next 
sphere and so to all the rest in turn, the movement being received 
and conveyed by the succeeding angelic orders presiding severally, in 
descending scale of dignity, over the concentric spheres. — Sec Convito, 
II. 6. 

174 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

suffers them to be torn apart and dispersed into the 
boundless chaos without order or foundation, so as to 
lose God's Presence and depart from their own unity, 
and to mingle together in a universal confusion. 
Now as to that quality of the Divine Peace and 
Silence, to which the holy Justus ^ gives the name 
of "Dumbness" and "Immobility" (sc. so far as 
concerns all emanation which our knowledge can 
grasp),^ and as to the manner in which It is still and 
silent and keeps in Itself and within Itself and is 
wholly and entirely one transcendent Unity in Itself, 
and while entering into Itself and multiplying Itself,^ 
doth not leave Its own Unity, but, even in the act of 
going forth to all things, remains entirely within 
Itself through the excess of that all-transcendent 
Unity : concerning these things 'tis neither right nor 
possible for any creature to frame any language or 
conception. Let us, then, describe that Peace (inas- 
much as It transcends all things) as " Unutterable," 
yea and " Unknowable " ; and, so far as 'tis possible 
for men and for ourselves who are inferior to many 

^ Fide Acts i. 23 ; xviii. 7 ; or Col, iv. 11. 

^ Victorinus calls God the Father Cessatio, Silentium, or Qtiies, and 
also Motiis, as distinguished from Motio (the name he gives God the 
Son), the former kind of movement being the quiescent generator of 
the latter, since Victorinus was an older contemporary of St. Augustine 
(see Conf. viii. 2-5) his speculations may have been known to D. 
The peace of God attracts by its mysterious influence. This influence 
is, in a sense, an emanation or outgoing activity (or it could not affect 
us), but it is a thing felt and not understood. 

2 It multiplies Itself by entering into the creatures and seeking to be 
reproduced in each of them. This whole passage throws light on the 
problem of Personality. If our personalities are ultimately contained 
in the Absolute, the Absolute is not a Person but a Society of Persons. 
I), would reply that the Absolute is Supra-Personal, and that in 
It our personalities have their ultimate existence, outside of them- 
selves, as an undifferentiated Unity, though that ultimate plane needs 
also and implies the existence of the relative plane on which our 
personalities exist as differentiated individuals. The Holy Spirit enters 
into the various individuals, but still possesses One Supra-Personal 
Godhead. Plotinus says the Godhead is indivisibly divided. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 175 

good men, let us examine those cases where It is 
amenable to our intuitions and language through 
being manifested in created things. 

2. Now, the first thing to say is this : that God is 
the Fount of Very Peace and of all Peace, both in 
general and in particular, and that He joins all things 
together in an unity without confusion whereby they, 
are inseparably united without any interval between 
them, and at the same time stand unmixed each in 
its own form, not losing their purity through being 
mingled with their opposites nor in any way blunting ( 
the edge of their clear and distinct individuality. Let 
us, then, consider that one and simple nature of the 
Peaceful Unity which unites all things to Itself to 
themselves and to each other, and preserves all things, 
distinct and yet interpenetrating in an universal 
cohesion without confusion. Thus it is that the 
Divine Intelligences derive that Unity whereby they 
are united to the activities and the objects of their 
intuition ; ^ and rise up still further to a contact, 
beyond knowledge, with truths which transcend the 
mind. Thus it is that souls, unifying their manifold 
reasoning powers and concentrating them in one pure 
spiritual act, advance by their own ordered path 
through an immaterial and indivisible act of spiritual 
intuition. Thus it is that the one and indissoluble 
connection of all things exists by reason of its Divine 
harmony, and is fitted together with perfect concord, 
agreement and congruity, being drawn into one with- 
out confusion and inseparably held together. For 
the entirety of that perfect Peace penetrates to all 
things through the simple, unalloyed presence of Its 
unifying power, uniting all things and binding the 
extremities together through the intermediate parts, 

^ Contemplation, Act of Contemplation, and Object Contemplated 
are all united together, and so imply a fundamental Unity which exists 
ulthnately in God. 

176 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

all things being thus conjoined by one homogenous 
attraction. And It bestows even upon the utmost 
limits of the universe the enjoyment of Its Presence, 
and makes all things akin to one another by the 
unities, the identities, the communions and the mutual 
attractions which It gives them ; for the Divine 
Peace remains indivisible and shows forth all Its 
\ power in a single act, and permeates the whole world 
without departing from Its own -Identity. For It 
goes forth to all things and gives to all things of Itself 
(according to their kinds), and overflows with the 
abundance of Its peaceful fecundity, and yet through 
the transcendence of Its unification It remains wholly 
and entirely in a state of Absolute Self-Unity.^ 

3. " But," some one perchance will say, "in wdiat 
sense do all things desire peace ? Many things rejoice 
in opposition and difference and distinction, and 
would never choose willingly to be at rest." Now if 
the opposition and difference here intended is the 
individuality of each thing, and the fact that naught 
(while it remains itself) wishes to lose this quality, 
then neither can we deny this statement ; but, how- 
ever, we shall show that this itself is due to a desire 
for Peace. For all things love to have peace and 
unity in themselves and to remain without moving or 
falling from their own existence or properties. And 
the perfect Peace guards each several individuality 
unalloyed by Its providential gift of peace, keeping 
all things without internal or mutual discord or 
confusion, and establishing all things, in the power of 
unswerving stability, so as to possess their own peace 
and rest.^ 

J Cf. p. 174, n. 3. 

" D.'s paradox is the paradox of sanity. We must hold at the 
same time two apparent contradictions. On one side all things are, 
in a sense, merged, in the other side they are not. Their Super- 
Essence is identical and is one and the same Super-Essence for all. Yet 

THE DIVINE NAMES 177 

4. And if all things which move be found desiring 
not to be at rest but always to perform their proper 
movements, this also is a desire for that Divine Peace 
of the Universe which keeps all things in their proper 
places so that they fall not, and preserves the indi- 
vidual and the motive life of all moving^ thincrs from 
removal or declension. And this it doth by reason 
that the things which move perform their proper 
functions throu2;h bein^^ in a constant state of inward 
peace. ^ 

5. But if, in affirming that Peace is not desired by 
all, the objector is thinking of the opposition caused 
by a falling away from Peace, in the first place there 
is nothing in the world which hath utterly fallen away 
from all Unity ; for that which is utterly unstable, 
boundless, baseless, and indefinite hath neither Being 
nor any inherence in the things that have Being. 
And if he says that hatred, to vv^ards Peace and the 
blessings of Peace is shown by them that rejoice in 
strife and anger and in conditions of variations and 
instability, I answer that these also are governed by 
dim shadows of the desire for Peace ; for, being 
oppressed by the various movements of their passions, 
they desire (without understanding) to set these at 
rest, and suppose that the surfeit of fleeting pleasures 
will give them Peace because they feel themselves 

each one severally and iiidividnally possesses It. The paradox is due 
to the fact that the question is one of ultimate Reality. 

All life and individuality start in the individual's opposition to the 
rest of the world, for by distinguishin;j^ myself from the world I, in a 
sense, oppose myself to it. This is the basis of selfishness and so of 
moral evil. But being transmuted by Love, it becomes the basis of all 
harmony and moral good, and so leads to Peace. And the same prin- 
ciples of opposition and harmony are at work in the whole creation, 
animate and inanimate alike. (Cf. Dante, Paradise, I. 103 to end.) 

^ Vide supra [Movet Deus sicut Desideratum] : True peace is restful 
energy, both elements of which are incomplete in the jjresent world 
but complete in the Godhead. 

178 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

disturbed by the unsatisfied cravings which have 
mastered them.^ There is no need to tell how the 
loving-kindness of Christ cometh bathed in Peace, 
wherefrom we must learn to cease from strife, whether 
against ourselves or against one another, or against 
the angels, and instead to labour together even with 
the angels for the accomplishment of God's Will, in 
accordance with the Providential Purpose of Jesus 
Who worketh all things in all and maketh Peace, 
unutterable and foreordained from Eternity, and 
reconcileth us to Himself, and, in Himself, to tlie 
Father. Concerning these supernatural gifts enougli 
hath been said in the Outlines of Divinity with 
confirmation drawn from the holy testimony of the 
Scriptures. 

6. Now, since thou hast, on a previous occasion, 
sent me an epistle asking what I mean by Very Being 
Itself, Very Life Itself, Very Wisdom Itself: and since 
thou saidst thou couldst not understand why some- 
times I call God "Life" and sometimes the "Fount 
of Life": I have thought it necessary, holy man of 
God, to solve for thee this question also which hath 
arisen between us. In the first place, to repeat again 
what hath often been said before, there is no contra- 
diction between calling God "Life" or "Power" and 
"Fount of Life, Peace, or Power." ^ The former 
titles are derived from forms of existence, and 
especially from the primary forms,^ and are applied 
to Him because all existences come forth from Him ; 
the latter titles are given Him becaus.e in a super- 
essential manner He transcends all things, even the 

1 Cf. Dante, Paradiso. " E se altra cosa vostra amor seduce Non 
e se non di quella alcun vestigio," etc. 

2 Absolute Existence or Life, etc., is in God super-essentially, and 
timelessly emanates from Him. It is in Him as a Super-Essence and 
projected from Him as an Essence. 

^ i. e. The angels, who, being the highest creatures, possess Exist- 
ence, Life, Peace, Power, etc., in the grea,test degree. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 179 

primary existences.^ "But," thou wilt say, "what 
mean we at all by Very Being and Very Life and 
those things to which we ascribe an Ultimate 
Existence derived primarily from God ? " We reply 
as follows : " This matter is not crooked, but straight- 
forward, and the explanation thereof is easy. The 
Very Existence underlying the existence of all things 
is not some Divine or Angelic Being (for only That 
Which is Super-Essential can be the Principle, the 
Being and the Cause of all Existences and of Very 
Existence Itself)^ nor is It any life-producing Deity 
other than the Supra-Divine Life which is the Cause 
of all living things and of Very Life,^ nor, in short, is 
It identical with any such originative and creative 
Essences and Substances of things as men in their 
rash folly call "gods" and "creators" of the world, 
though neither had these men themselves any true 
and proper knowledge of such beings nor had their 
fathers. In fact, such beings did not exist.'* Our 
meaning is different : " Very Being," " Very Life," 
" Very Godhead " are titles which in an Originating 
Divine and Causal sense we apply to the One 
Transcendent Origin and Cause of all things, but we 
also apply the terms in a derivative sense to the 
Providential Manifestations of Power derived from 
the Un participated God, i. e. to the Infusion of Very 
Being, Very Life, and Very Godhead, which so trans- 
mutes the creatures where each, according to its 
nature, participates therein, that these obtain the 

^ The titles "Absolute Life," etc., correspond to the Via Affirnia- 
tiva, and the titles " Cause of Absolute Life," etc. ,^to the Via Negativa. 

- The Godhead causes : (i) the particular existent thing, (2) the 
ultimate fact of Existence, i. e. Absolute Existence. The Exemplars 
are in the Godhead and not in the emanating Absolute Existence. 

^ See last note. 

■* Perhaps under the pretence of attacking Paganism D. is really 
aiming his shafts against JNIanicheism or some Gnostic heresy current 
in his day. 

i8o DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

qualities and names : " Existent," *' Living," " Divinely 
Possessed," etc.^ Hence the Good God is called the 
Fount, first, of the Very Primaries : then, of those 
creatures which share completely therein ; then, of 
those which share partially therein.^ But it needs 
not to say more concerning this matter, since some of 
our Divine Teachers have already treated thereof. 
They give the title " Fount of Very Goodness and 
Deity" to Him that exceeds both Goodness and 
Deity; and they give the name of "Very Goodness 
and Deity " to the Gift which, coming forth from 
God, bestows both Goodness and Deity upon the 
creatures ; and they give the name of *' Very Beauty " 
to the outpouring of Very Beauty ; and in the same 
manner they speak of "complete Beauty" and 
" partial Beauty," and of things completely beautiful 
and things beautiful in part.^ And they deal in the 
same way with all other qualities which are, or can be, 
similarly employed to signify Providential Manifesta- 
tions and Virtues derived from the Transcendent 
God through that abundant outpouring, where such 
qualities proceed and overflow from Him. So is 
the Creator of all things literally beyond them all, 
and His Super-Essential and Supernatural Being 
altogether transcends the creatures, whatever their 
essence and nature. 

1 (i) God possesses and ts Absolute Beiny, Absolute Life, etc. 

(2) He pours forth Absolute Being that the creatures may share it 
and so exist and be ennobled. 
- Migne's text here is corrupt, I have emended it. 

(i) The First Things = Absolute Existence, etc. 

(2) Those that share completely therein = the angels and perfected 

human souls. 

(3) Those that share partially therein = the lower orders of creation 

which possess ( xistence without life, or life without con- 
sciousness, or consciousness without spirituality (stones, 
plants, animals). 
I ^ The beauty of a human being is more complete than that of a 
horse, and spiritual beauty is more complete than mere physical 
beauty. 

THE DIVINE NAMES i8i 

CHAPTER XII 

Concer7U72g ''■Holy of holies;^ '' Ki7i'^ of kiiigs^^^ ''Lord of 

lords r " God of gods J' 

1. Forasmuch as the things which needed to be 
said concerning this matter have been brought, I 
think, to a proper ending, we must praise God 
(whose Names are infinite) as "Holy of holies" and 
" King of kings," reigning through Eternity and unto 
the end of Eternity and beyond it, and as " Lord of 
lords " and '■ God of gods." And we must begin 
by saying what we understand by " Very Holiness," 
what by " Royalty," "Dominion," and "Deity," and 
what the Scripture means by the reduplication of the 
titles. 

2. Now Holiness is that which we conceive as a 
freedom from all defilement and a complete and 

Vutterly untainted purity. And Royalty is the power 
to assign all limit, order, law, and rank. And 
Dominion is not only the superiority to inferiors, but 
is also the entirely complete and universal possession 
of fair and good things and is a true and steadfast 
firmness ; wherefore the name is derived from a word 
meaning "validity" and words meaning severally 
"that which possesseth validity" and "which cxer- 
ciseth" it.^ And Deity is the Providence which con- | 
templates all things and which, in perfect Goodness, 

^ D, holds that God's dominion is an absolute quality in Himself 
apart from all reierence to the creation. The Greek word, as he truly 
says, supports his view. 

The Latin Doviinus, on the other hand, implies the notion of 
governing-, and so has a necessary reference to the creation. Hence 
St. Augustine says that God could not actually be spoken of as 
"Lord" before the world or the angels were made. Eckhart says 
ihat before the creation God was not God, " Er war was Er war." 
D. holds that the title "God" is relative to us. Ikit then he holds — 
and here explains — that the roots of this relationship exist timelcssly in 
the undifferentiated Godhead. 

i82 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

goes round about all things and holds them to- 
gether and fills them with Itself and transcends all 
things that enjoy the blessings of Its providential 
care. 

3. These titles, then, must be given in an absolute 
sense to the All-Transcendent Cause, and we must 

/ add that It is a Transcendent Holiness and Dominion, 
that It is a Supreme Royalty and an altogether 
Simple Deity. ^ For out of It there hath, in one 
single act, come forth collectively and been distributed 
throughout the world all the unmixed Perfection of 
I all untainted Purity ; all that Law and Order of the 
world, which expels all disharmony, inequality and 
disproportion, and breaks forth into a smiling aspect 
of ordered Consistency ^ and Rightness, bringing into 
their proper place all things which are held worthy 
to participate in It ; all the perfect Possession of all 
fair qualities ; and all that good Providence which 
contemplates and maintains in being the objects of 
Its own activity, bounteously bestowing Itself for the 
Deification of those creatures which are converted 
unto It. 

4. And since the Creator of all things is brim-full 
with them all in one transcendent excess thereof He 
is called " Holy of Holies," etc., by virtue of Tlis 
overflowing Causality and excess of Transcendence.^ 
Which meaneth that just as things that have no 
substantial Being- are transcended by things that 
have such Being, together with Sanctity, Divinity, 
Dominion, or Royalty ; and just as the things that 

^ "Transcendent," "Supreme," "Simple,"' all express the same 
fact — that, being Super-Essential, it is above the multiplicity of the 
creatures. 

- Cf. Shelley, Adonais: "That Light whose smile kindles the 
universe." 

^ " Holiness " especially contains the notion of Transcendence. 

* i. e. The material things (cf. Myst. Theol. I.). This is the ordinary 
meaning of the phrase in D. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 183 

participate in these Qualities are transcended by the 
Very Qualities themseh^es — even so all things that 
have Being are surpassed by Him that is beyond 
them all, and all the Participants and all the Very 
Qualities are surpassed by the Unparticipated ^ 
Creator. And Holy Ones and Kings and Lords and 
Gods, in the language of Scripture, are the higher 
Ranks in each Kind ^ through which the secondary 
Ranks receiving of their gifts from God, show forth 
the abundance of that Unity thus distributed among 
them in their own manifold qualities — which various 
qualities the First Ranks in their providential, godlike 
activity draw together into the Unity of their own 
being.^ 

^ Material thini^s are surpassed by angels and perfected human souls, 
and these by the Divine Grace which they all share ; and this, together 
with the whole creation on which it is bestowed, is surpassed by God 
from Whom it emanates. For while this emanation can be commu- 
nicated the Godhead cannot. (Cf. Via Negativa. See esp. Mvst. 
Theol. I.). 

^ ?'. e. The higher ranks whether among angels or among human 
souls. (Cf. "I have said, ' Ye are gods,' " "hath made us kings and 
priests," etc. ) 

^ The highest ranks {i. e. the Seraphim and the Contemplative Saints) 
have a direct version of God, Whom they behold by an act of complete 
s]iiritual contemplation. 

Others, learning from them, behold God truly but less directly — by 
knowing rather than by Unknowing, by discursive Meditation rather 
than by intuitive Contemplation — or are called to serve Him chiefly in 
practical works. Contemplation is a complete activity of the concen- 
trated spirit, unifying it within itself and uniting it to all kindred spirits 
(for true Mysticism is the same in every age and place). Meditation 
and practical works are partial activities which imply a succession of 
different images in the same mind and a shifting variety of different 
mental types and interests in the same Community. 

i84 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

CHAPTER XIII 

Co7tcer7ii7ig ^'•Perfect-'' and " 0?ie.^^ 

I. So much for these titles. Now let us, if thou art 
willing, proceed to the most important Title of all. 
For the Divine Science attributes all qualities to the 
Creator of all things and attributes them all together, 
and speaks of Him as One.^ Now such a Being is 
Perfect : not only in the sense that It is Absolute 
Perfection and possesseth in Itself and from Itself 
distinctive Uniformity of Its existence,^ and that It 
is wholly perfect in Its whole Essence, but also in 
the sense that, in Its transcendence It is beyond 
Perfection ; and that, while giving definite form or 
limit to all that is indefinite. It is yet in Its simple 
Unity raised above all limitation, and is not contained 
or comprehended by anything, but penetrates to all 
things at once and beyond them in Its unfailing 
bounties and never-ending activities.^ Moreover, the 

^ Religion, in its highest forms, and Philosophy and Natural Science 
postulate and seek some Unity behind the world. Hence Unity is 
regarded as the tdthnate attribute. Thus Plotinus calls the Absolute 
" The One." God possesses all Attributes not separately but indivisibly, 
as pure light contains all colours. 

2 Though the Godhead is the Super-Essence of the creatures, yet on 
the other hand It is distinct from them because It transcends them. 
(See next note, ) This aspect of distinctness is manifested in the fact that 
the Emanation of Absolute Life, etc., is distinct from the Persons of 
the Trinity, the aspect of identity is manifested in the fact tliat They 
possess Absolute Life antecedently to the act of Emanation. 

^ The Godhead is Perfect : (i) absolutely, and not by participation in 
some other essence ; (2) tj-anscendently, and not in such a manner as to 
be differentiated from other essences (for on the super-essential plane of 
the Undifferentiated Godhead there is no other essence than It), The 
Emanation of Abs )!ufe Life, etc., is perfect absolutely, because, being a 
direct overflow from the Godhead, it does not participate in any other 
Essence ; but not transcendently, because it is differentiated from the 
particular things which share it. That is why it does not contain 
Exemplars. The creatures possess their true and undifferentiated being 
not in the Emanation but in the ultimate Godhead. The Emanation 

THE DIVINE NAMES 185 

Title *' Perfect " means that It cannot be increased 
(being always Perfect) and cannot be diminished, and 
that It contains all thino-s beforehand in Itself 
and overflows in one ceaseless, identical/ abundant 
and inexhaustible suppl)% whereby It perfects all 
perfect ^ things and fills them with Its own Perfection. 
2. And the title "One " implies that It is all things 
under the form of Unity through the Transcendence 
of Its single Oneness,^ and is the Cause of all things 
without departing from that Unity. For there is 
nothing in the world without a share in the One ; 
and, just as all number participates in unity (and we 
speak of one couple, 07ie dozen, one half, one third, or 
one tenth) even so everything and each part of every- 
thing participates in the One, and on the existence of 
the One all other existences are based, and the One 
Cause of all things is not one of the many things in 
the world,'* but is before all Unity and Multiplicity 
and gives to all Unity and Multiplicity their definite 
bounds.^ For no multiplicity can exist except by 

is, we may say, tra}iscendental, or timeless, but not traiiscoidciU^ or 
undifferentiated. D., by saying that "in Its transcendence ... It 
penetrates to all things at once and beyond them,'' teaches incidentally 
that the Godhead's Transcendence and Immanence are ultimately the 
same fact. They are two ways of looking at the one truth of Its 
Undiffcrenliation. Since It is undifferentiated the Godhead is beyond 
our individual being ; but since It is undifferentiated It is not ultimately 
other than ourselves. It is beyond our essence and is our Super-Essence. 
The theory of mere Transcendence is Deism, that of mere Immanence 
is Pantheism. True religion demands both in one fact and as one fact. 
So God is both near and far (see the VAhle fassim). He is far because 
He is nearer to ns than our oivn souls are. " Thou wast within, I was 
outside" (St. Augustine). Hence true Introversion is an act of self- 
transcendence. We must lose ourselves to find ourselves. 
^ Identical because timeless. 

2 "Perfect," a teim taken from the Mysteries expressing the final 
state of the initiated. 

3 Seep. 184, n. 3. * Cf. X., 2. 

° The Godhead is not one individual, or essence, among otheis, but is 
the Super-Essence of them all. The numbers i, 2, 3, 4, etc. = i X i, 
I X 2, I X 3, I X 4, etc. Thus in the form " i X i " the first figure 
N 

i86 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

some participation in the One : ^ that which is many 
in its parts is one in its entirety ; that which is many 
in its accidental quahties is one in its substance ;2 
that which is many in number or faculties is one in 
species ; ^ that which is many in its emanating activities 
is one in its originating essence.^ There is naught in 
the world without some participation in the One, the 
Which in Its all-embracing Unity contains beforehand 
all things, and all things conjointly, combining even 
opposites under the form of oneness. And without 
the One there can be no Multiplicity ; yet contrari- 
wise the One can exist without the Multiplicity just 
as the Unit exists before all multiplied Number.^ 
And if all things be conceived as being ultimately 
unified with each other, then all things taken as a 
whole are One.^ 

3. Moreover, we must bear this in mind : that when 
we attribute a common unity to things we do so in 

represents the unity underlying all numbers, the second figure represents 
unity as a particular number among other numbers. The first figure 
may thus be taken as a symbol of the Godhead, the second figure as a 
8} mbol of all created unity. 

1 Though created unity differs (see last note) from Uncreated Unity, 
yet it is, so to speak, a reflection thereof, as essence is a reflection of 
Super-Essence. So each number, because based on an underlying 
Unity, is itself a unit, and the underlying Unity of the Godhead shines 
through the world in all the harmonies and systems of things. 

2 A tree is one tree though (i) made up of root, trunk, branches, 
leaves, etc., (2) green in the leaves and brown in the trunk, etc. 

^ There are many oaks with different capacities of growth and pro- 
ductiveness, yet all belong to the same "oak species'' ; and there are 
many species or kinds of trees (oaks, chestnuts, firs, etc.) yet all belong 
to the genus "tree." 

* A man's thoughts, desires and acts of will all spring from his one 
jiersonality. 

^ Just as in the series 1x2, 1X3, 1X4, etc., if you destroy the 
2, 3, 4, etc., the I remains, so if the universe disappeared the Godhead 
would still remain. (Cf. Emily Bronte : "Every existence would exist 
in Thee.") 

^ All things possess the same Super-Essence, and that is why they are 
connected together in this world. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 187 

accordance with the preconceived law of their kind 
belonging to each one, and that the One is thus the 
elementary basis of all things.^ And if you take 
away the One there will remain neither whole nor 
part nor anything else in the world ; for all things 
are contained beforehand and embraced by the One 
as an Unity in Itself. Thus Scripture speaks of the-*\, 
whole Supreme Godhead as the Cause of all things \ 
by employing the title of " One" ; and there is One 
God VVho is the Father and One Lord Jesus Christ , 
and One unchanging Spirit, through the transcendent 
indivisibility of the entire Divine Unity, wherein all 
things are knit together in one and possess a supernal • 
Unity and super-essentially pre-exist. Hence all 
things are rightly referred and attributed unto It, 
since by It and in It and unto It all things possess 
their existence, co-ordination, permanence, cohesion,, 
fulfilment, and innate tendency. And you will not 
find anything in the world but derives from the One 
(which, in a super-essential sense, is the name of the 
whole Godhead) both its individual existence and the 
process that perfects and preserves it.^ And we also 
must, in the power of the Divine Unity, turn from 
the Many to the One and declare the Unity of the 
whole single Godhead, which is the One Cause of all 
things ; before all distinctions of One and Many, 
Part and Whole, Definiteness and Indefiniteness,^ 
1 Cf. p. 186, n. 3. 

^ i. e. Both its unity in space and its unity in time. 

^ A thing is definite when we can say of it : " This is not that," 
indefinite when it is doubtful w^hether this is, or is not, that. The God- 
head not being a particular thing, belongs to a region where tliere is no 
"this" or "that." So w^e cannot say, on that ultimate plane either: 
"This is not that," or, " It is doubtful whether t?as is that." Hence 
the mystical act of Unknowing. Knowdedge distinguishes things, Un- 
knowing passes beyond this act yet without confusion. In Unknowing 
the distinction between Thinker and Object of Thought is (from one 
point of view) gone ; and yet the psychical state is a luminously 
clear one. Our personalities in their Super-Essence are merged yet 
uncon fused. 

1 88 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Finitude and Infinitude ;^ giving definite shape to all 
things that have Being, and to Being itself; the 
Cause of everything and of all together — a Cause 
both co-existent and pre-existent and transcendent, 
and all these things at once ; yea, beyond existent 
Unity itself, and giving definite shape to existent 
Unity itself. For Unity, as found in the creatures, 
is numerical ; and number participates in Essence : 
but the Super-Essential Unity gives definite shape to 
existent unity and to ever)^ number, and is Itself the 
Beginning, the Cause, the Numerical Principle and 
the Law of Unity, number and every creature. y\nd 
hence, when we speak of the All-Transcendent God- 
head as an Unity and a Trinity, It is not an Unity 
or a Trinity such as can be known by us or any 
other creature, though to express the truth of Its 
utter Self-Union and Its Divine Fecundity we apply 
the titles of *' Trinity " and " Unity " to That Which 
is beyond all titles, expressing under the form of 
I^eing That Which is beyond Being.^ IBut no Unity 
)r Trinity or Number or Oneness or Fecundity or 
iny other thing that either is a creature or can be 
1 tiown to any creature, is able to utter the mystery, 
beyond all mind and reason, of that Transcendent 
Godhead which super-essentially surpasses all things. 
It hath no name, nor can It be grasped by the 
reason ; It dwells in a region be)^ond us, where our 
feet cannot tread. Even the title of " Goodness " \^q 
do not ascribe to It because we think such a name 
suitable ; but desiring to frame some conception and 
language about this Its ineffable Nature, we consecrate 
as primarily belonging to It the Name we most 
revere. And in this too we shall be in agreement 
with the Sacred Writers ; nevertheless the actual 

^ See p. 162 on "Greatness" and " Smallness." 
^ Numerical unity is a number among other numbers and so implies 
differentiation. The Godhead is undifferentiated. 

THE DIVINE NAMES 189 

truth must still be far beyond us. Hence we have 
given our preference to the Negative method, because 
this Ufts the soul above all things cognate with its 
finite nature, and, guiding it onward through all the 
conceptions of God's Being which are transcended by 
that Being exceeding all Name, Reason, and Know- 
ledge, reaches beyond the farthest limits of the world 
and there joins us unto God Himself, in so far as the 
power of union with Him is possessed even by 
us men. 

4. These Intelligible Names we have collected and 
endeavoured to expound, though falUng short not 
only of the actual meaning thereof (for such a failure 
even angels would be forced to confess), nor yet 
merely of such utterance as angels would have given 
concerning them (for the greatest of those among us 
who touch these themes are far inferior to the lowest 
of the angels) ; nor yet do we merely fall behind the 
teaching of the Sacred Writers thereon or of the 
Ascetics, their fellow-labourers, but we fall utterly 
and miserably behind our own compeers. And hence 
if our words are true and we have really, so far as in 
us hes, attained some intellectual grasp of the right 
way to explain the Names of God, the thanks are 
due to Him Who is the Creator of all things ; granting 
first the faculty of speech and then the power to use 
it well. And if any Synonym hath been passed over 
we must supply and interpret that also by the same 
methods. And if this treatment is wrong or imperfect, 
and we have erred from the Truth either wholly or 
in part, I beg thy loving-kindness to correct my 
unwilling ignorance, to satisfy with argument my 
desire for knowledge, to help my insufficient strength 
and heal my involuntary feebleness ; and that, 
obtaining thy stores partly from thyself and partly 
from others and wholly from the Good, thou wilt also 
pass them on to us. And I pray thee be not weary 

I90 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

in this kindness to a friend, for thou seest that we 
have not kept to ourselves any of the Hierarchic 
Utterances which have been handed down to us, but 
have imparted them without adulteration both to 
yourselves and to other holy men, and will continue 
so to do as long as we have the power to speak and 
you to hear. So will we do' no despite unto the 
tradition, unless strength fail us for the perception 
or the utterance of these Truths. But be these 
matters as God wills ^ that we should do or speak. 
And be this now the end of our treatise concerning 
the Intelligible Names of God. Now will I proceed, 
God helping me, to the Symbolical Divinity. 

^ This anthropomorphic phrase is not inconsistent with the concep- 
tions D. has been expounding ; because he regards the limits of indi- 
vidual human cnpacities, etc., as timelessly existent in the Super-Essence. 
Ey a natural, though inadequate, metaphor, the limits of the resulting 
activities are spoken of as due to God's Will. 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 

CHAPTER I ^ 

What is the Divine Gloojn. 

Trinity, which exceedeth all Being, Deity, and 
Goodness ! ^ Thou that instructeth Christians in Thy 
heavenly wisdom ! Guide us to that topmost height 
of mystic lore ^ which exceedeth light and more than 
exceedeth knowledge, where the simple, absolute, and 
unchangeable mysteries of heavenly Truth lie hidden 
in the dazzling obscurity of the secret Silence, out- 
shining all brilliance with the intensity of their dark- 
ness, and surcharging our blinded intellects with the 
utterly impalpable and invisible fairness of glories 
which exceed all beauty ! Such be my prayer ; and 
thee, dear Timothy, I counsel that, in the earnest 
exercise of mystic contemplation, thou leave the senses 
and the activities of the intellect and all things that 
the senses or the intellect can perceive, and all things 
in this world of nothingness, or in that world of being, 
and that, thine understanding being laid to rest,^ thou 
strain (so far as thou mayest) towards an union with 
Him whom neither being nor understanding can con- 
tain. For, by the unceasing and absolute renunciation 

^ Lit. " Super- Essential, Supra-Divine, Super-Excellent." 

^ Lit. "Oracles" ; /. e. to the most exalted and mystical teaching of 

Holy Scripture. 

^ Gk. ayvw(TTws here refers to a transcendent or spiritual Unknowing 

(as (lis inguished from mere ignorance). 

191 

192 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

of thyself and all things, thou shalt in pureness cast 
all things aside, and be released from all, and so shalt 
be led upwards to the Ray of that divine Darkness 
which exceedeth all existence.^ 

These things thou must not disclose to any of the 
uninitiated, by whom I mean those who cling to the 
objects of human thought, and imagine there is no 
super-essential reality beyond, and fancy that they 
know by human understanding Him that has made 

Darkness His secret place.^ And, if the Divine 

Initiation is beyond such men as these, what can be 
said of others yet more incapable thereof, who describe 
the Transcendent Cause of all things by qualities 
drawn from the lowest order of being, while they deny 
that it is in any way superior to the various ungodly 
delusions which they fondly invent in ignorance of 
this truth ? ^ That while it possesses all the positive 
attributes of the universe (being the universal Cause), 
yet in a stricter sense It does not possess them, since 

1 "The Super-Essential Ray of Divine Darkness." 

2 /. e. Philosophers and unmystical theologians. 

'^ i.e. Those who accept "popular theology." The first stage of 
theistic Religion is anthropomorphic, and God is thought of (like 
Jehovah) as a magnified man of changing moods. Popular religion 
seldom rises above this level, and even gifted theologians often sink 
to it. But it is, D. tells us, the lowest stage. Then comes a meta- 
physical stage. God is now thought of as a timeless Being and therefore 
changeless, but the conception of a magnified man has been refined 
rather than abolished. The ultimate truth about God and our relation 
to Him is held to be that He is a "Person" and that He has "made" 
the world. (This attitude is seen at its worst in Unitarian theology, 
Bradley's criticisms on Lotze show how this fails on the intellectual 
side. The Doctrine of the Trinity, by insisting on an unsolved Mystery 
in God, prevents Orthodox theology from resting permanently in this 
morass, though it often has one foot there.) And non-Christian 
thinkers, in opposition to this conception, regard the ultimate Reality 
as impersonal, which is a worse error still. We must get beyond our 
partial conceptions of "personality," "impersonality," etc. They are 
useful and necessary up to a point, but the Tiuth lies beyond them and 
is to be apprehended in a supernatural manner by what later wriiers 
call "infused" contemplation. The sum of the whole matter is that 
God is incomprehensible. 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 193 

It transcends them all, wherefore there is no con- 
tradiction between affirming and denying that It has 
them inasmuch as It precedes and surpasses all 
deprivation, being beyond all positive and negative 
distinctions ? ^- 

Such at least is the teachinsr of the blessed Bartho- 

o 

lomew.^ For he says that the subject-matter of the 
Divine Science is vast and yet minute, and that the 
Gospel combines in itself both width and straitness. 
Methinks he has shown by these his words how 
marvellously he has understood that the Good Cause 
o[ all things is eloquent yet speaks few words, or rather 
none ; possessing neither speech nor understanding 
because it exceedeth all things in a super-essential 
manner, and is revealed in Its naked truth to those 
alone who pass right through the opposition of fair 
and foul,^ and pass beyond the topmost altitudes of 
the holy ascent and leave behind them all divine 
enlightenment and voices and heavenly utterances and 
plunge into the Darkness where truly dwells, as saith 
the Scripture, that One Which is beymrd all things. 
For not without reason* is the blessed Moses bidden 
first to undergo purification himself and then to 
separate himself from those who have not undergone 
it ; and after all purification hears the many-voiced 
trumpets and sees many lights f^ash forth with pure 
and diverse-streaming rays, and then stands separate 
from the multitudes and with the chosen priests 
presses forward to the topmost pinnacle of the Divine 
Ascent. Nevertheless he meets not with God Himself, / 

^ On Via AffirDiativa and Via Negativa, vide Inti-. , p. 26 f. 

2 No writings of St. Bartholomew are extant. Possibly D. s 
inventing, though not necessarily. 

^ Vide Intr., p. 21. "Beyond Good and Evil" (though not in 
Nietzsche's sense). When evil disappears Good ceases to be an 
opposition to it, and so Good attains a new condiiion. 

* In the following passage we get the three stages tabulated by later V 
Mystical Theology: (i) Purgation, (2) Illumination, (3) Union. | 

194 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

yet he beholds — not Him indeed (for He is invisible) 
— but the place wherein He dwells. And this I take 
to signify that the divinest and the highest of the 
things perceived by the eyes of the body or the mind 
are but the symbolic language of things subordinate 
to Him who Himself transcendeth them all. Through 
these things His incomprehensible presence is shown 
walking upon those heights of His holy places w4iich 
are perceived by the mind ; and then It breaks forth, 
even from the things that are beheld and from those 
that behold them, and plunges the true initiate unto 
the J-)arkness_ of Unknowing wherein he renounces 
all the apprehensions of his understanding and is 
enwrapped in that which is wholly intangible and in- 
visible, belonging wholly to Him that is beyond all 
things and to none else (whether himself or another), 
and being through the passive stillness of all his 
reasoning powers united by his highest faculty to Him 
that is wholly Unknowable, of whom thus by a rejec- 
tion of all knowledge he possesses a knowledge that 
exceeds his understanding. 

CHAPTER n 

How it is 7iece5sary to be united with and render praise to Hi))i 
WJio is the cause of all and above all. 

Unto this Darkness which is beyond Light we pray 
that we may come, and may attain unto vision 
through the loss of sight and knowledge, and that in 
ceasing thus to see or to know we may learn to know 
that which is beyond all perception and understanding 
(for this emptying of our faculties is true sight and 
knowledge),^ and that we may offer Him that tran- 

^ See Intr. , p. 27, on the ecstasy. D.'s teiminology is always exact 
though exuberant — or rather exuberant because exact. And, since if 
the mind, in thinking of any particular thing, gives itself to that thing 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 195 

scencis allthingsthe praisesof atranscendent hymnody, 
which ;ve shall do by denying or removing all things^ 
that n e — like as men who, carving a statue out of 
marble, remove all the impediments that hinder the 
cleai perceptive of the latent image and by this mere 
remn-al display the hidden statue itself in its hidden [^ 
beaity.^ Now we must wholly distinguish this ' 
negative method from that of positive statements. 
For when we were making positive statements ^ we 
begnn with the most universal statements, and then 
tbrou2|-li intermediate terms we came at last to 
particular titles,^ but now ascending upwards from 

and so belongs to it, in utterly ceasing to belong to itself it ceases 
to have any self-consciousness and possesses a God-consciousness 
instead. This would be a mere merging of the personality, but that 
the Godhead, according to D. , is of such a paradoxical nature as to 
contain all the creatures fused and yet distinct (Intr , p. 28) so the self 
is merged on one side of its being and distinct on the oiher. If I lose 
myself in God, still it will always be "I" that shall lose myself There. 

^ This simile shows that the Via Negativa is, in the truest sense, 
positive. Our "matter-moulded forms" of thought are the really 
negative things. (Cf. Bergson.) A sculptor would not accept a block 
of ice in place of a block of marble (for ice wil| not carve into a statue) ; 
and yet the block of marble is not, as such, a statue. So, too, the 
Christian will not accept an impersonal God instead of a personal God 
(for an impersonal Being cannot be loved), and yet a " personal" God 
is not, as such, the Object of the Mystical quest. The conception of 
Personality enshrines, but is not, the UUimate Reality. If D. were 
open to the charge of pure negativity so often brought against him, he 
would have wanted to destroy his block of marble instead of carving it. 

^ Namely, in the Divine Names and in the Outlines ; see Chap. III. 

^ In the Divine Natnes D. begins with the notion of Goodness 
(which he holds to be possessed by all things) and proceeds thence to 
Existence (which is not possessed by things that are either destroyed or 
yet unmade), and thence to Wisdom (which is not possessed either by 
unconscious or irrational forms of Life), and thence to qualities (such as 
Righteousness, Salvation, Omnipotence) or combinations of opposite 
qualities (such as Greatness and Smallness) which are not, in the full 
sense, applicable to any creature as such. Thus by adding quality 
to quality (" Existence" to "Goodness," "Life" to "Existence," 
"Wisdom" to "Life," "Salvation," etc., to "Wisdom") he reaches 
the conception of God. But he constantly reminds us in the Divine 
Names that these qualities apply adequately only to the manifested 
Godhead which, in Its ultimate Nature, transcends them. 

190 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

particular to universal conceptions we strip off all 
qualities ^ in order that we may attain a, naked 
knowledge of that Unknowing which in all existent 
things is enwrapped by all objects of knowledge/^ and 
that we may begin to see that super-essential Darkness 
which is hidden by all the light that is in ex''stent 
things. 

CHAPTER III 

What are the affirmative expressions respecting Godj and w/i it 

are the negative. 

Now I have in my Outlines of Divinity set forth 
those conceptions which are most proper to the 
affirmative method, and have shown in what sense 
God's holy nature is called single and in what sense 
trinal, what is the nature of the Fatherhood and 
Sonship which we attribute unta Jt ; what is meant 
by the articles of faith concerning the Spirit; how 
from the immaterial and indivisible Good the interior 
rays of Its goodness have their being and remain 
immovably in that state of rest which both within 
their Ori2:in and within themselves is co-eternal with 
the act by which they spring from It ; ^ in what manner 

^ The process from the universal to the particular is the process of 
actual development (existence before life, and life before rationality, 
etc.); the converse is the natural process of thought, which seeks to 
refer things to their universal laws of species, etc. {Divine Names, 
V. 3). But this latter process is not in itself the Via Negativa, but 
only the ground plan of it, differing from it as a ground i:)lan of a 
mountain path differs from a journey up the actual path itself.^ The 
process of developing life complicates, but enriches, the world ; that 
of thought simplifies, but eviscerates it. Contemplation, being an act 
of the human spirit, is a process of developing life, and yet follows the 
direction of thought. Hence it enriches and simplifies at the same 
time. 

2 Cf. p. 194, n. I. 

3 The Good=(i) the Undifferentiated Godhead, and hence, in 
Manifesiion, (2) God the Father as the Fount of Godhead to the other 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 197 

Jesus being above all essence^ has stooped to an 
essential state in which all the truths of human nature 
meet ; and all the other revelations of Scripture 
whereof my Outlines of Divinity treat. And in the 
book of the Divine Names I have considered the 
meaning as concerning God of the titles Good, 
Existent, Life, Wisdom, Power and of the other titles 
which the understanding frames, and in my Symbolic 
Divinity I have considered what are the metaphorical 
titles drawn from the world of sense and applied to 
the nature of God ; what are the mental or material 
images we form of God or the functions and instru- 
ments of activity we attribute to Him; what are the 
places where tie dwells and the robes He is adorned 
with ; what is meant by God's anger, grief, and 
indignation, or the divine inebriation and wrath ; 
what is meant by God's oath and His malediction, by 
His slumber and awaking, and all the other inspired 
imagery of allegoric symbolism. And I doubt not 
that you have also observed how far more copious 
are the last terms than the first for the doctrines of 
God's Nature and the exposition of His Names could 
not but be briefer than the Symbolic Divinity.^ For 

Persons. The Rays = God the Son and God the Holy Ghost, Who, 
as manifested Differentiations, eternally proceed from the Father. 

The separate being of the Three Persons exists on the plane of 
Manifestation (of. St. Augustine, who says: "They exist seaindutii 
relalivHvi and not secundu/n essentia/n"). [Augustine says i2on 
scciiuduin siihstantiain. The translator quotes it correctly in his intro- 
duction, p. 10. — Ed.] But this plane is eternal. They wholly inter- 
])enetrate, and the state of rest is co-eternal with the Act of Their 
Procession, because They possess eternal repose and eternal motion. 

■'• This is a case of comimuticatio idiotiiatiun (cf. the title " Mother 
of God" applied to the Blessed Virgin Mary). The Godhead of our 
Lord is Super-E.^sential, not Plis Manhood. 

2 T\\e Sy)nboIical Divinity wzs an attempt lo spiritualize "popular " 
,'heology, the Divine Names sought to spiritualize philosophical theo- 
logy, the present treatise is a direct essay in Spiritual Theology. 

198 DIOXYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the more that we soar upwards the more our language 
becomes restricted to the compass of purely intel- 
lectual conceptions, even as in the present instance 
plunging into the Darkness which is above the 
intellect we shall find ourselves reduced not merely 
to brevity of speech but even to absolute dumbness 
both of speech and thought. Now in the former 
treatises the course of the argument, as it came down 
from the highest to the lowest categories, embraced 
an ever-widening number of conceptions which in- 
creased at each stage of the descent, but in the 
present treatise it mounts upwards from below towards 
the category of transcendence, and in proportion to ^ 
its ascent it contracts its terminology, and when the 
whole ascent is passed it will be totally dumb, being 
at last wholly united with Him Whom words cannot 
describe.^ But why is it, you will ask, that after 
beginning from the highest category when one method 
was affirmative we begin from the lowest category 
where it is negative?^ Because, when affirming the 
existence of that which transcends all affirmation, 
we were obliged to start from that which is most 
akin to It, and then to make the affirmation on which 
the rest depended ; but when pursuing the negative 
method, to reach that which is be}'ond all negation, 
we must start b}' appl}'ing our negations to those 
qualities which differ most from the ultimate goal. 
Surely it is truer to affirm that God is life and good- 
ness than that He is air or stone, and truer to deny 
that drunkenness or fury can be attributed to Him 

^ At the last stage but one the mind beholds an Object to Which all 
terms of thought are inadequate. Then, at the last stage, even the 
distinction between Subject and Object disappears, and the mind itself 
is That Which it contemplates. Thought itself is transcended, and 
the whole Object-realm vanishes. One Subject now knows itself as 
the part and knows itself as the Whole. 

2 In the Divine Names the order of procedure was: Goodness, 
Existence, Life, etc. Now it passes from sense-perception to thought. 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 199 

than to deny that we may apply to Him the categories 
of human thought.^ 

CHAPTER IV 

That He Who is the Pre-emi7ient Cause of e7'erythi?ig se?isibly 
perceived is Jtot Himself any one of the things sensibly 
perceived. 

We therefore maintain ^ that the universal Cause 
transcending all things is neither impersonal nor 
lifeless, nor irrational nor without understanding: in 
short, that It^is not a materjal body, and therefore 
does not possess outward shape or intelligible form, 
or quality, or quantity, or solid weight ; jior has It 
any local existence which can be perceived by sight 
or touch ; nor has It the power of perceiving or 
being perceived ; nor does It suffer any vexation 
or disorder through the disturbance of earthly 
passions, or any feebleness through the t}Tanny of 
material chances, or any want of light ; nor any 
change, or decay, or division, or deprivation, or ebb 
and flow, or anything else which the senses can 
perceive. None of these things can be either 
identified w^th it or attributed unto It. 

^ This shows that the Via Negativa is not purely negative. 

^ Being about to explain, in these two last chapters, that no mateiial 
or menial qualities are present in the Godhead, D. safeguards the 
position against pure negativity by explaining that ihey are not absent 
either. The rest of this chapter deals with the qualities (i) of inanimate 
matter ; (2) of material life. 

200 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

CHAPTER V 

That He IVJio is the Pre-ej)iiiiejit Cause of everythmg intelli- 
gibly perceived is not Himself any one of the tilings 
i?itelligibly perceived. 

Once more, ascending yet higher we maintain ^ 
that It is not soul, or mind, or endowed with the 
faculty of imagination, conjecture, reason, or under- 
standing ; nor is It any act of reason or under- 
standing ; nor can It be described by the reason 
or perceived by the understanding, since It is not 
number, or order, or greatness, or littleness, or 
equality, or inequality, and since It is not immovable 
nor in motion, or at rest, and has no power, and is not 
power or light, and does not live, and is not life ; nor 
is It personal essence, or eternity, or time ; nor can 
It be grasped by the understanding, since It is not 
knowledge or truth ; nor is It kingship or wisdom ; 
nor is It one, nor is It unity, nor is It Godhead^ or 
Goodness ; nor is It a Spirit, as we understand the 
term, since It is not Sonship or Fatherhood ; nor 
is It any other thing such as we or any other being 
can have knowledge of; nor does It belong to the 
category of non-existence or to that of existence ; 
nor do existent beings know It as it actually is, nor 
does It know them as they actually are ; ^ nor can 
the reason attain to It to name It or to know It ; 
nor is it darkness, nor is It light, or error, or truth ;* 

It is not (i) a Thinking Subject ; nor (2) an Act or Faculty of 
Thought ; nor (3) an Object of Thought. 

- Divine Names, II. 7. Godhead is regarded as the property of 
Deified men, and so belongs to relativity. 

'^ It knows only Itself, and there knows all things in their Super- 
Essence — sub spt'cie aeiirniiatis. 

■* Truth is an Object of Thought. Therefore, being beyond ob- 
jectivity, the ultimate Reality is not Truth. But still less is It Error. 

THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY 201 

nor can any affirmation or negation ^ apply to it ; 
for while applying affirmations or negations to those 
orders of being that come next to It, we apply not 
unto It either affirmation or negation, inasmuch as 
It transcends all affirmation by being the perfect 
and unique Cause of all things, and transcends all 
negation by the pre-eminence of Its simple and 
absolute nature — free from every limitation and 
beyond them ali.^ 

^ Cf. p. 199, n. 2. 

^ It is (i) richer than all concrete forms of positive existence; 
(2) more simple than the barest abstraction. (Cf. p. 196, n. i.) 

O 

THE INFLUENCE OF DIONYSIUS 
IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 

By W. J. Sparrow-Simpson 

The significance of the teaching of Dionysius 
cannot be appreciated aright without tracing to 
some extent his influence on subsequent rehgious 
thought. 

Four works of the Areopa2;ite survive. They 
are: Concerning the Heavenly tlierarchy ; Concern- 
ing the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy ; Concerning the 
Divine Names ; and, Concerning Mystical Theology. 

Commentaries upon thetn began to be written at 
an early date. The first great propagator of Dio- 
nysian theories was the very able monk and confessor 
Maximus. Maximus, who died in the year 662, 
wrote notes on all four treatises. These still survive, 
and may be found in the collected edition of the 
works of the Areopagite. Maximus is remarkably 
clear and acute, and contributed not a little to extend 
his Master's reputation. He was gifted with a sim- 
plicity of style which the Areopagite by no means 
shared, and expounded with great clearness the 
difficult passages of Dionysius. And certainly the 
reader will not deny that those passages are by no 
means few. 

Already, before Maximus's labours, the teaching of 
the Areopagite was known in the West, and was 

appealed to by Pope Martin the First in the Lateran 

202 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 203 

o 

Council of 649. Martin complained that the doc- 
trine of the Areopagite was being misrepresented. 
Dionysius was being credited with ascribing to Christ 
one divino-human activity {iina operatio deivirilis)^ 
whereas what Dion}'sius had Avritten was a new 
divino-human activity {>iaivr\ deavdQLKi) evsoysia, nova 
operatio dcivijilis)?- Apart from the theological 
controversy implied in the respective phrases, it is 
remarkable to find what authority is already ascribed 
to its teacliing. 

But it is really quite impossible to appreciate the 
historic place of Dionysius without a study of John 
Scotus Erigena. It was Erigena who in reality 
popularized Dionysius for Latin Christendom. The 
Greek writings of the Areopagite had been sent 
to the Gallican Church by Pope Paul in 757, and 
remained for nearly a century unread in the Abbey 
of St. Denis. Then Erigena, at the request of Charles 
the Bald, undertook to translate them into Latin. 
This he accomplished for all the four principal 
works. 

But Erigena did vastly more than merely act as 
translator. He incorporated the principles of the 
Areopagite in his celebrated treatise De Divisioiie 
NaturcB, in which his own spe:ulative system is con- 
tained, and which may be said to be as representative 
of his mind as the De Principiis is for Origen or the 
Suninia for St. Thomas. 

Erigena bases his whole conception of Deity on 
the teaching of Dionysius. The treatise is thrown 
into the form of a discussion between the Master and 
a Disciple. It is an attempt to reconcile Theology 
with Philosophy After the Master has insisted on 
the ineffable and incomprehensible nature of the 
Divine essence, the Disciple inquires how this propo- 
sition is to be reconciled with the teachinc:' of the 
^ See Hefele, Concilic?igeschichte, Bd. III. 196. 

204 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Theologians on the Unity and Trinity of God. The 
incomprehensibility of the First Cause appears self- 
evident. And if Deity is incomprehensible, definition 
is impossible. For that which cannot be understood 
certainly cannot be defined. We can only say that 
God is ; but ivhat He is we are unable to affirm. 
But if this is so, why have the Theologians ventured 
to predicate Unity and Trinity as characteristics of 
the ultimate reality? 

To the Disciple's criticism the Master replies by 
appealing to the teaching of the Areopagite. Did 
not the Areopagite affirm that no words, no names, 
no expression whatever, can express the supreme and 
causal essence of all things.^ That authority is quoted 
as decisive. 

Neither the Unity nor the Trinity in God is such 
that the clearest human intellect is able to conceive 
it. Why, then, have the Theologians taught these 
doctrines ? 

Erigena's answer is : In order to provide religious 
people with some definite object for contemplation 
and instruction. 
[ For this purpose the faithful are bidden to believe 
in their heart and confess with their lips that God is 
good, and that He exists in one Divine essence and 
three persons. 

And this teaching of the Theologians is, in the 
Master's opinion, not without philosophical justifi- 
cation. 

For contemplating the ineffable cause of all things, 
the Theologians speak of the Unity. 

Then again, contemplating this Divine Unity as 
extended into multiplicity, they affirm the Trinity. 
And the Trinity is the unbegotten, the begotten, and 
the proceeding. 

The Master goes on to explain the distinction be- 
tween affirmative and negative theology. Negative 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 205 

theology denies that certain things can be predicated 
of Deity. Affirmative theology asserts propositions 
which can be predicated. This again is altogether 
based on the teaching of Dionysius. 

Here the Disciple desires to be informed why it 
is that the Areopagite considers such predicates as 
goodness, truth, justice, wisdom, which appear to be 
not only Divine but the divinest of attributes, as 
merely figuratively transferred from man to Deity. 

The Master replies that no characteristics appli- 
cable to the finite and limited can be strictly applicable 
to the infinite and eternal. 

Thus, according to Erigena, following closely on 
the principles of the Areopagite, although goodness 
is predicated of Deity, yet strictly speaking He is 
not goodness, but plus quani bonitas or super bonus. 
Similarly, Deity is not Truth, hut plus quavi Veritas^ 
and super eternitas, and plus quain Sapiens. 

Hence affirmation and negation arc alike permis- 
sible in reference to Deity. 

If you affirm that Deity is super-essential, what is 
it precisely that is meant by the use of "super"? 
You do not in reality affirm what God is, but simply 
that He is more than those things which exist. But 
where the difference consists you do not define. 

But the reason why Erigena asserts the strict in- 
applicability of the term essential to Deity is, that 
he interprets the term in a way which involves spacial 
relations. Essence in all things that exist is local 
and temporal. But Deity is neither. 

Deity as Erigena contemplates it is simply the 
Infinite and the Absolute ; and of that, nothing what- 
ever can be strictly predicated beyond the fact that 
it is. The Cause of all things can only be known to 
exist, but by no inference from the creature can we 
understand what it is. 

Since, then, Erigena has postulated the philosophic 

2o6 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Absolute, the immutable, impassible First Cause, as 
the Deity, he is compelled to go on to den)^ that 
Deity can be subject to affection or capable of 
love. 

This conclusion the Disciple confesses to be pro- 
foundly startling. It appears to contradict the whole 
authority both of the Scriptures and of the Fathers. 
At the same time it is all logical enough, granting 
the First Cause to be incapable of action or passion, 
which seems to involve the Immutable in change : a 
contradiction of the very idea of Deity. It is all 
logical enough. But what about the Scriptures, 
which teach the contrary ? And what of the simple 
believers, who will be horrified if they hear such 
propositions ? 

The Master assures the Disciple that there is no 

need to be alarmed. For he is now employing the 

method of speculative reason, not the method of 

authority. He agrees with Dionysius, for Dionysius 

j had said as much, that the authority of the Scripture 

! is in all things to be submitted to. But Scripture 

■ ciocs not give us terms adequate to the representation 

i of Deity. It furnishes us with certain s}^mbols and 

, signs, by condescension to our infirmities. Dionysius 

is again appealed to in confirmation of this. 

It is curious to notice how, while professedly en- 
gaged in the method of speculative inquiry, Erigena 
Hills back on the authority of Dionysius : a very 
significant proof of the value wluch he ascribed to 
the Areopagite. 

So, then, at last the conclusion is reached that, 
strictly speaking, nothing whatever can be predicated 
concerning Deity, seeing that He surpasses all under- 
standing, and is more truly known by our nescience, 
ignorance concerning Him being the truest wisdom, 
and our negations more correct than our affirmations. 
For whatever you deny concerning Him you deny 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 207 

correctly, whereas the same cannot be said of what 
you may affirm. 

Nevertheless, subject to this premise of acknow- 
ledged inadequacy, qualities may be rightly ascribed 
to Deity by way of symbolical representation. 

Hence, it is correct to maintain that true authority 
does not contradict right reason, nor right reason 
true authority. Both spring from one source, and 
that one source is Divine. 

Thus by a metaphor God may be described as 
Love, although, as a matter of fact, He transcends it. 

It has been a matter of frequent dispute whether 
the system of Erigena is fundamentally Christian or 
Pantheistic. In the careful study of Erigena by 
Theodor Christlieb it is maintained that, while sen- 
tences may be quoted on either side, and the author 
vacillates, now towards Theism, now in a Pantheistic 
direction, his attempted reconciliation of Theology 
with Philosophy ends in the supremacy of the latter, 
and in the abolition of the essential characteristics of 
the Christian Re\'elation. 

That the Deity cannot be comprehended by human 
intelligence is a commonplace of all the great early 
theologians of the Church. It can be richly illus- 
trated from the theological orations of St. Gregory 
Nazianzen, or the writings of St. Augustine and St. 
Hilary upon the Holy Trinity. But then these 
theologians also maintained with equal conviction 
that God could be apprehended by man. For this 
balancing consideration Erigena finds no place. God 
is for Erigena that of which no distinctive quality can 
be predicated. God is in effect the Absolute. 

But then what becomes of God's self-conscious- 
ness? In Christlieb's opinion Erigena's conception of 
the Deity precludes any firm hold on the Divine self- 
consciousness. wSelf-consciousness involves a whole 
content of ideas, a world of thought, which contradicts 

2o8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

the absolute self-identity ascribed by Erigena to the 

Deity. 

In his anxiety to explain the transcendent excel- 
lence of Deity, the superlative exaltation above the 
contingent and the mutable, Erigena seems in the 
opinion of his critics to have over-reached the truth 
and reduced the Deity to an abstraction in which 
perfection and nothingness are identified. 

Erigena's conclusion raises in reality the all im- 
portant problem so constantly debated in modern 
thought, whether the Absolute is the proper concep- 
tion of Deity, and whether the God of religion and of 
fact is not rather spirit, self-consciousness, and perfect 
personality. The teaching of Dionysius in the ex- 
position of Erigena became scarcely distinguishable 
from Pantheism. 

Christlieb finds a similar unsatisfactoriness in 
Erigena's theory of the Trinity. 

It will be remembered that, after maintaining as 
his fundamental position that Deity cannot be defined 
because it cannot be comprehended, and that nothing 
whatever can be affirmed concerning it beyond the 
fact of its being, Erigena went on to justify the theo- 
logians of the Church in affirming the Unity and 
the Trinity. But the grounds on which Erigena 
justified the authorities of the Church are significant. 
He did not justify the doctrine on the ground that 
it was a truth revealed, or because it was an inference 
demanded of the fact and claim of Christ. It is 
remarkable how obscure a place Christ occupies in 
Erigena's conception of Deity. The ground on which 
Erigena would justify the doctrine is that Unity and 
Multiplicity may fairly be ascribed to the First Cause 
of all things, because Deity can be regarded in its 
simplicity as one and then regarded as extended 
into multiplicity. 

But it is impossible to avoid the criticism that this 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 209 

ascription of Unity and Multiplicity to Deity is not 
the same thing as the doctrine of the Trinity. Nor 
is it obvious why Trinity should be substituted for 
Multiplicity. Moreover, this Multiplicity exists sub- 
jectively in the human mind rather than in the being 
of Deity : since it is expressly forbidden by the 
author's fundamental principle to say anything what- 
ever concerning Deity beyond the fact that it exists. 
And further still, on the author's principles neither 
Unity nor Multiplicity can be strictly ascribed to 
Deity. Both must be merged in something else 
which is neither the one nor yet the other, and which 
escapes all possible definition. 

It is scarcely wonderful, therefore, that Christlieb 
should conclude that on Erigena's principles the 
doctrine of the Trinity is not really tenable. Erigena 
certainly endeavours to approximate to the Church's 
Tradition, and to give it an intellectual justification. 
But in spite of these endeavours he is unable to 
maintain any real distinctions in his Trinity. They 
have no actual substantial existence whatever. They 
are mere names and not realities. There may be 
appearances. But in its essential being, according jto 
Erigena, Deity is neither unity nor trinity, but an 
incomprehensible somewhat which transcends them 
both. For Erigena both the Unitarian and the 
Trinitarian representations of God are alike products 
of subjective human reflection. They are neither of 
them objected realities. If you rest on either of them 
you are according, to Erigena, mistaken. For God is 
more than Unit}' and more than Trinity. 

Looking back on the whole course of Erigena's 
exposition of Dionysian principles, we see that the 
Areopagite had identified God with the Absolute. 
Dean Inge says that " Dionysius the Areopagite 
describes God the Father as ' superessential indeter- 
mination/ ' the unity which unifies every unity,' ' the 

210 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

absolute no-thing which is above all reality.' ' No 
moral or trial,' he exclaims in a queer ebullition of 
jargon, 'can express the all-transcending hidclenness 
of the all-transcending superessentially superexisting 
super-Deity.' " ^ And Erigena did not hesitate to 
deny Being to Deity. Being, in his opinion, is a 
defect. The things that are not, are far better than 
the things that are. God, therefore, in virtue of His 
excellence, is not undeservedly described as Nihil — 
.nothingness. 

f Two conceptions of Deity emerge in this exposition. 
One is, that the Deity is identical with the Absolute. 
It is beyond personality, beyond goodness, beyond 
consciousness, beyond existence itself Nothing what- 
i ever can be predicated concerning it. Being is 
identical with nothingness. It is above the category 
i of relation. This is the philosophic conception. 

The other conception is that Deity possesses the 
attributes of self-conscious personality. This is the 
religious conception. 

In the exposition of Erigena the philosophic 
conception is affirmed to be the true, while the religious 
conception is regarded as the creation of the theo- 
logians for the purpose of explanation and of faith. 
I From this distinction certain things seem clear. It 
I seems clear that the philosophic conception of Deity 
' as identical with the Absolute, cannot satisfy the 
requirements of religion, and that Deity cannot become 
an obiect of adoration unless it is invested with the 
attributes of personality. That of which nothing 
can be predicated crinnot become the object of our 
worship. 

But at the same time if the religious conception of 
Deity as self-conscious and personal is offered to our 
contemplation with the express proviso that it does 
not represent what God really is, the proviso paralyses 

1 Cf. Inge, The Philosophy of Plot inns, II. 112. 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 211 

the wings of our aspiration and renders Deity im- 
possible as an object of prayer.^ 

Erigena was by no means d^ persona grata to the 
Church of his age. He was a metaphysician, without 
the mystical tendencies of Dionysius, and while he 
expounded the Areopagite's ideas roused suspicion 
and resentment by the boldness of his conclusions. 
At the same time his translations of Dionysius made 
the Greek Master's principles familiar to the Latin 
w^orld. 

In the Eastern Church the Areopagite's influence 
is clearly present in the great Greek Theologian, St. 
John of Damascus, When speaking of the inadequacy 
of human expressions to represent the reality of God 
John Damascene appeals to Dionysius.^ And the 
whole of his teaching on the Divine incomprehensi- 
bility is clearly due to the influence of the Areopagite. 
When we read that an inferior nature cannot com- 
prehend its superior, or when we find the distinction 
drawn between negative theology and affirmative, 
between that which declares what God is not and 
that which declares what He is ; and that the former 
]:>rcsents the Divine superiority to all created things ; 
when further still v/e read of the super-essential 
essence, and the super-divine Deity : we see in a 
moment the influerxe of Dionysian conceptions. 
Nevertheless St. John Damascene is anything rather 
than a blind adherent of Areopagite teaching. On 
the contrary it is profoundly, true as Vacherot^ has 
said, that he follows Dionysius with discrimination : 
or rather, perhaps, that he supplements the Doctrine 
of the Divine incomprehensibility by very definite 
teaching on the reality of the distinctions within the 

1 Cf. Inge, The Philosophy of Plotinus, II. 115. 
'■^ De Fide Ofihodoxa. Bk. I. ch. xii. 

^ Vacherot's Histoire Critique de F Ecole d'Ale:candrie, III. 40, 
1851. 

212 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

Deity and on the reality of the personal Incarnation 
of the eternal Son of God in Mary's Son. That is to 
say, that while the Philosopher appears in the Areo- 
pagite to eclipse the Theologian, the Theologian in 
St. John Damascene controls the Philosopher. The 
careful, discriminate use of Dionysius by the great 
Greek Schoolman is most remarkable. He assimilated 
the true elements while rejecting the questionable or 
exaggerated. 

Returning once more to the Church of the West, 
the influence of Dionysius is seen extending, through 
Erigena's translations, into the Monastic studies. 
The theologian Hugh, of the Abbey of St. Victor at 
Paris, wrote in ten books a Commentary on the 
Heavenly Hierarchy of the Areopagite, full of enthu- 
siastic appreciation of the great mystic's teaching. 

Far more important than this is the influence 
exerted by Dionysius over the mind of St. Thomas. 
It is not only that St. Thomas wrote a Covnnentary 
on the Divine Navies,^ but in the works of Aquinas his 
ideas are constantly reappearing. He is one of St. 
Thomas's favourite authorities. As one becomes in- 
creasingly more familiar with the greatest of all the 
scholastic theologians this ascendancy of the Greek 
mystic becomes more and more impressive. But it 
is almost needless to say that Aquinas treats the 
Areopagite critically. St. Thomas is profoundly 
averse from everything which resembles a Pantheistic 
tendency. His teaching alike on the Trinity and on 
the Incarnation belongs to another realm of thought 
from that of the neo-Platonist. 

At a later period misgivings arose in the Church 
whether the theology of the Areopagite was, in fact, 
altogether above suspicion. So long as his traditional 
identification with the disciple of St. Paul was main- 

^ See Parma edition of St. Thomas, Tom. XV. Opusculum vii. 
pp. 259-405. 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 213 

o 

taincd, and he was credited with being, by apostoHc 
appointment, first Bishop of Athens, these dis- 
tinctions made suspicion of his orthodoxy seem 
irreverent and incredible. But when the identifi- 
cation was questioned by the historical critics of the 
seventeenth century, and the tradition completely 
dispelled, then the term Pseudo-Dionysius began to 
be heard and to prevail, and criticism upon its 
orthodoxy arose in the learned schools in France. 

Le Ouien, in a dissertation prefixed to the works 
of St. John Damascene, propounds the formidable 
inquiry : Num Pseudo-Dionysius haereticus fuerit.^ 
Le Ouien is convinced that Dionysius employs 
language which confuses the Divine and the Human 
in our Lord ; fails to distinguish accurately between 
person and nature ; and betrays unquestionable 
monophysite tendencies. 

On the other hand, Bernard de Rubeis, in his 
Dissertatio7il^ says that Le Ouien fails to do justice to 
the author's meaning ; and that Aquinas understood 
the author better, and thought him orthodox. 

The University of Paris defended the Areopagite. 
The University of Louvain agreed. The Jesuits 
eagerly advocated his orthodoxy. Lessius, the cele- 
brated author of the Treatise on the Divine Perfections, 
corresponding with another Jesuit, Father Lanssel, 
declared that he had read the Areopagite frequently, 
and had carefully studied all his writings. For thirty- 
six years Dionysius had been his chosen patron, 
always remembered by him in the Sacrifice of the 
Mass, with a prayer to be permitted to share the 
Arcopagite's wisdom and spirit.^ What disturbed 
Lessius was that the Areopagite had not been better 

1 Migne, Patrol. Grccc, Tom. XCIV. i. 281. 

2 See also the Parma edition oi St. Thomas, Tom. XV. 430 f f. , wlitre 
this Dissertation is printed. 

•^ Migne, Patrol. Gncc, Tom. IV, 1002. 

214 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

translated. Inadequate terms had been put in the 
Latin rendering which might easily lead the reader 
into error. For many instances of this might be 
produced. Father Lanssel, however, is compelled to 
admit quite frankly that the Areopagite's writings 
contain difficulties which cannot be laid to the charge 
of his translators. St. Thomas himself had said as 
much. 

That Master of the Schoolmen, that thcologicB 
apex, who solved the hardest problems in theology 
more easily than Alexander cut the Gordian knot, 
did not hesitate to say that Dionysius habitually 
suffered from obscurity of style. This obscurity was 
not due to lack of skill, but to the deliberate design 
of concealing truth from the ridicule of the profane. 
It was also due to his use of platonic expressions 
which are unfamiHar to the modern mind. Some- 
times the Areopagite is, in the opinion of St. Thomas, 
too concise, wrapping too much meaning into a 
solitary word. Sometimes, again, he errs the opposite 
way, by the over-profuseness of his utterances. 
Nevertheless, this profuseness is not really super- 
fluous, for those who completely scrutinize it become 
aware of its solidity and its depth. The fact is, adds 
Father Lanssel, as Isaac Casaubon asserted, the Aero- 
pagite invents new words, and unusual unheard-of 
and startling expressions. The Confessor Maximus 
admitted that his Master obscures the meaning of the 
superabundance of his phraseology. 

When we come to the nineteenth century we find 
the Treatises of the Areopagite criticized, not only, or 
chiefly, for their form and style, but also for their 
fundamental principles. 

The System of the Areopagite was subjected to a 
very searching critical analysis by Ferdinand Christian 
Baur. {Christiiche Lehre von der Dreieinigkcit unci 
Menschwerdnng Gottes, 1842; Bd. II. 207-251.) 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 215 

According to Dionysius, as understood by Baur, 
God is the absolute Unity which stands contrasted 
with the Many. The Many denotes the world of 
concrete reah'ty. Doubtless there is a process from 
Unity to Multiplicity, affirmation and negation, but 
this process takes place solely in the subjective 
consciousness. 

How, then, asks Baur, can this Areopapjite con- 
ception of Deity be reconciled with the Christian 
conception, with which it appears to be in obvious 
contradiction ? 

The Areopagite speaks often of a Triad, and dwells 
on the Church's Doctrine of the Trinity. But the 
terms which in his system represent the Godhead are 
such as the super-good, the super-divine, the super- 
essential. These terms represent an abstraction. If 
any distinction exists, that distinction in no case 
exists within the Deity, but only in the activities 
which proceed from God as the super-essential Cause. 
Distinctions exist in our subjective consciousness. 
But they have no objective reality. If we call the 
Divine Mystery God, or Life, or Essence, or Light, or 
Word, we onl}^ mean thereby the influences which 
emanate from that Mystery. 

In Baur's opinion, therefore, the Trinitarian con- 
ception, as held in the Tradition of the Church, is in 
the system of Dionysius reduced to little more than 
names. 

Baur's criticism on the Areopagite's notion of 
Incarnation is not less severe. 

The System of Dionysius allows no distinctive and 
peculiar Incarnation at all. It allows no special 
and new relationships, but only a continual becoming. 
The Incarnation is, in the Areopagite's view, nothing^ 
more tlian the process from Unity to Multiplicity ; 
which is essential to Its conception of Deity. If 
Dionysius speaks of the God-man as an individual, 

2i6 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

that is either a mere concession to Tradition, or a 
lack of clearness in its own conception. The union 
of God with an individual such as the Christian 
Tradition postulates cannot, in Baur's opinion, be 
reconciled with the system of the Areopagite. 

A second modern opinion on the theological teach- 
ing of Dionysius is given by that singularly clear 
and sceptical Frenchman, Vacherot, in his Histoii-e 
de rEcole d Alcxandrie, 185 1, Tome III, pp. 23 ff. 

Vacherot considers the group of treatises ascribed 
to Dionysius to be the most curious monument of 
neo-Platonist influence over Christian theology. 
Philosophy affirms that negations concerning Deity 
are true on condition that they express nothing 
definite. In the author's opinion Theology cannot 
really give any positive instruction. Dionysius is under- 
stood by Vacherot to teach that mystical theology is 
the suppression of definite thought. To know God 
we must cease to think of Him. The devout is 
lost in a mystical obscurity of ignorance. Nothing 
definite can in reality be said of Deity. 

In Vacherot's opinion the orthodoxy of the 
Areopagite is more than doubtful. 

The Christian conception presents the living 
personal self-conscious God, Creator and Father of 
the world, in eternal inseparable relation with His 
Son and His Spirit, a Trinity inaccessible in itself, 
but manifested directly in Incarnation. 

But in the conception of this neo-Platonist thinker 
Deity is removed to an infinite distance from the 
human soul, and the Trinity is reduced to a mere 
abstraction. We are here far removed from the 
genuine Christian theology. 

Dionysius is to Vacherot a neo-Platonist philo- 
sopher in disguise, who while going over to Christi- 
anity retained his philosophic ideas which he adroitly 
combined with the principles of his new belief. 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 217 

A third modern critic of Dionysius is the Lutheran 
theologian, Dorner. Dorner was concerned only 
with the bearing of the Areopagite principles on 
the doctrine of the Person of Christ.^ 

In Dorner's opinion the mystical Christology of 
the Areopagite "forms an important link of con- 
nection between Monophysitism and the doctrine of 
the Church." " Not that we mean to affirm that the 
Areopagite was a declared Monophysite ; certainly, 
however, that his entire mode of viewing the world 
and God belong to this family." 

With regard to the doctrine of the Trinity, Dorner 
holds that on the principles of Dionysius " seeing that 
God is the One Who is at once in all and above all — 
yea, outweighs the negation of the many by the 
Divine Unity — all idea of distinct hypostasis in God 
ought consistently to be renounced ; in the Super- 
Essential God everthing sinks down into unity with- 
out distinctions. Much is said, indeed, of the Many, 
along with the One ; but the Trinity in God retains 
merely a completely precarious position." 

Dorner adds : " The result as far as Christology is 
concerned is very plain ; after laying down such 
premises, it was impossible for the Areopagite to 
justify, either anthropologically or theologically, a 
specific incarnation in one individual. If he taught 
it at all, it was because he had adopted it from the 
Creeds of the Church, and he was quite unable to 
put himself into a sincere and true relation towards 
it." 

To these criticisms may be added the remarks of 
a fourth modern writer, this time from the standpoint 
of the Roman Church. Bach, in his very able 
History of Dogma in the Middle Ages, says that, 
in the works of the Areopagite, Christ is frequently 
treated in so idealistic a fashion that the concrete 

* Dorner, Doctrine of the Person of Christ, Div. II. i. 157 ff. 
P 

2i8 DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE 

personality of the God-man is driven into the shade. 
The mysticism of Dionysius is not founded on the 
historical person of Christ, nor on the work of 
Redemption as a fact once actualized in time. 

Here may be added a criticism on Dionysius from 
a Bishop of the English Church. Bishop Westcott 
wrote — 

" Many, perhaps, will be surprised that such a 
scheme of Christianity as Dionysius has sketched 
should even be reckoned Christian at all." ^ Dr. 
Westcott went on to say of the Areopagite's prin- 
ciples : *' It must be frankly admitted that they bear 
the impress not only of a particular age and school, 
but also of a particular man, which is not wholly 
of a Christian type." And again elsewhere "very 
much of the system was faulty and defective." 

In closing this short survey of the place of Dionysius 
in the history of religious thought it is evident enough 
that we are confronted with an exceptional figure 
of unusual ascendancy. He is not made less per- 
plexing by the variety of estimates formed upon his 
theology by men of different schools and of marked 
ability. The student must be left to draw his own 
conclusions. But if those conclusions are to be 
correctly drawn he must have before his mind, at 
least in outlines, the fact of the Areopagite's historic 
influence. 

The general impression left upon the mind by the 
Areopagite's critics is that the author's strength con- 
sisted in his combination of philosophy with mysticism ; 
but that he was far more strong as a philosophic 
thinker than he was as a Christian theologian ; and 
that in his efforts to reconcile Christianity with neo- 
Platonism it is the philosophy which prevails, not with- 
out serious results to the theology of the Church. His 
greatest admirers appear to have employed him with 

^ Westcott, Religious Thought in the JVest, p. i88. 

INFLUENCE IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY 219 

discretion ; to have balanced his statements with more 
proportion, and to have read him in the Hght of 
strong Catholic presuppositions which to some extent 
neutralized his over-emphasis, and supplemented his 
omissions. It is an interesting speculation for the 
theological student what the position of these writings 
would have been if their author had never been 
identified with the disciple of St Paul. 

INDEX TO TEXT 

Affirmative Theology, 196 

Bartholomew, 193 

Clement, 141 

Differentiations in Deity, 67 ff. 
Divine Names, 51-190 

Elements of Divinity, 76, 83 
Elymas, 157-158 
Emanations, 79-80 
Evil (Nature of), 86 ff., 1 11- 130 

Fatherhood, 56 

God as Goodness, ^d ff. 
Light, 91-94 
Beauty, 95 ff. 
Love, 104 
Being, 131 ff. 
Life, 144 
Wisdom, 146 
Reason, 148-153 
Power, 154 

Righteousness, 158, 160 
Great and Small, 162 
Omnipotent, 169 
Peace, 173-178 
Holiness, 181 
Perfection, 184 
Unity, 185-190 

Hierotheus, 76-83, 86-107 
Plymns of Yearning, 107, 108 
109 

Ignatius, 104 
Illumination, 55, 58 
Incarnation, 76 

James, St., 84 

Negative Theology, 196 

Outlines of Divinity, 51, 196, 197 

Paul, St., ?>T, 
Peter, St., 84 

Scriptures, 52, 53 

Simplicity, 55 

Super-essential, 52, 53, 54, 56, 

59, 71, 139, 191 
Super-excellent, 191 
Super-intellectual, 52 
Supra-Divine, 191 
Symbolical Revelation, ^lo ff. 

Timothy, 191 

Trinity, 56, 65, 66, 79, 191 

Undifferenced Names of God, 6c;, 
68 

221 

INDEX TO NOTES AND 
INTRODUCTION 

Aquinas, 3, 81, 107, 143, 151, 

171, 172, 212 
Aristotle, 81, 92, loi, 171 
Augustine, 9, 10, 41, 42-65, 77, 

I03> 134, 136, 141, 143' 162, 
168, 181, 185, 197 

Bach, 217 
Baur, 214-216 
Bergson, 143, 152, 195 
Bernard de Rubeis, 213 
Bernard, St., 165 
Blake, 140 
Bradley, 114, 192 
Bronte, E., 186 

Contemplation, 25, 30, 33 

Damascenus, 211 

Dante, 88, 107, 140, 173, 177, 

178 
Dionysius, influence, 202-219 ; 

writings, 47 
Dorner, 217 

Eckhart, 122, 181 
Erigena, 3, 203-211 
Evil, problem of, 20-25 

Fox, George, 87 

God as Unity, 65-80 

Goodness, 86-130 

5 > 

5» 
55 

5 5 

Being, 131-143 
Life, 144-146 
Wisdom, 146-154 
Power, 1 54-1 6 1 

God as Great, 162-169 

Almighty, 169-173 
Peace, 173-180 
Holy, 181-1S3 
Perfection, 184, 190 

Godhead, 4-6, 6-19 

5) 
55 
55 

55 

Hierotheus, 107 

Hugh of St. Victor, 212 

Ignatius, St., 104 
Inge, 29, 210, 211 

John of the Cross, 103 
Julian of Norwich, 102, 143 

Lanssel, 213 
Lateran, C. (649), 213 
Le Bon, 109 
Le Quien, 213 
Lotze, 192 

Martin (i. Pope), 202 
Maximus, 3, 202 

Nietzsche, 90, 193 

Pachymeres, 3 
Pascal, 118 
Personality, 4 

Philosophy (Modern), D.'s rela- 
tion to, 30 
Plato, 107 

Plotinus, 2, 109, 138 
Proclus, I 
Psychology, 

33-40 

222 

INDEX TO NOTES AND INTRODUCTION 223 

Ruysbroeck, 122 

Scripture, D.'s relation to, 40 

Severus, 3 

Shelley, 1S2 

Spencer, 107 

Super-essential, 15, 16, 17, 45, 

51, 52, 53, 191 
Super-excellent, 191 
Supra-Divine, 191 

Tauler, 122 

Trinity, 9, 10, 42, 44, 45 

Vacherot, 211, 216 
Via Negatively 195, 196 
Victorinus, 174 
Von Hiigel, 172 

Westcott, 218 
Wordsworth, 95, 99 

w 

i 

Date Due 

wove «5fl 

• "i 6 

r^ i^''i 

fJl.ftV .' 

JAN 1 3 '6c; 

-f»,i 

II 

00 

vii*; 

#— T. 

I'MH- 

Library Bureau Cat. No. 1137 

W'EILS 8INDERY 
ALTHAM, MASS. 
Sm. 1946 

189,5[)62() 

3 5002 00343 6131 

Dionysius, the Areopagfte, on the Divine 

CLAPP 

BR 65 . D63 D413 1920 

Pseudo- Dionysius, 

Dionysius the Areopagite On 
thf divine names