International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) 
International Open Access Journal | www.ijtsrd.com 

* ISSN No: 2456-6470 | Volume-2 | Issue-6 | Sep-Oct 2018 4 

Nagarjuna's Reflection on Motion and Rest 

Dr. Sudipta Chattopadhyay 

Govt Approved Lecturer, Malda Women's College, Malda, West Bengal, India 

ABSTRACT 

Nagarjuna (C.150 - C.250) is considered to be one of 
the most famous thinkers of Indian Mahayana 
Buddhism, specially, in the Tibetan tradition and 
referred to as 'The Second Buddha'. Nagarjuna 
categorically repudiates the reality of motion as well 
as rest. He is known as the founder of the 
Madhyamika school of Buddhist thought, the school 
of the middle way. The middle way avoids both the 
extremes of etemalism as well as of nihilism. The 
main theory of Madhyamika is the doctrine of 
'emptiness' or ‘sunyata’ which shows that all 
phenomena lack a permanent, unchanging and 
independent self-existence. Phenomena possess a 
conventional existence in which they appear to have a 
self-nature, although in reality they do not. This 
teaching is also found in the Four Noble Truths of 
Buddha. Just like all other Hindu philosophical 
schools, according to Buddha too, all sentient beings 
live in an infinite cycle of suffering which is caused 
by their ignorance concerning the true nature of 
phenomena. Beings do not realize the emptiness both 
of things as well as of mental phenomena and adopt 
attitudes of like and dislike, which creates the process 
of suffering. But it can be stopped if the appearance of 
phenomena and their true nature is realized. In 
'Mulamadhyamakakarika', Nagarjuna tries to provide 
a philosophical rationale for the notion of 'emptiness', 
which is the key term in the 'Prajnaparamita Sutras', 
the earlier Mahayana literature. For Nagarjuna, 
Motion cannot be comprehended as identical with the 
mover for the mover and its activity (motion) cannot 
be distinguished then. If we have the conception of an 
inherent identity of the agent and its activity, the agent 
cannot really change its activity. A mover is identified 
with reference to motion and therefore, it would be a 
contradiction to say motion with mover. Again, 
‘motion without mover’ also, is not accepted, if it is 
accepted, then, motion would be absolutely different 
from the mover. He argues that the mover cannot be 

motionless in himself apart from the motion, as it is a 
contradiction to say a mover without motion. It is also 
impossible to say that it has a motion other than the 
motion which inheres in it, because it implies two 
motions, for it is a mover that moves. Therefore, it is 
difficult to explain whether the mover can be 
understood with or without the motion. But without 
motion our usual life would be stopped. Sun, moon, 
stars, planets and other stars cannot move without 
motion. If motion is not accepted then astronomy 
would be in vein. Even we cannot speak and write 
without the movement of our vocabulary organs and 
that of fingers respectively. So, the existence of 
motion has to accept in usual life, in scientific 
research and in all other aspects of life. 

INTRODUCTION 

According to Nagarjuna, it is impossible to give an 
intelligible account of motion, because to do so, is an 
attempt to make an analysis designed to cope with a 
certain limited practical problem apply far beyond its 
sphere of competence. Motion cannot be 

comprehended as identical with the mover for the 
mover and its activity (motion) cannot be 

distinguished then. If we have the conception of an 
inherent identity of the agent and its activity, the agent 
cannot really change its activity. A mover is identified 
with reference to motion and therefore, it would be a 
contradiction to say motion with mover. Again, 
‘motion without mover’ also, is not accepted, if it is 
accepted, then, motion would be absolutely different 
from the mover. He argues that the mover cannot be 
motionless in himself apart from the motion, as it is a 
contradiction to say a mover without motion. It is also 
impossible to say that it has a motion other than the 
motion which inheres in it, because it implies two 
motions, for it is a mover that moves. Therefore, it is 
difficult to explain whether the mover can be 
understood with or without the motion. 

@ IJTSRD I AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 I Issue - 6 I Sep-Oct 2018 

Page: 968 

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

In fact, Nagarjuna denies both, motion as well as rest. 
For him, space is divided mainly into two parts - the 
one is 'already traversed' and the other is 'yet to be 
traversed'. There is no space which is 'being 
traversed', because there, we have to admit two 
motions - motion in the space covered and motion in 
the moving body. Besides this, we have to admit two 
moving bodies, since it is not possible for the same 
body to be in two places at the same time. Not only 
that, when a body is at rest, before the beginning of 
the activity, motion does not occur. It is not possible 
to say that motion begins where it does not exist and 
therefore, motion cannot be thought in the space yet to 
come. 

DISCUSSION: 

Now, if we go through the 'Mulamadhyamakakdrikd', 
we find that Nagarjuna devotes the second chapter of 
his book to point out the inherent contradiction of the 
concept of motion (gati). According to him, 
considered from every aspect, the notion of gati or 
motion cannot be explained. For him, “What has been 
moved, in the first instance, is not being moved. What 
has not been moved is also not being moved. 
Separated from what has been moved and has not 
been moved, present moving is not known.(Gatam na 
gamyate tavad agatam naiva 

gamyate/gatagatavinirmuktam gamyamanam na 
gamyate.)”1 

Let us clarify this argument with an example as given 
in the commentary ‘Prasanyapada’ written by 
Candraklrti. “In the time of walking, when we put a 
step, a portion of the track of that movement is 
already traversed by the front portion of the foot 
which should be called ‘gata’ or ‘what is already 
traversed’, that is to say, there is no motion in that 
portion. Again, the back portion of the foot must be 
called ‘agata’ or ‘what is not yet traversed’. The 
portion of the track of the movement is not yet 
traversed by the back portion of the foot. Therefore, 
there is no motion there. Thus, in the time of walking, 
the so-called movement is not found anywhere. As a 
matter of fact, on a close scrutiny, there cannot be any 
movement. The concept of ‘motion’ must be 
regarded, therefore, as unreal.”2 

It is to be kept in mind that the arguments of 
Nagarjuna are directed against the Buddhist schools 
called ‘Sarvastitva Vada’. The Sautrantikas and 
Vaibhasikas belong to this school. According to them, 

an object is nothing but the collection of atoms only. 
It is different from the Vaisesika view called ‘Avayavi 
Vada’, viz., an object is something over and above the 
parts. 

It might be objected however from the opponents’ 
standpoint that “Where there is movement, there is 
motion. For which reason movement is in the present 
moving, and not either in the moved or in the not 
moved, for that reason motion is available in the 
present moving. (Cesta yatra gatis tatra gamyamane 
ca sa yatah/na gate nagate cesta gamyamane gatis 
tatah.)”3 

It is to be emphasised here that Nagarjuna anticipates 
the opponent’s objection. To this objection, Nagarjuna 
says that this objection presupposes two movers 
which is absurd. To explain, to assert ‘gamyamane 
gati’ or ‘motion in the present moving’, two motions 
have to be accepted for without motion there cannot 
be the act of present moving. The act of the present 
moving presupposes a mover. Again, the concept of 
‘motion’ is intelligible if a mover is presupposed. As a 
matter of fact, if there were two motions, then, two 
movers also ought to be accepted. 

Against this view, it might be objected that it may be 
granted for the sake of argument that if there are two 
motions there should not be any trouble. To accept 
two motions, it is not necessary to accept two movers. 
It can be treated as different actions of the same agent 
(mover). Do not we see a man walking and talking at 
the same time? 

To this, it has been replied by Candraklrti that “the 
self-same agent may perform two types of different 
actions at the same moment. But it would not be 
logically possible to perform two actions of the same 
type simultaneously. It is difficult to admit that the 
self-same person, say, Devadatta is the agent of the 
action of moving as well as the ‘motion’ at the same 
time.”4 

Further, the Madhyamika thinkers, mainly Nagarjuna 
and Candraklrti repudiate the reality of the mover 
(ganta) also. The term ‘mover’ only be understood 
with reference to motion and again, the term ‘motion’ 
only be understood with reference to the mover. So, 
there is obviously vicious circle and therefore, the 
concept of motion turns to be absolutely 
unintelligible. 

@ IJTSRD I Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com I Volume - 2 I Issue - 6 I Sep-Oct 2018 

Page: 969 

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

Again, the notion of mover itself is unintelligible 
further, for the following reason: A mover is 
understood only with reference to his motion. A 
person cannot be called a mover if he does not move. 
But Nagarjuna points out that ‘a mover moves’ is 
nothing but a tautology bacause the word ‘moves’ 
becomes meaningful only in respect to his movement. 
For Nagarjuna, we cannot say that ‘Devadatta goes’ 
or ‘ganta gacchati’, because, there is nothing other 
than ‘gata’ (what is already traversed) and ‘agata’ 
(what is not yet traversed). If we say that Devadatta 
gacchati or Devadatta moves, we have to say either 
gata moves or agata moves. But it is not acceptable. 
Therefore, all is void, what we see is apparently true 
but not absolutely true. 

Against this view, it might be said that movement 
exists, as kala (time) exists. The moment when a 
movement is going, is called the present. The moment 
when the movement ended, is called the past and the 
moment when a movement will occur, is called the 
future. Different agents like singers; cookers etc. 
perform their duties when needed. It is true in the case 
of a mover also. ‘A person is a mover’ does not imply 
that he always moves. 

This argument, however, would be summarily 
rejected by the Madhyamika thinkers as the very 
concept of ‘time’ or ‘kala’ itself has been denied by 

them. It might be claimed that motion exists, because 
it has a beginning, e.g., Devadatta is standing and 

then, starting to walk. But for Nagarjuna, as there is 
nothing like motion, there is no beginning and end of 
it. What is done, i.e., ‘what is already traversed’, has 
no beginning. There is nothing like ‘being traversed’ 
and therefore, has no beginning. Again, ‘what is not 
yet traversed’, has no motion and therefore, has no 
beginning and end. Therefore, the concept of ‘motion’ 
cannot be established by the concept of ‘beginning 
and end’. 

Again, Nagarjuna’s thesis cannot be repudiated by 
admitting that motion exists as rest exists. For 
Nagarjuna, motion would exist if its opposite rest 
would exist. He denies rest. To explain, according to 
him, “it is not the mover or the non-mover (static) 
which is at rest and there is no third body which is at 
rest. The non-mover is not at rest, as it is already 
stationary and there cannot be two rests as this would 
involve two stationary bodies. As it is impossible for a 
mover to be without motion, it would be a 
contradiction to say that mover is at rest. Indeed, rest 

is not possible by cessation from motion, because 
cessation or stopping is an opposite activity of a 
mover. A mover cannot stop from the space ‘already 
traversed’ or ‘yet to be traversed’ or ‘that which is 
being traversed’. Rest cannot begin when someone is 
at rest or is not at rest.”5 

In 'Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna: The 
Philosophy of the Middle Way', Kalupahana 
comments that "Prior to the commencement of 
movement, there is neither the present moving nor the 
moved from which the movement is initiated. How 
could there be a movement in the not moved? "6 

To explain, If a runner cannot get started in the 
present moment, it is not possible for him to get 
started forever, either because he has to transgress an 
infinite series of space-segments or because the 
atomic moment in which the movement should have 
started cannot be atomic for it has to consist of two 
moments, one in which the object is at rest and one in 
which it moves and also not in any following present 
moment. 

Kalupahana also comments that "When the 
commencement of movement is not being perceived 
in any way, what is it that is discriminated as the 
moved, the present moving, or the not moved? "7 

To explain, before an object can start to move in an 
atomic time-instant 'commencement of moving', it has 
to be in some state concerning motion and non-motion 
in the preceding moment. This cannot be the present 
moving, because this moment precedes it; it cannot be 
another 'moved', because the preceding moment has to 
be a state of non-motion for the object starts to move. 
The moment in which the movement should begin, is 
not perceptible as an atomic entity, because in this 
case it ought to be in two opposite states, namely, 
moving and not-moving. Nagarjuna does not want to 
refute the possibility of perceiving motion as such but 
only in relation to a certain conception held, i.e., the 
infinite divisibility of moments of time. The thought 
of an unchanging, permanent substance in phenomena 
being one of the basic conceptions Nagarjuna wants to 
refute. For him, a moved object cannot possess a 
substance remaining really the same throughout the 
course of motion. Nagarjuna emphasizes further that 
if it should be granted for the sake of argument that 
motion exists, then, the question is: What is the 
relation between a mover and his motion? There may 
be two types of relation between them-‘motion with 

@ IJTSRD I Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com I Volume - 2 I Issue - 6 I Sep-Oct 2018 

Page: 970 

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

mover’ or ‘motion without mover’. The first relation, 
i.e., ‘motion with mover’ is not accepted, if it is 
accepted, then, motion and mover would be identical 
and for Nagarjuna, "If movement were to be identical 
with the mover, it would follow that there is identity of 
agent and action. (Yad eva gamanam gantd sa eva hi 
bhaved yadi/ ekibhavah prasajyeta kartuh karmana 
eva ca .)"8 

To explain, motion cannot be comprehended as 
identical with the mover for the mover (agent) and its 
activity (motion) cannot be distinguished then. If we 
have the conception of an inherent identity of the 
agent and its attribute (activity), the agent cannot 
really change its attribute. A mover is identified with 
reference to motion and therefore, it would be a 
contradiction to say motion with mover. 

The second relation, i.e., ‘motion without mover’ also, 
is not accepted, if it is accepted, then, motion would 
be absolutely different from the mover. Nagarjuna 
claims that "If the discrimination is made that the 
mover is different from motion, then there would be 
movement without a mover, and mover without 
movement.(Any a eva punar gantd gat eh yadi 
vikalpyate/ gamanam syad rter gantur gantd syad 
gamanad rte.) "9 

To explain, it is not possible to admit the activity of 
‘motion’ as absolutely different from the mover, for 
then, the ‘movement’, i.e., the action of moving 
cannot be predicted to the ‘mover’ as it is difficult to 
see how two absolutely different things can be 
predicated to each other. If we conceive the two as 
inherently different, we cannot explain the continuity 
of the one moving object. For Nagarjuna, both, the 
mover and the motion do not exist, as they cannot be 
comprehended either as identical or as different from 
each other and so, for Nagarjuna and other 
Madhyamika thinkers, it is not possible to establish 
the reality of the concept of ‘motion’ by any means. It 
is found to be riddled with contradictions and it is 
nothing but ‘sunya’. 

There is another equally strong assumption held by 
the Nyaya-Vaisesika thinkers which is, viz., a thing is 
something over and above its parts. The discussion so 
far shows that according to Nagarjuna, the concept of 
motion is unreal. But it might be emphasized here that 
the underlying assumption of Nagarjuna’s argument 
is, a thing is nothing but a cluster of atoms. This is the 
basic assumption of the Buddhist philosophers like 

Sautrantikas and Vaibhasikas and it is really very 
difficult to re-establish the concept of motion if this 
assumption is accepted. It might be pointed out 
however that this assumption is accepted by all the 
Indian philosophers. In other words, a thing is entirely 
a new product which is different from its component 
atoms. If this assumption is accepted, then, the 
repudiator argument of Nagarjuna mentioned in 
karika I, falls to be ground. 

We find that the argument refuting the relationship of 
a mover and its motion has also logical defects. 
Madhyamika argument can be refuted by introducing 
the Nyaya-Vaisesika notion of Samavaya or 
Inherence. The movement is an action and the mover 
is an object. A predicate is related to its subject by the 
relation of Inherence (Samavaya). Here, the ‘mover’ 
is the agent and the action ‘movement’ is the 
predicate. It is obvious that they are not identical but 
the action is predicated to the object and these two are 
related by the relation of Inherence. 

Thus, it is found that Nagarjuna’s thesis that ‘motion 
is unreal’, has no legs to stand upon. He argues that 
the mover cannot be motionless in himself apart from 
the motion, as it is a contradiction to say a mover 
without motion. It is also impossible to say that it has 
a motion other than the motion which inheres in it, 
because it implies two motions, for it is a mover that 
moves. Therefore, it is difficult to explain whether the 
mover can be understood with or without the motion. 
It is also difficult to say whether motion resides in a 
body which is itself independent of motion or not. 
Nagarjuna states that "An existent mover does not 
carry out the movement in any of the three ways. 
Neither does a non-existent mover carry out the 
movement in any of the three ways. Nor does a person 
carry out the movement, both existent and non¬ 
existent, in any of the three ways. Therefore, neither 
motion, nor the mover, nor the space to be moved is 
evident. (Sadbhuto gamanam gantd triprakdram na 
gacchat/nd sadbhuto ’pi gamanam triprakdram sa 
gacchati/gamanam sadasadbhutam triprakdram na 
gacchati/ tasmad gads ca gantavyam ca na 
vidyate. )"10 

To explain, The 'three ways' are the assertions 'what 
has moved is being moved', 'what has not moved is 
being moved' and 'what has both moved and not 
moved is being moved'. The first implies a stable, 
substantial entity; the second a completely different, 
unconnected entity and the third implies both of these. 

@ IJTSRD I Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com I Volume - 2 I Issue - 6 I Sep-Oct 2018 

Page: 971 

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 

All three of these are impossible and ‘motion’, 
‘mover’ and the ‘space to be moved’- all are 
unintelligible. 

CONCLUSION: 

In the language of physics, we can say that motion is a 
change in position of an object over time. In 
mathematics, motion is described in terms of 
displacements, distance, time, velocity, speed and 
acceleration. We cannot deny the existence of motion. 
In fact, we cannot deny the existence of motion. Our 
general sense asserts that any object in this universe 
stands with reference to space-time continum. To be 
in motion, an object has to move from one place to 
another place, with reference to time. It indicates the 
change of its position, with reference to time. 

In our times, we know from science that Earth, Sun 
and other planets and stars move on their own orbits. 
If motion is not accepted, then, it would not be 
possible and astronomy would become false. I have 
discussed earlier that NASA's Kepler mission has 
confirmed the first near-Earth-size planet, Kepler- 
45 2b in the habitable zone around a Sun-like, G2-type 
star. This discovery and the introduction of 11 other 
new small habitable zone candidate planets mark 
another milestone in the journey to finding another 
Earth. Kepler-452b is larger than Earth, its distance 
from its parent star is 5 percent farther than the 
distance between the Earth and the Sun. Kepler-452 is 
6 billion years old, 1.5 billion years older than our 
sun. It has the same temperature, and is 20 percent 
brighter and has a diameter 10 percent larger. John 
Jenkins, Kepler data analysis lead at NASA's Ames 
Research Center in Moffett Field, California. For him, 
we can think of Kepler-452b as an older, bigger 
cousin to Earth. Kepler-452b is the smallest planet to 
date discovered orbiting in the habitable zone, the 
area around a star where liquid water could pool on 
the surface of an orbiting planet, of a G2-type star, 
like our Sun. Including this planet, the total number of 
confirmed planets become one thousand and thirty. 

In practical life, human beings and other animals 
change places for various purposes, e.g., food, shelter, 
learning, etc. If there is no motion, how would it be 
possible for them to lead a normal life as without 
movement they cannot change their places. If there is 

no motion, then, we cannot speak with others. To talk 
to others the movement of our vocabulary organs, i.e., 
lips and tongue, has to accept and the movement 
indicates motion. Again to write, the movement of 
fingers also indicates motion. Hence, this discussion 
proves that motion has reality and it exists. 

REFERENCES: 

1. 'Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna: The 
Philosophy of the Middle Way': David J. 
Kalapuhana (Trs.): Motilal Banarsidass Publishers 
Pvt. Ltd.: Delhi: 1 st edn.199Ep.118 

2. ‘Prasanyapada: The commentaryof 

Madhyamakasdstra ’: CandrakTrti: Karika 1: The 
Mithila Institute of Post-graduate Studies and 
Research in Sanskrit Learning (publ.): Darbhanga: 
1960: p.33. 

3. 'Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna: The 
Philosophy of the Middle Way': David J. 
Kalapuhana (Trs.): Motilal Banarsidass Publishers 
Pvt. Ltd.: Delhi: 1 st edn,1991:p.ll9. 

4. ‘Prasanyapada: The commentaryof 

Madhyamakasdstra CandrakTrti: Karika 1: The 
Mithila Institute of Post-graduate Studies and 
Research in Sanskrit Learning (publ.): Darbhanga: 
1960: p.35. 

5. 'Studies in Indian Thought': Collected Papers of 
Prof. T. R. V. Murti: Harold G. Coward (ed.): 
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Pvt. Ltd.: 1 st 
edn.l983.p.155-156. 

6. 'Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna: The 
Philosophy of the Middle Way': David J. 
Kalapuhana (Trs.): Motilal Banarsidass Publishers 
Pvt. Ltd.: Delhi: 1 st edn.199Ep.125. 

7. Ibid: p. 125-126. 

8. Ibid: p. 128. 

9. Ibid: p. 129. 

10. 10. Ibid: p. 130-131. 

@ IJTSRD I Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com I Volume - 2 I Issue - 6 I Sep-Oct 2018 

Page: 972