Literacy in Islam 
OU à KA 

[ English - £34.21 | 

www islamreligion.com website 

DNE 

2013 - 1434 

IsiamHouse... 

Lui | sadi 
Id | 

[aij > 

Baghdad was hit by a series of explosions. The city raked by 
violence. Baghdad eguals chaos, death, and destruction. Baghdad 
is a city screaming in pain and dying in the smokescreen. As we 
watch the tangled mess on our television screens, it is hard to 
imagine that Baghdad was once a great seat of learning. Baghdad 
and books have been synonymous for hundreds of years. 
Bookshelves line family homes and booksellers line the streets of 
Baghdad. Even now, amidst the rubble and pandemonium the 
residents of Baghdad shop for books. "It is an old disease in Iraq — 
people spend their money on books, not on food,” jokes an Iraqi 
translator for NBC News’. 

In the period, that western history has come to call the Dark 
Ages, the love affair between Baghdad and books began. In a time 
when churches across Europe felt themselves fortunate to have a 
library consisting of several books, there was a street in Baghdad 
lined with more then 100 shops, each selling books, stationary, or 
both. Across the western world, literacy was restricted to the rich 
or religious authorities, but in Baghdad, the people had access to 
more then 30 libraries. 

l(http://worldblog.msnbc.msn.com/archive/2007/11/30/487951.aspx) 

2 

Within 200 years after the death of Prophet Muhammad, the 
small Islamic nation grew into an Empire that stretched from 
North Africa to Arabia, from Persia to Uzbekistan and pushed 
onwards to the frontiers of India and beyond. Around 750CE 
Baghdad, the city built on the banks of the Tigris River was 
established as the capital of the Islamic empire. Its location 
connected it to countries as far away as China, and Baghdad soon 
became not only the political and administrative centre but also the 
hub of culture and learning. 

Men and women from all parts of the Empire flocked to 
Baghdad and brought with them knowledge from the far corners of 
the known world. 

Muslims, Jews, Christians, Hindus, Zoroastrians, and even 
people from other more obscure faiths lived in Baghdad. Books 
began to symbolise life of Baghdad. The streets were alive with 
authors, translators, scribes, illuminators, librarians, binders, 
collectors, and sellers. However, these people from such diverse 
backgrounds need to be connected. Arabic developed as the 
language of scholarship and the connection was established. 

The works of Plato, Aristotle, Ptolemy, and Plutarch among 
many others were translated into Arabic. Jewish philosophers 
used Arabic translations of Greek philosophical works to write 
their own treatise and essays. When Europe began to emerge from 
the Dark Ages into a period of enlightenment, they relied on books 
written in Arabic to redeem and reclaim the foundations of the 
Western empire. 

Many of the original books translated in Baghdad were lost or 
destroyed in their home countries, and remained only in their 
Arabic translations. The scholars of Baghdad were responsible for 
preserving classical works from the Greeks, Romans, and 
Egyptians and even translated classics from Persia, India and 
China. These great works were then translated from Arabic back 
into languages such as Turkish, Persian, Hebrew, and Latin. 

3 

Catholic theologian, Thomas Aquinas made his famous integration 
of faith. and reason after reading Aristotle's philosophy in a 
translation by Baghdad scholars. 

The scholars of Baghdad not only collected and synthesised the 
great works, they added to the body of knowledge. They opened 
up new fields of scholarship, such as celestial mechanics, and 
introduced the world to algebra and geometry. A Baghdad scholar 
produced an ophthalmology textbook, believed the world's first 
medical book containing anatomical drawings. It was the 
definitive work in both the east and west, and was used for more 
than eight centuries. 

As Baghdad transformed itself into a centre of learning Caliph, 
Harun AI Rashid, and his son, al-Mamoon, opened one of history's 
most renowned think tanks, Bayt al Hikmah, or the House of 
Wisdom. The scholars at the House of Wisdom, unlike their 
modern counterparts, did not "specialize." Al-Razi was a 
philosopher and a mathematician as well as a physician, and al- 
Kindi, wrote on logic, philosophy, geometry, calculation, 
arithmetic, music, and astronomy. Among his works were such 
titles as The Reason Why Rain Rarely Falls in Certain Places, The 
Cause of Vertigo, and Crossbreeding the Dove. 

The historian al-Magrizi described the opening of the House of 
Wisdom in 1004 CE. “The students took up their residence. The 
books were brought from [many other] libraries ... and the public 
was admitted. Whosoever wanted was at liberty to copy any book 
he wished to copy, or whoever required to read a certain book 
found in the library could do so. Scholars studied the Quran, 
astronomy, grammar, lexicography and medicine. The building 
was, moreover, adorned by carpets and all doors and corridors had 
curtains, and managers, servants, porters, and other menials were 
appointed to maintain the establishment." 2 

2(http://www.sfusd.edu/schwww/sch618/ScienceMath/Science and Math.html) 

4 

Books have always played a role in the life of Baghdad. In 11" 

century CE Baghdad , a manuscript “... was about the size of the 
modern book, containing good quality paper with writing on both 
sides, and bound in leather covers". An average bookshop 
contained several hundred titles including the Quran and 
commentaries on the Quran, languages and calligraphy, Christian 
and Jewish scriptures, histories, government works, court 
accounts, pre-Islamic and Islamic poetry, works by various schools 
of Muslim thought, biographies, astronomy, Greek and Islamic 
medicine, literature, popular fiction, and travel guides (to India, 
China, Indochina). 3 

Today, as the bombs explode around them and their world falls 
into an abyss, the people of Baghdad hold on to their literary 
heritage. Amongst the rubble, the booksellers ply their trade and 
the citizens of Baghdad make choices between reading and eating. 
This however is not surprising for Islam has a long tradition of 
literacy. The first word of Quran revealed to Prophet Muhammad 
was iqra — read, learn, and understand In part two we will go on a 
journey of discovery to see what the Quran and the authentic 
traditions of Prophet Muhammad say about literacy and seeking 
knowledge. 

3 Ibid. 

Islam is a religion that is concerned with literacy. When the 
Quran was revealed the first word was igra — read, learn, 
understand. In a cave, outside Mecca, the angel Gabriel squeezed 
Prophet Muhammad's chest and demanded that he read. Unable to 
read or write the Prophet replied, “I cannot read". 

"Read! In the Name of your Lord, Who has created (all that 
exists). He has created man from a clot (a piece of thick 
coagulated blood). Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous, 
Who has taught by the pen, He has taught man that which he knew 
not." (Quran 96:1-5) 

Prophet Muhammad never learned to read or write but he did 
understand the importance of literacy. Although the majority of 
Arabs at the time were illiterate, they possessed a powerful and 
eloquent love of words. Arabs were masters of the spoken word — 
poetry, story telling, and memorising genealogies. Encouraging 
literacy was a natural progression. 

Muslims believe that the words of the Quran are the literal 
words of God, and preserving them was always of paramount 

6 

concern. From the earliest days of Islam, the Prophet's 
companions began to write down the words of the Quran. They 
were written on bark, bone, animal skins, and even stones. This 
ushered in a new era of literacy. 

Many of the first Muslims were poor, without position or 
prestige in Meccan society, or were slaves. Islam offered them a 
chance of equality and respect. Prophet Muhammad wisely 
understood that his new nation would have a better chance of 
surviving, and thriving, if its followers were literate and well 
educated. 

After the battle of Badr, the first battle against the Meccan 
oppressors, the fledgling Muslim army took seventy prisoners. 
Prophet Muhammad knew that most of the prisoners were literate 
and he offered freedom to those who taught ten Muslims to read 
and write. 

The new Muslims began to understand the importance of 
implementing Quran's guidance into their lives. Then, just as 
now, literacy allowed the believers to look at the world around 
them and contemplate the wonders of creation, and the 
magnificence of The Creator. The believers read Quran to be 
come closer to God. They seek knowledge in order to strengthen 
their faith. They implement that knowledge in order to worship 
God, with true submission and certainty. 

“And that those who have been given knowledge may know 
that it (this Quran) is the truth from your Lord, so that they may 
believe therein, and their hearts may submit to it with humility. 
And verily, God is the Guide of those who believe, to the Straight 
Path.” (Quran 22:54) 

In his traditions that were painstakingly recoded by Muslim 
scholars, Prophet Muhammad encouraged his followers to seek 

knowledge“. He said that if someone followed a path in pursuit of 
knowledge, God would make his path to Paradise easy. ^ He also 
said that knowledge was one of three good deeds that continued 
even after death. ° 

Human beings have minds and intellect. We also have the 
power of reasoning and the free will to accept or reject 
knowledge. God created human beings with the tools for 
acquiring knowledge. He taught the father of humankind, Adam, 
the names of everything. Adam was taught language skills, and 
how to apply knowledge, make plans and decisions, and achieve 
goals. We, the children of Adam, have inherited these skills in 
order that we can exist in the world and worship God in the best 
manner. 

"He taught Adam all the names of everything." (Quran 2:31) 

“And He gave you hearing, sight, and hearts, that you might 
give thanks (to God)." (Quran 16:78) 

The pursuit of knowledge is important in Islam. Prophet 
Muhammad encouraged his followers to attend learning classes, 
and he sent teachers of Quran to the outlying tribes and far away 
cities. He sat with his followers and taught them the principles of 
Islam, and he listened attentively, often with tears running down 
his face, to their recitation of Quran. Prophet Muhammad said the 
best of his followers were those who learnt the Quran and then 
taught it to others. ' 

The first Muslims established schools for teaching and learning 
Quran and Islamic sciences. Islam was practiced secretly for fear 
of persecution, however a school was established in the house of 
a man by the name of Akram. Even now in the 21* century, across 

4 Throughout the article, knowledge refers to beneficial knowledge. Knowledge 
that allows one to know and understand God, and the wonders of creation. 

5 Saheeh Al-Bukhari. 

6 Saheeh Muslim. 

7 Saheeh Muslim. 

the Islamic world, students attend schools named Darul Akram 
(The house of Akram) in memory and recognition of the first 
Islamic school. 

Islam holds knowledge, education, literacy, and intellectual 
pursuits in high regard. Throughout Islamic history, there are 
countless instances of the establishment of schools and 
universities, and libraries and think tanks. Muslims established 
theories of education, wrote curriculums, pursued literature and 
art, and took the concept of seeking knowledge to new heights. In 
part three we will look at theories of education and the 
establishment of schools and centres of learning. 

"Read! In the Name of your Lord, Who has created (all that 
exists). He has created man from a clot (a piece of thick 
coagulated blood). Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous, 
Who has taught by the pen, He has taught man that which he knew 
not." (Quran 96:1-5) 

The first word of Quran revealed to Prophet Muhammad, may 
God praise him, was read. Read in the name of your Lord. God 
asks the believers to read, seek knowledge, contemplate the 
universe and its wonders, and give thanks. Consequently, from 
day one Islam has encouraged literacy and education. Throughout 
Quran, God repeatedly emphasises the importance of education. 

“God will exalt in degree those of you who believe, and those 
who have been granted knowledge." (Quran 58:11) 

“And be not in haste (O Muhammad) with the Quran before its 
revelation is completed to you, and say, “My Lord! Increase me in 
knowledge." (Quran 20:114) 

From its inception, Islam has encouraged learning. It fosters 
scientific inquiry; open learning circles; the use of community 
resources; peer review; problem solving approaches; story telling 

10 

and free education. The importance of learning is highlighted by 
the fact that Prophet Muhammad established education as an 
integral part of Islam. 

Prophet Muhammad established the first Knowledge Sessions 
at Dar'ul Arqam. ? He would sit in the mosque after prayers, his 
companions gathered around him, teaching them about the 
foundations of Islam, the importance of morality and most 
importantly the Oneness of God. Prophet Muhammad taught the 
students in his knowledge sessions verses of Quran and he sent 
Quran teachers to communities outside Mecca and Medina. 

Memorising and understanding the Quran was, and still is the 
most important subject in Islamic education, followed by learning 
and memorising the traditions of Prophet Muhammad. These 
traditions are transmitted via a chain of narration that guarantees 
their authenticity, in much the same way that reference lists and 
bibliographies are used today to guarantee honesty in scholarship. 

The teachers closely followed the traditions of Prophet 
Muhammad, may God praise him. They sat on the ground with 
their pupils seated in a semi circle in front of them. Beside the 
teacher would be his most trusted and learned student, transcribing 
all that was said. Education in Islam grew rapidly from small 
learning circles to schools attached to mosques. Within a short 
time, larger schools and universities began to spring up all over the 
Islamic Caliphate. 

As the Caliphate expanded, the Prophet's method of teaching 
spread. Gathering and transmitting Quran and Islamic knowledge 
was considered a praiseworthy occupation. Kuttabs (learned men) 
and mu'allams (teachers) were found in every Islamic city and 
village. Ibn Hawgal on his visit to Sicily claimed to have counted 
about 300 elementary teachers. Jubayr b. Hayya, who was later to 
be an official and governor in the early Islamic Caliphate was a 

8 See part 2 of Literacy in Islam. 
11 

teacher in a school in Taif. Islamic personalities such as al- 
Hadjadd and the poet's al-Kumayt and al-Tirimmah are said to 
have been schoolmasters. ? 

The most renowned and well-respected scholars considered it 
an honour to teach. Ibn Muzahim (d. 723CE ) exegist, traditionist 
and grammarian, is said to have had a school in Kufa attended by 
more than 3000 children. In order to supervise all his pupils he 
rode up and down between the rows of children on a mule. 

Other subjects began to be added to Islamic education. There 
were classes in Islamic manners, Islamic law and jurisprudence, 
mathematics, grammar and medicine, agriculture, ethics, civics, 
economics, and history. The teachers, their assistants and their 
students all took education very seriously. The method of one 
teacher is described in the following passage. 

"He went several times over the passage from the law book; 
revised it with the students after they had committed it to memory; 
called attention to the divergent rulings of Imams Malik and Abu 
Hanifa in particular, and sometimes of others and to the 
reservations of the text. He then quoted the proof texts, then he set 
forth analogous cases in very clear language, repeating them in 
different words till they sank into the students minds.” I9 

The mosques and schools were generally charitable 
foundations. Literacy and education was encouraged so 
vigorously that no pupil was turned away. Lack of money did not 
mean lack of education. Remarkable similarities exist between 
procedures established in early Islamic institutions and educational 
facilities today. There were prizes for proficiency, poetry, and 
oratory contests; examinations were conducted, and degrees 
granted. 

9 http://www.muslimheritage.com/topics/ 
10 A. S. Tritton: Muslim Education in the Middle Ages. London: Luzac and Co. 
Ltd., 1957, p. 90. 

12 

A famous educator was Ibn Sina (known in the west as 
Avicenna) who was a thinker, doctor, and teacher. In the 10? 
century CE, he wrote medical textbooks that were used as primary 
medical references for more than 800 years. Ibn Sina developed 
curriculums and theories of education able to stand the tests of 
time. 

He emphasized the need for children to learn the Quran, poetry, 
devoutness and ethics. But he also did not ignore a child's need 
for play, movement, and diversion. H He thought the overall aim 
of education was the physical, spiritual, and moral growth of each 
individual. He thought of education as a way of preparing children 
to make a lasting contribution to their society. 

Although unlettered, Prophet Muhammad, may God praise 
him, understood the importance of literacy and education. He 
inspired his followers to seek knowledge and pass that knowledge 
on to others. He taught the importance of memorising Quran and 
acting upon the knowledge it conveys. He encouraged his 
followers to look for the signs of God's magnificence in the world 
around them. To love God one has to know Him, Knowing Him 
comes by understanding the splendour of the world He created. 
Knowledge is the key to loving our Creator and worshipping Him 
in the best way. 

11 (http://www.muslimheritage.com/topics/default.cfm?TaxonomyTypeID=101&Ta 
xonomySubTypeID=129&TaxonomyThirdLevelID=-1&ArticleID=1063) 

13