CAHIERS D’^TUOES M^DI^VALES ^ 

CAHIER SPECIAL d) 

TRANSLATION 
BY JOHN O’MEARA 

^'/bELLARMIN • DUMBARTON OAKS 

- 

Universite de Montreal 
UNBIBLIOtHeOUE 

RiRi 

DF 

-T DE3 

;Ri<cRsS*‘AlNES 

PERIPHYSEON 

(The Division of Nature) 

ERIUGENA 

Bellarmin 

Montreal 

PERIPHYSEON 

(The Division of Nature) 

Translation by I.P. Sheldon-Williams 
Revised by John J. O’Meara 

Dumbarton Oaks 
1987 Washington 

Cahiers d’etudes medievales 
Cahier special — 3 

Donnees de catalogage avant publication (Canada) 

Erigena, Johannes Scotus, ca. 810-ca. 877. 

Periphyseon = The division of nature 

(Cahiers d’etudes medievales ; cahier special 3) 

Bibliography 

ISBN 2-89007-634-2 

1. Philosophy of nature — Early works to 1800. I. Title. II. Title: On the 
division of nature. III. Series. 

B765.J33D43 1987 

110 

C87-096305-8 

D1 1 1.C33 no cahier special 3 

/ 

Editions Bellarmin 
8100 boul. Saint-Laurent 
Montreal, Qc H2P 2L9 

Dumbarton Oaks 
1703 32"^ Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 

U.S.A. 20007 

Couverture: Pierre Peyskens 

Depot legal — 4'-' trimestre 1987 — Bibliotheque nationale du Quebec 
Copyright® Les Editions Bellarmin 1987 
ISBN 2-89007-634-2 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

About this translation . 9 

1. Introduction . 11 

2. Translation . 23 

3. Note on Sources in the Greek and Latin Fathers in the Periphyseon ... 717 

4. Short Bibliography . 721 

Vv 

'K 

j 

•J 

1* 

i 

ABOUT THIS TRANSLATION 

The first three books of this translation are a reproduction, with the 
minimum necessary adjustments, of that by Dr. I.P. Sheldon-Williams in the 
Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies’ edition of the Periphyseon, still in course 
of complation, for which due gratitude to the Institute is hereby expressed. To 
this has been added the publication of a draft translation of the remaining two 
books of the work, exactly as edited by H. J. Floss in Migne’s Patrologia Latina 
122, prepared by Sheldon-Williams and considerably revised by me — not 
however, for reasons of desirable continuity, to the extent of eliminating 
unusual elements of style and structure that indicate Sheldon-Williams’ close 
and conscious affinity with Eriugena. The marginalia for books 4 and 5 are 
taken from MS Bamberg H. J.IV 6, as reproduced by M. Cappuyns in Jean Scot 
Erigene 207-13. The numbers and letters in the margins refer to the columns 
and sections of P.L. 122; the numbers (only) refer to the sequence of chapters 
there. The terms (N)utritor and (A)lumnus correspond to Master and Disciple. 
For all references, including Biblical, notes, and some help with the use of 
brackets (especially in the early books) the reader is referred, when it is 
available, to the Dublin Institute’s edition. Acknowledgment is gratefully made 
to Dumbarton Oaks, Washington D.C., for a generous grant towards this 
publication ; to the Royal Irish Academy which supports the study of Eriugena 
generously; to Miss Mary Brennan, Archivist of the Centre for Eriugenian 
Studies at University College, Dublin, for her practical help ; and to Professor 
G.H. Allard, of the Institut d’Etudes Medievales, Montreal, and President of 
the Society for the Promotion of Eriugenian Studies, to whose good offices this 
volume is particularly indebted. 

John. J. O’Meara 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Eriugena, as he is now called, was a philosopher born in Ireland early in 
the ninth century. For a long time he was known as John Scotus Erigena, a 
name given to him by Archbishop Ussher of Dublin in 1632. This latter title, 
however, is pleonastic (for both “Scotus” in the ninth century and “Erigena” 
effectively mean “born in Ireland”), and has given rise to confusing him with 
John Duns Scotus, who, also a philosopher, was born in Scotland in the 
thirteenth century. 

Ireland in the ninth century was a rural society where monasteries, 
sometimes with schools attached, were prominent settlements. These schools 
were famous for learning, although the level of that learning, and if it contained 
much of the secular literature of Greek and Rome, are still subjects of debate. 
What is clear is that Irish scholars from these schools were most conspicuous 
among those on the Continent in the ninth century who knew Greek. 

From one of these schools probably, Eriugena made his way to Francia, 
the kingdom of Charles the Bald (823-877). That kingdom in 843 corresponded 
with the France of to-day to the exclusion, however, of Brittany and all 
territory east of a line going roughly from Ostend to Marseilles : hence it can be 
referred to in a general way as France. It is sometimes suggested that Eriugena 
fled from the Vikings, who by the middle of the ninth century had begun to 
intensify their raids on Ireland and had plundered several important monas¬ 
teries. At the same time one must note that there had been a long tradition of 
peregrination from Ireland, and that Charles the Bald offered inducements to 
scholars who would work in his kingdom. At any rate Eriugena appears to have 
gone to France about 848. 

12 

PERIPHYSEON 

Charles the Bald, grandson of Charlemagne, had become king in 840 and 
at the time of Eriugena’s coming presided over what is sometimes called the 
Second Carolingian Renaissance. The great centres of culture were concentrated 
within his realm — Saint- Vaast, Saint-Riquier, Saint-Amand, Corbie, Saint- 
Denis, Saint-Germain-des-Pres, Saint-Germain-d’Auxerre : these were then 
more active than even Saint-Gall, Reichenau or Fulda. The king himself had 
had a good formation in letters, greatly admired the monastic life, loved and 
made an important collection of books, and was known as the “philosopher 
king” because of his interest in philosophy and efforts to promote its study, 
especially within a theological context. In particular, Charles had a positive 
interest in things Greek : he loved Greek pomp in the liturgy and was pleased to 
be addressed in Greek terms — anax, archos, autokrator, kurios, monarchos, 
agathos, orthodoxos, and so on. An interesting question arises as to whether 
Eriugena stimulated this interest in things Greek in him, or his interest in 
Eriugena arose because the latter was capable of translating Greek. It is clear in 
any case that when Eriugena gravitated in due course to Charles’ court, he 
knew he would find there an atmosphere congenial to his intellectual interests. 
Nor was his interest in Art uncatered for : there is evidence of the existence at 
the court of a “Hofschule”, an atelier for the production of richly — decorated 
books for Charles’ personal use. 

There may be traces of Eriugena’s sojourn on the Continent before he 
joined Charles at what is known as the Palace School. It is thought that he may 
have been at Schuttern in the diocese of Strasbourg. There is stronger reason to 
suggest that he was associated with Reims. 

Eriugena finally emerges clearly into history in 851 or so as a member of 
the Palace school of Charles. Since Charles’ court was itinerant, there is 
considerable difficulty in associating it with one place; but most scholars are 
agreed that the school is to be associated with Laon, Quierzy or Compiegne, all 
to the north-east of Paris. This school had also relations with the Cathedral 
school of Laon where Irish scholars were prominent. At the Palace School, 
then, Eriugena took up his career, first as a teacher of the liberal arts. It is not to 
be assumed that he was then — or indeed at any time — a cleric. 

The purpose of schooling in the liberal arts had been laid down by 
Charlemagne and Alcuin — the achievement of Christian wisdom and thereby 
the binding together of the whole Carolingian community. A number of works 
of a grammatical or literary character attributed to Eriugena, but as yet without 
acceptance, may reflect Eriugena’s activities at this time. These activities, we do 
know, also included commentary on the Bible and an interest in medicine. The 
main evidence for his teaching, however, is available to us in his commentary 
on the Wedding of Philology and Mercury of the Carthaginian Martianus 
Capella, an extraordinary book written sometime between 410 and 439. The 

INTRODUCTION 

13 

work has been classified by C.S. Lewis as mythological allegory: he also 
declared that “this universe, which produced the bee-orchid and the giraffe, has 
produced nothing stranger than Martianus Capella.” However that may be, it 
was the most popular schoolbook on the subject of the liberal arts, the trivium 
(Grammar, Dialectic and Rhetoric) and the Quadrivium (Geometry, Arithmetic, 
Astronomy and Harmony) for the best part of a thousand years. Eriugena, 
therefore, had knowledge of this wide spread of disciplines. But The Wedding of 
Philology and Mercury, much affected also the use of the Greek language and of 
Neoplatonic ideas : Eriugena’s commentary shows an appreciable interest in 
these. Eriugena also insisted that the liberal arts are innate in everyone and 
constitute an independent way to salvation. He proclaims that “no one enters 
into heaven except through philosophy.” His position was very like Augustine, 
one of his greatest sources, at the time of his conversion in 386 : “authority 
(religion) could dispense altogether with reason ; authority aided by reason was 
more desirable than authority alone ; reason depended on some authority so 
that it might begin to operate ; and reason could arrive at an understanding of 
what was taught by authority.” This did not remain Augustine’s position on 
this matter. 

In Martianus Capella Eriugena also found — we do not know if for the 
first time — the Neoplatonic idea of reality as a progression outwards from the 
One followed by a return to the One. This idea is the basic one in Eriugena’s 
own great work — the Periphyseon, the study of nature, sometimes called "‘"‘The 
Division of Nature"' Not surprisingly Eriugena got the reputation of being 
learned. 

As a result of this reputation Eriugena was invited by Hincmar, bishop of 
Reims, to reply to the monk Gottschalk who was alleged to hold the doctrine 
that there was a double Predestination — to heaven and to hell, as distinct from 
the doctrine held by Hincmar, which was that there was predestination of the 
elect only. Eriugena’s de praedestinatione was produced in late 850 or early 85 1 . 
His approach, as he emphasized, was on the basis of reason. Strictly speaking, 
he contends, there is no predestination : there is only God. God is simple. There 
can be no change in him. Nothing is “fore” — known or “pre” — destined by 
him. It was in accordance with God’s unchangeable law that some would be 
saved (“pre-destined”) and others would bring punishment upon themselves 
through the evil motion of their own free will. Eriugena accepts that Augustine 
does use formulae to the effect that God predestines the reprobate to 
punishment, but he insists that Augustine also uses formulae excluding this. 
Moreover Augustine, he contends, by an antiphrasis actually means the 
opposite when he speaks of predestination to the death of the soul. Augustine 
himself frequently puts forward a similar argument in his own controversies, an 
argument ultimately based on the ancient assumption of there being one 

14 

PERIPHYSEON 

doctrine to be preached to the mass of men (exoteric), and another, often 
contradictory, to be held by the intimates of a school (esoteric). Eriugena 
asserts that those who hold incorrect views on such topics as predestination, do 
so because of their ignorance of liberal studies. 

Hincmar, at whose invitation Eriugena had written the de praedestinatione, 
was embarrassed by the work, and avoided any notice of it. Others, however, 
condemned it outright and accused Eriugena of vanity and reliance on mere 
dialectics. Nevertheless Eriugena appears to have won favour, or further 
favour, in the eyes of Charles the Bald, for he was now invited by him to 
translate from the Greek the works of one known as the Pseudo-Dionysius or 
Dionysius the Areopagite, said to have been the disciple of St. Paul, the first of 
the Fathers of the Church and the first bishop of Paris and protector of the 
royal abbey of St. Denis. The Pseudo-Dionysius was, in fact, an author 
dependent on the doctrine of Proclus (410-485), who wrote around the first 
quarter of the sixth century; he was probably a Syrian lightly touched by 
monophysitism. His works are The Divine Names, Mystical Theology, The 
Heavenly Hierarchy, The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and Letters. The doctrine of 
these works affected Eriugena profoundly. We can but mention two of the most 
important points here : apophatic theology, the superiority, when we speak of 
God, of negation over affirmation ; and the Neoplatonic interpretation of 
things as being a descent from the One followed by an ascent to Him, a 
procession and a return — something he may already have imbibed from 
Martianus Capella. The translation of the Pseudo-Dionysius led Eriugena to 
translate in turn the Ambigua ad lohannem and the Quaestiones ad Thalassium of 
Maximus the Confessor, for Maximus explained many of the more obscure 
passages of the Pseudo-Dionysius. Maximus was born about 580 near Tiberias. 
The influence of Maximus on Eriugena was even more profound : one of the 
salient points is that we know indeed that God is, but not at all what He is. 
Maximus led Eriugena in due course to Gregory of Nyssa, born in Cappadocia 
about 331, whose de hominis opificio he also translated. From Gregory he 
received the doctrine, for example, that matter was a confluence of invisible 
realities, and the doctrine of man as an image of God. It would be fair to say 
that although he continued to regard Augustine as the main source of his 
doctrine, Eriugena from the time of his translating these three Greek authors, 
looked more to them for the congenial inspiration of his thought. In due course 
his own great original work, the Periphyseon, was deeply marked by them. 

To the Periphyseon we now come. This work takes the form of a 
catechetical dialogue in which a “Nutritor” and “Alumnus,” effectively 
Master and Disciple” (terms used in some later manuscripts and some 
modern editions), discuss the doctrine to be imparted: the Disciple is a mere 
foil to the Master who expounds almost everything. It is in five “books”. 

INTRODUCTION 

15 

contains about a quarter of a million words, is dedicated to a former colleague 
at the Court of Charles the Bald called Wulfadus, was composed between 862 
and 866 and was published around 867. 

The first book * deals with God as Source, one who creates but is not 
created. The second deals with the first or primordial causes, things which are 
created and themselves create. The third book treats of the created universe 
which is created, but does not itself create. And the fourth and fifth books deal 
with God as End, one who does not create and is not created. In this way is 
expounded the externation or procession or descent of all that is from God, 
and its return or ascent to him. The return is a reversal of the outgoing process. 
This fourfold, logical, “division” of things is the source of an alternative title 
for the Periphyseon, de diuisione naturae, the division of nature or of all reality. 

The primary division of nature, however, is into being and non-being. 
These are to be considered according to five different modes. The first mode is 
according to perceptibility : that which can be perceived by intellect or sense is 
said to be ; that which is not so perceptible is said not to be. God, for example, 
is not so perceptible and so is said not to be. The second mode of being and 
non-being is according to order or place on the descending and ascending scale 
from the Creator to the lowliest creature and back again : if being is predicated 
of man, then an angel has not being, and vice versa. The third mode is according 
to actualization : a thing is, if it is actualized ; it is not, if it remains merely 
possible. The fourth mode is according to the faculty of perception : that which 
the intellect perceives, is: that which is perceived by sense, is not. The fifth 
mode is according to the realization of God's image and is applicable to man 
only : if man is in sin, he is not ; if he is restored to God’s image through grace, 
he is. 

The//>.y/ book deals, then, with God as Source. God is incomprehensible 
to the creature who can know that God is, but not what He is. God, 
nevertheless, makes Himself known to the creature through theophanies or 
appearances : even the angels see only theophanies of God and no theophany 
must be mistaken for God Himself. Still a theophany, being for man a 
condescension of God’s Wisdom to human nature through grace and an 
exaltation of that nature to Wisdom through love, is a “deification,” a 
conformation to God’s Wisdom. What the intellect knows, it becomes. As 
Maximus says: air is not light; yet it is so filled with light that it seems to be 
nothing but light ; iron molten in fire, although it remains iron, is indistinguish¬ 
able from the fire. So will the creature be with God. 

* In the summary that follows I draw upon one published by me in Eriugena, Cork 1969, 
pp. 33-62. 

16 

PERIPHYSEON 

Through these theophanies the incomprehensible God becomes somehow 
comprehensible” to us. The term God {Theos) combines the notions of 
running {thed) and seeing (theord), movement and rest. Movement and rest are 
not reconcilable in the creature, but in God they are. These terms are applied 
only metaphorically to God. Insofar as God creates, He can be said to be 
created \n what He creates — just as our mind is^ even when it is not active ; but 
when it has thoughts, it can be said to become. 

The order of the universe tells us that God is wise ; its motion that he lives. 
Hence we can conclude that God is a Trinity, essence (the Father), wisdom (the 
Son) and life (the Holy Spirit). 

God transcends all the categories of Aristotle. We can know Him through 
affirmative Theology, but less imperfectly through negative Theology. We may 
say that God is “good but since goodness implies the existence of badness, it 
IS better to deny that God is “good” and state rather that God is “more-than- 
good.” One can more truly state what God is not, rather than what He is : “who 
IS better known by not knowing; ignorance of Whom is true wisdom; who is 
more truly and trustworthily denied in all things than affirmed” (510 B). 

A primary question is how an incorporeal Creator can create corporeal 
things. In fact the corporeal is a confluence of incorporealities. 

In the second book of the Periphyseon Eriugena describes the procession of 
creatures from the Creator through the primordial causes to the diversity of 
things. Strictly speaking this is merely a logical procession : there is no true 
essence apart from the Creator. These causes or essences can also be called 
divine ideas, examples, definitions, volitions, predestinations. They are the 
unchangeable “reasons” of all things to be made, before they are made. The 
Father preformed these “reasons” in His Word. 

Eriugena has recourse to Maximus the Confessor’s five-fold downward 
division of things : that between the uncreated nature and the created ; that 
between things intelligible and things sensible; that between heaven and earth 
(angel and man); that between Paradise and the inhabited earth (man before 
the Fall and man after the Fall) ; and that between male and female. From these 
it is seen that man is the focus or harmony of all creation : all creatures, visible 
and invisible, are found in him. 

When Genesis tells us “In the beginning (the Principle) God made heaven 
and earth we understand that to mean that the Father made the primordial 
causes of things intelligible and things sensible in the Son. These causes are not 
real being which is God, but they are the nearest thing to real being, and are to 
be distinguished from formless matter (which also derives from the primordial 
causes), which is the nearest thing to non-being. They remain invisible in the 
Word, ever looking upon him who forms them. They form other things below 

INTRODUCTION 

17 

them through which they appear. They are co-eternal with the Word, but their 
co-eternity is modified by the fact that their being comes from him, not his from 
them. 

Eriugena then proceeds to a discussion of the divine ignorance. God does 
not know evil. He does not know anything whose “reasons” he has not made. 
He does not know experimentally what he foreknows. Finally he does not know 
himself in any category. God does not know what he is, because he is not 
anything. His ignorance is ineffable intelligence. 

The Trinity receives much discussion in this book. Eriugena adopts the 
Greek formula describing the Trinity as three substances in one essence as 
against the Latin one of three persons in one nature. The Father is the cause of 
the Son begotten of him; the Son is the cause of all the primordial causes 
established in him by the Father ; the Father is also the cause of the Holy Spirit 
who proceeds from him through the Son : the Holy Spirit is the cause of the 
division, multiplication and distribution of all causes into their effects, both in 
genus, species and individuals according to nature and grace. 

But all these things, Eriugena tells us, are reasoned more profoundly and 
truly than told ; are intellected fnore profoundly and truly than reasoned ; and 
more profoundly and truly are than they are intellected. Man is not different 
from the Trinity except that it has deity by essence, he by grace. 

In the third book Eriugena turns his attention more formally to the created 
universe. The things here have their being through participation, that is “the 
distribution of divine grants and gifts” from the top of the scale of creation to 
the bottom. All things on the scale participate in what is above them and are 
participated in by what is below them. Participation is the distribution of a 
divine grant by which a thing subsists ; it is also the distribution of a divine gift, 
that is grace, by which a subsisting thing is adorned. 

Creation is from nothing. “Nothing” is no “matter,” or any cause, or any 
occasion, or anything co-essential or co-eternal with God. It is not a privation 
of relation or being. It describes the total absence of essence. All things in the 
Word are the Word itself, are eternal and are made. The Wisdom of the Father 
is the creating cause of all things, is created in all things that it creates, and 
contains all things in which it is created. One can illustrate from the monad : all 
possible numbers are causally and eternally in it — but not all numbers are 
actually in it. The very same numbers are eternal where they exist in potency, 
that is in the monad. But they are made where they exist in act. 

Corporeal things come from incorporeal things and return to incorporeal 
things. Quantities and qualities (in themselves incorporeal) are joined together 
to become formless matter. When incorporeal forms and colour are added to 
this a corporeal thing ensues. 

18 

PERIPHYSEON 

All things were always in God’s Wisdom through the primordial causes, 
but they can be described as coming to be for us, only when they become 
corporeal. But how all things are eternal and made is known only to the Word. 
And so God is all in all : we should not understand God and the creature as 
two things removed from one another, but as one and the same thing. For the 
creature subsists in God, and God is created in the creature in a wonderful and 
ineffable way, making himself manifest, invisible making himself visible” 
(678C). 

“Nothing” is the ineffable, incomprehensible and inaccessible clarity of the 
divine goodness, which, because it is above being, is unknown to all intellects 
and, while contemplated by itself, is not, was not, and never will be. Hence it is 
called darkness. All creatures are theophanies or appearances of God, the 
further down the scale the clearer. The divine goodness, which is called 
“nothing,” descends from itself to itself, as it were from nothing to something. 
Its first progression is to the primordial causes in which it comes to be, as it 
were a certain formless matter, the principle of all being, life and intelligence. 
Descending from these causes God comes to be in their effects and is revealed in 
his appearances. From the multiple forms of these effects he descends to bodies. 
And so he makes all, and becomes all things in all things, and returns to 
himself, calling all things back to himself. So from nothing he makes all things : 
from his super-essence all essence, from the negation of all things the 
affirmation of all. 

Tht fourth and fifth books deal with God as End; since consideration 
has been given of God as source in the first book, here there is treatment 
especially of the end of things created, and particularly of man, who sums up all 
creation within himself: all creatures will be saved in man. 

Man in his original state before the Fall was simple, spiritual, celestial and 
individual. He was not divided into male and female. Man’s nature did not sin 
and was unaffected by sin : sin was done by the perverse will. Man’s soul is the 
image of God : it fills all parts of him, but is contained by none ; and one knows 
only that it is, not what it is. Man’s first condition, that of spiritual form, which 
is spiritual body, is unchangeable. What is added from outside his nature — the 
material body — is superfluous and changeable. This material body dissolves 
into its elements and does not persist. The differences of bodies arise from the 
qualities of corruptible seeds — but one and the same form of man remains 
individually in all. 

The good and the bad will persist forever, but the good only will be happy. 
The natural form of the body is incorruptible and unchangeable : only the 
material body is corrupted. Man’s natural body and soul, therefore, return by 
stages to become intellect : firstly, the body resolves itself into its four physical 

INTRODUCTION 

19 

elements ; secondly, each man in the resurrection will recover his own body 
from the elements ; thirdly, that body will be changed into spirit ; fourthly, that 
spirit, which is man’s whole nature, will return to the primordial causes ; finally, 
all nature itself and its causes will be moved towards God — there will be 
nothing but God alone. The return of all is the conversion of bodies to souls, of 
souls to causes, and of causes to God. While Eriugena is aware that Western 
theologians, notably Augustine, do not believe that a corporeal nature can 
become incorporeal, the Greeks — and Ambrose in the West — are confident 
of this. The change is a certain ineffable uniting of substances that is not 
intelligible to us. 

One must bear in mind that the substance of the human body is intelligible. 
The body can, therefore, simply pass into soul, and soul to intellect, and 
intellect into God : there is no transmutation of properties or confusion or 
destruction of essences or substances. 

Eriugena asks the question if the substances (essences or “reasons”) of 
created things ever proceed from the primordial causes. He decides that they do 
not. This means thaf the universe is made up of accidents which, while 
proceeding from the substances, nevertheless adhere to them in a way known 
only to the Creator. Substances are like causes in being both incorporeal and 
intelligible ; the causes, however, are the most general “reasons” of all things in 
the Word, while the substances are individual and special properties and 
“reasons” of individuals. 

It is the property of an intellectual substance to be one with God through 
contemplation — but through grace it becomes God. Those intellects that are 
most purified are deified. Creation was not an accident to the Creator : he was 
always inseparable from it, even if in his perpetuity he rises above it ; even if He 
precedes it in eternity: even if His being is its source. The primordial causes 
were created always. 

And what about hell? It is against reason, Eriugena believes, to say that a 
part of human nature will be punished forever. Human nature is one, simple, 
without composition and free from dissimilitude or multiplicity of parts. It is 
altogether in itself and altogether in its individuals. God cannot punish 
anything that He made, that is a substance, such as man. God could, however, 
punish what He did not make — for example, the perverse movement of man’s 
will which is not substantial. It can be punished by fantasies. But it is man’s 
libidinous appetite rather than his bad will that is the cause of his punishment. 
It is inexplicable how the evil will of angels or men can be the efficacious cause 
of sin and its punishment. 

Both good and evil will enjoy the spirituality and incorruptibility of body, 
the same glory of their nature, the same essence, the same eternity. They will 

20 

PERIPHYSEON 

have different fantasies — the good, of divine contemplations through God’s 
appearances according to their elevation ; the evil, of mortal things, false and 
diverse according to the motions of their evil thoughts. 

The deified will ascend through innumerable steps of divine contemplation 
so as to see God in the glass of divine fantasy. The reprobate will descend 
through the diverse descents of their vices into the depth of ignorance and 
exterior darkness. Human nature, however, in which both just and unjust 
participate, will be placed as a kind of medium which is affected neither by the 
happiness of the Just nor the unhappiness of the unjust, maintaining its own 
natural good only, holding the substances of all, and giving itself to all who 
participate in it. 

The return can be divided into seven steps : firstly, there is the change of 
the earthly body into vital motion ; secondly, of vital motion into sense ; thirdly, 
of sense into reason ; fourthly, of reason into intellect. Here is fixed the end of 
the whole rational creation. Body, vital motion, sense, reason and intellect at 
this stage make, not five things, but one — since the lower is always taken in in 
the higher in such a way that, while not ceasing to be, it becomes one with it. 

There follow three more steps of ascent : firstly, the intellect passes into the 
knowledge of all things after God ; secondly, knowledge passes into wisdom, 
that is, the intimate contemplation of truth insofar as this is conceded to the 
creature ; and thirdly, the highest, the setting, so to speak, through supernatural 
power of the most purified souls in God himself, as it were a darkness of 
incomprehensible and inaccessible light, a darkness in which the causes of all 
things are hidden. And then the night shall be brightened as the day. This will 
be the eighth day of blessedness. The first stages of the return are within the 
limits of nature. The other three are supernaturally and superessentially within 
God himself. When they are united, only God will appear in anything. Just as in 
the most purified air nothing shines but light alone. 

Among other works of Eriugena were Expositions on the Celestial Hierarchy 
of the Pseudo-Dionysius (865-70), a Homily on the Prologue to the Gospel of 
St. John (865-70), a Commentary on St. John's Gospel, and some thirty-six 
poems, one of which, the Aulae Sidereae, may have been the last thing he wrote, 
possibly in 877. His exegetical works contain the same doctrine as is found in 
the Periphyseon but are written in a more intimate style. The Homily on the 
Prologue to St. John's Gospel is particularly appealing. 

The poems are written about half and half in Elegiac Couplets and 
Dactyllic Hexameters. Nearly all praise Charles the Bald. Many of them treat of 

INTRODUCTION 

21 

the themes of the Incarnation, the Crucifixion and the Descent of Christ into 
hell. Occasionally philosophical themes are touched upon. They are particularly 
distinguished by their extensive use of Greek : some poems are written entirely 
in Greek. 

In reading Eriugena’s prose one always has a sense not only of the obvious 
rhetoric, but also of the poetic vein that breaks forth from time to time in 
phrases and whole passages that are instinct with poetry. This is part of 
Eriugena’s appeal. 

We know nothing of Eriugena after, at latest, 877. William of Malmesbury 
has the story, which looks like legend, that he was invited to Oxford and later to 
teach in the Abbey of Malmesbury, where his students killed him with their 
styles. An inscription in the Great Church of Malmesbury is supposed to have 
described him as Saint John the Sophist. 

Eriugena had followers in his time and later among the mystics — the 
School of St. Victor, Eckhart, Tauler, Ruysbroeck and the German mystics, 
Nicholas of Cusa and his professed disciple Giordano Bruno. On the whole, 
however, the West has not welcomed his ideas. Indeed the espousal of his 
doctrine by Berengar of Tours, Gilbert of Poitiers, Almaric of Bena and David 
of Dinant led to its condemnation by the Councils of Vercelli in 1050 and of 
Rome in 1059: it was finally condemned by a Bull of Honorius III in 1225. 
There was a revival of interest in him among German philosophers in the 
nineteenth century; this has become more general in recent times. 

John J. O’ Meara 

2 

TRANSLATION 

PERIPHYSEON 

BOOK I 

Nutritor. As I frequently ponder and, so far as my talents 
allow, ever more carefully investigate the fact that the first and 
fundamental division of all things which either can be grasped by 
the mind or lie beyond its grasp is into those that are and those that 
are not, there comes to mind as a general term for them all what in 
Greek is called Ouok; and in Latin Natura. Or do you think 
otherwise ? 

Alumnus. No, I agree. For I too, when I enter upon the path 
of reasoning, find that this is so. 

N. Nature, then, is the general name, as we said, for all things, 
for those that are and those that are not. 

A. It is. For nothing at all can come into our thought that 
would not fall under this term. 

N. Then since we agree to use this term for the genus, I should 
like you to suggest a method for its division by differentiations into 
species ; or, if you wish, I shall first attempt a division, and your part 
will be to offer sound criticism. 

A. Pray begin. For I am impatient to hear from you a true 
account of this matter. 

N. It is my opinion that the division of Nature by means of 
four differences results in four species, (being divided) first into that 
which creates and is not created, secondly into that which is created 
and also creates, thirdly into that which is created and does not 
create, while the fourth neither creates nor is created. But within 

441A 

Concerning 
the first 
division of 
all things 
into those 
which are 
and those 
which are 
not 

441B 

1 

On the 
division of 
Nature 

442A 

26 

PERIPHYSEON 

442B 

2 443A 

Of the five 
modes of the 
first division 
of all things 
3 

these four there are two pairs of opposites. For the third is the 
opposite of the first, the fourth of the second; but the fourth is 
classed among the impossibles, for it is of its essence that it cannot 
be. Does such a division seem right to you or not? 

A. Right, certainly. But please go over it again so as to 
elucidate more fully the opposition(s) within these four forms. 

N. I am sure you see the opposition of the third species to the 
first — for the first creates and is not created ; it therefore has as its 
contrary that [which is created and does not create — and of the 
second to the fourth, for the second both is created and creates ; it 
therefore has as its contrary in all respects the fourth,] which neither 
creates nor is created. 

A. I see (that) clearly. But I am much perplexed by the fourth 
species which you have introduced. For about the other three I 
should not presume to raise any question at all, because, as I think, 
the first is understood to be the Cause of all things that are and that 
are not. Who is God ; the second to be the primordial causes ; and 
the third those things that become manifest through coming into 
being in times and places. For this reason a more detailed discussion 
which shall take each species individually is required, as I think. 

N. You are right to think so. But in what order we should 
pursue our path of reasoning, that is to say, which of the species of 
Nature we should take first, I leave it to you to decide. 

A. It seems to me beyond question that before the omers we 
should say of the first species whatever the light of minds has 
granted us to utter. 

N. Let it be so. But first I think a few words should be said 
about the first and fundamental [division] — as we called it — of all 
things into the things that are and the things that are not. 

A. It would be correct and wise to do so. For I see no other 
beginning from which reasoning ought to start, and this not only 
because this difference is the first of all, but because both in 
appearance and in fact it is more obscure than the others. 

N. This basic difference, then, which separates all things 
requires for itself five modes of interpretation : 

I. Of these modes the first seems to be that by means of which 
reason convinces us that all things which fall within the perception 
of bodily sense or (within the grasp oQ intelligence are truly and 
reasonably said to be, but that those which because of the excellence 

BOOK I 

27 

of their nature elude not only all sense but also all intellect and 
reason rightly seem not to be — which are correctly understood only 
of God and matter and of the reasons and essences of all the things 
that are created by Him. And rightly so : for as Dionysius the 
Areopagite says, He is the Essence of all things Who alone truly is. 
“For”, says he, “the being of all things is the Divinity Who is above 
Being.” Gregory the Theologian too proves by many arguments 
that no substance or essence of any creature, whether visible or 
invisible, can be comprehended by the intellect or by reason as to 
what it is. For just as God as He is in Himself beyond every creature 
is comprehended by no intellect, so is He equally incomprehensible 
when considered in the innermost depths of the creature which was 
made by Him and which exists in Him ; while whatsoever in every 
creature is either perceived by the bodily sense or contemplated by 
the intellect is merely some accident to each creature’s essence 
which, as has been said, by itself is incomprehensible, but which, 
either by quality or by quantity or by form or by matter or by some 
difference or by place or by time, is known not as to what it is but as 
to that it is. 

That, then, is the first and fundamental mode [of division] of 
those things of which it is said that they are and those (of which it is 
said) that they are not. For what somehow appears to be (a mode of 
division) based upon privations of substances and accidents should 
certainly not be admitted, in my opinion. For how can that which 
absolutely is not, and cannot be, and which does not surpass the 
intellect because of the pre-eminence of its existence, be included in 
the division of things? [ — unless perhaps someone should say that 
the absences and privations of things that exist are themselves not 
altogether nothing, but are implied by some strange natural virtue 
of those things of which they are the privations and absences and 
oppositions, so as to have some kind of existence.] 

II. Let then the second mode of being and not being be that 
which is seen in the orders and differences of created natures, which, 
beginning from the intellectual power, which is the highest and is 
constituted nearest to God, descends to the furthermost (degree) of 
the rational [and irrational] creature, or, to speak more plainly, 
from the most exalted angel to the furthermost element of the 
rational [and irrational] soul [ — I mean the nutritive and growth¬ 
giving life-principle, which is the least part of the soul in the general 
acceptance of the term because it nourishes the body and makes it 
grow]. Here, by a wonderful mode of understanding, each order. 

443B 

That no 
essence or 
substance is 
intelligible in 
itself 

443C 

443 D 

4 444A 

28 

PERIPHYSEON 

including the last at the lower end [which is that of bodies and in 
which the whole division comes to an end], can be said to be and not 
to be. For an affirmation concerning the lower (order) is a negation 
444B concerning the higher, and so too a negation concerning the lower 
(order) is an affirmation concerning the higher [and similarly an 
affirmation concerning the higher (order) is a negation concerning 
the lower, while a negation concerning the higher (order) will be an 
affirmation concerning the lower]. Thus, the affirmation of “man” 
(I mean, man while still in his mortal state) is the negation of 
“angel”, while the negation of “man” is the affirmation of “angel” 
[and vice versa]. For if man is a rational, mortal, risible animal, then 
an angel is certainly neither a rational animal nor mortal nor risible : 
likewise, if an angel is an essential intellectual motion about God 
and the causes of things, then man is certainly not an essential 
intellectual motion about God and the causes of things. And the 
same rule is found to apply in all the celestial essences until one 
reaches the highest order of all. This, however, terminates [in] the 
highest negation [upward] ; for its negation confirms the existence of 
444C no higher creature. Now, there are three orders which they call “of 
equal rank” : the first of these are the Cherubim, Seraphim, and 
Thrones; the second, the Virtues, Powers, and Dominations; the 
third, the Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. Downwards, on 
the other hand, the last (order) merely [denies or confirms the one 
above it, because it has nothing below it which it might either take 
away or establish] since it is preceded by all the orders higher than 
itself but precedes none that is lower than itself. 

It is also on these grounds that every order of rational or 
intellectual creatures is said to be and not to be : it is in so far as it is 
known by the orders above it and by itself ; but it is not in so far as it 
does not permit itself to be comprehended by the orders that are 
below it. 

5 III. The third mode can suitably be seen in those things of 
which the visible plenitude of this world is made up, and in their 
causes in the most secret folds of nature, which precede them. For 
whatsoever of these causes through generation is known as to 
444D matter and form, as to times and places, is by a certain human 
convention said to be, while whatsoever is still held in those folds of 
nature and is not manifest as to form or matter, place or time, and 
445A the other accidents, by the same convention referred to is said not to 
be. Clear examples of this mode are provided over a wide range (of 
experience), and especially in human nature. Thus, since God in that 

BOOK I 

29 

first and one man whom He made in His image established all men 
at the same time, yet did not bring them all at the same time into this 
visible world, but brings the nature which He considers all at one 
time into visible essence at certain times and places according to a 
certain sequence which He Himself knows : those who already <are 
becoming, or> have become visibly manifest in the world are said 
to be, while those who are as yet hidden, though destined to be, are 
said not to be. Between the first and third (mode) there is this 
difference : the first (is found) generically in all things which at the 
same time and once for all have been made in (their) causes and 445B 
effects ; the third specifically in those which partly are still hidden in 
their causes, partly are manifest in (their) effects, of which in 
particular the fabric of this world is woven. To this mode belongs 
the reasoning which considers the potentiality of seeds, whether in 
animals or in trees or in plants. For during the time when the 
potentiality of the seeds is latent in the recesses of nature, because it 
is not yet manifest it is said not to be; but when it has become 
manifest in the birth and growth of animals or of flowers or of the 
fruits of trees and plants it is said to be. 

IV. The fourth mode is that which, not improbably according 6 
to the philosophers, declares that only those things which are 
contemplated by the intellect alone truly are, while those things 
which in generation, through the expansions or contractions of 
matter, and the intervals of places and motions of times are 
changed, brought together, or dissolved, are said not to be truly, as 445C 
is the case with all bodies which can come into being and pass away. 

V. The fifth mode is that which reason observes only in human 7 
nature, which, when through sin it renounced the honour of the 
divine image in which it was properly substantiated, deservedly lost 
its being and therefore is said not to be ; but when, restored by the 
grace of the only-begotten Son of God, it is brought back to the 
former condition of its substance in which it was made after the 
image of God, it begins to be, and in him who has been made in the 
image of God begins to live. It is to this mode, it seems, that the 
Apostle’s saying refers : “and He calls the things that are not as the 
things that are’’ ; that is to say, those who in the first man were lost 

and had fallen into a kind of non-subsistence God the Father calls 445D 
through faith [in His Son] to be as those who are already reborn in 
Christ. But this too may also be understood of those whom God 
daily calls forth from the secret folds of nature, in which they are 
considered not to be, to become visibly manifest in form and matter 

30 

PERIPHYSEON 

446A 

446B 

That the 
reasons of 
all things in 
God are said 
not to be, 
446C 
but are said 
to be through 
certain 
theophanies, 
in so far as 
they can be 
compre¬ 
hended by 
the angelic or 
the human 
intellect 

and in the other (conditions) in which hidden things are able to 
become manifest. 

Although keener reasoning can discover some modes besides 
these, yet I think at the present (stage) enough has been said about 
these things, unless you disagree. 

A. Quite plainly so — except that I am rather perplexed by 
what St. Augustine appears to have said in his Hexemeron, namely 
that the angelic nature was established before every other creature, 
not in time but in status, and on this account it contemplated the 
primordial causes, that is, those primary exemplars which the 
Greeks call TrpcoiOTUTra, even of others besides its own, first in God ; 
then the creatures themselves in their effects. For it cannot have 
known its own cause before it proceeded into its proper species. 

N. Not even that should worry you : but consider more closely 
what has been said. For if we say that the angels knew the primary 
causes of things as they are constituted in God we shall seem to go 
against the Apostle, who affirms that God Himself and the causes of 
all things in Him, if they are not other than what He Himself is, are 
above all that is said and understood ; and therefore we must steer a 
straight and middle course, avoiding the appearance of either going 
against the Apostle or of not holding the opinion of a teacher of 
weighty and sacred authority. Therefore, that each has spoken the 
truth must not be doubted, nay rather, must strongly be maintained. 
So reason permits us to say that the cause of all things, which 
surpasses all understanding, does not become known, according to 
the Apostle, to any created nature. “For who”, says he, “has known 
the intellect of the Lord?” And in another place: “the peace of 
Christ which surpasses all understanding.” But if the Cause of all 
things is inaccessible to all things that are created by it, then there 
can be no doubt but that the reasons of all things, which exist [in it] 
eternally and without change, are completely inaccessible to all 
things of which they are the reasons. And yet anyone who might say 
that in the intellects of the angels there are certain theophanies of 
those reasons, that is to say, certain [divine] manifestations which 
are comprehensible to the intellectual nature, but which are not the 
reasons, i.e. the primary exemplars, themselves, will not, I think, 
stray from the truth. And we believe that St. Augustine was not 
incorrect when he said that these theophanies were beheld in the 
angelic nature before the generation of all the natures that are below 
it. So let us not worry about having said that the angels behold the 
causes of the lower creature, and (that they do so) first in God, then 

BOOK I 

31 

in themselves. For it is not only the divine essence that is indicated 
by the word “God”, but also that mode by which God reveals 
Himself in a certain way to the intellectual and rational creature, 446D 
according to the capacity of each, is often called “God” in Holy 
Scripture. This mode the Greeks are accustomed to call theophany, 
that is, self-manifestation of God. An example of it is : “I saw the 
Lord sitting”, and other similar expressions, since it is not His 
Essence that (the prophet) saw, but something created by Him. 

Therefore it is not to be wondered at that the angel should be 
understood to possess, in a certain sense, a threefold knowledge : 447A 
one, that is, from above, which, (coming) from the eternal reasons 
of things, is reproduced first in him after the mode just mentioned; 
then that which he receives from what is above him he commits to 
himself as it were in a wondrous and ineffable memory, some sort 
of image, as it were, reproducing an image ; and hence, if he can by 
this mode have knowledge of what is above him, who would dare 
say that he has not in him some knowledge of what is below? With 
truth therefore is it said that those things that can be comprehended 
by the reason and by the intellect are, and with equal truth that 
those things which surpass all reason and intellect are not. 

A. What then shall we say of that happiness to come which is 8 
promised to the saints, which we consider to be nothing else but the 
pure and unmediated contemplation of the Divine Essence itself? — 
as St. John the Evangelist says : “We know that we are the sons of 447B 
God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be. But when that 
shall have appeared we shall be like unto Him, for we shall see Him 
as He is.” In the same way the Apostle Paul: “Now we see in a 
mirror and obscurely, but then face to face.” Also St. Augustine in 
his books “On the City of God” says, I think, of the contemplation 
that is to be of the Divine Essence: “Through the bodies that we 
shall put on, in every body we see wherever we turn the eyes of our 
body we shall contemplate with translucent clarity God Himself.” 

For if the eminence of the Divine Essence surpasses the purest 
power of angelic contemplation — since it has been established by 
the foregoing arguments that the Divine Essence is comprehensible 447C 
to no intellectual creature, which without doubt consists chiefly in 
the angels ; and the happiness promised to us is no other than 
equality with the angelic nature — how will the happiness of human 
nature be able to contemplate the eminence of the Divine Essence? 

N. Shrewdly and observantly (spoken). For your difficulty 
here is not without cause. Nevertheless, I should have thought you 

32 

PERIPHYSEON 

447D 

448A 

448 B 

were sufficiently answered by what we have already pointed out in 
general concerning every creature. 

A. What was that? Please go over it again. 

N. Did we not make the general assertion that the Divine 
Essence is in itself comprehensible to no bodily sense, to no reason, 
to no intellect, whether of man or of angel? 

A. I remember, and I cannot deny that I accepted it. But, as it 
seems to me, that conclusion you refer to will be wholly invalidated 
by our allowing to the intellectual creature a contemplation of the 
Divine Essence in itself; or, if it cannot be invalidated since it has 
been confirmed by the surest arguments, you will have to show by 
sound reasons and probable examples the mode of divine contem¬ 
plation that is promised to the saints in the time to come and in 
which the angels subsist at all times. 

N. What mode it is you seek I know not, unless it be that which 
we have just now been briefly discussing. 

A. What that is I should like you to tell me again, for I do not 
remember it. 

N. Do you remember the agreement we reached when we were 
speaking about the Hexemeron of the holy father Augustine? 

A. I do remember, but I should like to hear you a second time 
[on this subject]. 

N. Your difficulty was, as I think, how this Father [said] that 
the angels contemplated the causes of the things that were to be 
created, which are eternally in God and which are God, first in God, 
then in themselves, then the proper species and (specific) differences 
of the creatures themselves, if the Divine Essence, together with the 
reasons which are in it, cannot be comprehensible essentially. 

A. I remember it all. 

N. Do you remember our answer to these points ? 

A. Yes, I recall, if my memory does not deceive me, you were 
saying that it is not the causes of things themselves, which subsist in 
the Divine Essence, that the angels beheld but certain divine 
manifestations which, so you say, the Greeks call theophanies, and 
which take their names from the eternal causes of which they are the 
images. You further added that not only the Divine Essence itself 
which exists in itself without change was called God, but that also 

BOOK 1 

the theophanies which are reproduced out of it and by it in the 
intellectual nature are themselves given the name of God. 

N. You remember clearly. For this is what we said. 

A. But how does it concern the present task? 

N. Not a little, in my opinion. For that is the mode in which I 
think the angels behold God all the time, and the righteous in this 
life when they experience ecstasy and in the (world) to come (when 
they will) see (Him) as the angels do. 

A. Then we shall not see God Himself in Himself, for not even 
the angels do so — since this is impossible for every creature. For 
“He alone”, as the Apostle says, “possesses immortality and dwells 
in inaccessible light — ” ; but we shall contemplate certain theo¬ 
phanies which are made in us by Him. 

N. No. For from the one and the same Form which all things 
desire [I mean the Word of God] each shall receive a form according 
to the degree of his own sanctity and wisdom. For (the Form) itself 
says of itself in the Gospel: “In my Father’s house are many 
mansions,” calling itself the house of its Father because while it is 
one and the same (Form) and remains unchanging, it will be 
multiple to the sight of those to whom it shall be given to dwell in it. 
For each one, as we have said, shall possess in himself knowledge of 
the only begotten Word of God up to the measure that grace will 
bestow upon him. For as great as is the number of the elect, so great 
will be the number of the mansions ; as much as shall be the 
multiplication of holy souls, so much will be the possession of divine 
theophanies. 

A. It seems likely. 

N. Well do you say “likely.” For who on such matters [would 
say with assurance] that the case was thus and not otherwise when 
they would seem to exceed the strength of man’s grasp while (he is) 
still in this fragile flesh? 

A. But I should like you to expound to me briefly what you can 
guess about this theophany, that is, what it is, whence it is, where it 
is, whether it is formed without us or within. 

N. It is a deep thing you ask, and I do not know what deeper 
thing there can be for human inquiry. However, I will say what I 

34 

PERIPHYSEON 

have been able to discover about this subject in the books of the 
holy fathers who have been bold enough to speak of such things. 

[A. Please do. 

N.] So you ask what it is, and whence, and where? 

[A. Yes. 

N.] We find that Maximus [the monk, a godly philosopher,] 
has treated of this theophany most profoundly and subtly in his 
commentary on the Homilies of Gregory the Theologian. For he 
says that theophany is effected from no other (cause) but God, but 
that it happens as a result of the condescension of the Divine Word, 
that is, of the only begotten Son Who is the Wisdom of the Father, 
downwards, as it were, upon human nature which was created and 
449B purified by Him, and of the exaltation upwards of human nature to 
the aforesaid Word by divine love. [By condescension I mean here 
not that which has already taken place through the Incarnation but 
that which is brought about by theosis, that is to say, the deification, 
of the creature.] So from this condescension of the Wisdom of God 
upon human nature through grace, and the exaltation of the same 
nature to that same Wisdom through choice, theophany is brought 
about. With this interpretation the holy father Augustine seems to 
agree in his exposition of that passage from the Apostle, “He Who is 
made unto us righteousness and wisdom” ; for he expounds it as 
follows: The Father’s Wisdom, in which and through which all 
things were made, which is not created but creating, comes into 
being in our souls by some ineffable condescension of compassion 
449C and attaches to itself our intellect so that in some ineffable manner a 
kind of composite wisdom, as it were, is formed out of its 
descending upon us and dwelling in us, and out of our understanding 
which through love is raised up by it to itself and is formed in it.” In 
the same way, concerning righteousness and the other virtues he 
teaches that they derive from no other source than a certain 
wondrous and ineffable conformation of the Divine Wisdom and 
our own understanding. For, as Maximus says, as far as the human 
intellect ascends through charity, so far does the Divine Wisdom 
descend through compassion, and it is this that is the cause and the 
substance of all the virtues. Therefore every theophany, that is, 
every virtue, both in this life [in] which it is still only beginning to 
take shape [in those] who are worthy to be formed, and in the future 
life (in those who) shall receive the perfection of the divine 
beatitude, is effected not externally but internally out of God and 
449D out of themselves. 

BOOK I 

35 

[A.] It is from God, then, that the theophanies happen through 
grace in the angelic nature and in human nature when it has been 
illuminated, purified, and perfected, as a consequence of the descent 
of the Divine Wisdom and of the ascent of the human and angelic 
understanding. 

[N. Clearly. For] consistent with this is [the statement] of the 
same Maximus that whatever the intellect shall have been able to 450A 
comprehend, that it itself becomes. Therefore, to the extent that the 
mind comprehends virtue, to that extent it becomes virtue itself. 

But if you require examples of these things, they are plainly set lO 
forth by the same Maximus : “For just as air illuminated by the sun 
appears to be nothing else but light, not because it loses its own 
nature, but because the light prevails in it so that it is believed itself 
to be light, so human nature when it is united with God is said to be 
God through and through, not because it ceases to be (its own) 
nature but because it receives a share in Divinity so that only God 
appears to be in it. Also, when there is no light present the air is 
dark, while the light of the sun as it subsists by itself is comprehended 
by no bodily sense. But when the sunlight mingles with air, then it 
begins to appear: so that in itself it is incomprehensible to the 
senses, but when mixed with air it can be comprehended by the 450B 
senses.” And from this you are to understand that the Divine 
Essence is incomprehensible in itself, but when it is joined to an 
intellectual creature it becomes after a wondrous fashion manifest : 
so that the former, I mean the Divine Essence, is seen alone in the 
latter, namely the intellectual creature. For the ineffable excellence 
of the former surpasses every nature which participates in it, so that 
in all things nothing else but itself is presented to those that have 
understanding, while in itself, as we have said, it is not manifest in 
any fashion. 

A. I quite see what you wish me to understand, but as to 
whether it can stand together with the words of the holy father 
Augustine I am not sufficiently clear. 

N. Be more attentive then, and let us return to those words of 
his which we first cited. They are these, I think [in the twenty-second 450C 
(book) “On the City of God”] : “Through the bodies that we shall 
(have) put on, in every body we see wherever we turn the eyes of our 
body, we shall contemplate with translucent clarity God Himself.” 

Note the sense of the words. For he did not say, “Through the 
bodies we shall (have) put on we shall contemplate God Himself’ 

36 

PERIPHYSEON 

(for in Himself He cannot be seen) ; but he said : “Through the 
bodies we shall (have) put on, in every body we see, we shall 
contemplate God Himself.” Therefore it is through bodies in 
bodies, not through Himself, that He shall be seen. Similarly, it is 
through intellect in intellects, through reason in reasons, not 
through itself, that the Divine Essence shall appear. For so strongly 
shall the excellence of the Divine Power be manifested in the life to 
come to all those who shall be worthy of its contemplation that 
450D nothing but itself shall be apparent in either these bodies or these 
intellects. For “God shall be all in all” — as if the Scripture said 
plainly: God alone shall be manifest in all things. Hence the holy 
Job declares : “Even in my flesh I shall see God”, which is as if he 
had said : In this flesh of mine, which is afflicted with many trials, 
451A there shall come to be such glory that, in the same way as nothing is 
now manifest in it but death and corruption, so in the life to come 
nothing in it will be manifest to me but God alone. Who in very 
truth is life and immortality and incorruptibility. But if such was the 
glory to which he looked forward in respect of his body’s felicity, 
what are we to think will be his spirit’s status? — especially as, in 
the words of great Gregory the Theologian, “the bodies of the saints 
shall be changed into reason, their reason into intellect, their 
intellect into God” ; and thus the whole of their nature shall be 
changed into Very God. Many most excellent examples of this have 
been adduced by the aforesaid Maximus in his exposition of 
Gregory, one of which we have already mentioned in speaking of 
the air. But now we shall introduce a second, which concerns iron 
451B and fire. For when iron is melted in fire and reduced to a liquid, 
nothing of its nature appears to the senses to remain, but all is 
changed into the quality of fire, and it is by the reason alone that it is 
known to preserve its own nature, though reduced to a liquid state. 
So, just as the air appears wholly as light, and iron when melted 
appears to take on wholly the quality of fire, as we have said, and in 
fact to be fire, although their substances persist : so the sound 
intellect must hold that after the end of this world every nature, 
whether corporeal or incorporeal, will seem to be only God, while 
preserving the integrity of its nature, so that even God, Who in 
Himself is incomprehensible, is after a certain mode comprehended 
in the creature, while the creature itself by an ineffable miracle is 
changed into God. But let these words suffice, if their meaning is 
clear to you. 

A. It is certainly as clear as such things are permitted to be to 
451C our minds: for concerning what is ineffable who in this life can 

BOOK 1 

37 

speak with such clarity as to leave nothing more for inquirers to 
wish for — especially as we are promised no other glory than 
knowledge by direct experience in the life to come of those things 
which here (on earth) are believed by faith, and inquired into and, as 
far as may be, commended by reason ? 

N. Your opinion is cautious and sensible. And now, I think, we 
must return to the task we have set ourselves, namely to the division 
of Nature. 

A. Certainly we must return to it : for in what is going to be 
said some sort of moderation must be observed if it is ever to come 
to a conclusion. 

N. Well, then: of the aforesaid divisions of Nature the first 
difference, as has seemed to us, is that which creates and is not 
created. And rightly so : for such a species of Nature is correctly 
predicated only of God, Who, since He alone creates all things, is 
understood to be dvapxo(;, that is, without beginning, because He 
alone is the principal Cause of all things which are made from Him 
and through Him, and therefore He is also the End of all things that 
are from Him, for it is He towards Whom all things strive. 
Therefore He is the Beginning, the Middle and the End: the 
Beginning because from Him are all things that participate in 
essence ; the Middle, because in Him and through Him they subsist 
and move ; the End, because it is towards Him that they move in 
seeking rest from their movement and the stability of their perfection. 

A. I most firmly believe and, as far as I may, understand that 
only of the Divine Cause of all things is this rightly predicated ; for it 
alone creates all things that are from it, and is not itself created by 
any cause which is superior (to itself) or precedes it. For it is the 
supreme and unique Cause of all things which take their existence 
from it and exist in it. But I would like [to know] your opinion 
about this. For I am not a little perplexed when I so often find in the 
books of the Holy Fathers who have attempted to treat of the 
Divine Nature that not only does it create all things that are, but 
itself also is created. For, according to them, it makes and is made, 
[and] creates and is created. If, then, this is the case, I do not find it 
easy to see how our reasoning may stand. For we say that it creates 
only, but is not created by anything. 

N. You have every reason for being perplexed. For I too am 
greatly puzzled by this, and I should like [to be able] to learn [by] 

11 

Concerning 
the nature 
which 
creates and 
451D 
is not 
created 

452A 

12 

452B 

38 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the name 
which is God 

452C 

Concerning 
the motion 
and rest of 
God 

452D 

453A 

your guidance how it can be that these (statements), which seem to 
contradict one another, are prevented from conflicting [with one 
another] ; and how to approach this question according to right 
reason. 

A. Please speak first yourself : for in such matters I look to you 
rather than to myself for an opinion, and for a lead in reasoning. 

N. First, then, I think we must consider that name which is so 
commonly used in Holy Scripture, that is, (the Name oO God. For 
although there are many names by which the Divine Nature is 
called, such as Goodness, Essence, Truth, and others of this kind, 
yet that is the name which most frequently occurs in Scripture. 

A. It is certainly seen to be so. 

N. Of this name [then] an etymology has been taken over from 
the Greeks : for either it is derived from the verb Gecopw, that is, “I 
see” ; or from the verb 080), that is, “I run” ; or — which is more 
likely [since] the meaning of both is [one and] the same — it is 
correctly held to be derived from both. For when it is derived from 
the verb Gecopo), Geo^ is interpreted to mean “He Who sees”, for He 
sees in Himself all things that are [while] He looks upon nothing 
that is outside Himself because outside Him there is nothing. But 
when Geoq is derived from the verb Geco it is correctly interpreted 
“He Who runs”, for He runs throughout all things and never stays 
but by His running fills out all things, as it is written : “His Word 
runneth swiftly.” 

[And yet He is not moved at all. For of God] it is most truly 
said that He is motion at rest and rest in motion. For He is at rest 
unchangingly in Himself, never departing from the stability of His 
Nature; yet He sets Himself in motion through all things in order 
that those things which essentially subsist by Him may be. For by 
His motion all things are made. And thus there is one and the same 
meaning in the two interpretations of the same name, which is God. 
For in God to run through all things is not something other than to 
see all things, but as by His seeing so too by His running all things 
are made. 

A. What has been said of the etymology of the name is 
sufficient and convincing. But I do not satisfactorily see whether He 
may move Who is everyw'here, without Whom nothing can be, and 
beyond Whom nothing extends. For He is the place and the 
circumference of all things. 

BOOK I 

39 

N. I did not say that God moves beyond Himself, but from 
Himself in Himself towards Himself. For it ought not to be believed 
that there is any motion in Him except that of His Will, by which He 
wills all things to be made ; just as His rest [is understood] not as 
though He comes to rest after motion but as the immoveable 
determination of His same Will, by which He limits all things so that 
they remain in the immutable stability of their reasons. For properly 
speaking there is in Him neither rest nor motion. For these two are 
seen to be opposites one of the other. But right reason forbids us to 
suppose or understand that there are opposites in Him — especially 
as rest is, properly speaking, the end of motion, whereas God does 
not begin to move in order that He may attain to some end. 
Therefore these names, like many similar ones also, are transferred 
from the creature by a kind of divine metaphor to the Creator. Not 
without reason ; for of all things that are at rest or in motion He is 
the Cause. For from Him they begin to run in order that they may 
be, since He is the Principle of them all ; and [through Him] they are 
carried towards Him by their natural motion so that in Him they 
may rest immutably and eternally since He is the End and Rest of 
them all. For beyond Him there is nothing that they strive for since 
in Him they find the beginning and end of their motion. God, 
therefore, is called “He Who runs” not because He runs beyond 
Himself, Who is always immutably at rest in Himself, Who fills out 
all things; but because He makes all things run from a state of 
non-existence into one of existence. 

A. Return to the subject. For these things seem to be not 
unreasonably spoken. 

N. Please tell me which subject you mean. For in trying to say 
something about intervening questions we commonly forget the 
main one. 

A. Was not this the task we set ourselves: to try our best to 
find out on what grounds those who treat of the Divine Nature say 
that the same (Nature) creates and is created? For that it creates all 
things no one of sound intellect is in doubt ; but how it is said to be 
created is not, we thought, a question to be cursorily passed over. 

N. Just so. But, as I think, in what has already been said 
considerable headway has been made towards the solution of this 
question. For we agreed that the motion of the Divine Nature is to 
be understood as nothing else but the purpose of the Divine Will to 
establish the things that are to be made. Therefore it is said that in 

453B 

453C 

Why God is 
said to create 
and to be 
created 

40 

PERIPHYSEON 

453D all things the Divine Nature is being made, which is nothing else 
than the Divine Will. For in that Nature being is not different from 
willing, but willing and being are one and the same in the establish¬ 
ment of all things that are to be made. For example, one might say : 
this is the end to which the motion of the Divine Will is directed: 
that the things that are may be. Therefore it creates all things which 
it leads forth out of nothing so that they may be, from not-being 
454A into being ; but it is (also) created because nothing except itself exists 
as an essence since itself is the essence of all things. For as there is 
nothing that is good by its nature, except (the divine nature) itself, 
but everything which is said to be good is so by participation in the 
One Supreme Good, so everything which is said to exist exists not in 
itself but by participation in the Nature which truly exists. Not only, 
therefore, as was mentioned earlier in our discussion, is the Divine 
Nature said to be made when in those who are reformed by faith and 
hope and charity and the other virtues the Word of God in a 
miraculous and ineffable manner is born — as the Apostle says, 
speaking of Christ, “Who from God is made in us wisdom and 
justification and sanctification and redemption” ; but also, because 
454B that which is invisible in itself becomes manifest in all things that 
are, it is not inappropriately said to be made. For our intellect also, 
before it enters upon thought and memory, is not unreasonably said 
<not> to be. For in itself it is invisible and known only to God and 
ourselves; but when it enters upon thoughts and takes shape in 
certain phantasies it is not inappropriately said to come into being. 
For it does so in the memory when it receives certain forms [of 
things and sounds and colours and <other> sensibles] — for it had 
no form before it entered into the memory — ; then it receives, as it 
were, a second formation when it takes the form of certain signs 
of <forms and> sounds — I mean the letters which are the signs of 
sounds, and the figures which are the signs of mathematical 
forms — or other perceptible indicators by which it can be commu¬ 
nicated to the senses of sentient beings. By this analogy, far removed 
454C as it is from the Divine Nature, I think it can be shown all the same 
how that Nature, although it creates all things and cannot be created 
by anything, is in an admirable manner created in all things which 
take their being from it ; so that, as the intelligence of the mind or its 
purpose or its intention or however this first and innermost motion 
of ours may be called, having, as we said, entered upon thought and 
received the forms of certain phantasies, and having then proceeded 
into the symbols of sounds or the signs of sensible motions, is not 
inappropriately said to become — for, being in itself without any 

BOOK I 

41 

sensible form, it becomes formed in fantasies — , so the Divine 
Essence which when it subsists by itself surpasses every intellect is 
correctly said to be created in those things which are made by itself 
and through itself and in itself [and for itself], so that in them either 
by the intellect, if they are only intelligible, or by the sense, if they 
are sensible, it comes to be known by those who investigate it in the 
right spirit. 

A. Enough has been said about this, I think. 

N. Quite enough [unless I am mistaken. 

A.] But it is still necessary for you to explain why the Divine 
Nature is only called creative and not created, if, as the aforesaid 
reasons have shown, it both creates and is created. [For there seems 
to be a contradiction here.] 

N. You are very attentive. For I see that this too merits 
investigation. 

A. Certainly it merits it. 

N. Listen then to what follows and apply the mind’s eye to this 
brief answer of mine. 

A. Go on. I will follow attentively. 

N. That the Divine Nature is the Founder of the universe you 
do not doubt ? 

A. Proceed to what follows. For to hesitate over this would be 
impiety. 

N. Similarly that it is created by nothing you perceive by faith 
and by intellect ? 

A. (I perceive) nothing more surely. 

N. Then when you hear that it is created, you are not placed in 
doubt as to its being created not by another nature but by itself? 

A. No. 

N. Well, then : is it not in any case creating whether it creates 
itself or the essences that are created by it ? For when it is said that it 
creates itself the true meaning is nothing else but that it is 
establishing the natures of things. For the creation of itself, that is, 
the manifestation of itself in something, is surely that by which all 
things subsist ? 

454D 

13 

455A 

455B 

42 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. What has been said up to now seems probable. But I should 
like to hear what theology teaches about this ineffable and incom¬ 
prehensible Nature which is the Creator and Cause of all things, 
[that is, whether it exists, what it is, of what sort it is, and how it is 
defined.] 

455C 

Of the One 
Cause of all 
things triply 
subsisting 

N. Does not this very theology which you have just mentioned, 
which is concerned entirely or for the most part with the Divine 
Nature, hold — plainly enough for those who can see the truth — 
that from what has been created by itself one can deduce merely that 
this Nature subsists as an essence, but not what that essence is ? For, 
as we have often said, it exceeds not only the endeavours of human 
reasoning, but even the most pure intellects of the celestial essences. 
But the theologians have correctly deduced from the things that are 
that it is, and from their divisions into essences, genera, species, 
differences and individuals that it is wise, and from the stable 
motion and moving rest of all things that it lives. In this way they 
also discovered the great truth that the Cause of all things is of a 
threefold substance. For, as we said, from the essence of the things 
that are it is understood to be ; from the marvellous order of things 
that it is wise ; from their motion it is found to be life. Therefore the 
Cause and creative Nature of all things is, and is wise, and lives. And 
from this those who search out the truth have handed down that in 
its essence is understood the Father, in its wisdom the Son, in its life 
the Holy Spirit. 

455D A. These things have been made sufficiently clear to me and I 
see that they are very true. [It is, of course, quite impossible to 
define what or of what kind it is, since what quite refuses to be 
understood is quite impossible to be defined.] But I should like to 
hear for what reason the theologians have dared to predicate of the 
Cause of all things unity and trinity. 

N. Over this last question of yours we need not expend much 
456A labour — especially as the theologian St. Dionysius the Areopagite 
expounds for us with the utmost truth and by the surest arguments 
the mysteries of the Divine Unity and Trinity. For he says : “There is 
no way of signifying by verb or noun or any other part of articulated 
speech how the supreme and causal Essence of all things can be 
signified.” For it is not unity or trinity of such a kind as can be 
conceived by any human intellect however pure, or by any angelic 
intellect however serene ; but in order that the religious inclinations 
of pious minds may have something to think and something to say 
concerning that which is ineffable and incomprehensible, especially 

BOOK I 

43 

for the benefit of those who demand from catholics a rational 
account of the Christian religion, either, if they are well-disposed, 
because they wish to learn the truth, or, if they are ill-disposed, as an 
opportunity for attacking and criticizing it, these religious expres¬ 
sions by which the Faith is symbolized have been both devised and 
handed down by the holy theologians so that we may believe in our 
hearts and confess with our lips that the Divine Goodness is 
constituted in Three Substances of One Essence. And even this 
(truth) was discovered only in the light of spiritual understanding 
and rational investigation : for in contemplating, as far as the 
enlightenment of the Spirit of God would take them, the one and 
ineffable Cause of all things and the one simple and indivisible 
Principle they affirmed the Unity; and then by observing that this 
Unity did not consist in any singularity or barrenness they gained an 
understanding of the Three Substances of the Unity, namely the 
Unbegotten and the Begotten and the Proceeding. Now, they called 
the condition, [that is, the relation,] of the Unbegotten Substance to 
the Begotten Substance Father, the condition of the Begotten to the 
Unbegotten Substance Son, and the condition of the Proceeding 
Substance to the Unbegotten and to the Begotten Substance Holy 
Spirit. But since the attention of the holy commentators of Holy 
Scripture is almost entirely concentrated upon this subject, enough, 
I think, has been said for the present. 

A. Quite enough : but I should like to hear a plainer account of 
the condition of the Three Divine Substances; for it would be 
possible for someone to take these mystical names of the Holy 
Trinity, namely. Father and Son and Holy Spirit, as referring not to 
Their condition but to Their nature; for “father” seems to be the 
name of the substance of the Father, and similarly “son” the name 
of the substance of the Son, and the denomination “Holy Spirit” 
also seems to signify nothing other than His substance. 

N. Perhaps we too should not deny that we believe and profess 
just this if the supreme and venerable authority of St. Gregory the 
Theologian and the assent of sound reason did not prohibit us from 
believing such things. For when he was questioned by the Euno- 
mians, those most virulent adversaries of the Catholic Faith, 
concerning this name of “father”, whether it signified a nature or an 
operation, enlightened by divine grace he made a wonderful reply, 
saying that it was (the name) neither of a nature nor of an operation, 
but only of the relation to the Son. For were he to reply that 
“father” was the name of a nature, they would at once follow this up 

456B 

Concerning 
the con¬ 
dition, that 
is, the rela¬ 
tion, of the 
Three 
Divine 
Substances 
456C 
namely of 
the Father, 
of the Son, 
and of the 
Holy Spirit 

456D 

457A 

44 

PERIPHYSEON 

by saying that similarly “son” also was the name of a nature ; but if 
this were granted, it would necessarily follow that “father” was the 
name of one nature and “son” of another. For in one and the same 
nature there cannot be two names differing the one from the other; 
and from this they would make their point that Father and Son were 
axepouaiac;, that is, of diverse essence or nature. Of like (wisdom) 
was his answer concerning operation : for if it were granted them 
that “father” was the name of an operation, they would promptly 
conclude that the Son was a creature since “father” was admitted to 
be [the name] of His operation, that is, of His creation. 

A. Most certainly this was a praiseworthy reply, and one 
457B inspired by truth. But we ought to look into it a little more closely. 
For, as it seems to me, they would not immediately be able to blame 
him even if he did say that “father” was the name of a nature. Why 
should they? Is it impossible for two names, differing from one 
another in sound but not in sense, to be understood in one and the 
same nature, when we see that both Abraham and Isaac, that is, a 
father and a son, signify one nature? For it is not that Abraham is 
the name of one nature and Isaac of another, but both are of one 
and the same nature. 

N. You would be correct in what you say if you could equally 
assert that, in this example of yours of Abraham and Isaac, what is 
meant by Abraham and Isaac is not different from what in their case 
is meant by father and son. For as well as Abraham being 
Abraham’s [own] name, “father” too is a name applying to the 
same Abraham. In like manner also, as well as Isaac being Isaac’s 
457C name, “son” too is a name applying to the same Isaac. But 
“Abraham” and “father”, or “Isaac” and “son” are not predicated 
of the same thing. For it is to the substance of Abraham, that is, to 
the special person that he is, that “Abraham” refers, whereas no one 
of sound understanding would doubt that when he is called “father” 
the reference is to his relationship to his son Isaac. The same must 
be understood of “Isaac”. For by this name “Isaac” is meant his 
own individual substance, whereas what is made known by “son” is 
his condition in respect of his father. For you cannot deny that such 
names, that is, father and son, denote relation and not substance. If, 
then, among us, that is, in (the case of) human nature, these names 
are predicated not substantivally but relatively, what are we to say 
in the case of the Supreme and Holy Essence in which Holy 
Scripture has established such names, namely. Father, Son and 

BOOK I 

45 

Holy Spirit, for the mutual relation, that is, condition, of the 
Substances ? 

A. I now see the reply of the holy theologian to be completely 
supported by the truth. For, as has been shown, whether in the 
Divine Nature or the human, the name of a relation cannot be 
applied to a substance or essence. But I should like to hear from 
you, clearly and succinctly, whether all the categories — for they are 
ten in number — [can truly and properly be predicated] of the 
supreme One Essence in Three Substances of the Divine Goodness, 
and of the Three Substances in the same One Essence. 

N. On this subject I know of no one who could speak 
succinctly and clearly. For in such a matter as this either one should 
keep wholly silent and resign oneself to the simplicity of the 
Orthodox Faith, for it surpasses every intellect, as it is written: 
“Thou Who alone hast immortality and dwellest in inaccessible 
light” ; or, if one has begun to discuss it, one will have to show in 
many ways and by many arguments what is likely to be the truth, 
making use of the two branches of theology, the affirmative, which 
by the Greeks is called KaxacpanKfi, and the negative, which is 
named ourocpanKfi. The one, that is dTrocpaiiKT), denies that the 
Divine Essence or Substance is any one of the things that are, that is, 
of the things which can be discussed or understood ; but the other, 
KaiacpaTiKT), predicates of it all the things that are, and for that 
reason is called affirmative — not that it affirms that it is any of the 
things that are, but (because) it teaches that all things which take 
their being from it can be predicated of it. For that which is the 
cause can reasonably be expressed in terms of the things that are 
caused. For it says that it is Truth, Goodness, Essence, Light, 
Justice, Sun, Star, Spirit, Water, Lion, Bear, Worm, and innumerable 
other things; and not only does it draw its lessons about it from 
those things which accord with nature, but from the things which 
are contrary to nature, since it describes it as being drunken [and] 
foolish [and] mad. But of these things it is not our present purpose 
to speak ; for enough is said about such things by St. Dionysius the 
Areopagite in his “Symbolic Theology”, and therefore we may 
return to the question you have asked. For you had inquired 
whether [all] the Categories are [properly] to be predicated of God 
or (only) some of them. 

A. Yes, let us return to that. But first I think we must ponder 
why the names you have mentioned, I mean Essence, Goodness, 
Truth, Justice, Wisdom, and others of that sort, which seem to be 

457D 

458A 

Concerning 

458B 

KaiacpaTiKT] 

and 

aTTocpaiiKi^ 

458C 

46 

PERIPHYSEON 

not merely divine but the divinest, and to signify nothing else but 
that Divine Substance or Essence, are said by the aforementioned 
holy father and theologian to be metaphorical, that is, to have been 
transferred from the creature to the Creator. For / think it must be 
considered that he had some mystical and hidden reason for saying 
so. 

N. You observe well. Here too is something which I see should 
not be passed over without consideration, and therefore I should 
458D like you to tell me whether you understand that anything opposed to 
God or conceived alongside of Him exists. By “opposed” I mean 
either deprived of Him or contrary to Him or related to Him or 
absent from Him; while by “conceived alongside of Him” I mean 
something that is understood to exist eternally with Him without 
being of the same essence with him. 

A. I see clearly what you mean. And therefore I should not 
dare to say that there is either anything that is opposed to Him or 
anything understood in association with Him which is eispouGiov, 
that is, which is of another essence than what He is. For opposites 
459A by relation are always so opposed to one another that they both 
begin to be at the same time and cease to be at the same time, 
whether they are of the same nature, like single to double or 2/3 to 
3/2, or of different natures, like light and darkness, or in respect of 
privation, like death and life, sound and silence. For these are 
correctly thought to belong to the things which are subject to 
coming into being and passing away. For those things which are in 
discord with one another cannot be eternal. For if they were eternal 
they would not be in discord with one another, since eternity is 
always like what it is and ever eternally subsists in itself as a single 
459B and indivisible unity. For it is the one beginning of all things, and 
14 their one end, in no way at discord with itself. For the same reason I 
do not know of anyone who would be so bold as to affirm that 
anything is co-eternal with God which is not co-essential with Him. 
For if such a thing can be conceived or discovered it necessarily 
follows that there is not one Principle of all things, but two [or 
more], widely differing from each other — which right reason 
invariably rejects without any hesitation : for from the One all things 
take their being ; from two [or more], nothing. 

N. You judge correctly, as I think. If therefore the aforesaid 
Divine Names are confronted by other names directly opposed to 
them, the things which are properly signified by them must also of 
necessity be understood to have contraries opposite to them ; and 

BOOK I 

47 

therefore they cannot properly be predicated of God, to Whom 
nothing is opposed, and with Whom nothing is found to be co¬ 
eternal which differs from Him by nature. For right reason cannot 
find a single one of the names already mentioned or others like them 
to which another name, disagreeing with it, being opposed or 
differing from it within the same genus, is not found ; and what we 
know to be the case with the names we must necessarily know to be 
so with the [things] which are signified by them. But since the 
expressions of divine significance which are predicated of God in 
Holy Scripture by transference from the creature to the Creator — 
if, indeed, it is right to say that anything can be predicated of Him, 
which must be considered in another place — are innumerable and 
cannot be found or gathered together within the small compass of 
our reasoning, only a few of the Divine Names can be set forth for 
the sake of example. Thus, [God] is called Essence, but strictly 
speaking He is not essence: for to being is opposed not-being. 
Therefore He is UTrepouoioc;, that is, superessential. Again, He is 
called Goodness, but strictly speaking He is not goodness : for to 
goodness wickedness is opposed. Therefore (He is) ujrepayaGoq, 
that is, more-than-good, and 67r8paya06Tr|(;, that is, more-than- 
goodness. He is called God, but He is not strictly speaking God : for 
to vision is opposed blindness, and to him who sees he who does not 
see. Therefore He is UTiepBeog that is, more-than-God — for 086(; is 
interpreted “He Who sees”. But if you have recourse to the 
alternative origin of this name, so that you understand deoq, that is, 
God, to be derived not from the verb 08(opo), that is, “I see”, but 
from the verb 080), that is, “I run”, the same reason confronts you. 
For to him who runs he who does not run is opposed, as slowness to 
speed. Therefore He will be bntpBeoq, that is, more-than-running, 
as it is written : “His Word runneth swiftly” : for we understand this 
to refer to God the Word, Who in an ineffable way runs through all 
things that are, in order that they may be. We ought to think in the 
same way concerning Truth : for to truth is opposed falsehood, and 
therefore strictly speaking He is not truth. Therefore He is 
U7r8pa?ifi0r|(; and U7i8pa>ifi08ia, that is, more-than-true and (more- 
than-)truth. The same reason must be observed in all the Divine 
Names. For He is not called Eternity properly, since to eternity is 
opposed temporality. Therefore He is U7r8paid)viO(; and UTTcpaiCDVia, 
that is, more-than-eternal and (more-than-)eternity. Concerning 
Wisdom also no other reason applies, and therefore it must not be 
thought that it is predicated of God properly, since against wisdom 
and the wise are set the fool and folly. Hence rightly and truly He is 

459C 

459D 
That any¬ 
thing which 
has an 
opposite 
cannot be 
properly 
460A 
predicated 
of God 

460B 

48 

PERIPHYSEON 

460C 

Concerning 
the names by 
which God is 
properly 
named, in so 
far as God 
can be 
named 
anything 

460D 

461A 

called iL)7repao(pO(;, that is, more-than-wise, and urrepaotpla, that is, 
more-than-wisdom. Similarly, He is more-than-life because to life is 
opposed death. Concerning Light it must be understood in the same 
way : for against light is set darkness. For the present, as I think, 
enough has been said [concerning these (matters)]. 

A. It must indeed be admitted [that enough has been said]. For 
the subject of our present debate does not allow us to say all that is 
necessary concerning such matters because of what must be discussed 
with a view to the business in hand. Return, therefore, if you please, 
to the consideration of the decad of the categories. 

N. I am surprised at the keenness of your attention which has 
been vigilant enough up to now. 

A. On what grounds, pray, do you say that? 

N. Did we not say that, strictly speaking, the ineffable Nature 
can be signified by no verb, by no noun, and by no other audible 
sound, by no signified thing? And to this you agreed. For it is not 
properly but metaphorically that it is called Essence, Truth, Wisdom, 
and other names of this sort. Rather, it is called superessential, 
more-than-thruth, more-than-wisdom. But do not even these (names) 
seem to be, in a way, proper names? For if it is not called Essence 
properly, yet it is properly called superessential ; similarly, if it is not 
called Truth or Wisdom properly, yet it is properly called more- 
than-truth and more-than-wisdom. It does not, therefore, lack 
names referring properly to it. For although among the Latins these 
names are not usually pronounced under a single accent or by a 
unitary harmony of composition, except the name superessentialis, 
by the Greeks, on the other hand, each is expressed by a single 
compound. For never, or scarcely ever, will you find [such 
compounds used in speech as are] superbonus or superaeternus and 
others like (them). 

A. I too wonder what I was thinking of when I let this 
important inquiry go ignored, and therefore I earnestly ask you to 
enter into it. For in whatever way the Divine Substance is spoken of, 
whether by simple parts of speech or by compounds, whether in 
Greek or in Latin, provided only it be a proper way, it will be seen 
that it is not ineffable. For that is not ineffable which can be spoken 
of in any way. 

N. Now you are on your guard, I see. 

A. Yes indeed. But so far this incidental question is anything 
but clear to me. 

BOOK I 

N. Return, then, to the conclusion we reached a little earlier. 

For, unless I am mistaken, we said that there were two supreme 
branches of theology — and this we said not of ourselves but on the 
authority of St. Dionysius the Areopagite, who very clearly, as has 
been said, asserts that theology is divided into two parts, that is, into 461B 
KaxacpaTiKf) and dTrocpaiiKTi, which Cicero translates into “intentio” 
and “repulsio”, but we prefer to render by Affirmation and 
Negation with a view to expressing the meaning of the terms more 
accurately. 

A. I see that I do remember something of the sort, as I think. 

But I do not yet see how it helps us in the matter we now wish to 
consider. 

N. Do you not see that these two, namely Affirmation and 
Negation, are the opposites of one another? 

A. I am sufficiently aware of that ; and I think there can be no 
greater contrariety. 

N. Attend, then, more carefully. For when you have reached 
the point of view of perfect reasoning you will see clearly enough 
that these two which seem to be the contraries of one another are in 
no way mutually opposed when they are applied to the Divine 
Nature, but in every way and at every point are in harmony with 
each other. And that this may become more evident we shall employ 
a few examples. For instance: KaxacpaxiKf) says: “It is Truth”; 
dTTOcpaxiKf) contradicts : “It is not Truth”. Here there appears some 
kind of contradiction, but a closer investigation reveals that there is 
no conflict. For that which says: “It is Truth”, does not properly 
affirm that the Divine Substance is Truth, but that it can be called 
by such a name by a transference of meaning from the creature to 
the Creator; for, the Divine Essence being naked and stripped of 
every proper signification, it clothes it in such names as these. On 
the other hand, that which says: “It is not Truth”, clearly under¬ 
standing, as is right, that the Divine Nature is incomprehensible and 
ineffable, does not deny that it is, but (denies) that it can properly be 
called Truth or properly be Truth. For all the significations with 
which KaxacpaxiKf] clothes the Divinity are without fail stripped off 
it by dTTOcpaxiKf]. For the one, clothing it, says, for instance: “It is 
Wisdom”, while the other, unclothing it, says: “It is not Wisdom.” 
So the one says: “It can be called this”, but does not say: “It 
properly is this”; the other says: “It is not this although it can be 
called after this.” 

Of the 

harmony 

between 

KaiacpaTiKT) 

and 

461C 

aTTOcpaiiKT) 

461D 

50 

462A 

462B 

How 
affirmation 
and negation 
are found to- 
462C 
gether in each 
of the names 
which have 
the prefix 
super or 
more than 

462D 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. Unless I am mistaken, I fully understand this, and things 
which hitherto seemed to me to be mutually contradictory are now 
seen as clear as day to agree with one another and in no way [to 
dissent] when they are applied to God. But how this may lead to a 
solution of the present problem I confess I do not yet see. 

N. Pay closer attention, then, and tell me, as far as you are 
able, to which branch of theology belong those significations which 
we previously introduced, I mean superessential, more-than-truth, 
more-than-wisdom, and the others like them, that is to say, whether 
we should allocate them to the affirmative or to the negative 
theology. 

A. I am not so bold as to decide for myself. For when I see that 
the aforesaid significations lack the negative particle [which means 
“not”], I fear to include them in the negative branch of theology; 
yet if I include them in the affirmative branch I realize that I am not 
doing justice to their sense. For when it is said : “It is superessential”, 
this can be understood by me as nothing else but a negation of 
essence. For he who says : “It is superessential”, openly denies that 
it is essential, and therefore although the negative is not expressed in 
the words pronounced, yet the hidden meaning of it is not hidden 
from those who consider (them) well. Indeed, as I think, I am 
compelled to admit that these aforesaid significations which in 
appearance do not imply a negation belong, as far as they can be 
understood, rather to the negative than to the affirmative branch of 
theology. 

N. I see that you have shown the greatest care and vigilance in 
your reply, and I strongly approve the way in which you have very 
subtly observed behind the outward expression of the affirmative 
branch the meaning of the negative. Let us then, if you agree, 
attempt a solution of the present problem as follows: that these 
names which are predicated of God by the addition of the particles 
super- or more-than-, such as superessential, more-than-truth, 
more-than-wisdom, and the like, comprehend within themselves in 
the fullest sense the two previously mentioned branches of theology, 
so that in outward expression they possess the form of the affir¬ 
mative, but in meaning the force of the negative. And let us 
conclude with this brief example: it is Essence, affirmation: it is 
Non-essence, negation : it is superessential, affirmation and negation 
together — for superficially it lacks the negation, but is fully 
negative in meaning. For that which says: “It is superessential”, 
says not what it is but what it is not ; for it says that it is not essence 

BOOK I 

but more than essence, but what that is which is more than essence it 
does not reveal. For it says that God is not one of the things that are 
but that He is more than the things that are, but what that “is” is, it 
in no way defines. 

A. We must not linger over this question any longer, I think. 

And now, if you agree, the nature of the categories must be 
considered. 

N. Aristotle, the shrewdest among the Greeks, as they say, in 463A 
discovering the way of distinguishing natural things, included the 
innumerable variety of all things which come after God and are 
created by Him in ten universal genera which he called the ten 
categories, that is, predicables. For, as he holds, nothing can be 
found in the multitude of created things and in the various motions 
of minds which cannot be included in one of these genera. Now, the 
Greeks call them ouaia, 7ioa6Tr|(; Tioioiri^, Tipoq xi, KcTaGai, 

TOTioq, xpovoq, TTpaxieiv, rraGeT v, which are called in Latin essentia. Of the ten 
quantitas, qualitas, ad aliquid, situs, habitus, locus, tempus, agere, categories 
pati. And of these ten genera there are innumerable subdivisions 
which our present task does not permit us to discuss lest we should 
digress too far from our topic — especially as it is the function of 463B 
that branch of philosophy which is called dialectic to break down 
these genera into their subdivisions from the most general to the 
most specific, and to collect them together again from the most 
specific to the most general. But, as the holy father Augustine says 15 
in his books on the Trinity, when we come to theology, that is, to the 
study of the Divine Essence, the relevance of the categories is wholly 
extinguished. For if the force of any one of the Categories whatsoever 
is effective in those natures which are created by God and in their 
motions, yet in that Nature which can neither be spoken of nor 
understood it is throughout and in every respect ineffective ; and yet, 
as we have said before, in the same way as almost all that is properly 
predicated of the nature of created things can be said metaphorically 
of their Creator, so that some significant statement may be made 
(concerning Him), so also what is signified by the categories, which 463C 
strictly speaking can only be discerned in created things, can 
without absurdity be pronounced about the Cause of all things 
— not to signify properly what it is, but to show by analogy what 
we, when in a certain manner inquiring about it, might, with 
probability, think about it. 

A. I clearly see that the categories can in no way be properly 
predicated of the Ineffable Nature : for if any one of the categories 

52 

463 D 

464A 

That no 
category is 
predicated of 
God prop¬ 
erly but meta¬ 
phorically 

Concerning 
oua'i a 

Concerning 

quantity 

464B 

Concerning 

464C 

quality 

PERIPHYSEON 

were to be properly predicated of God, it would necessarily follow 
that God is a genus. But God is neither genus nor species nor 
accident : therefore no category can properly signify God. 

N. Your view is correct. Not in vain, I think, was the trouble 
we have been willing to take over the two branches of theology. For 
we should not have been able so easily, and with hardly any 
difficulty at all, to arrive at this treatment of the categories, namely, 
that they cannot properly be predicated of God, had we not first 
satisfied ourselves that, in the case of the primordial causes which 
were established before all else by the One Cause of all things, I 
mean Essence, Goodness, Virtue, Truth, Wisdom, and the others of 
this sort, it is only metaphorically that they signify God. For if the 
created causes of all things which come first in order after it and 
which can only be apprehended by the perceptions of sheer mind fall 
short of the One Ineffable Cause of all things as regards excellence 
of essence, so that it can by no means be properly signified by their 
names, what are we to say of these aforementioned ten genera, 
which are discerned not only in intelligible things but also in sensible 
things? Surely it is not to be believed that they are truly and 
properly predicated of the Divine and Ineffable Nature. 

A. I think so too: that it is [not to be believed]. So it is not 
ouaia because it is more than ouala, and yet it is called ouaia 
because it is the Creator of all oualai [that is, of all essences]. It is 
not quantity because it is more than quantity. For every quantity 
extends in three dimensions, length, breadth, and depth, and these 
three dimensions are again produced in six directions : for length 
goes up and down, breadth to the right and to the left, depth 
forwards and backwards. But there is no dimension in God ; 
therefore there is in Him no quantity. Moreover quantity (consists) 
in the number of parts, either naturally continuous as in the case of 
a line or of time, or naturally discontinuous, as in that of corporeal 
or intelligible numbers; the Divine Substance is neither composed 
of continuous parts nor divisible into separate parts. Therefore it is 
not a quantity. And yet it may not inappropriately be called 
quantity in two ways : either because “quantity” is often used in the 
sense of abundance of power, or because it is the origin and cause of 
all quantity. 

Concerning quality also we must think in the same way: for 
God is no quality, no quality is an accident to Him, in no quality 
does He participate. And yet quality is very often predicated of 
Him, either because He is the Creator of all quality or because 

BOOK I 

quality is very frequently used in reference to the virtues. For 
goodness as well as justice and the other virtues are often called 
qualities. But God is Virtue and More-than-virtue. The principle of 
relation is not as patently obvious as are the definitions of the other 
categories. For it appears to be the only category which is, so to say, 
properly predicable of God : and for this reason I see that we must 
inquire with the utmost care whether in the Most High and Holy 
Trinity of the Three Supreme Substances “father” is properly said in 
relation to the Son, similarly “son” (in relation) to the Father, and 
“holy spirit” (in relation) to the Father and the Son because the 
Spirit is of both — for that these are the names of conditions St. 
Gregory the Theologian asserts in a manner not to be doubted — , 
or whether here again, as in the case of the other categories, this one 
also, which is called relation or condition, must be believed and 
understood to be predicated of God metaphorically. 

N. Your method of inquiring into the mystery of truth is a 
reasonable one, as I think. For it does seem as if none of the 
categories except this one alone is properly predicated of God. But 
whether this is really so or not must be examined with the utmost 
reverence and care. For if it is properly predicated of God, almost 
all our previous reasoning will be undermined. For we asserted that 
nothing at all can properly be said or understood of God. Indeed, 
the category of relation will not be reckoned among the ten genera 
of the categories if it is properly predicated of God. But if this is 
found to be the case the number of the categories will not be ten but 
nine. Therefore there is no course left open to us but to understand 
that this category too, as well as the others, is predicated of God 
metaphorically; for to this we are prompted and urged by sound 
reasoning lest what has already been said should begin to appear 
uncertain. For why, is it contrary to sound reasoning if we say that 
“father” and “son” are names for that condition which is called “in 
relation to something” and for what is more than condition? For 
the same condition is not to be believed in the most exalted 
Substances of the Divine Essence and in those which were created 
after it and by it. For, if I am not mistaken, just as it surpasses every 
essence, wisdom, and virtue, so also in an ineffable manner it goes 
beyond every condition. For who would believe that there is the 
same kind of condition between the Father and His Word as there 
can be observed between Abraham and Isaac? For the latter 
condition, being of the flesh and resulting from the division of 
nature after the sin of the first man, is found, on inquiry, to consist 

53 

16 

Concerning 

relation 

464D 

465A 

465B 

54 

465C 

Concerning 

situation 

465D 

466A 

17 

Concerning 

condition 

That con¬ 
dition is 
found in all 
the categories 

466B 

PERIPHYSEON 

in the multiplication by generation ; in the former case it is believed 
and (in so far as it is revealed by the radiance of the Divine Light) 
known to be an ineffable bond uniting the Unbegotten and the 
Begotten Substances. In the latter case what is under consideration 
did not proceed from nature but from transgression ; in the former, 
what is contemplated is known to proceed from the ineffable 
fertility of the Divine Goodness. But let us pass on to other 
categories. 

A. There are six left, unless I am mistaken : of which the first is 
K8ia0ai, that is, “to lie”, which others call situation. Now situation 
means the posture of a creature, whether visible or invisible. For 
instance : it is said of some body either, “it lies”, or, “it stands” ; 
[similarly it is said of the mind if it is at rest, “it lies” ; if it is alert, “it 
stands”] — because standing is usually applied to this category ; for 
motion is related to time. — But because God neither stands nor lies 
the aforesaid category can in no way be predicated of God. And yet, 
since He is the Cause of standing and of lying — for in Him all 
things both stand, that is, subsist immutably in their reasons, and 
lie, that is, find their rest, because He is the End of all things, beyond 
which there is nothing for them to strive for — , “to lie” or situation 
can be predicated of Him metaphorically. [For if God truly and 
properly lies or sits or stands He does not lack posture : if He does 
not lack posture He occupies place. But He does not occupy place: 
therefore He is not contained within any situation.] 

N. I clearly see what you mean, and therefore I see fit that we 
should pass on to the category of condition, which seems to be the 
most obscure of all the categories because of its excessive range. For 
there is scarcely any category in which some condition is not found. 
For even essences or substances stand in regard to one another in 
respect of some condition. For we state in what proportion, that is 
condition, rational and irrational essence stand to one another [for 
the irrational could not be so called but for its condition of absence 
of reason, as the rational is not so called save from its condition of 
the presence of reason]. For every proportion is a condition 
although not every condition is a proportion; because properly 
speaking proportion can only be found where there are at least two 
terms, while condition is found in single things also. For instance: 
the condition of the rational soul is virtue. So proportion is some 
species of condition. But if you wish it to be made clear by an 
example how the condition of proportion is found in essence, take 
the case of numbers. For numbers, as I think, are understood to be 

BOOK I 

present in all things as their essence. For it is in numbers that the 
essence of all things subsists. Do you see, then, what kind of 
proportion there is between two and three? 

A. Yes, certainly. I think it is the proportion of two-thirds : and 
from this one example I can get to know the various kinds of 
proportion of all the other substantial numbers when they are 
brought into relation with each other. 

N. Turn your attention, then, to the rest (of the categories), 
and learn that there are no species of quantity, or of quality, or of 
that which is called “in relation to something”, or of situation, or of 
place, or of time, or of action, or of passion, in which some kind of 466C 
condition is not found. 

A. I have often searched into such matters and have found it to 
be so. For, to make use of a few examples, in quantities when the 
great and the small and the medium-sized are compared, condition 
is plainly evident. [Also in the quantities of numbers, distances, 
durations of time, and other similar things, you will clearly find the 
condition of proportion.] Similarly in quality. For instance: in 18 
colours, white and black and whatever intermediate colour there 
may be [are related to each other by condition]. [For white and 
black, because they occupy extreme positions in the range of 
colours, stand in regard to one another in the condition of contra¬ 
riety, while (the range of) colour stands in regard to its extremes, 
white, I mean, and black, in the condition of intermediacy.] Also, in 
that category which is called Tipoq ii, that is, “in relation to 466D 
something”, (condition) is much in evidence, as the condition of 
father to son or son to father, of friend to friend, of double to single, 
and other instances of this sort. In the case of situation too it is 19 
easily seen how standing and lying possess a condition in respect of 
one another [for they are diametrically opposed to one another. For 467A 
you will certainly never form a notion of standing distinct from the 
notion of lying, but the two always occur to you together, although 
they do not appear together in any one thing.] What is to be said of 20 
place, when the higher and the lower and the intermediate are 
considered? Do they lack condition? 

N. By no means: [for these names do not proceed out of the 
nature of things but from the point of view of one who observes 
them part by part. For there is no up and down in the universe, and 
therefore in the universe there is nothing either higher or lower or 
intermediate. These (notions) are rejected by a consideration of the 

56 

467B 

467C 

That oOa'ia 
and 

quantity and 
quality are 
467D 
found in all 
the categories 

468A 

PERIPHYSEON 

whole, but introduced by attention to the parts. The same thing 
applies to the greater and the less : for nothing in its own genus can 
be either small or great, but such concepts have been formed by the 
thought of those who compare differing quantities, and therefore 
the condition is brought about in them by the consideration of 
spaces or of parts. For no nature would be either greater or smaller 
than any other nature, just as none is either higher or lower, since 
the nature by which all subsist is one, being the creation of one 
God.] 

A. What of time ? When times are compared with one another, 
does not condition come clearly into view in them? — for instance, 
days compared to hours, hours to minutes, minutes to the moment, 
moments to indivisible units? Much the same one will find in the 
higher units of time if one ascends there. [For in all these is seen the 
condition of the whole to the parts and of the parts to the whole.] 

N. Assuredly it is not otherwise. 

A. And how (is it) in the diverse motions of action and 
passion? Is not condition everywhere in evidence? For to love and 
to be loved are conditions of the lover and the beloved since they are 
reciprocal to one another whether they occur in a single person, 
which is called by the Greeks auxoTraGeia, that is, when action and 
passion are observed in one and the same person, as ‘T love 
myself’ ; or between two persons, which is called by the Greeks 
8T8po7id0Eia, that is, when the lover is one person and the beloved is 
another, as “I love you”. 

N. This too I see to be true. 

A. I ask you therefore why this category of condition, since it 
seems to be naturally inherent in all the other categories, has its own 
place as a species by itself in the decad of the categories, as though 
founded upon its own proper reasons. 

N. Is it perhaps for the very reason that it is found in all that it 
subsists in itself? For that which is of all belongs properly to none, 
but is in all in such a way as to subsist in itself. For the same may be 
observed also in the category of Essence. Consider: although there 
are ten categories, is not one of them called essence or substance, 
while nine are accidents subsisting in the substance? For they 
cannot subsist by themselves. Essence appears to be in all, for 
without it they are not able to be. And yet, it occupies a place of its 
own, for that which is of all is proper to none but common to all, 
and while it subsists in all it does not cease to be in itself, according 

BOOK I 

to its proper reason. The same may be said of quantity. For we say : 
What quantity of essence? What quantity of quality ? What quantity 
of relation? What quantity of situation? What quantity of condi¬ 
tion? How great a place? How small or how great an extent of 
time? What quantity of action? What quantity of passion? Do you 
see how extensively quantity is applied to the other categories ? And 
yet it does not cease to hold its own place. What of quality? Is it not 
usual for this to be frequently predicated of all the other categories ? 
For we say: What quality of ouaia? What quality of size? What 
quality of relation, situation, condition, place, time, action, passion ? 
For we ask in respect of all these what is their quality. And yet 
quality does not abandon the reason of its proper genus. What, 
then, is strange if the category of condition, while it is observed in 
all, is said to possess its own reason? 

A. It is not to be considered strange at all. For right reason 
convinces us that it cannot be otherwise. 

N. Do you not then see that the Divine Essence does not 
participate in any condition, and that nevertheless condition can be 
not unsuitably predicated of it since (the Divine Essence) is its 
Cause? For if condition were predicated of it properly, (the Divine 
Essence) would not be of itself but of another. For every condition is 
understood to be in some subject and to be the accident of 
something, which it is impious to believe of God, to Whom nothing 
is an accident, and Who is not an accident to anything, and Who is 
not comprehended in anything, nor anything in Him. 

A. Enough has been said of this category, as I think. 

N. What then ? For the remaining categories can we not briefly 
summarize from what has been said before? For God is neither 
place nor time, and yet metaphorically He is called the Place and 
Time of all things because He is the Cause of all places and all times. 
For the definitions of all things subsist in Him as places, as it were ; 
and from Him as from a certain moment of time, through Him as 
through a certain period of time, [and] towards Him as towards the 
end, as it were, of times, the motion of all things both begins and 
moves and comes to an end, although He Himself neither moves 
Himself nor is moved by Himself or by another. Consider: if He 
were properly called place and time would it not appear that He 
would not be outside all things on account of the excellence of His 
Essence, but be included in the number of all the things that are? 
For place and time are counted among all the things that have been 

58 

468D 

469A 

22 

A review of 
the ten 
categories 

469B 
Concerning 
motion and 
rest and the 
whole, which 
comprise 
within them¬ 
selves the ten 
predicables 

23 

Concerning 

condition 

469C 

PERIPHYSEON 

created. For in these two the whole of the world that now exists is 
comprised and (they are that) without which it cannot exist, and 
therefore they are called by the Greeks cpv dveu to Tidv, that is, 
“without which the universe” cannot exist. For everything that is in 
the world must move in time and be defined in place; even place 
itself is defined and time itself moves. But God neither moves nor is 
defined. [For (He is) the Place of places by which all places are 
defined, and, since He is not fixed in place by anything but gives 
place to all things within Him, He is not place but More-than-place. 
For He is defined by nothing, but defines all things : therefore He is 
the Cause of all things. In the same way, the Cause of times moves 
the times, but itself is not moved by any time in any time : for it is 
More-than-time and More-than-motion.] Therefore He is neither 
place nor time. 

A. Your words are so plain, clearer even than daylight, that 
enough already seems to have been said now on the nature of the 
categories and about their metaphorical use for denoting the Divine 
Essence, in view of the further demands of our present task. 

N. Of these ten genera four are at rest, that is, ouaia, quantity, 
situation, place; [while] six are in motion, quality, relation, condi¬ 
tion, time, action, passion : and I do not think you are unaware of 
this. 

A. Yes, this is clear to me, and I have no more questions to ask 
about it. But what follows from this? 

N. That you should plainly understand that the ten genera 
already mentioned are comprised within two higher and more 
general genera, namely motion and rest, which again are gathered 
into that most general genus which is usually called by the Greeks to 
Tidv, but by our writers Vniuersitas. 

A. This I much welcome because of those who think that there 
cannot be found in the nature of things any more general genus to 
precede the ten already mentioned genera which were discovered 
and named by Aristotle. 

N. Does then this division of the categories (into those) in 
motion and (those) at rest, that is, four at rest, six in motion, seem to 
you correct ? 

A. Yes, except that I am still not sufficiently clear about two : I 
mean, condition and relation. For these two categories seem to me 
to be rather at rest than in motion. For whatever has attained to its 

BOOK I 

proper condition remains immutable : for if it were to move in any 
way it would clearly be no longer a condition. [For] virtue in the 
soul is only then truly a condition of the mind when it abides in it 
immutably so that it cannot be separated from it. And that is the 
reason why no true condition is found in bodies: for the armed or 
the clothed man can be deprived of his armour or his clothing. In 
relation also rest is thought to prevail. For the relation of father to 
son or of double to single, and vice versa, is unalterable. For a father 
is always the father [of his son] just as a son [is always the son of his 
father] and so forth. 

N. Perhaps you would not have hesitated much (over this) if 
you had been more careful to notice that everything which does not 
perfectly inhere in a creature so as to be of one nature with it but 
proceeds by certain increases to its perfection which cannot be 
separated from it and which cannot change must be in motion. But 469D 
every condition is an ascending motion towards perfection in that of 
which it is the condition. But who would presume to be assured of 
perfection in this life ? Therefore condition is in motion. Concerning Concerning 
relation also your hesitation is surprising to me, since you see that it relation 
cannot exist in one and the same subject, for it always appears in 
two. But that the mutual attraction of two subjects is the effect of 470A 
some sort of motion who would doubt ? There is also another way in 
which things in motion are very clearly distinguished from things at 
rest — to say no more for the moment of that most general principle 
by which all things created by God after God are shown to be in 
motion, for all things move through the process of generation from 
the state of non-existence into the state of existence, for the divine 
Goodness summons all things out of not-being into being so that 
they are (created) out of nothing, and each one of the things that are 
is moved by a natural desire towards its own essence and genus and 
species and individuality — : we properly say that those things are at 
rest which subsist by themselves and have no need of any [subject] in 
order that they may be, while those things which exist in something 
because they cannot exist by themselves we not inappropriately 
judge to be in motion. Thus, condition and relation are in some 470B 
subject, and strive by a natural motion to be in it always, because 
without it they cannot exist. Therefore they are in motion. 

A. Then what shall we say of place, of quantity, of situation, 
which you have set among the things that are at rest? For 
concerning ouala, that is, essence, no one doubts but that it does 
not require anything in order to subsist : for it is upon it that all the 

24 

Concerning 
place and 
quantity and 
situation 

PERIPHYSEON 

60 

rest are supported. But these, I mean place and quantity and 
situation, are counted among the accidents of essence, and therefore 
are moved by desire for the subject in which they are and without 
which they cannot be. And if this is the case, all are in motion save 
ouaia, which alone is without movement — except for that by 
which all things strive towards being — since it alone subsists by 
itself. 

470C N. Your question is not altogether ridiculous for you follow 

the common opinion. But if you look more closely you will find that 
place is not contained by anything but contains all things that are 
placed in it. For if place is nothing else but the limit and definition 
of every finite nature, then surely place does not strive to be in 
something, but all things which are in it are rightly always seeking it 
as their limit and their end, in which it is of their nature to be 
contained and without which it is understood that they would melt 
away into infinity. Therefore place is not in motion, since all that is 
in place moves towards it ; but it itself is at rest. Concerning quantity 
and situation reason teaches the same. For what does everything 
which partakes of quantity or position, whether sensible or intelli¬ 
gible, strive for if not that it may attain to its own perfect quantity 
and position, that there it may find its rest? Therefore they do not 

470D seek but are sought after ; therefore they are not in motion ; 
therefore they are at rest. 

A. Are we then to say that these three, quantity, situation, 
place, are accidents of ouaia, or that they are substances in their 
own right ? 

25 

How the 
subject and 
what is 
predicated of 
471A 
the subject 
constitute 
the same 
thing 

N. I see that this too is worthy of inquiry. For according to the 
opinion of the dialecticians everything that is is either a subject, or 
what is predicated of a subject, or what is in a subject, [or what is 
predicated of and is in a subject]. But if right reason is consulted it 
replies that “subject” and “what is predicated of a subject” are one, 
and differ in no respect. For if, as they say, “Cicero” is a subject and 
first substance, while “man” is predicated of the subject and second 
substance, what difference in regard of nature is there except that 
the one is in the individual while the other is in the species, since 
species is nothing else but the unity of the individuals and number 
nothing else but the plurality of the species? If then the species is 
total and one and indivisible in the individuals and the individuals 
are an indivisible unity in the species, what difference there is in 
respect of nature between “subject” and “what is predicated of a 
subject” I do not see. [The same must be understood concerning the 

BOOK I 

61 

accidents of the first substance : for what is in the subject is not other 
than what is at the same time in and predicated of the subject. Thus, 
art, to take an example, is one and the same thing in itself and in its 
species and in its individuals. Therefore the art of each particular 
thing, which is called by the dialecticians simply “that which is in 
the subject”, is not other than art in general, which is called by the 
same persons “that which is in the subject and predicated of the 
subject”, since, while it subsists in the subject, that is, in the first 
substance, it is predicated of the subject, that is, of the art that is 
proper of something, but in its whole and in its parts it is one and 
the same thing. And so there are left “subject” and “what is in a 
subject”.] But if you look more carefully, taking St. Gregory the 
Theologian and his [most wise] commentator Maximus as your 
guides, you will find that in all things that are, oOola is in itself 
wholly incomprehensible not only to the sense but also to the 
intellect, and therefore that it is known to exist (only) from these 
circumstances, as we may call them, by which I mean place, 
quantity, situation, to which is also added time. For within these, as 
within certain boundaries which have been placed about it, essence 
is known to be enclosed, so that they seem neither to be accidents to 
it as though subsisting in it — for they are outside it — nor to be 
able to exist without it, since it is the centre of the revolutions of 
time and dispositions of place, quantities, and situation. Therefore 
some of the Categories are predicated around ouala, which are said 
to be a kind of Tiepioxai, that is, “circumstances”, because they are 
seen to be about it, while some, which are called by the Greeks 
aupPapaia, that is, “accidents”, are within it : quality, relation, 
condition, action and passion. And these are understood also 
outside it [in other categories], for example : quality in quantity, as 
colour in a body; also, quality in ouala, as invisibility and 
incomprehensibility in genera; also, relation outside ouoia: father 
to son, son to father ; for these are not of nature but of the transitory 
process of generation which is an accident of their bodies. [For the 
father is father not of the nature of the son nor is the son son of the 
father’s nature : for father and son are of one and the same nature. 
But no nature begets itself or is begotten of itself.] There is, 
however, relation even within ouaia when genus is related to species 
and species to genus. For genus is the genus of species and species is 
the species of genus. Condition also is found both outside ouaia 
and within, as, with regard to the body, we say that (a person) is 
armed or clothed. But the condition of ouaia is the unchangeable 
virtue of genus and species by which the genus even when it is 

How what is 
in the subject 
and what is 
471B 

at the same 
time in and 
predicated of 
the subject 
constitute 
the same 
thing 

471C 

How some 
accidents are 
outside ouaia 
and some are 
within it and 
appear out¬ 
side it by 
other 
accidents 
471D 

472A 

PERIPHYSEON 

divided into species still remains one and indivisible in itself and 
subsists as a whole in each species, and all its separate species form a 
single whole in it. The same virtue is also seen in the species, which, 
even when it is divided among individuals, preserves undiminished 
the force of its own indivisible unity, and all the individuals into 
which it appears to be infinitely divided are in it finite and an 
indivisible unity. But concerning action and passion no one is in 
doubt, for we see that bodies [although they belong to quantity] 
both act and suffer. Also the genera and species of ouala itself when 
they multiply into diverse species and individuals are seen to act. 
But if a man should by exercising his reason in accordance with that 
art which is called dvaXuiiKT) unite, by gathering them together, the 
individuals into their species and the species into their genera and 
the genera into ouala, they are said to suffer [not that he himself 
gathers them, for they are gathered, as also divided, by nature ; but 
because he seems to gather them by an act of his reason : for when 
he divides them he is also said to act, while they are said to suffer.] 

A. Although these things appear to be obscure they do not so 
completely elude my mind that nothing in them is revealed clearly 
and distinctly; and since I see that almost all the Categories are so 
interrelated that they can scarcely be distinguished from one 
another in a definite way — for they all, as it seems to me, appear to 
be involved in one another — I urge you to show in what property 
each can be found. 

N. How does it seem to you? Is ouala wholly [and properly] 
contained within the most general genera and in the more general 
genera as well as in the genera themselves and in their species and 
again in those most special species which are called atoms, that is, 
individuals ? 

A. I see that there is nothing else in which ouala can be 
naturally present except in the genera and species which extend from 
the highest down to the lowest, that is, from the most general to the 
most special, that is, the individuals, and up again from the 
individuals to the most general genera. For in these, as it were in its 
natural parts, it subsists as a whole. 

N. Go OP to the remainder then. Does the property of quantity 
seem to you to exist anywhere but in the number of the parts, or in 
their spaces, or in their measures, whether those parts be continuous 
as are the parts of lines or of times and of other things which are 
held together by continuous quantity, or are discontinuous, being 

BOOK I 

63 

marked off by definite natural limits as are numbers and every 
multitude, [in] which it is clear that there is discontinuous quantity? 

A. This too is clearly apparent. 

[N.] And does that which is called quality properly reside 473A 
anywhere but in shapes and surfaces, either in natural bodies or in 
geometrical bodies such as plane figures like triangles, rectangles, 
polygons, and circles ; and also in (those of) solid structure, such as 
cubes, cones, and spheres? For solid bodies, whether natural or 
geometrical, when they are inwardly investigated for the spaces 
which they occupy, I mean length, breadth, and depth, are allotted 
to quantity, but when their surface is considered, they belong to 
quality. Is it not also prominent in incorporeal things, seeing that all 
arts and virtues, whether they be rational or irrational, as long as 
they have not yet attained to the immutable stability of the mind, 
are referred to it ? 

A. Go on to the remainder. For this I clearly see, and agree 473B 
that it is so. 

N. And does that which is called by the Greeks npog ii, but by 
us “with regard to something” or relation, properly occupy any 
other place in nature than in the proportions of things or numbers, 
and in the indissoluble ties which exist between those things which 
stand in regard to one another so that when the one is spoken of the 
meaning is understood not from itself but from the other which is 
opposed to it? Of this indestructible affinity and inseparable bond 
examples are provided by the multiple numbers, which are linked to 
one another, the double, the triple, the quadruple, and others of the 
sort up to infinity ; and also by fractions such as 3/2, 4/3, 5/4 and 
others of this kind, in all of which not only the integers exhibit 
various proportions when compared with one another, but also the 
parts of individual numbers, brought into conjunction with one 473C 
another, are inseparably linked by the ratios of their proportions; 
and this you will find not only in the terms of numbers themselves 
but also in the proportions of proportions which the arithmeticians 
call proportionalities. 

A. I am not ignorant of this either: for these things are well 
known to those who are skilled in the arts. 

N. What is to be said of situation? Does it not have its proper 
place in the natural or artificial distributions of corporeal things or 
in the dispositions of spiritual things? For when I say “first”, 
“second”, “third”, and “next”, whether in the case of wholes, or 

64 

PERIPHYSEON 

473D 

474A 

474B 

27 

Similarly 

concerning 

place 

The defini¬ 
tion of body 

474C 

The defini¬ 
tion of spirit 

parts, or genera, or species, is it not the situation of each that I have 
in mind? Again, if I say “to the right”, “to the left”, “upwards”, 
“downwards”, “forwards”, “backwards”, what else do I indicate 
but a position either of the whole world in general or of its parts? 
For he who says of a body, “it lies” or “it sits” or “it stands” means 
nothing else than that it is lying down or is standing up or is 
suspended in a kind of balance between up and down. Also, if 
someone says such things of the mind he will seem to mean nothing 
else than that it is still lying prone under the passions of sins, or is 
making some effort to get free from them, or has perfectly risen to 
the virtues. 

A. This does not seem so difficult to understand either. Go on 
to the rest. 

N. Next, I think, comes condition, which is most clearly seen in 
the certain possession of virtues or of vices. For every art, that is, 
every motion of the rational or irrational mind, once it has attained 
to a fixed state so that it cannot in any way on any occasion be 
moved from it but always adheres to the mind so that it seems to be 
one with the mind itself is called a condition, and therefore every 
perfected virtue which is inseparably fixed in the mind is truly and 
properly called a condition. In the same way, in bodies in which 
nothing stable is to be seen, condition, strictly speaking, is hardly, if 
ever, to be found : for to call that a condition which is not possessed 
all the time though it appears to be possessed for some of the time 
will be a misuse of the term. 

A. Go on to the rest : for no one denies that this is likely to be 
so. 

N. Next comes place, which, as we just said, is constituted in 
the definitions of things that can be defined. For place is nothing 
else but the boundary by which each is enclosed within fixed terms. 
But of places there are many kinds : for there are as many places as 
there are things which can be bounded, whether these be corporeal 
or incorporeal. For instance : body is a compound welded together 
<^of the qualities^ of the four elements under a single species: for 
by this definition all bodies which consist of matter and form are 
included in one general description. Also: spirit is an incorporeal 
nature without form or matter in itself: for every spirit that is either 
rational or intellectual is by itself formless, but if it turns towards its 
Cause, that is, to the Word, by Whom all things are made, then it 
takes on form. Therefore the one Form of all rational and intellectual 

BOOK I 

65 

spirits is the Word of God. But if the spirit is irrational it is equally 
formless in itself, but it takes form from the fantasies of sensible 
things. Therefore the form of all irrational spirits is the fantasy of 
corporeal things implanted in their memory by means of the 
corporeal senses. Among the liberal arts also very many definitions 
are found : for there is no art without its definitions, as there are the 
dialectical definitions from genus, from species, from name, a priori, 474D 
a posteriori, from contraries, and other definitions of this kind, 
which there is no time to discuss now. For the dialectical definitions 
extend over so wide a field that from wherever in the nature of 
things the dialectical mind finds an argument which establishes a 
doubtful matter it describes the esse of the argument [or the seat of 
the argument] as a place. You will find the same thing in the other 475A 
arts [which are bounded by their places, that is, by their proper 
definitions, of which the following are examples : 

Grammar is the art which protects and controls articulate 
speech. 

Definitions 
of the arts 

Rhetoric is the art which carries out a full and elaborate 
examination of a set topic under the headings of person, matter, 
occasion, quality, place, time, and opportunity, and can be briefly 
defined : rhetoric is the art which deals acutely and fully with a topic 
defined by its seven circumstances. 

Dialectic is the art which diligently investigates the rational 
common concepts of the mind. 

Arithmetic is the reasoned and pure art of the numbers which 
come under the contemplations of the mind. 

Geometry is the art which considers by the mind’s acute 
observation the intervals and surfaces of plane and solid figures. 

475B 

Music is the art which by the light of reason studies the 
harmony of all things that are in motion that is knowable by natural 
proportions. 

Astronomy is the art which investigates the dimensions of the 
heavenly bodies and their motions and their returnings at fixed 
times. 

These are the general definitions of the liberal arts, these the 
terms within which they are contained. But inside these definitions 
there are innumerable others. 

A. By these arguments I am forced to confess that place exists 28 
in the mind alone. For if every definition is in art and every art is in 

66 

PERIPHYSEON 

mind, every place, since place is definition, will necessarily be 
nowhere else but in the mind. 

29 N. You observe correctly.] 

A. Then what must be said of those who declare that the 
475C habitations of men and the other animals are places; who similarly 
consider that this common air, and also the earth, are the places of 
all who dwell in them ; who say that water is the place of the fishes ; 
who think the ether is the place of the planets, the sphere of heaven 
that of the stars? 

N. Nothing but to persuade them (of their error) if they are 
teachable [and wish to be taught] : or if they are stubborn, to 
disregard them entirely. For right reason laughs at people who say 
Questions such things. For if body is a different thing from place it follows that 
about place is not a body. But the air is the fourth part of this corporeal 

and visible world : therefore it is not a place. For it is agreed that this 
visible world is composed of the four elements as of four general 
475D parts, and is, as it were, a body built up of its parts, from which, 
namely from these universal parts, coming together in a wonderful 
476A and ineffable mingling, the proper and individual bodies of all 
animals, trees, and plants are composed, and at the time of their 
30 dissolution return to them once more. For as this sensible world as a 
whole rotates with unceasing motion about its pivot, I mean earth, 
about which, as about a kind of centre, the other three elements, 
namely, water, air, fire, spin in unceasing rotation; so by an 
invisible motion which is never interrupted the universal bodies, I 
mean the four elements, coming together compose the particular 
bodies of individual things, which at their dissolution return again 
from particular bodies to universal bodies — although there will 
always remain without change, like a centre, the natural essence 
which is proper to each individual, which can neither move nor 
increase nor diminish. For it is the accidents that are in motion, not 
476B the essence ; nor is it even the accidents themselves that are in 
motion either by increase [or by decrease], but it is the participation 
of them by essence that undergoes such changes. For right reason 
does not allow it to be otherwise : for every nature, whether of the 
essences or of their accidents, is immutable: but, as we said, the 
participation of the essences by the accidents or of the accidents by 
the essences is perpetually in motion. For participation can have a 
beginning and increase and decrease, until this world attains its end 
in the stability in all things, after which neither essence nor accident 
nor their participation of one another will suffer any motion : for all 

BOOK I 

67 

will be the immovable self-identical One when all things shall have 
returned to their immutable reasons. [But I think I must discuss this 
Return in another place.] But the reason why only the centre of the 
world, that is, earth, is always at rest, while the remainder of the 
elements revolve about it in eternal motion, demands a thorough 
inquiry. For we know the opinions both of the pagan philosophers 
and of the Catholic Fathers on this question. For Plato, the greatest 
of those who philosophized about the world, gives in his “Timaeus” 
many reasons for asserting that this visible world is composed of 
body and soul like some vast animal ; and the body of this animal is 
compacted of the four well-known and general elements and of the 
various bodies which are made from them, while its soul is a 
universal life-principle which animates and sets in motion all things 
which are in motion or at rest. [Hence the Poet : 

“To begin with, the spirit within nourishes the sky and the 
earth and the watery wastes, the shining globe of the moon and the 
Star of Titan.”] 

But because the soul itself, as he says, is eternally in motion, for 
the purpose of giving life to its body, that is, to the whole world, and 
of ruling it, and of imparting movement to it by bringing together 
and separating again in various ways the diverse particular bodies, 
and yet keeps to its own natural and unchanging state ; it is 
[therefore] ever in motion and ever at rest. And thus its body also, 
that is, the universe of visible things, is partially at rest in eternal 
stability, as is earth; and partially <moving> with eternal velocity, 
as is the ethereal region ; partially neither at rest nor moving with 
velocity, as water; partially moving with velocity but not with 
maximum velocity, as is the case with air. And this theory of the 
excellent philosopher is not to be despised, as I think : for it seems to 
be ingenious and true to nature. But since Gregory, the great Bishop 
of Nyssa, reasons very subtly about the same matter [in his treatise 
“On the Image”] I think we had better follow his opinion. For he 
says that the Founder of the universe established this visible world 
between two extremes which are the contraries of one another, I 
mean between heaviness and lightness, which are absolutely opposed 
to each other ; and therefore, since earth is established in heaviness it 
remains always without motion [for heaviness cannot move] and is 
set in the centre of the world, and occupies the extreme [and 
innermost] boundary ; while the ethereal regions always revolve 
with indescribable speed about the centre for the reason that they 
are constituted in the nature of lightness [which cannot be at rest]. 

476C 

31 476C 

The reason 
of the visible 
world 

476D 

477A 

477B 

68 

PERIPHYSEON 

and occupy the extreme boundary of the visible world ; but the two 
elements which are constituted between, namely, water and air, have 
a ceaseless movement proportionately moderated between heaviness 
477C and lightness [so] that [each] follows more closely the limit which is 
nearest to it than that which is remote from it : for water moves 
more slowly than air because it adheres to the heaviness of earth, 
while air is in more rapid motion than water because it is adjacent to 
the lightness of ether. But although the extreme parts of the world 
seem to oppose one another on account of the diversity of their 
qualities, yet they are not in all things in disagreement : for although 
the ethereal regions perpetually revolve with the utmost velocity, 
nevertheless the chorus of the stars maintains its immutable station 
so that it both revolves with the ether and keeps its natural place 
with a stability that resembles that of earth : while, on the other 
hand, although earth is eternally at rest, all things that originate 
from it are in an eternal motion which resembles that of the 
lightness of the ether, in coming to birth through generation, 
increasing into the number of places and times, and then again 
477D decreasing and coming to the point where form and matter fall 
apart. 

32 A. You seem to have been led rather too far away from the 
main question by an incidental one : for whereas it was our intention 
to speak about place, you have abandoned place and turned aside to 
treat of the world; and where this is leading I do not know. 

478A 33 

What the 
difference is 
between 
body and 
place 

478B 

N. To no other end but that we should distinguish by careful 
reasoning between the nature of bodies and the nature of places : for 
confusion between these is the principal, if not the sole, cause of 
error to many, if not all, of those who hold this visible world, and its 
parts both general and particular, to be places. For if, in the light of 
right reason, they were to distinguish the genera of all things 
accurately and correctly, they would never include body and place 
in the same genus. For none of those who rightly consider and 
distinguish the natures of things confuses places and bodies in a 
single genus, but separates them by a rational distinction. For 
bodies are included in the category of quantity, but the category of 
quantity differs widely by nature from the category of place. 
Therefore body is not place since a locality is not a quantity ; for, as 
we said before, quantity is nothing else but the definite measuring 
out of parts which are separated either by the reason alone or by 
natural differentiation, and the rational extension to definite limits 
of those things which extend in the dimensions of nature, I mean in 

BOOK I 

69 

length, in breadth, and in depth ; while place is nothing else but the 
boundary and enclosure of things which are contained within a fixed 
limit. Therefore if this world is a body it necessarily follows that its 
parts are bodies too. But if they are bodies they belong to the genus 
of quantity, not to that of locality. But they are bodies : therefore 
they are not places. Do you then see how it is concluded from the 
foregoing arguments that this world with its parts is not a place but 
is contained within place, that is, within the fixed limit of its 
definition? For that which contains is one thing and that which is 
contained is another. Bodies are contained in their places : therefore 
body is one thing and place another, just as the quantity of parts is 
one thing, their definition another. Therefore those four well-known 
elements are not places but are enclosed in places, for they are the 
principal parts which between them make up the totality of the 
sensible world. 

A. What has been said by you concerning the difference 
between places and bodies seems most likely to be true, but I should 
like you to go over it again in more detail. For I do not [see] why 
this world is not a place when many things are placed in it. 

N. You are aware, I think, of the fact that none of the aforesaid 
ten categories which Aristotle defined, when thought of by itself, 
that is, in its own nature, in the light of reason, is accessible to the 
bodily senses. For ouala is incorporeal and the object of no sense, 
while the other nine categories are about it or within it. But if the 
former is incorporeal, surely it must be apparent to you that 
everything which is either attached to it or subsists in it and cannot 
exist apart from it is incorporeal ? Therefore, all the Categories are 
incorporeal when considered in themselves. [Some] of them, how¬ 
ever, by a certain marvellous commingling with one another, as 
Gregory says, produce visible matter, while some appear in 
nothing and remain for ever incorporeal. For ouala and relation, 
place, time, action, passion are not reached by any bodily sense, 
while quantity and quality, situation and condition, when they come 
together and constitute matter, as we said just now, are normally 
perceived by bodily sense. If, then, place is normally counted among 
those things which are by no means accessible to the bodily senses, 
while bodies, if not perceived by the senses, are not bodies, does that 
not prove that [place] is [not] a body? — I am speaking here of the 
bodies that are produced by the coming together of the four 
elements of the world. For the four elements of the world, although 

478C 

That the 
world is not 
a place 

478D 

34 479A 

70 

PERIPHYSEON 

479B 

That 
corruptible 
bodies are 
produced by 
a concourse 
of accidents 

479C 

That s u b - 
stances and 
accidents in 
themselves 
remain 
without 
change 

35 

He concludes 
that the 
479D 
world is not 
a place 

480A 

36 

they are discrete bodies in themselves, yet because of the indes¬ 
cribable fineness and purity of their nature, surpass all mortal 
sense — . Therefore place is one thing and body another. Or does it 
seem to you otherwise? 

A. By no means. And this latest conclusion of our reasoning 
excludes all possibility of allowing that place and body are of a 
single genus. But that which I notice you have added incidentally, 
that visible matter combined with form — for whatever becomes 
manifest becomes manifest through form — is nothing else but a 
concourse of certain accidents, troubles me not a little. j 

N. Let it not do so. For, as I have said, the great Gregory of 
Nyssa in his homily “On the Image” proves it to be so by reasons 
beyond doubt, saying that matter is nothing else but a certain i 
composition of accidents which proceeds from invisible causes to 
visible matter. Not unreasonably: for if in this corporeal [and ; 
dissoluble] matter there should be any simple, immutable, and quite | 
indissoluble essence, then it could not be wholly dissolved by any 
thought [or action]. But in fact it is dissolved : therefore there is 
nothing in it which is indissoluble. For genera and species and 
dxopa are eternal and endure for the very reason that there is in 
them something which is one and indivisible which can neither be 
dissolved nor destroyed. [Also, the accidents themselves remain 
without change in their own nature(s) for the reason that underlying 
them all there is something indivisible in which they all naturally 
subsist as one.] 

A. Nothing is more true, in my opinion : and therefore I am 
waiting for you to bring the present inquiry to a close. 

N. What remains but to say that when, for instance, we see that 
our bodies are placed on this earth or surrounded by this air, they 
are simply bodies within bodies ? For the same reason the fish in the 
sea, the planets in the ether, the stars in the firmament, are bodies 
within bodies, lesser within greater ones, grosser within finer, light 
ones within lighter, pure within purer. For true reason teaches that 
all these things, sensible as well as intelligible, are contained within 
their proper places, that is, in their natural definitions. 

A. I do not dispute this conclusion either, for I perceive it to be 
true. But I wonder very much why the custom has come into 
common usage in everyday life of saying that all these bodies, 
whether of heaven or of air or of water or of earth, are the places of 
the lesser bodies within them, and similarly of holding that ouoia is 

BOOK I 

71 

nothing else but this visible and tangible body : and therefore I 
earnestly pray that it may not be tedious for you to prolong further 
the discussion of this present problem. 

N. Why, then : we have, have we not, already agreed that all 
things that are known by bodily sense or reason or intellect can 
justly be predicated of God because He is the Creator of them all, 
although a pure contemplation of the truth establishes the fact that 
[He] is none of the things that are predicated of Him ? 

A. Reason teaches that this is undeniable, and it is clearer than 

day. 

N. If therefore it is just to predicate of God all things that are, 
not indeed properly, but by a kind of metaphor because they derive 
from Him, what is strange if all things which are in place [because 
everywhere they are seen to be enclosed in things greater than 
themselves] can be called places, although none of them is strictly 
speaking a place but is contained within the place [of its proper 
nature], and although we see that it is by psxovopla [that is, by a 
transference of name] that those things which are contained are 
called after the things which contain them [although they are not 
contained by them in such a way that without them they could not 
subsist within their natural limits? For the common usage of 
mortals usually calls the wife or the family a “house”, although by 
nature the two notions are distinct : for it is not the house which 
confers on wife or family their substantial being, but the place of 
their nature. But because it is in it that they possess (their substantial 
being) they are customarily called after it], and similarly the things 
that contain (are called) after the things that are contained by them ? 
For example : air contains light, and therefore air filled with light is 
called light; the eye is called sight or vision although in respect of 
the property of its nature it is neither sight nor vision. For who does 
not know that the eye is a corporeal part of the head and that it is 
moist, and that it is that through which the sight pours forth from 
the brain like rays out of the meninx, that is, membrane. [The 
meninx, however, receives the nature of light from the heart, that is, 
from the seat of fire.] For sight is the emission of natural light in the 
sense of seeing of him who possesses it, bursting forth in the manner 
of rays, which, when it surrounds the colours and forms of sensible 
bodies without, with marvellous swiftness takes on the form [of 
those coloured visible shapes]. For vision is an image, formed in the 
rays of the eyes, of the shapes and colours of bodies, which with no 
intervening delay is seized by the sense and implanted in the 

480B 

37 

480C 

The 

definition 
of sight 

480D 

The 

definition 
of vision 

72 

PERIPHYSEON 

481A 

38 

That the 
parts of the 
world are 
not called 
places 
properly 

481B 

39 

That place 
and time are 
inseparable 

481C 

481D 

memory of the percipient. It is the same with the sense of the ears. 
For that part of the head which is properly called ear is also called 
after hearing because it is the instrument of hearing ; and so it is for 
a thousand (other examples) of this kind. 

A. This too I plainly perceive. 

N. Do you then see that it is by custom and for the necessity of 
having something significant to say about things that humanity, 
incapable of distinguishing the things that truly are, has devised 
these misleading names for them, calling the lowest and central part 
of the visible world, I mean earth, the place of animals that walk? 
Similarly to this it calls the part that is adjacent to it and inseparable 
from it, and closest to it by the quality of coldness, I mean water, the 
place of all (animals) that swim ; and then it considers the part of the 
world that comes third in the natural order to be the place of the 
winged species, and in the same way it customarily names the 
immense spaces of the ether the places of the celestial bodies which 
revolve about it in circular motion : all of which, if studied 
according to the true reason of the distinction of natures, are seen to 
be not places but parts of the world enclosed within their places. But 
in order that you may clearly know that these aforesaid general 
parts of the world and the parts of those parts down to the smallest 
divisions are not places but are enclosed within places, the nature of 
place itself must be considered a little more carefully, if you agree. 

A. Certainly I agree, and I am burning with zeal to hear this. 

N. Take then, to start with, this kind of reasoning, which we 
have taken over from the Holy Fathers, namely from Gregory the 
Theologian and the excellent commentator of his homilies, Maxi¬ 
mus : everything that is, except God Who alone properly subsists 
above being itself, is understood to be in place, with which [namely 
with place] time is always and in every way simultaneously under¬ 
stood. For it is impossible to conceive place if time is withdrawn, as 
it is impossible for time to be defined without understanding it in 
connexion with place. For these are included among the things which 
are always found inseparably together; and without these no 
essence which has received being through generation can by any 
means exist or be known. Therefore the essence of all existing things 
is local and temporal, and thus it can in no way be known except in 
place and time and under place and time. For the universe of all 
things is not under itself or within itself : for it is irrational and 
impossible to make a statement to this effect, namely, that the 

BOOK I 

73 

universe itself is above the totality of itself, when, in fact, it is 
defined by the ultimate causative Power, which is beyond everything 
and defines everything [under itself in itself]. The place of the 
universe, then, is its outer limit, according to the definition some 
give to place, saying : Place is the boundary outside the universe, or 
its very position outside the universe, or the comprehensive limit in 
which that which is comprehended is comprehended. Again, all 
things will be shown to be under time by the fact that all things 
which possess being after God do not possess it simply but after 
some manner, and therefore are not without a beginning. For 
everything which receives the reason of essence after some manner, 
although it is, yet was not. Therefore to be after some manner, this is 
to be in place ; and beginning after some manner to be, this is to be 
in time. And therefore since everything that is, except God, subsists 
after some manner and has begun to subsist through generation, it is 
necessarily enclosed within place and time. Hence, when we say that 
God is, we do not say that He is after some manner; [and] therefore 
we use the words “is” and “was” in Him simply and infinitely and 
absolutely. For the Divine is incomprehensible to all reason and all 
intellect, and therefore when we predicate being of Him we do not 
say that He is ; for being is from Him but He is not Himself being. 
For above this being after some manner there is More-than-being, 
and absolute Being beyond language and understanding. If, however, 
the things that are possess being after some manner but not 
absolutely, how will their being under place not be manifested by 
their position and the limitation of the reasons in which they are 
established by nature, and their being wholly under time by their 
beginning? Do you see then that place and time are understood (to 
be) prior to all things that are ? For the number of places and times, 
as St. Augustine says in chapter six of the “De Musica”, precedes all 
things that are in them : for the mode, that is, measure, of all things 
that are created is, in the nature (of things), logically prior to their 
creation ; and this mode and measure of each is called its place, and 
so it is. Similarly, the origin and beginning of its birth is seen to be 
logically prior to everything which is born and has a beginning, and 
therefore everything which was not and is has begun to be from a 
beginning in time. Thus, only God is infinite, all else is limited by a 
“where?” and a “when?” [that is, by place and time] — not that 
place and time are not in the number of those things that are created 
by God, but that they are prior, not in extent of time but only in 
respect of creation, to all things that are in the universe. For that 
which contains is necessarily understood as prior to that which is 

Definitions 
of place 

482A 

482B 

482C 

74 

PERIPHYSEON 

482D 

40 

Concerning 

Melchisedec 

483A 

483B 

Conclusion 
concerning 
place and 
time 

483C 

contained, as the cause precedes the effect, fire the conflagration, 
voice the word, and so on ; and therefore we hold that no other 
beatitude is promised to those who are worthy, and [that there will 
be] no other end of this world, but the ascent beyond places and 
times of all those who shall receive the glory of theosis, that is, 
deification. For those who are bound by place and time are finite ; 
but the eternal beatitude is infinite. Therefore those who participate 
in the eternal and infinite beatitude will be encompassed neither by 
place nor by time. For that which is written concerning Melchisedec 
alone, that he had no father or mother, nor a beginning of days to 
his attaining essence through generation, nor end of his time, must, I 
think, be understood generally of all who shall participate in the 
beatitude that is to come. For all who shall return into their eternal 
reasons which have neither a beginning of time [through generation 
in place and time] nor an end [through dissolution], and are not 
defined by any local position so that only (their eternal reasons), 
and nothing else, will be in them] will surely lack every local and 
temporal limit. For being infinite they will to infinity adhere in the 
Cause of all things, which lacks all definition because it is infinite; 
for only God will be manifest in them when they surpass the limits 
of their nature [ — not that their nature perishes in them, but that in 
them He alone is manifest Who alone truly is. And to surpass nature 
is this : that nature is not manifest, just as air, as we have often said, 
when full of light, is not manifest because the light prevails alone.] 
Therefore, that which is understood generally of the place and time 
of the universal creature will necessarily be understood of the special 
and individual places and times of its parts from the highest 
downwards. But according to the intelligence place in general and 
time in general are prior to all that is in them : therefore the 
knowledge of special and individual places and times is prior to 
those things which are understood in them as species and individuals. 
And thus it is concluded that place is simply the natural definition 
and mode and position of each creature, whether a general creature 
or a species, just as time is simply the beginning of the movement of 
things through generation from not-being into being, and the fixed 
measurements of this motion of changeable things until there shall 
come the enduring end in which all things shall be immutably at 
rest. 

A. The purpose of this reasoning is beginning to become clear, 
I think : for, as far as I can understand, it seeks to accomplish 
nothing else than to prove that place is simply the natural definition 
of each creature, within which it is wholly contained and beyond 

BOOK I 

75 

which it by no means extends : and from this it is given to 
understand that whether one call it place or limit or term or 
definition or circumscription, one and the same thing is denoted, 
namely, the confine of a finite creature. And although some think 
there are many kinds of definition, that alone and truly is to be 
named definition which is usually called by the Greeks ouai(b5r|(;, 
but by our writers essentialis : for others are either enumerations of 
the [intelligible] parts of the ouala, or corollaries drawn from 
outside by means of its accidents, or any kind of opinion about it 
whatsoever. But only the ouoid)5r|(; admits for purposes of definition 
that alone which fully completes the perfection of the nature it 
defines. For a definition, as Augustine says, admits nothing more 
and nothing less than that which it has undertaken to define; 
otherwise it is utterly faulty. 

N. You see it clearly. The foregoing argument seeks to show 
just what you have said. 

A. But I wonder and do not clearly see how the definition of 
each essence is said to be not within it but outside it, that is, how it 
can be said to be neither the whole nor a part of it. 

N. Be more attentive, then, so that you may learn this too. 

A. As much as the inner light allows. 

N. Tell me, pray : As all things are comprised in two genera — 
for everything which is said to be is either visible and perceived [or 
can be perceived] by the bodily senses, or is invisible and contem¬ 
plated [or can be contemplated] by the eye of the intelligence [either 
in itself or through something that is associated with it] — in which 
of the aforesaid genera do you consider definitions to be? 

A. That is an absurd question. For who among the truly wise 
would put place, or limit, or definition, or any kind of circum¬ 
scription within which each substance is confined, among the things 
which are accessible to the bodily senses, when he sees that the limits 
of the line or triangle or any plane or solid figure are incorporeal? 
[For the (geometrical) point, from which the line begins and in 
which it ends, is neither the line nor part of the line, but its limit, and 
therefore its place is not perceived by sense but thought of by the 
reason alone. The sensible point, on the other hand, is part of a line, 
but is not its beginning or its end. Similarly, the line itself also, 
rationally considered, is incorporeal, and is the beginning of a 
surface. The surface is incorporeal too, and is the end of the line but 
the beginning of a solid. But the solid also is incorporeal, and is the 

41 

What should 
be meant by 
a true 
definition 
483D 

484A 

Whether 
definitions 
are contained 
within the 
visibles or 
the invisibles 

484B 

42 

484C 

76 

PERIPHYSEON 

484D 

43 

Concerning 
the species 
of the 
invisibles 
485A 

485B 

end of the perfection of the whole. For whatever there is in these 
that bodily sense has managed to grasp, that is, any point or line or 
surface or solidity that is visible, surely consists of figures of 
incorporeal things, not their true substance, which is incorporeal.] 
And similarly in the case of natural bodies, whether they are sensible 
by the proper mixing of the elements of which they consist or elude 
mortal powers of perception by their fineness, the limits of their 
nature are perceived by the intellect alone. [For form, which 
contains all matter of bodies, is incorporeal. Matter itself, if one 
examines it carefully, is also built up of incorporeal qualities.] 

N. So you think that it is to the genus of the invisibles that 
definitions, which we have called the places of circumscribed things, 
belong? 

A. Indeed I think so, and there is nothing that I see more 
surely. 

N. You think rightly. But as the genus of the invisibles may in 
turn be divided into many species — for there are some of the 
invisibles which are understood and understand, some which are 
understood and do not understand, some which neither are under¬ 
stood nor understand — in which of these species do you think that 
definitions should be included? 

[A.] Surely in that which understands and is understood. For 
the act of defining is the act of a reasoning and understanding 
nature. 

N. There seems to be no alternative. For no nature that does 
not understand that it itself exists can define either a nature that is 
equal to itself or one that is its inferior. [For as to what is its 
superior, how can it get to know that when it cannot rise above the 
knowledge of itself?] 

A. Therefore the intellectual nature alone, which is constituted 
in man and angel, possesses the skill of definition. [But whether 
angel or man can define himself, or man angel, or angel man, is no 
small question : concerning which I desire to know your opinion. 

N. My opinion is that they can neither define themselves nor 
each other. For if man defines himself or the angel he is greater than 
himself or the angel. For that which defines is greater than that 
which is defined. The same argument applies to the angel. Therefore 
I think that these can only be defined by Him Who created them in 
His own image. 

BOOK I 

77 

A. From this argument I conclude that no other natures are 
defined by the rational mind than those which are inferior to itself, 
whether they be visible or invisible.] 

N. Whosoever says this does not stray [from the truth] ; and 
therefore wherever are the definitions of things that are defined, 
there too, surely, will be the places of things that are circumscribed. 
For from the reasons given above it results that place is definition 
and definition is place. 

A. It is evidently so. 

N. But the definitions [of bodies and of things devoid of 
reason] are nowhere but in the rational soul. In it therefore will also 
be the places of all things that are comprehended in place. But if the 
rational soul is incorporeal, which no wise man doubts, it is plain 
that whatever is understood in it must be incorporeal ; [and] place is 
understood in the soul, as has already been determined : therefore it 
is incorporeal. 

A. I see that this too is rightly concluded. [For whether the 
angelic nature contains the definitions of the things that are inferior 
to it, as Augustine seems to hold, for the angels are also believed to 
minister to the things that are below them, or whether it eternally 
contemplates the things that are above it, that is, the eternal causes 
of things, this argument holds. For he is not severed from the truth, 
as I see, who believes that the human mind, though still burdened 
with earthly fantasies, can comprehend the created causes of natures 
inferior to itself if he lives a pure life; but that the angelic (mind) 
seeks the eternal reasons of all things, and, moved by love, is ever 
drawing human nature towards the same. 

N. You perceive rightly.] Do you then see that place is simply 
the act of him who understands and by virtue of his understanding 
comprehends those things which he can comprehend, whether they 
be sensible or accessible (only) to the intellect? [However, if this is 
so,] then that which is defined is one thing and its definition is 
another. 

A. I see that they are different. But an intellect which under¬ 
stands itself seems to be the place of itself because it defines itself. 

N. It would not be unreasonable to say this either, if there is 
any intellect, after God, Who is called the Intellect of all things, that 
can understand itself. But if every intellect except God is defined not 
by itself but by that which is above it, no intellect will be the place of 

485C 
That the 
places, that 
is, the 
definitions, 
of bodies are 
compre¬ 
hended in 
the rational 
soul 

485D 

486A 

78 

PERIPHYSEON 

itself but will be placed within that which is above it. [And did we 
not agree a little earlier on that this must be so?] 

A. I think we must have a fuller discussion about this at 1 

44 another time. But now I should like to know whether the nature of | 

the mind which defines, that is, which comprehends within the place I 

of its knowledge everything which is understood by it, is different j 

from the place itself, or definition of the thing placed or defined. | 

486B N. I see that this is not unworthy of investigation either, for | 
many are in doubt about it. But since we see that the liberal arts 1 
which are constituted in the soul are different from the soul itself, 
which is a kind of subject of the arts, while the arts seem to be a kind 
of accidents which are inseparable from, and natural to, the soul, 
what hinders us from placing the method of defining among the 
arts, attaching it to the art of Dialectic, whose property is to divide 
and combine and distinguish the natures of all things which can be 
understood, and to allot each to its proper place, and therefore is 
usually called by the wise the true contemplation of things? For as 
in every rational and intellectual nature there are observed three 
things which are inseparable from one another and abide indes- 

486C tructibly for ever, I mean ouala and SOvapic; and evepyeia, that is. 
Essence, Power, and Operation — for according to St. Dionysius, 
these are eternally associated with one another [and are, as it were, 
one], and can neither be increased nor diminished, since they are 
immortal and immutable — does it not seem likely to you and 
consistent with sound reason that all the liberal arts should be held 
to be in that part which is called the evepycia, that is, the operation, 
of the soul? For it has been rightly sought out and found by the 
philosophers that the arts are eternal and are immutably attached to 
the soul forever, in such a way that they seem to be not some kind of 
accidents of it, but natural powers [and actions] which do not and 
could not withdraw from it, and which do not come from anywhere 
but are innate in it as part of its nature, so that it is doubtful whether 

486D it is the arts which confer eternity upon it because they are eternal 
and eternally associated with it so that it may be eternal, or whether 
it is by reason of the subject, which is the soul, that eternity is 
supplied to the arts (for the ouala and the Power and the Operation 
of the soul are eternal), or whether they coinhere in each other, all 
being eternal, in such a way that they cannot be separated from one 
another. 

45 A. To this argument, since it is true, I know of no one who 
would dare to object. [For each of your alternatives could be 

BOOK I 

79 

affirmed without coming into conflict with reason. But the one you 
put forward last is clearly more likely to be true than the others.] 
But to return to the same problem : it is not quite clear to me how 
ouala, whether in genera or species or individuals, can be defined, 
since in earlier arguments in this book it was agreed that it is 
incomprehensible to any bodily sense or to any intellect. 

N. Nobody can define ouala in itself or say what it is. But from 
the things which are inseparably associated with it and without 
which it cannot be, I mean from its place and time — for every 
ouala created out of nothing is local and temporal : local because it 
is after some manner since it is not infinite, temporal because it 
begins to be what it was not — , one can define only that it is. 
Therefore ouala is in no way defined as to what it is, but is defined 
that it is : for from place, as we have said, and from time and from 
other accidents which are understood to be either within it or 
outside, is given not what it is but only that it is ; and this could aptly 
be said of all ouala universally, the most general, the most special, 
and the intermediate kinds. For even the Cause of all things, which 
is God, is only known to be from the things created by Him, but by 
no inference from creatures can we understand what He is, and 
therefore only this definition can be predicated of God : that He is 
He Who is More-than-being. 

A. To this argument also none of those who are of sound 
understanding will, in my opinion, object. 

N. So now you see more clearly than daylight that those should 
be laughed at, or rather pitied, and therefore be recalled to a true 
discernment of things if they are willing, or should be left quite 
alone if they prefer to persist in their attitude, which is utterly 
inimical to truth, who hold the opinion that the parts of this visible 
world are the natural places of the other bodies which are constituted 
within them. For, to speak for example of my own body — because 
to suppose that the soul is contained within the corporeal spaces of 
this world would be quite outrageous — , if this air is its place, it 
follows that its place is the fourth part of it; for it is known to 
everyone that [every visible body] consists of four parts, namely, of 
fire, air, earth, and water. But nothing could be nearer to unreason 
than to suppose that the whole [of a body] is placed within a part of 
it. For the right view is that the whole comprehends all its parts but 
the part does not contain the whole. Also, if I should say that my 
body is in this air as in its place, it follows that it can have no fixed 
place [there]. For this air is constantly revolving about the earth. 

487A 

That no 
essence can 
be defined 
as to what it 
is but only 
that it is 

487B 

46 

487C 

The 

strongest 
arguments 
that no part 
of the world 
can be a place 

487D 

80 

PERIPHYSEON 

and therefore a body placed in it must have at one and the same time 
an innumerable number of places, which reason does not allow at 
all. For it has been proved by earlier arguments that place is at rest 
and is not varied by any motion. So just as whoever stands or sits or 
488A swims in a river cannot keep to that part of the river so as to be able 
to say that he occupies a fixed place in the river, since it is agreed 
that it is unceasingly flowing by, so no one ought to call this air the 
place of his body, for it is unceasingly mobile and at no moment of 
time is at rest. But if anyone should object to this argument that 
earth, because it is always at rest, is correctly called the place of 
bodies, let him likewise consider that earth is the matter of bodies. 
Concerning not their place. And who, if he uses his reason, would dare to say 
that the matter of bodies is the place of the same bodies? 
[— especially since matter in itself, if rationally considered, is 
neither in motion nor at rest. It is not in motion since it does not yet 
begin to be contained within a definite form — for it is through form 
that matter is moved ; without form it is immobile, according to the 
Greeks — for how will that be moved which is not yet limited by any 
488B place or fixed time? And it is not at rest because it does not yet 
possess the end of its perfection. For rest is the end of motion. But 
how can that be at rest which has not yet begun to move? How 
therefore can the matter of a body be the place of the body which is 
made from it, when even matter itself is not, in itself, circumscribed 
by any certain place or mode or form, (and) is not defined in any 
definite way save by negation ? For it is negatively defined as not 
being any one of the things that are, since it is from it that all the 
things that are created are believed to be made.] Again, if the parts 
of this visible world are the places of our bodies or of others, our 
places cannot be for ever. For when the body of an animal has 
decayed and its parts return in separation to their natural abodes 
488C from which each was taken, its place, air, for instance, or water or 
earth or fire, will no longer exist, but the individual parts of the one 
body become so mingled each with the element whose nature it 
shares that it is one <with> it [ — though they are not in their 
elements as one thing in another]. For that which is restored to air 
will be air, and is not, as it were, established in some place in the air 
[ — not that there is any confusion of bodies, but in nature’s 
admirable way each will possess its own part in each of the elements 
as a whole throughout the whole, not as a part in a part, so that at 
the time of the resurrection no one will receive what is not his own ; 
just as the light from many luminaries is joined together in such a 
way that there is in it no confusion and no separation. For while it 

BOOK I 

81 

appears to be one and the same light, yet each luminary possesses its 
own light not confused with the light of another, and yet in a 
wonderful way they all become a whole and produce a single light.] 
Therefore air is one thing and its place another. In the same way, I 
think, must be understood the case of the other elements and of the 
restoration to them of the parts of bodies that have decayed. And if 
so, it will necessarily follow either that these general parts of the 
world are not the places of the bodies they pervade [and compose] ; 
or that the bodies themselves have no definite place or have no place 
at all, which the nature of things and a true view of it do not allow us 
to concede. For no creature can be without its own definite and 
unchangeable place and its own fixed duration and limits of time, 
whether it be corporeal or incorporeal ; and that is why, as we have 
often said, these two, namely, place and time, are called by the 
philosophers d)v dveu, that is, “without which” ; for without these 
no creature which has its beginning by generation and subsists after 
some manner can exist. And to take the first example that comes to 
hand, if everything which surrounds a body is its place, then colour 
will be the place of a body, for there is no visible body which is not 
surrounded by the light of a colour. But if colour is the place of a 
coloured body, it will necessarily follow that a quality is the place of 
the body : but who is burdened with such appalling stupidity as to 
maintain that the quality of a body is the body’s place? But if the 
colour of a body is an incorporeal quality, and, being outside the 
body, surrounds it all about, that it is not its place will be evident to 
any wise man. On these grounds it is not allowed that this air or any 
other element of the world, although they surround the bodies that 
are placed within them, [can], for all that, by any means be their 
places. 

A. Enough has been said about this. But I think [a few words] 
should be said against those who think that the body and the body’s 
essence are one and the same, being so deceived that they have no 
doubt but that substance itself is corporeal and visible and tangible. 
For many, indeed almost all, labour under this error, not distin¬ 
guishing the natural differences of things. 

N. Nothing is more tedious than battling against stupidity. For 
before no authority does it admit defeat, by no reason is it 
convinced. But since stupidity is not equal in (all) men, and their 
minds are not (all) clouded to the same extent, I see that a few 
arguments must be brought against them. 

488D 

489A 

That no 
creature is 
without 
place and 
time 

489B 

47 

What the 
difference is 
between a 
body and its 
essence 

489C 

82 

PERIPHYSEON 

489D 

490A 

48 
That 
essence and 
490B 
power and 
natural 
operation are 
in every 
creature 
inseparable 

A. Certainly they must. For if they profit from them there will 
be gain, but if not, we shall ourselves, from the exercise of our 
discussion, obtain a firmer grip on these distinctions of natures. 

N. Let us then carefully consider these few of the many 
syllogisms of Dialectic : Every body which is composed of matter 
and form, since it can be dissolved, is corruptible ; but mortal body 
is composed of matter and form ; therefore it is corruptible. [Again] 
every ouaia is simple and admits no composition of matter and 
form, since it is an indivisible unity ; therefore no ouala is reasonably 
allowed to be a mortal body. [Now this is said because every ouola, 
although it is understood to be composed of essence and essential 
difference — for this is a compositeness which no incorporeal 
essence can be without, for even the Divine Ouaia itself which is 
held to be not only simple but more-than-simple admits essential 
difference, because there is <in it> the Unbegotten, the Begotten, 
and the Proceeding <Substance> — , nevertheless this compo¬ 
siteness, which is recognizable by the reason alone and which 
demonstrably comes about by no act or operation, is reasonably 
considered a simplicity.] But for a firmer assurance that ouala, that 
is, essence, is incorruptible, read the book of St. Dionysius the 
Areopagite “On the Divine Names” at that place where he deals 
with the nature of demons and their wickedness [(saying) that it can 
corrupt no essence of either themselves or others] and you will find 
that he argues very subtly that nothing of the things that are, in so 
far as it is an essence and a nature, can by any means be corrupted. 
For there are these three things which in every creature, whether 
corporeal or incorporeal, as he himself demonstrates by the surest 
arguments, are incorruptible [and inseparable] : ouaia, as we have 
often said, 50vapiq, evepyeia, that is. Essence, Power, its natural 
Operation. 

A. [I request an illustration of these three. 

N. There is no nature, whether rational or intellectual, which 
does not know that it is, although it may not know what it is. 

A. This I do not doubt. 

N. Thus, when I say, “I understand that I am”, do I not imply 
in this single verb, “understand”, three (meanings) which cannot be 
separated from each other? For I show that I am, and that I can 
understand that I am, and that I do understand that I am. Do you 
not see that by the one verb are denoted my ouaia and my power, 
and my act ? For I would not understand if I were not, nor would I 

BOOK I 

83 

understand if I lacked the power of understanding, nor does that 
power remain latent in me, but breaks forth in the operation of 
understanding. 

A.] True and truthlike. 

N. Then must not those who say that the material body is an 
ouala either confess that their body is not composed of form and 
matter but is an incorruptible ouala ; or be compelled by truth to 
admit that their body is corruptible and material, and therefore not 
an ouoia? 

A. Surely they must. But you seem to me to be denying not 
that every body in general is an ouoia, but only every body which is 
composed of matter and form. 

N. Listen carefully then, so that you may judge that I was not 
speaking of some species of bodies but generally of every body, 
although I mentioned the special case of the body which is 
composed of form and matter for the purpose of the present inquiry 
directed against those who <say> that their mortal and transient 
bodies are nothing else than their ouala, and that their ouala is 
nothing else but their body, which is material and composed of 
different (parts), namely, of form and matter [and the various 
accidents]. But that you may learn for certain that it is universally 
true that no body is an ouala, take the following kind of argument. 

A. I will. But I see that first we must have some kind of regular 
form for this argument. For the foregoing reasoning was more like 
an argument from contraries than the model of a dialectical 
syllogism. 

N. Let this be the main theme : Whether ouala is a corruptible 
body. All ouala is incorruptible ; nothing incorruptible is a material 
body : therefore no ouala is a material body. And conversely : 
therefore no material body is an ouala. Again : No body which is 
composed of form and matter is simple; but all ouala is simple: 
therefore no body composed of form and matter is an ouala. 
[Again : All men have one and the same ouala — for all participate 
in one essence, and therefore because it is common to all it is the 
property of none — ; but body is not common to all men — for each 
possesses his own proper body — : therefore ouala is not common 
and at the same time a body ; but it is common : therefore it is not a 
body. The same is evidently true with regard to the other animals 
and to inanimate creatures.] 

490C 

490D 

49 

491A 

Very acute 
arguments 
concerning 
the distinc¬ 
tion between 
body and 
essence 

491B 

84 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. This formula answers the purpose. Return [pray] to the 
general type of argument which you promised [whereby it is 
concluded that no body is an ouaia]. 

N. Everything which is comprehended within length, breadth, 
and depth, since it is enclosed in diverse kinds of dimension, is a 
body, while that which admits none of these dimensions because it is 
one and simple and cannot admit into its nature any motion 
through space is necessarily incorporeal ; but ouala is not extended 
in length or breadth or depth, and because it remains indivisible in 
491C the simplicity of its nature is incorporeal ; therefore no ouala, being 
without dimension, is corporeal, just as no body, being extended in 
space, is an ouala. 

A. I should like this too to be put in the shape of a regular 
dialectical formula. 

491D 

492A 

Examples of 
essence and 
body 

N. Let it be then the conditional form of syllogism, thus : Main 
theme : Whether ouala is a body. If ouala is a body it admits the 
dimensions of length, breadth, and depth ; but ouala does not admit 
length, breadth, and depth : therefore it is not a body. But if you 
wish to hear the syllogism of EvOupppa, that is, of the common 
concept of the mind, which holds the primacy of all conclusions 
because it is deduced from those things which cannot be at the same 
time, take a formula of this kind : (A thing) is not both ouala and 
not incorporeal ; but it is ouala : therefore it is incorporeal : for it 
cannot be simultaneously (true) that it is ouala and that it is not 
incorporeal. Again : (A thing) is not both ouala and a body ; but it is 
ouala : therefore it is not a body. Again : (It is) not (true that a 
thing) is not both ouala and incorporeal ; but it is ouala : therefore 
it is incorporeal. There is therefore a very strong proof by which it is 
recognized that body is one thing and ouala is another : for ouala is 
divided into genera and species, while a body is separated 2ts a whole 
into its parts. Again, a body is not a whole in (any of) its parts, for 
the whole body is not comprehended in the head or in the hands and 
feet, and it is greater in the sum of all its parts, but less in each of its 
parts when they are not taken together; while ouala, on the other 
hand, is whole in each of its forms and species, and is not greater in 
the sum of them when they are gathered together, nor smaller in 
each of them when they are separated from each other. For it is not 
more extensive in the most general genus than in the most specified 
species, nor less in the most specified species than in the most general 
genus ; and, to take an example, ouala is not greater in all men than 
in one man, nor smaller in one man than in all men ; it is not greater 

BOOK I 

85 

in the genus in which all species of animals are one than in man 
[alone], or ox, or horse ; nor is it smaller in any one of these species 
than in all of them together. Again, a body can be cut up into parts 
so that its whole perishes : for instance, when it is resolved into those 
elements from which it is produced when they come together and 
form is added to them, it perishes as a whole. For when the parts are 
not together and are not contained within their proper form, by no 
act or operation can there be in anything a whole existing together, 
although they (i.e. the parts) can be conceived together in the 
thought of one who considers the natures of things. [But it is one 
thing to be together in the reason’s contemplation of nature, which 
always gathers together all things in the intellect and comprehends 
them inseparably as a whole ; another thing, what is effected by the 
operation of the agent or the passivity of the patient in the way of 
separation or collection of sensible parts. For the reason of all 
numbers is in undistributed unity, and can neither be increased nor 
diminished, but corporeal or imaginary numbers can be both 
increased to infinity and reduced until they are almost nothing.] On 
the other hand, ouola, although, by the reason alone, it is divided 
into its genera and species and individuals, nevertheless remains 
indivisible by virtue of its nature and cannot be separated by any 
visible act or operation. For it subsists in its subdivisions eternally 
and immutably as a whole that is always together, and all its 
subdivisions are always together as an inseparable unity in it. And 
therefore although a body, which is nothing else but the quantity of 
ouola, or, to speak more accurately, not the quantity but a 
quantum, can be separated into parts by an act and operation or at 
least by suffering its own fragility, itself, that is, the ouala of which 
the body is a quantum, remains immortal and inseparable by virtue 
of its proper nature. Now the reason why I added that a body is 
more rightly called a quantum than quantity is that those accidents 
which are called natural, when regarded in themselves as they 
naturally are, are incorporeal and invisible and are beheld only by 
the eye of reason (as being) about ouala itself or within it and are, as 
it were, causes having their effects, as quantity itself and quality are 
[the cause of a quantum and a quale] and the other genera of 
accidents, of which I think we have said enough [(that is) that 
whereas they are invisible, they produce visible effects]. Therefore a 
body is not the quantity of ouala, but a quantum, just as the visible 
colour which is perceived about a body is not the quality of ouala, 
but a quale constituted in a quantum, and so forth. I thought we 
might also introduce into our little discussion a sentence of the holy 

492B 

492C 

How ysia 
is divided 
although it is 
indivisible 

Concerning 
the partition 
of the body 
while its 
492D 
oua'ia is 
inseparable 

50 

Concerning 
the invisible 
accidents 
which pro- 
493A 
duce their 
visible effects 

86 

PERIPHYSEON 

51 

493B 

493C 

What the 
493 D 
difference is 
between 
geometrical 
bodies and 
natural 
bodies, 
which by 
reason of 
their ouoia 
are real 

494A 

father Augustine from the book which he wrote on the “Categories” 
of Aristotle : “After the description of ouala” [he says], “seeing that 
a definition of it was impossible for the reasons I have recorded 
above, the next thing inevitably required was a definition of its 
accidents, of which the first is the quantum. Not without reason. 
For when we see anything it is necessary to estimate how much of it 
there is. But how much of it there is cannot be discovered unless it is 
surveyed under the application of measurement. If, then, one wishes 
to measure its length without regard to its breadth, length without 
breadth subjected to measure is called ypapiif) — not that there is 
any such thing as length without breadth, but because anyone who 
measures the length alone is said to measure a ypappf] . But when 
breadth is measured together with length it is called an CTTicpaveia, 
while if depth is brought into the measurement as well, altogether 
they constitute a body — but we do not take this body in the sense 
that we are used to take the natural (body) lest we should seem to be 
reverting to ouala.” This is said in order that we should know that 
these norms (of measuring) have their several existence in geo¬ 
metrical bodies, in which these three can be separately distinct ; but 
they are inseparably associated in natural bodies, in which only by 
the intellect can quantity be separated from ouala. For while one 
seems to be speaking of quantity, he is thought to be confusing 
things as though he were saying something about ouala. [[Do you 
see what it is that this master of the highest authority is saying? 
When, he says, someone seems to be discussing quantity, that is, the 
dimensions upon which a body is constructed, he is thought by 
those who believe that ouala is nothing else but the body which they 
see to be saying something about ouala itself.] If, then, geometrical 
bodies, which we contemplate only by the mind’s eye, and which we 
only manage to construct from the images in our memory, subsist in 
some ouala, then surely they are natural, and there is no difference 
between geometrical and natural bodies. But as it is, since we 
contemplate geometrical bodies with the mind alone, and since they 
do not subsist in any ouala and are therefore rightly called 
imaginary, while natural bodies are natural for the very reason that 
they subsist in their natural oualai, that is, their essences, and 
cannot exist without them, and therefore are true bodies — otherwise 
they would not be contemplated in natural things, but in the reason 
alone — , we are straightway given to understand that body is one 
thing and ouala another, since a body is sometimes without ouala 
and sometimes, so as to be a real body, is associated with ouala, 
without which it cannot become real but is merely a figure in the 

BOOK I 

87 

imagination ; while onala by no means requires a body in order to 
be since it subsists by itself.] I think enough has been said about 
these things. 

A. Quite enough. But, as I see, it remains for you briefly to 
discuss matter itself and form, of which you assert that material 
bodies are composed. For I think this must not be omitted, since it is 
not sufficiently clear to me whether it is the same form which 
underlies genus and which combines with matter to produce a body. 

N. Of the forms, some are understood in ouaia, others in 
quality ; but those which are in ouala are the substantial species of 
the genus. For of them genus is predicated because it subsists in 
them. For the genus, as we have often said, is whole in each of its 
forms, just as also the several forms are one in their genus ; and all 
these, that is, genera and forms, flow from the single source of ouaia 
and by a natural circulation return to it again. But the forms which 
are assigned to quality are properly called forms (only) in natural 
bodies, while in geometrical bodies they are called figures. For every 
geometrical body is comprised by spatial dimensions and figure 
alone, but by no substance. Every imaginary body is, of course, 
produced by the three general dimensions, namely, length, breadth, 
and depth, but not all geometrical bodies are circumscribed by one 
general figure. For some originate from the triangular figure, others 
from the quadrilateral, others from the pentagonal or from some 
other of the infinite number of polygons, others are developed from 
the circular surface; and thus, as far as the number of lines can 
progress from three onwards, so far can the manifold arrangement 
both of figures and surfaces be varied. Therefore the number of 
dimensions and lines in geometrical bodies is assigned to quantity: 
but the arrangement and position of sides and angles and the 
conditions of the surfaces are a property of quality, and this is called 
the geometrical form or, properly, figure. But as in natural bodies 
the number and distinction of their members are considered, 
whether they are separated by natural divisions or are naturally 
joined, nobody denies that these are the property of quantity; and 
that, on the other hand, the order and position of their natural parts 
or members are assigned to quality [and] are properly called form. 
For we say the form of man is standing upright and that of the other 
animals is stooping downwards. [Hence those are called deformed 
who do not possess a suitable harmony of their members or are 
deprived of the beauty of colour, which is produced in bodies from 
the fiery quality which is calor. For color stands for calor by the 

Concerning 

the 

differences 
of forms 

52 

494C 

What 
difference 
there is 
between 
quantity and 
quality in 
geometrical 
bodies 

Again, what 

difference 

there is in 

natural 

494D 

bodies 

between 

quantity and 

quality 

88 

Why colour 
is also called 
form 

495A 

What 
53 
495B 
difference 
there is 
between the 
form of ouaia 
and that of 
quality 

495C 

PERIPHYSEON 

change of a single letter, and forma is called after formum, that is, 
“hot”, by changing the syllabe -mum into -ma. For the men of old 
called a hot thing formum, whence also “forceps” get their name, 
formum capientes. We are also accustomed to call enormous those 
who exceed the natural measure of their limbs, as it were without 
norm, that is, without measure.] Do you not see that this consists 
not in the number and size of the members but in the position of the 
parts of the body [and in the light of its colour] ? Or does it seem to 
you otherwise? 

A. Not (otherwise), in my opinion. But how this difference is 
pertinent to the question we have set ourselves I am waiting to 
know. 

N. Was it not settled between us by the reasons given above 
that body is one thing and ouaia is another? 

A. Sufficiently and abundantly. 

N. So if by a natural distinction the quantity of a body is 
separated from the concept of its ouaia, although they are attached 
to each other in such a way that ouaia is the subject of quantity and 
of a given quantum, while quantity itself or the given quantum are 
accidents of ouaia, is it not clearer than day that the form which is 
beheld in ouaia not as an accident to it but as it itself is different 
from that which from quality in combination with quantity produces 
the perfect body ? 

A. Now I see your drift. 

N. Do you think that I mean that it is the essential form which, 
in combination with matter, produces the natural body? 

A. Certainly not that. Rather I see that it is what you do not 
mean. 

N. Pray tell me how. 

A. From the aforesaid distinction of forms, namely into 
essential forms and qualitative forms, you appear to me to suggest 
nothing else but that it is that form which is a species of quality that, 
when it is joined to matter, produces a body, of which the substance 
is ouaia. [For these three are found in all natural bodies : ouaia, 
quantity, quality ; but ouaia is always discerned by the intellect 
alone, for in nothing does it appear visibly. Quantity and quality, 
however, (inhere) invisibly in ouaia in such a way that they break 
forth into visibility in a quantum and a quale when by uniting with 
one another they compose a body.] For if the geometrical body, in 

BOOK I 

89 

which there is no ground of ouaia, is reasonably shown to consist 
only of the quantity of its dimensions and lines and the quality of its 
form, which is called figure, what objection is there to our saying 
that the natural body, whose permanence, in so far as it can be 
permanent, is grounded on the virtue of its ouola, is produced by 
that form which is brought from quality into conjunction with the 
quantity which is taken from matter? For I think that you are 
suggesting nothing else than that we should recognize that it is from 
the concourse and commingling of the four elements of this world 
that the matter of bodies is made, by which, when whatever form 
from quality is added, the finished body is produced. [For what is a 
difficulty for many is none for me. For they think we are going 
against ourselves and making affirmations which are contradictory 
and which conflict with our own opinion when at one point we say 
that matter is produced by the concourse of the four elements, at 
another that the cause of matter is the joining of quantity and 
quality to ouaia. Nor is this strange, for they do not know that the 
elements of this world are composed of nothing but the concourse of 
the aforesaid accidents of ouaia. For fire is produced by the 
conjunction of heat and dryness, air by that of heat and moisture, 
water by that of moisture and cold, earth by that of cold and 
dryness. And since these qualities which come together cannot by 
themselves become manifest, quantity supplies them with a quantum 
in which they can make a sensible appearance. For quantity is, as it 
were, a second subject after ouaia, and that is why it is placed first 
after it in the order of the categories, since without quantity quality 
cannot become manifest. Therefore, if the elements are made from 
quantity and quality, and the bodies are made from the elements, 
then bodies are (produced) from quantity and quality.] 

From what 
kind of 
495D 

matter and 
form, on the 
ground of 
ouaia, the 
body is 
produced 

496A 

496B 

N. Since [,then,] I perceive that you have accurately foreseen 
the end which I am pursuing, tell me, pray, whether you think this 
division of forms into two species each of a different genus, namely, 
forms of ouaia and forms of quality, to have been established or 
not. 

A. I think it is established, and likely to be true, although it is 
not without some mental reservation that I allow it to be reasonable. 
For you would more easily persuade me that it is the addition of 
substantial, rather than of qualitative, form to matter that produces 
a natural body. For I would more readily believe that the cause 
which produces the body is ouaia than that it is quality. [For it was 
established, I think, by reasons already given that quality is the 

90 

PERIPHYSEON 

496C cause not only of matter but of form, only that it produces matter by 
being mingled with quantity, while it is by itself alone that it casts 
form uppon matter — not that I do not know that a single cause 
produces out of itself many effects, for I see that from the single 
cause of fire breaks forth heat as well as light, and that light in turn 
is the cause of brightness and of shadows. Again : how many 
different bodies are made from one and the same matter ! Into how 
many individuals is one form multiplied ! And so forth — and 
therefore I should think that ouala itself, and not its accidents, 
becomes the form to matter.] 

N. I very much wonder why what was clearly agreed between 
us just before has slipped from your memory. Consider, then, more 
carefully, and I will go over it again briefly. 

A. I am ready. Go over it again. 

N. Was it not definitely agreed between us that ouala is 
incorporeal ? 

A. Yes. 

496D N. And I should certainly assume that you have not yet 
forgotten that quantities and qualities, in so far as they are 
contemplated in themselves, are incorporeal, and do not subsist in 
any subject save ouala, of which they are the accidents, and that 
they abide in it inseparably. 

A. To this too I firmly hold. 

497A N. Must we not, then, say that it is probable that whatever 

results from quantity and quality, that is, every quantum and every 
quale, receives the cause of its establishment from no other source 
than ouala itself, to which quantity and quality themselves are 
shown naturally to occur, as its first and greatest accidents, and 
without which they cannot be? For I see no reason why whatever 
proceeds from those things which are in the source should not be 
traced back to that very source — especially as ouala itself, in so far 
as it is ouala, can by no means possess a visible or tangible or 
spatially extended appearance, but it is the concourse of the 
accidents which are in it or which are understood about it which, by 
coming into being, is able to create something sensible and extended 
in space. For quantity and quality combine together to produce a 
quantum and quale, and these two, combining together and receiving 
generation in a certain mode and at a certain time, manifest the 

497B finished body ; for the other accidents appear to be added to these. 

BOOK I 

For there are these four principal questions which we ask about our 
bodies and about those of others [whether animate or inanimate] : 
How much is there of it? Of what parts is it made up — is it 
extended in the dimensions of length and breadth and depth? Of 
what sort is it — of upright and human form, or of stooping and 
animal? At what time was it born, or after what mode is it defined 
and established in itself so that it may not be infinite but a unity 
confined within its own genus? These things, as we have said, are 
primordially observed in our bodies; but by inquiring further 
beyond these we contemplate, in a loftier consideration, its ouala, 
which is the source of substantial forms. For we say : of what 
oi)aid)5r|(;, that is, substantial, form is this or that body? Is it of 
human form, or equine [or that of some other irrational animal 
included within ouola]? For by these names it is not the bodies of 
the animals that are denoted, but [their] substantial forms. For 
whether we are considering ourselves or other animals, there are 
three things which we ought to know distinctly : what we are ; what 
is ours ; what is about us. We are our substance, which is endowed 
with life and intellect [beyond our body and all its senses and its 
visible form]. Ours, [but] not our own self, is the body which is 
attached to us and composed of a quantum and a quale and the 
other accidents, and is sensible [mutable, dissoluble, corruptible; 
and the truest thing to say of it is that it is nothing else but the 
organs or seats of the senses, which are called by the Greeks 
aia0r|Tf)pia, that is, ala0f|a8cov ifjpia, “keepers of the senses”. For 
as the soul is incorporeal and unable to reveal her operations by 
herself without the senses, and the senses themselves are ineffective 
unless they are kept in certain seats, the Creator of nature created 
for the use of the soul a body in which she might keep certain 
vehicles of hers, so to speak ; that is, the senses]. About us are all the 
sensible things of which we make use, such as the four elements of 
this world and the bodies which are composed out of them. For our 
mortal bodies cannot survive without them. For they feed upon 
earth, they drink water, they breathe air, they are warmed by fire. 
Two bestow growth and nourishment: earth and water; two 
provide life : air and fire. Two are passive, in so far as they pass into 
the body : earth and water ; two are active, in so far as they kindle 
the furnace of the body : air and fire. For the power of fire, whose 
seat is in the heart, distributes the subtle exhalation of food and 
drink by hidden channels to the different parts of the body, and 
separates off the excrement into the privy. But unless the fire itself is 
fanned by the breath of air and fed by food and drink, as though it 

91 

Four things 
ought to be 
considered in 
every body 

Of every 
body it must 
be asked of 
what sub¬ 
stantial form 
497C 
it is 

54 

What we are 

What is ours 

497D 

498A 
What is 
about us 

92 

PERIPHYSEON 

498 B 

55 

How visible 
bodies are 
made from 
invisible 
things 

498C 

56 
498 D 

499A 

were by kindling wood, it quickly goes out, and without delay the 
whole frame of the body crumbles and falls and grows numb since 
the cold overcomes the strength of the heat. But the place for 
discussing these things is elsewhere. 

A. I accept this as probable. But I do not cease to ask myself of 
what kind their meeting with one another can be, how things that 
are incorporeal and invisible in themselves, by coming together with 
one another, produce visible bodies, so that matter is nothing else, 
and has no other cause for its establishment, but the tempered 
mixture, among themselves in themselves and not in another, of 
things which are contemplated by the eye of wisdom alone — 
especially as the great Boethius, outstanding among the philosophers 
of either tongue, asserts in his books “On Arithmetic” as follows : 
“Wisdom is the comprehension of the truth of the things which are 
and possess their own immutable substance. Now we say that those 
things are which neither increase by expansion nor diminish by 
contraction nor change by variation, but ever preserve themselves in 
their own vigour by relying upon the resources of their own nature. 
Now these are : qualities, quantities, forms, magnitudes, small¬ 
nesses, equalities, conditions, acts, dispositions, places, times, and 
whatever is found united in some manner to bodies, which, although 
they are themselves incorporeal by nature, and vigorous by reason 
of (their) immutable substance, yet are changed by the participation 
of body, and at the touch of a variable thing pass into mutable 
inconstancy. These, then, possessing by nature, as has been said, 
immutable substance and force, are truly and properly said to be.” 
Does not this opinion give us clearly to understand that matter and 
the body that is made out of it are something different from quantity 
and quality and the other things which are contemplated only by 
wisdom and which eternally preserve the immutable power of their 
nature, while the matter and body of which they are the accidents 
are diverse and unstable as a result of variable change? 

For, why : does it not seem likely that if matter consisted of the 
coming together of quantity and quality and the other natural 
accidents, it would of necessity also itself be immutable ? For why is 
what is understood of the causes not also understood of their effects, 
so that, as the quantities and qualities and other like things are 
beheld by the eye of the mind alone, so too matter and body are 
subject not to the bodily senses but to the intellect? But as it is, we 
perceive the formed matter of which the body is made with the 
bodily sense [for the unformed (matter) is nothing but intelligible]. 

BOOK I 

93 

although we perceive quantity and quality only by the intellect. How 
then can quantity and quality produce matter, which is something 
very different from them? 

N. You are seriously misled, or wish to mislead others, by a 
false argument. But whether you yourself are in doubt about these 
things or are assuming the role of others who are in doubt about 
them I am not yet sure. 

A. I see that each is the case with me. For I was both concerned 499B 
to put this question on behalf of others who justifiably are either 
uncertain about such matters or are wholly ignorant of them, and I 
see that I too am not so clear about them that I have no further 
inquiry to make into the matter. 

N. I think, then, that reason and authority must be brought to 
bear in order that you may be fully clear about these things. For on 
these two is based the whole ability of discovering the truth of 
things. 

A. Indeed they must. For these questions have been asked by 
many, but few have found the answer. 

N. Say then : what do you think about the matter itself from 
which, when it is formed, bodies are made? By itself, when it is 
unformed, is it contemplated by sense or by reason? 

A. Surely by reason. For I dare not say by sense, since matter 
which lacks form cannot be grasped by any corporeal sense. 

N. You have answered correctly. But see that you do not again 499C 
question us further about what you have now assumed. For we are 
wasting too much time over such matters when others more 
important await our consideration. 

A. Concerning what has now been defined between us by pure Concerning 
speculation I shall not, I think, trouble you further. But I keep 
wondering at your having said that more important matters await 
our consideration : for what should be more important, after God, 
for the reason to consider than unformed matter I do not see, when 
the questions it raises are : What is matter? What is form? What is 
made from matter and form? Whence (comes) matter? Is it to be 
included among the primordial causes which were created by God 
first of all, or even from the secondary causes which proceed from 
the primordials? Is it to be reckoned among the things which are 
subject to the senses or among those which are to be allotted to the 499D 
intellect? And can it be defined when it is still infinite or is it 

PERIPHYSEON 

definable even when it is finite? — which seems to conflict with 
reason, since it has been clearly established by the holy fathers that 
there are two, and two only, that cannot be defined, God and 
matter. For God is without limit and without form since He is 
500A formed by none, being the Form of all things. Similarly matter is 
without form and without limit, for it needs to be formed and 
limited from elsewhere, while in itself it is not form but something 
that can receive form. And this similarity between the Cause of all 
things, from which and in which and through which and for which 
all things exist, and this unformed cause — I mean matter — which 
was created to the end that those things which in themselves cannot 
be grasped by the senses might by some means have a sensible 
appearance in it, is understood in contrary sense. For the supreme 
Cause of all things is without form and limit because of its eminence 
above all forms and limits. For it is not only the principal Form of 
all things, but More-than-form, surpassing every form and forming 
everything that can receive form [and everything that cannot]. [For 
it is both the Form of the things that can be formed, because they 
either desire it or turn to it, and the Formlessness of those things 
500B which, because of the excellence of their nature and their close 
similarity to itself, namely their Cause, cannot be formed. For this 
Formlessness of the things that cannot be formed is not called 
formlessness as if it lacked form, but because it is above every 
sensible and intelligible form : and that is why this Cause of all 
things is usually predicated both affirmatively and negatively : it is 
Form ; it is not Form : it is Formlessness ; it is not Formlessness. For 
whatever is predicated of it can be both affirmed and denied, 
because it is above everything that can be said and that can be 
understood and that cannot be understood.] Matter, on the other 
hand, is called formless by reason of its being deprived of all forms. 
For by it nothing is formed, but it receives different forms. 

500C N. You are not far from the truth. Does it not therefore 
necessarily follow that since formless matter is beheld only by the 
eye of the mind, I mean by the reason, it is incorporeal? 

A. Not even this would I dare to deny. 

N. It is incorporeal, then ? 

A. It is indeed. I see that I am caught in my own judgement. 

N. Do you wish this to be confirmed by authority? 

A. Very much, and I pray that this be done. 

BOOK I 

95 

N. We find that many of those proficient in both profane and 
sacred wisdom have treated of matter, but it is enough to rely on the 
testimony of a few. St. Augustine in his book of “Confessions” 
asserts that formless matter is the mutability of mutable things 
which is receptive of all forms : and with this Plato agrees in the 
“Timaeus”, saying in similar language that formless matter is the 
receptivity of forms. From the unanimity of these two it can be 
defined in these words : Formless matter is the mutability of 
mutable things, receptive of all forms. St. Dionysius the Areopagite 
in his book “On the Divine Names” says that matter is participation 
in adornment and form and species, for without these [matter] is 
formless and cannot be understood in anything. And from what 
Dionysius says can be gathered the following : if matter is partici¬ 
pation in adornment and form and species, that which lacks 
participation in adornment and form and species is not matter but a 
certain formlessness. Therefore, whether formless matter is a muta¬ 
bility receptive of forms, as Augustine and Plato say, or a form¬ 
lessness which lacks participation in species and form and adorn¬ 
ment, as Dionysius says, you will not deny, I think, that if it can be 
understood at all, it is perceived only by the intellect. 

57 

Concerning 

formless 

matter 

500D 

50IA 

A. I have long agreed that this is undeniable. 

N. Again, do you think that the species and form and adorn¬ 
ments themselves, by participation in which that formlessness or 
mutability we mentioned is changed into matter, is considered by 
any other means than by the eye of the mind? 

A. By no means. For as to form and species, without which 
there can be no adornment, it has been sufficiently demonstrated by 501B 
the reasons given above that they are wholly incorporeal. 

N. So now you see that from incorporeal things, namely 
mutable formlessness which yet is receptive of forms, and form 
itself, something corporeal, namely matter and body, is created. 

A. I see it clearly. 

N. You admit, then, that bodies can be made from the 
concourse of incorporeal things? 

A. I admit it, since I am compelled by reason. 

N. Surely you must confess, since this is so, that bodies can be 58 
resolved into incorporeal things so as not to be bodies (any more) 
but wholly dissolved ; while incorporeal things by their natural 
concourse and marvellous harmony produce bodies in such a way 

96 

PERIPHYSEON 

501C 

Concerning 

shadow 

501D 

59 

502A 

He confirms 
what he said 
before, that 
bodies are 
produced 
from the 
502B 
concourse of 
accidents 

that they do not by any means lose their natural state and 
unchanging vigour, just as, to employ a simile, shadow is produced 
from light and body, and yet neither the light nor the body is 
changed into shadow ; shadow, on the other hand, when it vanishes, 
is understood to return into its causes, namely into body and light. 
For the right view is that the cause of shadows is body and light, in 
which their nature is latent because they have no place in which they 
can appear on account of the brightness of the light which surrounds 
the bodies on all sides. For they are wrong who think that shadow 
perishes when it is not apparent to the senses. For shadow is not 
nothing, it is something. If it were not so Scripture would not say, 
“And God called the light day and the darkness night”, for God 
does not give a name to anything that is not from Himself. Nor in 
that passage does the loftiness of the theory obscure the truth of the 
history. [For if the actual events are there considered, we hold that 
darkness and night are nothing else but the earth’s shadow cast by 
the rays of the sun that are poured around it, shaped like a cone, and 
always pointing away from the globe of light. And the same is true 
of lesser shadows by whatsoever kind of light and bodies they are 
projected, whether (the shadows) are finite or infinite and of 
whatever shape they are.] Do not then be surprised that bodies are 
created from incorporeal causes and are resolved into them again, 
while the causes themselves are created by, and proceed from, one 
and the same Cause that is creative of all things. For from the Form 
of all things, namely, the only-begotten Word of the Father, every 
form is created, whether it be substantial or the kind which derives 
from quality and in union with matter generates body. From the 
same source also comes every formlessness. Nor is it surprising that 
from the Form which is formless because of its eminence should 
come to be created the formlessness which is due to the privation of 
all forms, when not only homogeneous but also heterogeneous 
things, that is, not only things of a single genus but also things of 
differing genus, and not only those that are said to be or not to be 
because of their eminence, but also those of which this is said on 
account of privation, flow from the same Source of all things. For, 
why : is it not now quite clear to you that it was not without reason 
that we said, on the authority of St. Gregory of Nyssa, that bodies 
are made from the concourse of accidents, when you see that other 
authors, both Greek and Latin, assert that bodies are made from 
incorporeal things? And that was why I decided to introduce into 
our discussion the assumption of the aforesaid father Gregory. For, 
disputing with those who say that matter is co-eternal with God, he 

BOOK I 

97 

says in the book “On the Image” : “Nor does that opinion concern¬ 
ing matter which teaches that it has its subsistence from the 
intellectual and the immaterial seem to be inconsistent with what is 
deduced from what follows. For we find that all matter is produced 
from certain qualities, and that if it is divested of these it will by no 
means be comprehended by itself. Nevertheless, each species of 
quality is separated from its subject by reason. But reason is an 
intellectual and incorporeal speculation. Thus, when some animal 
or piece of wood or anything else of the things which have the 
constitution of material things is submitted to our speculation, we 
get to know many things about the subject by way of division by the 502C 
intelligence, each of which is related unconfusedly to what is being 
considered. For to take into account its colour is one thing, its 
weight another; another again its quantity, and another, the 
particular way it feels to the touch. For softness, and two-cubit 
length, and the other things that have been mentioned are not, from 
the point of view of reason, confused with one another or with the 
body. For in each of these is understood its special cause with regard 
to which it is interpretative, and none” [of these (causes)] “which 
are considered about the subject is confused with any other quality. 

If, then, colour is (solely) intelligible, and if solidity is (solely) 
intelligible, and quantity, and the other peculiarities of this kind, 
and if when any of these is withdrawn from the subject the whole 
concept of the body shall disappear as well, it will follow (for us) to 502D 
assume that, of those things whose absence we find to be the cause 
of the dissolution of the body, the coming together creates its 
material nature. For as there is no body in which ‘thing’,” [that is], A very clear 
ouola, “and shape and solidity and extension and weight and the argument 
rest of the peculiarities are not present — yet none of these is a body the co*n-”^ 
but something else which is found to be apart beside the body — so, course of the 
on the other hand, when the aforesaid things come together, they accidents 
produce the corporeal substance. But if the understanding of 
peculiarities is intelligible, and if God also is an intelligible nature, it 503A 
is not at all inconsistent that these intellectual causes are supplied to 
the coming into being of the bodies from the incorporeal Nature, the 
intellectual Nature supplying the intelligible powers, and the coming 
together of these with one another producing the generation of the^ 
material nature.” Do you not then see that this Doctor’s excellent 60 
and very powerful argument [clinches the matter] ? [For] if the body 
were something else besides the concourse of the accidents of ouala, 
when these were withdrawn it would subsist in itself by itself. For no 
subject which subsists by itself requires accidents in order that it 

98 

PERIPHYSEON 

503B 

That body 
cannot sub¬ 
sist by itself 
without its 
accidents 

61 

503C 

503D 

504A 

may be. Such a subject is ouala itself : for whether it has accidents or 
does not have them, whether there are in it things which cannot exist 
without it or whether things which, either by thought alone or by act 
and operation, can be separated from it withdraw from it, it always 
subsists without change by its own natural resources. But body, 
when the accidents are withdrawn, can by no means subsist by itself 
since it is not supported by any substance of its own. For if you 
withdraw quantity from body it will not be a body; for it is held 
together by the dimensions and number of its members. Similarly if 
you take quality away from it, what is left will be shapeless and 
nothing. The same view must be taken of the other accidents by 
which the body is seen to be held together. So that which cannot 
subsist by itself without accidents must be understood to be nothing 
else but the concourse of those same accidents. [So what is strange 
or contrary to reason in taking the excellent Boethius likewise to 
have understood by “the variable thing” nothing else but the 
material body which is constituted, as he says, from the concourse 
of things which really are ; and (that) as long as they are considered 
in it they must necessarily suffer a certain mutability? Nor is it 
strange that things which by themselves are immutable will be 
observed otherwise in their simplicity by the pure gaze of the mind 
than they will be seen by the bodily sense in their composition in 
some matter made from their own commingling, since we see that 
those things which are simple and incorruptible by themselves 
produce, when they come together with one another, something 
composite and corruptible. For who does not know that this mass of 
the earthly globe is made up of four simple elements, and that while 
it is corruptible and dissoluble, those elements from which it is 
produced all the same remain in their indissoluble simplicity? And 
this relation can be generally applied to almost all bodies.] And I 
think enough has been said about these matters. 

A. Enough, surely. And I see that we must now return to a 
consideration of the rest of the categories. For there is no doubt that 
to hesitate longer over these matters is the mark of those who 
understand too little of the natures of things; and therefore I feel 
shame and regret for my slowness on many occasions. 

N. Do not feel shame or regret. For although the subjects we 
are discussing are so clear to the wise that none of them would feel 
uncertain about them, I have no doubt that (such discussions) are 
useful to the uninstructed and to those who are taking the path of 
reason from lower to higher planes. 

BOOK I 

99 

A. By no means is it to be doubted, and I see that this is the 
case with me. Go on to the rest. 

N. Two categories remain for examination unless I am mis- 62 
taken, namely, those of acting and suffering. For in discussing place 
we said something of time as well — as much as was required for the 
purpose of the present inquiry. 

A. I am not now asking anything further about time or place, 
for what has been said about these is sufficient. For if one says 
concerning each (subject) everything that reason seeks to be consi¬ 
dered, the discussion will scarcely, if ever, come to an end. 

N. Consider, then : are action and passion predicated of God, 
or is it to be held that, as in the case of the other categories, they are 
employed metaphorically? 

Concerning 
acting and 
suffering 

A. Metaphorically, surely. For is it to be thought that these 504B 
two override the rules that bind the others when they are seen to be 
of slighter power? 

N. Tell me, pray, how does it seem to you? Are not moving 
and being moved an acting and suffering? 

A. I see that it is not otherwise. 

N. Similarly, I think, loving and being loved? 

A. They come under the same rule : that these verbs and their 
like are actives and passives no one instructed in the liberal arts is 
ignorant. 

N. If then these verbs, whether they are active or passive in 
meaning, are no longer properly predicated of God, but meta¬ 
phorically, and if nothing that is predicated metaphorically is said of 
Him in very truth but after a certain manner, then in very truth God 
neither acts nor is acted upon, neither moves nor is moved, neither 
loves nor is loved. 

A. This last inference requires not a little looking into. For 
against it, as I think, there seems to be ranged the authority of the 504C 
whole of Holy Scripture and of the Holy Fathers. For how often, as 
you know, does Holy Scripture explicitly affirm that God acts and 
suffers, loves and is loved, desires and is desired, sees and is seen, 
moves and is moved, and all else of this sort. The instances of these 
(expressions) I have decided to omit lest they should lead to 
prolixity, seeing that they are innumerable and occur everywhere to 
anyone who seeks them ; and the use of this single example from the 

PERIPHYSEON 

504D 

505A 

505B 

Gospel is sufficient : “Whoso loveth Me shall be loved by My Father 
and I shall love him and shall reveal Myself to him.” Again, 
St. Augustine in his Hexemeron, discussing the divine motion, has 
uttered these words: “Now the Spirit that creates moves itself 
without time and place ; it moves the spirit that is created through 
time without place ; it moves the body through time and place.” If, 
then, acting and suffering are predicated of God not in very truth, 
that is, not properly, as we said above, it follows that neither are 
moving or being moved. For to move is to act, while to be moved is 
to suffer. Further, if He neither acts nor suffers how is He said to 
love all things and to be loved by all things which were made by 
Him? For loving is a motion of the agent, while being loved is the 
cause and the end of the motion of the patient. [But here I am 
speaking after the common usage. For if one looks into the nature 
of things more closely one will find that many verbs which have a 
merely superficial appearance of being active because of their 
sound, yet in their meaning have a passive sense; and on the other 
hand what is superficially passive has an active sense. For he who 
loves or desires suffers himself, while he who is loved or desired 
acts.] But if God loves what He makes He is surely seen to be 
moved ; for He is moved by His love. And if He is loved by those 
who can love whether they know what they love or do not know it, 
is it not certain that He moves (them)? For it is the love of His 
beauty that moves them. Therefore how it is said that He neither 
moves nor is moved lest it should appear that He acts and suffers is 
something I cannot find out by myself, and therefore the more 
insistently demand that you untie the knot of this question. 

N. Do you think that, in those who act, the agent is one thing, 
the ability to act is another, and the acting another, or that they are 
one and the same? 

A. My opinion is that they are not one, but three, differing 
from each other. For the lover, that is, he who loves, is a substance' 
of a certain definite person, who has an accident of a certain potency 
by which this substance can act whether he does so or not; while if 
this substance moves itself by means of this potency so as to perform 
some act he is said to act. And thus there are seen to be three things, 
namely, a substance, and the potency to act that is in it, and the 
acting out of this potency upon some object, as the effect of some 
cause, whether this action be reflexive, that is, whether it turns back 
upon the same person, or whether it passes on to another. 

BOOK I 

N. You draw a correct distinction. How does it seem to you? 

Must not the same distinction be observed in him who suffers, so 
that the patient is one thing, the potency to suffering another, and 505C 
the suffering itself another, whether he suffers at his own hands or at 
another’s ? 

A. The same, surely. 

N. So these three are not of the same nature either in those who 
love or in those who are loved ? 

A. They are not, in my opinion. For substances have one 
nature, accidents another. For he who acts or suffers is a substance, 
but the potency of acting or suffering and the acting and suffering 
themselves are accidents. 

N. I wonder how you have forgotten the questions which arose 
and were answered, I think, and finally settled in our earlier 
discussions. 

A. Please prompt me, and call back to my memory what they 
were ; for I do not deny that I am heedless and forgetful through a 
defect of the memory which is forgetfulness. 

N. Do you remember that it has been deduced and concluded 
by us that ouala, Suvapic;, evepyeia, that is, essence (as we have 505D 
often said), power and operation, form an inseparable and incor¬ 
ruptible trinity in our nature which by the wonderful harmony of 
nature is so integrated with itself that the three are a unity and the 
unity is three, and that they are not as it were of diverse nature but 
of one and the same, not as a substance and its accidents but as an 
essential unity and substantial differentiation of three in one? 

A. I remember it and will never again commit it to oblivion. 

For to commit to oblivion the most apparent image of the Creator is 506A 
a most foolish and unfortunate thing to do. But I do not yet see 
where this is to lead, unless perhaps that when I was asked by you I 
replied that there were three things distinct from one another, one 
being in the nature of a subject while two are in the nature of 
accidents ; and these three seem to be very different from the 
previous three, and thus either only those three which we said were 
of one and the same substance truly exist, that is, essence, power, 
operation ; while those which I have now introduced, that is, 
substance and its accidents, namely, the possibility of acting and the 
effect of this possibility, which is acting, must be supposed to be 
superfluous and not to be deduced by reason ; or the reverse ; or again 

101 

102 

PERIPHYSEON 

506B 

Concerning 
the three¬ 
fold and 
universal 
essence and 
power and 
operation, 
especially of 
rational and 
intelligible 
natures ; and 
the trinity 
which can be 
considered in 
individuals 
506C 

506D 

507A 

63 

(which I think must be the more correct opinion), both the latter 
and the former exist in the nature of things and are distinguished by 
their own natural differences. But whether this is to be conceded or 
not, this I leave to your judgement to decide. 

N. What you proposed last seems to agree with right reason : 
for whoever says that the essential trinity, namely, essence, power, 
operation, is constantly and incorruptibly present in all natures and 
especially in rational and intellectual natures does not, I think, 
depart from the truth ; and this trinity cannot be increased or 
diminished in anything in which it is present. But the trinity that 
comes after it is understood to be as it were an effect of the 
preceding trinity. For it does not conflict with the truth, I think, if 
we say that from essence itself, which is created one and universal in 
all things and common to all things and therefore, because it 
belongs to all that participate in it, is said [to be] the property of 
none of the individuals that participate in it, there emanates by a 
natural progression a certain proper substance which belongs to no 
one else but to him only whose it is ; and furthermore this substance 
has its own possibility which derives from nowhere else but from the 
universal power itself of the aforesaid universal essence and virtue. 
Similarly with regard to the proper operation of the most particular 
substance and the most particular potency it must be said that it 
descends from nowhere else but from the universal operation itself 
of the [same] universal essence and universal power. Nor is it 
strange if these three which are considered in individuals are said to 
be a kind of accidents of the aforesaid universal trinity, [and] its first 
manifestations, since it itself is by itself one and immutably abides in 
all things which have their existence from it and in it, and cannot 
either increase or diminish or be destroyed or perish : while these 
which are most particularly considered in individuals can increase 
and diminish and vary in many ways. For not everyone participates 
in the universal essence and power and operation in the same way: 
some do so more, some less, but no one is totally deprived of 
participation in it. Furthermore, it itself remains one and the same in 
all that participate in it, and to no one does it make itself more or 
less available for participating in it, any more than light to the eyes. 
For it is whole in each of them and in itself. But to be increased or 
diminished is a falling short of or a perfecting of participation, and 
therefore is not unreasonably judged to be an accident. For that 
which is always what it is is rightly called the true substance, while 
that which is variable proceeds either from the mutability of an 

BOOK I 

103 

unstable substance or from participating in accidents, whether 
natural or not natural. And do not be surprised that some accidents 
are called substances because they act as the substances of other 
accidents, when you see that to quantity, which is undoubtedly an 
accident of substance, other accidents occur, such as colour which 
makes its appearance about quantity, and periods of time which are 
discerned in the limited movements of things. [For time is the exact 
and rational measurement of the stopping and going of mutable 
things.] 

Concerning 
the acci¬ 
dents of 
accidents 

The 
507B 
definition 
of time 

A. This, I think, is exactly what I was driving at. But I should 
like you to give a brief and clear outline of this last way of 
considering things. 

N. Let us, if you agree, assume that the triple understanding of 
things, that is, of essence, of power, of operation, is established by 
the Creator of all as the immutable subsistence and firm basis [of 
things]. 

A. It must be assumed, I think. 

N. Then that trinity which can be contemplated in individuals 
and which proceeds from the first essential trinity must be regarded,, 
as I see it, as the effect, as it were, of a preceding cause, and its 
primordial motions and a kind of primordial accidents. 

A. This too must be admitted. 

N. But whatever occurs to those three which come after, 
whether from within or from without, whether naturally or from 507C 
some chance events, is seen to come about, as it were, as an accident 
of accidents. 

A. Again, I do not object to this conclusion. For since, 
according to Aristotle, there are ten genera of things, which are 
called categories, that is, predicaments — and we find that none of 
the Greeks or the Latins oppose this division of things into genera 
— we see that all first essences, which the Greeks call oualai — 
rightly, because they are by themselves, and do not require anything 
in order that they may be ; for so they have been established by the 
Creator, like a kind of immutable foundations — are included under 
a single genus, and they subsist in their wonderful and unchanging 
trinity in the likeness of the principal Cause of all things, that is, as 
has often been said before, in essence, power, operation, while the 
other nine genera are said to be accidents — and not without 507D 
reason ; for they subsist not by themselves but in the aforesaid 

PERIPHYSEON 

104 

508A 

Concerning 
the acci¬ 
dents of 
accidents 
again 

essential trinity. For the name which the Greeks give to place and 
time, (bv dv8i), that is, without which the other things cannot exist, 
is not to be understood as meaning that the substantial trinity we 
have mentioned is to be counted among the things which cannot 
subsist without place and time; for it does not require the aid of 
place and time to subsist since it exists by itself by the excellence of 
its own creation before and above place and time. But the nine 
genera which are allotted to accidents alone are so divided by our 
authorities that these accidents which are originally seen in essences 
soon change into substances because they act as substance towards 
other accidents. For the first division of all things is into substances 
and accidents, the second is of accidents into substances, and this 
division can be carried almost to infinity because that which is at the 
moment an accident of what is prior to it is soon made into the 
substance of what follows it. But of this we must speak elsewhere, 
while for the present, if you agree, let us continue with the subject 
we set ourselves. 

N. Well, then : is it your opinion that there are [no] accidents 
508B but of some essence or of some accident? 

A. Nobody skilled in the arts would say otherwise. For accident 
was rightly so called for no other reason than that it occurs to an 
essence or substance or to some accident. 

A repetition N. Are acting and suffering included in the number of the 
concerning accidents? 
acting and 

suffering A. Certainly. 

N. Then they belong to some substance. [For they are the 
accidents of particular substances, since to general essences no 
accident occurs.] 

A. I would not deny this either. 

N. Tell me, pray : does any accident occur to the supreme and 
simple [and] divine Nature? 

A. Far be it (from me to say such a thing). 

N. Is it an accident of anything? 

A. I would not say this either ; for if so it would appear to be 
passible and mutable and receptive of another nature. 

N. So it does not admit any accident and it is not an accident to 
anything? 

A. None surely, and to nothing. 

BOOK I 

105 

N. Acting and suffering are accidents? 

A. This too has been granted. 508C 

N. Then the supreme Cause of all things and supreme Principle, 
which is God, does not admit acting or suffering? 

A. The force of this reasoning allows me too little space to 
manoeuvre. For if I say it is false, reason itself might easily make a 
laughing-stock of me [and forbid me to be unfaithful to all that I 
have so far admitted] : if I say that it is true, it will necessarily follow 
that what I have granted in the case of acting and suffering I should 
also similarly grant in the case of the other active and passive verbs 
[of whatever class of verbs they may be], that is, that God neither 
loves nor is loved, neither moves nor is moved, and a thousand 
similar things [and, what is more, that He neither is nor subsists]. 

But if I do so, do you see under how many and how great and how 
frequent missiles of Holy Scripture I shall succumb? [For their din 
is all about me, proclaiming that this is false.] You are also well 508D 
aware, I think, how troublesome and difficult it is to put such an 
opinion to simple souls when the ears of those who are seen to be 
wise are horrified when they hear it. 

N. Do not be afraid. For now we must follow reason, which 
investigates the truth of things and is not overborne by any 
authority, and is by no means prevented from revealing publicly 509A 
[and proclaiming] to all men the things which it [both] zealously 
searches out by circuitous reasoning and discovers with much toil. 

For the authority of Holy Scripture must in all things be followed 64 
because the truth dwells there as though in a retreat of its own, but it 
is not to be believed as a book which always uses verbs and nouns in 
their proper sense when it teaches us about the Divine Nature, but it 
employs certain allegories and transfers in various ways the meanings 
of the verbs or nouns out of condescension towards our weakness 
and to encourage by uncomplicated doctrine our senses which are 
still untrained and childish. Hear the Apostle when he says : “I gave 
you milk to drink, not food.” For the purpose of the Divine Oracles 
is to convey to us and suggest concerning what is ineffable and 
incomprehensible and invisible something to think about for the 509B 
nourishment of our faith. For concerning God nothing must be said 
or thought by those who live pure and pious lives and are serious 
seekers after the truth except what is found in Holy Scripture, and 
no meanings or allegorical interpretations but its own are to be used 
by those who either believe in or discourse about God. For who 

106 

PERIPHYSEON 

would presume to pronounce about the Ineffable Nature anything 
invented by himself, except such measures as it has played itself 
concerning itself upon its sacred instruments, I mean, the theo¬ 
logians? But in order that you may be more firmly convinced, I 
think the testimony of the theologian St. Dionysius must be intro¬ 
duced at this point, if you agree. 

A. I certainly agree, and I welcome nothing more gladly than 
to have reason confirmed by the soundest authority. 

N. In the first chapter of the book “On the Divine Names” this 
509C theologian has much to say in praise of the authority of Holy 
Scripture. But because in his usual way he expresses himself in an 
involved and distorted language, and therefore many find him 
extremely obscure and difficult to understand, I have decided to 
present his opinion on this subject by arranging his words in an 
order easier to understand than that in which they are written in 
their own place. “We must by no means”, he says, “risk saying 
anything or forming any notion of the superessential... Divinity 
except what is divinely revealed to us by the Holy Oracles. For the 
superessential knowledge of the Superessentiality which is above 
reason and intellect and essence must be applied... to the higher 
radiancies which are girt about by prudence and sanctity concerning 
divine things, fixing their gaze on high in so far as the illumination 
65 of the Divine Oracles inspires them.” Do you see how he absolutely 
509D anyone from daring to say anything concerning the hidden 

Divinity except what is said in the Holy Oracles ? To which, namely 
the Oracles, he gives a most glorious and most true name: “higher 
radiancies which are girt about by prudence and sanctity concerning 
divine things.” The same (theologian) in the same chapter a little 
later (writes): “For just as the invisible things cannot be compre- 
510A hended or contemplated by sensible things, nor simple things and 
things lacking likeness by those which are (moulded) into shape and 
likeness, nor the untouched and the unfigured formlessness of 
incorporeal things by things formed in the shapes of bodies; by the 
same principle of truth the superessential Grandeur surpasses the 
essences and the Unity above mind surpasses the minds, and the 
suprasensible (One) is impossible to all virtues, and hidden from all 
reason is the suprarational Good, the Unity which unifies all unity 
and the Essence which is beyond all essence and the Intellect which 
is invisible and the Word which is hidden; Irrationality and 
Invisibility and Namelessness, existing after such a manner as do 
none of the things that exist, and, while causing the being of all 

BOOK I 

things, is yet itself not an ov, for it is the summit of all being — and 
in whatever (other) way it reveals itself properly and knowably. 
Therefore, as has been said, concerning this superessential and 
hidden Divinity one must not dare to say or even to understand 
anything except the things which have been divinely expressed to us : 
for this is the way in which it has transmitted the most excellent 
revelation of itself in the Oracles. For such knowledge and contem¬ 
plation of it as there is, is inaccessible to all things that exist, being 
superessentially remote from them all.” These words suffice on the 
necessity of following the authority of Holy Scripture alone, espe¬ 
cially in discussions about the Divine ; while reason is wholly 
concerned with suggesting, and proving by the most accurate 
investigations into the truth, that nothing can be said properly 
about God, since He surpasses every intellect and all sensible and 
intelligible meanings Who is better known by not knowing, of 
Whom ignorance is the true knowledge. Who is more truly and 
faithfully denied in all things than He is affirmed. For whatever 
negation you make about Him will be a true negation, but not every 
affirmation you make will be a true affirmation : for if you show 
that He is this or that you will be proved wrong, for He is none of 
the existing things that can be spoken of or understood. But if you 
declare : “He is not this nor that nor anything”, you will be seen to 
speak the truth, for He is none of the things that are or of those that 
are not, and no one may draw near Him who does not first, by 
persevering in the way of thought, abandon all the senses and the 
operations of the intellect, together with the sensibles and everything 
that is and that is not, and, having achieved a state of not-knowing, 
is restored to the unity — as far as is possible — of Him Who is 
above every essence and understanding, of Whom there is neither 
reason nor understanding. Who is neither spoken nor understood, 
for Whom there is neither name nor word. But not unreasonably, as 
we have often said, all things that are, from the highest to the lowest, 
can be spoken of Him by a kind of similitude or dissimilitude or by 
contrariety or by opposition, since He is the Source of all things 
which can be predicated of Him. For He created not only things 
similar to Himself but also things dissimilar, since He Himself is the 
Like and the Unlike, and the Cause of contraries. For right reason 
shows that by virtue of the things that are truly created by Him 
[even] those which seem to be their contraries and which through 
privation of essence do not exist are contained (in Him). For no vice 
is found which is not the shadow of some virtue, either by deception 
or by open contrariety — by deception, as pride wears the shadow 

107 

510B 

66 

510C 

’ ATTOCpailKT) 

510D 

That God is 
the Cause 
and the 
511A 

Arranger of 

likenesses 

and 

unlikenesses 
and con¬ 
traries and 
privations 

108 

PERIPHYSEON 

of [true] might, luxuriousness of tranquillity, rage of fortitude, 
anger of chastisement [and justice], and so forth ; by contrariety, as 
wickedness of goodness : for as goodness conducts existing things 
out of non-existence in order that they may be, so wickedness strives 
to corrupt all things that are and to dissolve them utterly so that 
they may not be ; and if this were so [that is, if all things were to 
perish], it also would perish at the same time : for if nature were 
51 IB done away, so also would vice be done away. But by the virtue of 
goodness all nature is sustained so that it may not perish, though up 
to now wickedness has been tolerated in her [namely, in nature] so 
that goodness may be honoured by contrast with its contrary, and 
the virtues exercised by a rational activity, and nature itself be 
purged when death shall be swallowed up in victory and goodness 
alone will both be manifest in all things and reign over all things, 
and wickedness will be totally done away. But there is a fuller 
discussion of these things in the Fifth Book. So do not let any 
authority frighten you away from the things which the rational 
deduction from right contemplation teaches you. For true authority 
does not conflict with right reason, nor right reason with true 
authority, since there is no doubt but that both flow from the same 
67 source, the Wisdom of God. The one has conceded and conferred to 
51 1C pious inquirers the ability to think and say many things about the 
incomprehensible and ineffable Nature, so that the study of true 
religion should not be silent on all matters, but nourish those who 
are as yet ignorant in the simplicity of the teaching of their faith, and 
that, instructed [and armed<and> fortified by divine defences], it 
may have an answer for those who challenge the Catholic Faith ; 
while the purpose of the other is to correct, by the instillation of 
religion and piety, those simple people who thus far have been 
nourished in the nursery of the Church, lest they should either 
believe or think anything unworthy of God, or should suppose that 
everything that Holy Scripture predicates of the Cause of all things 
is predicated properly, whether it is a question of the most glorious 
and exalted names such as Life or Virtue or the names of the other 
virtues ; or intermediate names such as Sun, Light, Star, or anything 
from the higher regions of this visible world which is predicated of 
51 ID God; or those (taken) from the lower motions of the visible 
creature, such as Breath, Cloud, Brightness, Sunrise, Thunder, Dew, 
Shower, Rainfall ; also Water, River, Earth, Stone, Log, Vine, Olive, 
Cedar, Hyssop, Lily, Man, Lion, Ox, Horse, Bear, Panther, Worm ; 
512A also Eagle, Dove, Fish, Monster, and the numberless other names 
which are taken from the created nature and applied to the Creative 

BOOK 1 

109 

Nature by a kind of metaphor and figurative manner of expression ; 
and, what is more strange, not only from the created nature did 
Scripture in its ingenuity make these transpositions to the Creator, 
but even from things which are contrary to nature, namely. Frenzy, 
Drunkenness, Intoxication, Forgetfulness, Anger, Rage, Hatred, 
Concupiscence, and other similar terms, by which the minds of the 
uninstructed are less seriously deceived than by the aforementioned 
metaphors which are taken from nature. For the soul, rational, to be 
sure, but somewhat simple, may be deceived into thinking, when it 
hears the names of natural things predicated of God, that they are 
applied to him properly ; it is not, however, entirely gullible, so that 
when it hears the names of those things that are contrary to nature 
predicated of the Creator it either judges that they are altogether 
false and rejects them, or acknowledge and believes that they are 
said figuratively. 

A. I am not so much in awe of authority or so fearful of 
offending less capable minds as to be ashamed of announcing 
frankly the clear deductions and unassailable definitions of right 
reason, especially as discourse about such matters is held only 
among the wise, to whom nothing is more pleasing to the ear than 
true reason, nothing more delightful to investigate when it is being 
sought after, nothing more beautiful to contemplate when it is 
found. But I am waiting to hear what you intend by this reasoning. 

N. What do you think I intend by these arguments except that 
you should understand that as the nouns which denote the things (of 
created nature), whether substances or accidents [or essences], can 
be predicated of the Creative Nature metaphorically but not pro¬ 
perly, so also the verbs that denote the motions of created nature, 
whether natural or not natural, can be predicated of it meta¬ 
phorically but not properly? For if [the names] of essences or 
substances or accidents are applied to God not in a real sense but 
from the need to express somehow His inexpressible Nature, does it 
not necessarily follow that the verbs also which denote the motions 
of the essences, substances, and accidents cannot be applied properly 
to God, Who by the incomprehensible and ineffable excellence of 
His Nature rises above every essence, every substance, and every 
accident ; every motion and every activity and passivity ; and 
everything which is said and understood concerning such things, 
and everything which is neither said nor understood and yet which is 
within them ? For, why : if God is called Love by metaphor although 
He is More-than-love and surpasses all love, why should He not in 

That the 
soul is more 
easily de¬ 
ceived by 
hearing like 
things 

predicated of 
God than 
512B 
unlike 

68 

512C 

512D 

110 

513A 

69 
513B 
What 
difference 
there is 
between 
reason and 
authority 

513C 

PERIPHYSEON 

the same way be said to love although He surpasses every motion of 
loving? [For He seeks nothing apart from Himself since He alone is 
all in all things.] Similarly, if He is named He Who acts and Actor, 
He Who makes and Maker, not indeed properly but by a kind of 
verbal transposition, why should not [also] acting and making, or 
being acted upon or suffering, be predicated of Him in the same 
manner of speaking? And I think the same must be understood in 
the case of the other verbs which denote all the motions of the 
mutable creature, whether natural or not natural, whether intel¬ 
lectual or rational or irrational, whether corporeal or incorporeal, 
whether local or temporal, whether straight or oblique or angular or 
circular or spherical. 

A. You strongly press me to admit that this is reasonable. But I 
should like you to bring in some supporting evidence from the 
authority of the Holy Fathers to confirm it. 

N. You are not unaware, I think, that what is prior by nature is 
of greater excellence that what is prior in time. 

A. This is known to almost everybody. 

N. We have learnt that reason is prior by nature, authority in 
time. For although nature was created together with time, authority 
did not come into being at the beginning of nature and time, 
whereas reason arose with nature and time out of the Principle of 
things. 

A. Even reason herself teaches this. For authority proceeds 
from true reason, but reason certainly does not proceed from 
authority. For every authority which is not upheld by true reason is 
seen to be weak, whereas true reason is kept firm and immutable by 
her own powers and does not require to be confirmed by the assent 
of any authority. For it seems to me that true authority is nothing 
else but the truth that has been discovered by the power of reason 
and set down in writing by the Holy Fathers for the use of posterity. 
But perhaps it seems otherwise to you? 

N. By no means. And that is why reason must be employed 
first in our present business, and authority afterwards. 

A. Proceed in what order you like : for I am your follower. 

N. Do you think there can be any making or suffering without 
some motion of the maker or the sufferer? 

A. About the maker I have no doubt, for I do not see that it is 
possible for the maker to make (something) without some motion 

BOOK I 

111 

on his part. But how that which suffers experiences motion in itself I 
do not yet clearly discern. 

N. Do you not see that everything that makes (something) 
moves itself or is moved to the end that it may move that which it 
seeks to make from that which was not into that which is? For 
nothing can pass from that which was not into that which is without 513D 
some motion of its own and of another, whether it is conscious of 
those motions or not. [I am not now speaking of that general 
motion that is common to all creatures, by which all things are 
moved from nothing into being, but of the usual motion in time by 
which every day mutable matter, moved either by nature or by art, 
receives qualitative forms.] 

A. I see now, and reproach myself for being so slow-witted [in 514A 
not perceiving that everything that suffers suffers either its own 
motions or another’s or both]. 

N. Therefore the maker and the thing made suffer motions of 
their own. For that which makes suffers its motion towards making, 
while that which is made sustains its own motion and another’s : its 
own by passing from that which was not into that which is; 
another’s because it is not by itself the cause of its own motion, but 
(this is) either the natural motion or the free will or some necessity 
of him who makes it. Therefore that which is made, as we have said, 
suffers its own motion and another’s, while that which makes suffers 
its own alone [although it may often happen that he who makes is 
moved to make by some other cause, so that maker and sufferer are 
seen to be one and the same]. But this motion of the maker, 514B 
although it may arise from various causes, either natural or 
voluntary or involuntary, is called his own for this reason, that it is 
understood (to be) not external to him but within him. 

A. I do not deny that you have convinced me of this [and 
therefore I look forward to the rest of your exposition]. 

N. I think no motion can lack a beginning and an end. For Concerning 
reason insists that every motion starts from some beginning and motion 
tends towards some end in which once it has arrived it comes to rest. 

And this [the venerable] Maximus asserts most explicitly in the third 
chapter of the “Ambigua”, where he says : “If God is immutable, as 
being the fullness of all things, but everything which receives being 
[from] the things that are not is moved, then certainly it is wholly 
borne towards some cause.’’ For, as the same Maximus teaches 
elsewhere, “the Cause of all things is the same [as] the End of all 514C 

112 

PERIPHYSEON 

things. For God is the Beginning, that is, the Cause, of all creatures 
and their End since from Him they receive their being and begin to 
be, and towards Him they are moved in order that they may attain 
in Him their rest.” The same (author says) in the same chapter a 
little later: “He is the motion of the things that have come into 
being, whether the intellectual motion of intellectual things or the 
sensible motion of sensible things : for there is nothing of the things 
that have come into being that is wholly... immovable.” And a little 
later : “Now, this motion” our holy instructors in the sacred science 
of the Divine Mysteries “call natural power, which hastens towards 
its own end ; or passion, that is, a motion which passes from one to 
another, of which the end is impassibility; or active operation, of 
which the end is self-perfection. But none of the things that have 
514D come into being is its own end, for it is not its own cause either: 
otherwise it would be unbegotten and without beginning and 
immutable, as having nothing to which it could by any means move, 
for it would surpass the nature of the things that are, as having 
nothing for the sake of which to exist — for that is a true definition 
of it, although it is another’s, which says : An end is that for the sake 
of which all things (are), while it itself is for the sake of nothing. Nor 
515A is it perfection in itself; otherwise it would not (have to) be made, as 
being complete ; similarly it would not receive its being from 
anything either. For it would be perfect in itself, as also non-causal. 
Nor is it impassibility ; otherwise it would be permanent as well as 
infinite and uncircumscribed. For suffering is not by nature present 
in that which is wholly impassible, which is neither loved by another 
nor moved towards something else by love...” “For to be an end and 
perfection and impassibility belongs only to God, since He is 
unchanging and fulfilled and impassible ; while to the things that 
have been made it belongs to be moved towards the End that has no 
beginning... For all things that have been made suffer being moved, 
just as those things that are not are motion in itself and power in 
itself. If then the things that come into being are rational things, 
then they are also certainly in motion, since they are moved in 
accordance with their nature from their beginning by being, in 
515B accordance with their knowledge towards their end by well-being. 
For the end of the motion of things that are moved is the well-being 
in that which is eternally, just as the beginning also is Being itself, 
which indeed is God, Who gives both being (as a natural gift) and 
well-being (as a grace), since He is the Beginning and the End. For 
our general motion is from Him as from a beginning, and our 
particular motion is towards Him as towards an end. But if the 

BOOK I 

113 

intellectual nature is moved intellectually as is rationally consistent 

with itself, it certainly also understands ; but if it understands it 

certainly loves that which it understands ; if it loves then it certainly 

suffers its outgoing towards it as something lovable ; but if it suffers 

(this passion for it), it surely hastens (towards it) also ; if it hastens, it 

is certainly embarked upon a powerful motion ; but if it is embarked 

upon a powerful motion, it does not rest until it becomes a whole in 

the whole beloved and is comprehended in that whole, freely 

accepting the whole in accordance with its choice as a salutary 515C 

limitation, in order that it may become whole in that limiting whole, 

so that from itself it no longer wishes anything at all, being able to 

understand that it is a limited whole, but from that which limits it ; 

as air is wholly illuminated by light, and the whole lump of iron is 

liquefied by the whole of the fire.” Do you see how this venerable 

master teaches that no motion is to be found except in those things 

which begin from an origin and proceed by their natural motion to 

their end ; and how he defines this natural motion in three ways. Concerning 

thus : “Motion is a natural power hastening towards its end” ; or 

^ . r u- L. definition of 

thus: “Motion is a passion coming from one to another, ot which 

the end is impassibility” ; or thus : “Motion is an active operation, of 

which the end is self-perfection” ? But as to his saying : “Motion is a 

passion coming from one to another”, while this is understood of 515D 

natural motion, it must not be understood as meaning that the 

origin from which the passible motion, that is, that which suffers its 

own motion, arises is other than the end it seeks, for of all things 

which are naturally moved the beginning and the end are (but) one 

— for it is God from Whom and through Whom and towards 

Whom all things are moved. But what is thought of as a beginning is 

different from what is thought of as an end, and therefore these two 

meanings are spoken of, as it were, as two different things although 516A 

they refer to the One Beginning and End of all things; as for 

instance if someone were to say : “From what is understood as the 

beginning to what is understood as the end in God.” Then consider 71 

that everything which lacks a beginning and an end necessarily lacks 

all motion also. But God is anarchos, that is, without beginning, 

because nothing precedes Him or makes Him to be ; nor does He 

have an end because He is infinite: for it is understood that there is 

nothing after Him since He is the Limit of all things beyond which 

nothing proceeds. Therefore He does not admit any motion. For He 

has nowhere to move Himself, since He is the Fullness and the Place 

and the Perfection and the Station and the Whole of all things, or 

rather. He is More-than-fullness-and-perfection, More-than-place- 

114 

PERIPHYSEON 

5I6B 

516C 

How being 
made is 
predicated 
of God 

The 
definition 
of Faith 

516D 

72 

517A 

and-station, More-than-whole-of-all-things. For He is more than 
that which is said or understood of Him, in whatever way anything 
is either said of Him or understood. 

A. These things are quite clear to me, I think. 

N. If then you attribute all motion to the creature while you 
make God free from all motion, are you so slow-witted as to 
attribute making and suffering to Him from Whom you exclude all 
motion, when you have unhesitatingly admitted, I think, in your 
earlier and reasonable deductions, that these two cannot occur save 
in those things in which there is motion? 

A. About suffering I would have no doubt at all. For that God 
is impassible I wholly believe and understand. By suffering I mean 
that which is opposed to making, that is, being made. For who 
would say or believe, still less understand, that God suffers being 
made when He is the Creator, not a creature ? For when, as we have 
long agreed, God is said to be made, this is said obviously by a 
figure of speech. For He is held to be made in His creatures 
generally because in them He, without Whom they cannot be, is not 
only understood to be, but also is their Essence. “For the Being of 
all things is the Divinity that is beyond being”, as St. Dionysius 
says. He is also said to be made in the souls of the faithful when He 
is either conceived in them by faith and virtue or begins somehow to 
be understood through faith. For faith is nothing else, in my 
opinion, but a certain principle from which knowledge of the 
Creator begins to emerge in the rational nature. But about making I 
do not yet have a clear view, for I hear all Holy Scripture and the 
Catholic Faith declare that God is the Maker of all things. 

N. You have already admitted that there cannot be making 
without a motion of the maker. 

A. I have. 

N. You must either, then, allow motion to God, without which 
making is inconceivable, or you must deny Him both motion and 
making. For these two are counted among the things which go 
together and which arise and pass away together. 

A. I cannot allow motion to God, Who alone is immutable and 
has nowhere and nothing towards which to move Himself, since in 
Him are all things, indeed, since He himself is all things; on the 
other hand I cannot deny Him making since He is the Maker of all 
things. 

N. Then you will separate motion from making? 

BOOK I 

115 

[A.] I cannot do that either, since I see that they are inseparable 
from one another. 

N. What will you do then ? 

A. I do not know : and therefore I earnestly beg you to open 
some way for me and to free me from this extreme difficulty. 

N. Adopt this method of reasoning then : what is your opinion ? 

Did God exist before He made all things? 

A. It seems to me that He did. 

N. Then making was an accident to Him. For that which is not 
co-eternal and co-essential with Him is either some other thing 
outside Him or an accident to Him. 

A. I would not believe that there was another thing apart from 
Him and outside Him. For in Him are all things and outside Him is 517B 
nothing. And I would not be so bold as to allow any accident to 
Him : otherwise, He is not simple but a composite of essence and 
accidents. For if another thing which is not Himself is understood 
(to be) with Him, or if there is something accidental to Him, then 
surely He is neither infinite nor simple — a thing which the Catholic 
Faith and true reason most firmly deny. For they confess that God 
is infinite and more than infinite — for He is the Infinity of Infinites 
— and simple and more than simple — for He is the Simplicity of all 
simple things — and they believe and understand that there is 
nothing with Him, since He is the periphery of all things that are 
and that are not and that can be and that cannot be and that appear 
to be either contrary or opposite to Him, not to say like and unlike : 
for He is the Likeness of like things and the Unlikeness of unlike 517C 
things, the Oppositeness of opposites, the Contrariness of contraries. 

For He gathers and puts all these things together by a beautiful and 
ineffable harmony into a single concord : for those things which in 
the parts of the universe seem to be opposed and contrary to one 
another and to be discordant with one another are in accord and in 
tune [when] they are viewed in the most general harmony of the 
universe itself 

N. You understand rightly; see now that you do not in what 
follows regret having admitted any of the things you now admit. 

A. Proceed in what order you please. I shall follow you, and 
shall not take back anything that I have conceded. 

N. God, then, did not exist before He made all things? 

116 

PERIPHYSEON 

517D 

Concerning 

518A 

making 

518B 

73 

518C 

A. No : for if He did, the making of all things would be an 
accident to Him ; and if the making of all things were an accident to 
Him, it would be understood that motion and time were in Him, 
for He would move Himself to make the things which He had not 
yet made, and He would precede in point of time His own action, 
which was neither co-essential with Him nor co-eternal. 

N. Then His action of making is co-eternal with God and 
co-essential? 

A. So I believe and understand. 

N. Are God and His making, that is. His action, two things, or 
one simple and indivisible thing? 

[A.] I see that they are one : for God does not admit number in 
Himself, since He alone is innumerable and Number without 
number and the Cause of all numbers which surpasses every 
number. 

N. Therefore it is not one thing for God to be and another to 
make, but for Him being is the same as making? 

A. I dare not resist this conclusion. 

N. So when we hear that God makes all things we ought to 
understand nothing else than that God is in all things, that is, that 
He is the Essence of all things. For only He truly exists by Himself, 
and He alone is everything which in the things that are is truly said 
to be. For none of the things that are truly exists by itself, but 
whatever is understood truly (to be) in it receives <its true being> 
by participation of Him, the One, Who alone by Himself truly is. 

A. Nor would I wish to deny this. 

N. Do you see, then, how true reason completely excludes the 
category of making from the Divine Nature and attributes it to the 
things which are mutable and temporal and cannot be without a 
beginning and an end? 

A. I see this clearly too : and now at last I understand without 
any doubt that no category applies to God. 

N. What then? Should we not examine in the same way the 
force of all the verbs which Holy Scripture predicates of the Divine 
Nature, so as to conclude that nothing else is signified by them but 
the Divine Essence and More-than-essence, itself, which is simple 
and immutable and cannot be grasped by any intellect or signi¬ 
fication? For instance: when we hear that God wills and loves or 

it 

mi 

Da 

lb 

m: 

\i 

lal 

ar 

ID 

fl 

ai: 

ft' 

si 

Di 

ft 

n 

k 

k 

r 

II 

!l 

II 

I 

C 

I 

I 

i 

c 

I 

1 

BOOK I 

117 

desires, sees, hears, and the other verbs which can be predicated of 
Him, we should simply understand that we are being told of His 
ineffable Essence and Power in terms which are adapted to our 
nature, lest the true and holy Christian religion should be so silent 
about the Creator of all things that it dare not say anything for the 
instruction of simple minds and in refutation of the subtleties of the 
heretics who are always lying in wait to attack the truth and 
labouring to overthrow it and seeking to lead into error those who 
are less well instructed in it. Therefore to be and to will and to make 
and to love and to desire and to see and the other things of this sort 
which, as we said, can be predicated of Him, are not different things 
for God, but all these are to be accepted as one and the same in 
Him, and indicate His ineffable Essence in the way in which it 
allows itself to be signified. 

A. Indeed (they are) not different. For where there is true and 
eternal and indissoluble simplicity by itself, there cannot be anything 
which is either this and that or which is much and various. But I 
should like you to tell me more explicitly, so that I may clearly see, 
how, when I hear that God loves or is loved, I shall understand 
nothing but His Nature without any motion of lover or beloved. For 
when I have been shown this I shall have no misgiving at all in 
reading anywhere or hearing that He wills or desires or is desired, 
loves or is loved, sees or is seen, seeks or is sought, and likewise that 
He moves or is moved. For all these must be accepted in one and the 
same sense. For as will and desire and vision and longing too and 
motion, when predicated of God, indicate to us one and the same 
thing, so the verbs, whether they be active or passive or neutral and 
in whatever sense they are uttered, are understood not to disagree 
(with one another) by any difference of meaning, in my opinion. 

N. [I think you] are not deceived in this either, for it is as you 
think. First, then, take this definition of love: Love is a bond and 
chain by which the totality of all things is bound together in 
ineffable friendship and indissoluble unity. It can be defined in this 
way too : Love is the end and quiet resting place of the natural 
motion of all things that are in motion, beyond which no motion of 
the creature extends. These definitions St. Dionysius openly supports 
in the “Amatory Hymns”, saying : “Let us think of love, whether we 
are speaking of divine or angelic or intellectual or psychic or natural 
love, as a certain unitive and continuative power which moves the 
higher things to provide for the lower, and again those of equal form 
to exercise a close influence upon one another, and those things 

518D 

74 519A 

519B 

The 

definition 
of Love 

519C 

118 

PERIPHYSEON 

519D 

520A 

Concerning 

suffering 

520B 

75 

A simile 
from the 
magnet 

which are placed lowest to turn to those that are better and are 
placed above them.” The same (author says) in the same (Hymns) : 
“Since we have given in order the many kinds of love which derive 
from the One... let us now... involve them all together again into the 
one and all-embracing Love and Father of them all and collect them 
together from (being) many, first comprehending in two general 
(virtues) all (their) amatory virtues, over which absolutely commands 
and rules, from the summit of all things, the immeasurable Cause of 
all love, towards which also is directed all the love from all things 
that exist in conformity with the nature of each existent.” The same 
(author says) in the same (Hymns): “Come now, and gathering 
these”, that is, the virtues of love, “again into one, let us say that 
there is one simple virtue which moves itself to a unitive mingling (of 
all things) from the Best to the lowest of beings and back from that 
through all things in order to the Best again, spinning itself out from 
itself through itself towards itself and ever winding itself up again 
into itself in the same way.” Rightly therefore is God called Love 
since He is the Cause of all love and is diffused through all things 
and gathers all things together into one and involves them in 
Himself in an ineffable Return, and brings to an end in Himself the 
motions of love of the whole creature. Moreover this diffusion of the 
Divine Nature into all things which are in it and from it is said to be 
the love [of all things], not that what lacks all motion and fills all 
things at once is diffused in any way, but because it diffuses through 
all things the rational mind’s way of regarding (them) [and moves it, 
for it is the Cause of the diffusion and motion of the mind] to seek 
Him and to find Him and to understand Him, as far as it is possible 
to understand one who fills all things in order that they may be, and 
in the pacific embrace of universal love gathers all things together 
into the indivisible Unity which is what He Himself is, and holds 
them inseparably together. Again, He is said to be loved by all 
things that were made by Him not because He suffers anything from 
them — for He alone is impassible — but because all things seek 
Him and because His beauty draws all things to Himself. For He 
alone is truly lovable because He alone is the supreme and real 
Goodness and Beauty. For He Himself is whatever in creatures is 
understood (to be) really good and really beautiful and lovable. For 
as there is no essential good so there is nothing essential(ly) 
beautiful and nothing essential(ly) lovable apart from Himself 
alone. Therefore, as that stone which is called the magnet, although 
by a natural power of its own it attracts to itself the iron which 
approaches it, does not move itself in any way in order to do this nor 

BOOK I 

119 

suffers anything from the iron which it attracts to itself ; so the 
Cause of all things leads back to itself all things that derive from it 
without any motion of its own but solely by the power of its beauty. 
Hence again St. Dionysius says among other things : “But... why do 
the theologians call God sometimes Love but at other times Desire, 
at other times Lovable and Desirable ?“ He concludes his homily by 
saying: “Because... under the one aspect He is moved, under the 
other He moves.” This conclusion the venerable Maximus expounds 
more fully by saying: “As being Love and Desire God is moved, 
while as Lovable and Desired He moves to Himself all things which 
are receptive of love and desire.” And this must be explained more 
clearly still : He is moved as bringing an inseparable bond of love 
and desire to those who are receptive of them, but moves as 
attracting through nature the desire of those who are moved 
towards Him. And again : He moves and is moved as thirsting to be 
thirsted for and loving to be loved and desiring to be desired. For 
even this sensible light which fills the whole visible world, while it 
remains ever immutable although its vehicle, which we call the solar 
body, revolves in an eternal motion through the intermediate 
spaces of ether about the earth, nevertheless the light itself, flowing 
forth from this vehicle as from an inexhaustible source, so pervades 
the whole world by the immeasurable diffusion of its rays that it 
leaves no place into which it may move itself, and remains ever 
immutable. For everywhere in the world it is always full and whole, 
and it does not depart from any place nor does it seek any place save 
a certain small part of this lower air about the earth, which it leaves 
free for the purpose of admitting the earth’s shadow which is called 
night ; and yet it moves the gaze of all animals which are sensitive to 
light and draws them to itself that by it they may see in so far as they 
can see what they can see ; and therefore it is thought to be moved, 
because it moves the rays of the eyes so that they are moved towards 
it [that is, it is the cause of the motion of the eyes towards seeing]. 
[And do not be surprised to hear that the nature of light, which is 
fire, fills the whole sensible world and is everywhere without change. 
For St. Dionysius also teaches this in his book on the “Celestial 
Hierarchy”, and St. Basil too affirms the same in the “Hexaemeron”, 
(saying) that the substance of light is everywhere, but breaks forth 
by some natural operation in the luminaries of the world whether 
they be great or small, not only in order to provide illumination but 
that it may mark off the whole of time into portions by the motions 
of the celestial bodies.] What shall I say of the skills which the wise 
call the Liberal Arts, which, while they remain in themselves by 

520C 

How God is 
called Love 
and Lovable 

A simile 
520D 
from cor¬ 
poreal light 

521A 

521B 

A simile 
from the 
Arts 

120 

PERIPHYSEON 

521C 

KaxacpaTiKi^ 

and 

dnocpaTiKT) 

521D 

522A 

76 

522B 

themselves complete, whole, and immutable, yet are said to be 
moved when they move the rational mind’s way of regarding (them) 
to seek them, to find them, and attract it to consider them, so that 
they too, although, as we said, they are immutable in themselves, yet 
seem to be moved in the minds of the wise because they move them ? 
And there are many other things in which an obscure likeness of the 
Divine Power is seen. For it itself is above every likeness and 
surpasses every example, and while by itself and in itself it is 
immutably and eternally at rest, yet it is said to move all things since 
all things through it and in it subsist and have been brought from 
not-being into being, for by its being, all things proceed out of 
nothing, and it draws all things to itself. And it is said to be moved 
because it moves itself to itself, and therefore it moves itself and, as 
it were, is moved by itself. Therefore God by Himself is Love, by 
Himself is Vision, by Himself is Motion ; and yet He is neither 
motion nor vision nor love, but More-than-love, More-than-vision, 
More-than-motion. And He is by Himself Loving, Seeing, Moving; 
and yet He is not by Himself moving, seeing, loving, because He is 
More-than-loving, More-than-seeing, More-than-moving. Also, by 
Himself He is Being-loved and Being-seen and Being-moved ; yet He 
is not by Himself being-moved nor being-seen nor being-loved, 
because He is More-than-being-loved and More-than-being-seen 
and More-than-being-moved. Therefore He loves Himself 
and is loved by Himself in us and in Himself ; and yet He does not 
love Himself nor is loved by Himself in us or in Himself, but more 
than loves and is loved in us and in Himself. He sees Himself and is 
seen by Himself in Himself and in us; and yet He does not see 
Himself nor is seen by Himself in Himself or in us, but more than 
sees and is seen in Himself and in us. He moves Himself and is 
moved by Himself in Himself and in us ; yet He does not move 
Himself nor is moved by Himself in Himself or in us, because He 
more than moves and is moved in Himself and in us. And this is the 
prudent and catholic and salutary profession that is to be predicated 
of God: that first by the Cataphatic, that is, by affirmation, we 
predicate all things of Him, whether by nouns or by verbs, though 
not properly but in a metaphorical sense ; then we deny by the 
Apophatic, that is, by negation, that He is any of the things which 
by the Cataphatic are predicated of Him, only (this time) not 
metaphorically but properly — for there is more truth in saying that 
God is not any of the things that are predicated of Him than in 
saying that He is ; then, above everything that is predicated of Him, 
His superessential Nature which creates all things and is not created 

BOOK I 

must be superessentially More-than-praised. Therefore that which 
the Word made Flesh says to His disciples, “It is not you who speak 
but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you”, true reason 
compels us to believe, and say, and understand in the same way with 
reference to other like things : it is not you who love, who see, who 
move, but the Spirit of the Father, Who speaks in you the truth 
about Me and My Father and Himself, He it is Who loves Me and 
sees Me and My Father and Himself in you, and moves Himself in 522C 
you that you may desire Me and My Father. If then the Holy Trinity 
loves and sees and moves Itself in us and in Itself, surely It is loved 
and seen and moved by Itself after a most excellent mode known to 
no creature, by which It both loves and sees and moves Itself, and is 
loved, seen, and moved by Itself in Itself and in Its creatures 
[although It surpasses all that is said about It. For who and what 
can speak about the Unspeakable, for Whom no proper noun or 
verb or any proper word is found or exists or can come into 
existence, and “Who alone possesses immortality and dwells in 
inaccessible light”? “For who knows the intellect of the Lord?”] 

But before we end the present discussion I thought I should insert at 
this point the opinion of St. Dionysius on the Divine Rest and 522D 
Motion, if you agree. 

A. Certainly I agree. And by this last piece of reasoning I see 77 
that I am purged of every doubt. 

N. In the book “On the Divine Names” [he says] : “But let us 523A 
say what remains (to be said) concerning the Divine Station or Seat. 

But what else is it but God’s remaining Himself in Himself and 
being, after a unique mode, established in unchanging natural 
immutability, and His... being enthroned above all things, and His 
(always) working in the same respect about the same thing in the 
same way, and His subsisting wholly from Himself in His utter 
stability, and (His being) unchangeable and wholly immutable in 
relation to Himself, and being all these things after a superessential 
mode? For He is causal of the station and structure of all things. 

Who is above every structure and station, and Who establishes in 
Himself all things, immutable and preserved by the stability of their 
proper goods. Again : even when the theologians say that the 
Immutable goes forth into all things and is mutable, must not this 
also be divinely understood ? For that motion of His is to be piously 523B 
understood not as a carrying away, or as an alienation from oneself, 
or as an exchanging, or as a turning round, or as a motion in place, 
not in a straight line, not in a circle, not in a combination of the two. 

121 

122 

PERIPHYSEON 

524A 

Conclusion 
concerning 
acting and 
suffering 

78 

524B 

not intelligible, not psychic, not physical ; but as God’s bringing into 
essence and containing all things, and providing in every way for all 
things, and being present to all things by His immeasurable 
circumambience of them, and by His providential outgoings and 
operations towards all existing things. But it must also be permitted 
us to celebrate the motion of God the Immutable in a manner 
befitting to God by the reason, and while motion in a straight line 
must be understood as the undeviating and irrevocable procession 
of His operations and the generation of all things from Himself, 
helicoidal”, that is, oblique, ’’motion must be understood as His 
steady procession and fruitful rest, and motion in a circle as His 
self-identity holding together the middle and the extreme parts, the 
container and the contained, and as the return of those things which 
have come forth from Him into Himself.” 

A. Our method requires, I think, that you should gather up 
into a brief conclusion what has been said about the impossibility of 
anyone properly predicating of God acting and suffering, or making 
and being made ; and so bring this book to its end. 

N. You have long conceded, if I am not mistaken, that for God 
to be is not other than to act or make, but that for Him it is one and 
the same thing (both) to be as well as to act and to make. For a 
simple nature does not admit the notion of substance and accidents. 

A. Yes, I conceded it with conviction. 

N. Therefore, just as being is predicated of Him although He is 
not in the strict sense being because He is more than being and is the 
Cause of all being and essence and substances, so also He is said to 
act and to make although He is more than acting and making and is 
the Cause of all for making and acting without any motion that 
could be attributed to accident, being beyond all motion. For of all 
motions and of all accidents, as indeed of all essences. He is the 
Cause and Principle. 

A. To this too I would unhesitatingly agree. 

N. What is left, then, but that you should understand that it is 
altogether necessary that, just as strictly speaking being as well as 
acting and making are removed from Him, so suffering and being 
made are removed? For how that which is not liable to acting and 
miaking can be liable to suffering and being made I do not see. 

A. Set an end to the book : for there is enough contained [in it]. 

PERIPHYSEON 

BOOK II 

N. Since in the earlier book we spoke briefly of the universal 1 
division of universal nature — not as (a division) of a genus into its 
species nor of a whole into its parts [for God is not a genus of the 
creature nor the creature a species of God any more than the 
creature is the genus of God nor God a species of creature. The 
same can be said of the whole and its parts, for God is not the whole 
of the creature nor the creature a part of God any more than the 
creature is the whole of God or God a part of the creature, although 
[in the loftier contemplation of Gregory the Theologian we who 
participate in human nature are a part of God because “in Him we 
live and move and have our being”, and] in a metaphorical sense 
God is said to be both genus and whole and species and part since 524D 
everything which is in Him and (comes) from Him can honestly and 
reasonably be predicated of Him], but by a kind of intellectual 
contemplation of the universe, under which term I include both God 
and creature — let us now, if you agree, re-examine the same 
division of nature more broadly. 

A. I agree, and (it seems) very necessary. For unless (this 
subject) is opened up by a broader inquiry of the reason it will 
appear that we have only touched upon it, not discussed it. 

N. This then, as I think, was the fourfold division of universal 
nature as we gave it above : (first) into that form or species — if one 
may rightly call form or species the First Cause of all things which 525A 
surpasses every form and species since it is the formless Principle of 
all forms and species — which creates and is not created. [Now we 
call God the formless Principle so that no one may suppose that He 

523D 

124 

PERIPHYSEON 

525B 

525C 
That the 
universe 
considered in 
God is form¬ 
less while in 
the creature 
it is multi¬ 
form 

525D 

is to be reckoned in the number of the forms while (in fact) He is the 
Cause of all forms. For every formed thing seeks Him while in 
Himself He is infinite and more than infinite, for He is the Infinity 
of all infinities. Therefore, not being constricted or defined by any 
form, since He is unknowable to every intellect. He is more 
reasonably called formless than form ; for, as has often been said, we 
can speak more truly about God by negation than by affirmation] ; 
secondly into that which is both created and creates ; third comes 
that which is created and does not create; then fourth that which 
neither creates nor is created. 

A. So indeed was the division made. 

N. Therefore, since in our earlier discourse we have already 
spoken briefly of the oppositions of these forms of nature — for we 
considered how the third conflicts with the first, for they confront 
each other as it were from diametrically opposed positions ; for, as 
we said, (the species) which is created but does not create is the 
opposite of that which creates and is not created. Similarly the 
second form is opposed to the fourth ; for (the species) which is 
created and creates is the opposite of that which neither is created 
nor creates. [Now, the reason why we say that the universal nature 
possesses forms is that it is from her that our intelligence is in a 
manner formed when it attempts to treat of her; for in herself the 
universal nature does not everywhere admit forms. It certainly is not 
improper for us to say that she comprises God and creature, and 
therefore in so far as she is creative she admits no form in herself, 
but gives multiformity to the nature formed by her] — I think we 
should now consider in what respects they resemble one another, 
and in what they differ. 

A. The natural order demands (that we should proceed) in no 
other way. 

N. The second form is similar to the first in that it creates, but 
dissimilar in that it is created. For the first creates and is not created, 
while the second both creates and is created. The third takes on a 
likeness of the second in that it is created, but differs from it in that 
it creates nothing. For the second both is created and creates, while 
the third is created and does not create. The third is similar to the 
fourth in that it does not create, but is dissimilar in that it is created. 
For the third is created and does not create, while the fourth neither 
is created nor creates. Furthermore the fourth is similar to the first 
because it is not created, but appears to be remote from it because it 

BOOK II 

does not create. For the first creates and is not created, while the 
fourth neither creates nor is created. And now that the oppositions 
and similarities and differences have been stated, I see that we must 
say a few words about their return and collection by that science 
which the philosophers call dva?iUTiKf|. 

A. This too is required by the (natural) order. For there is no 
rational division, whether it be of essence into genera or of genus 
into species and individuals or of the whole into its parts — for 
which the proper name is partition — or of the universe into those 
divisions which right reason contemplates therein, that cannot be 
brought back again by the same stages through which the division 
had previously ramified into multiplicity, until it arrive at that One 
which remains inseparably in itself (and) from which that division 
took its origin. [But I see that it is necessary that first you tell me a 
little about the etymology of the word dvaXuiiKt], for it is not clear 
to me. 

N. ’Ava>iUTiKf| come from the verb dvaXuo) which means “I 
resolve” or ‘T return” ; for dva- stands for “re-”, Xvg) for “solve”. 
Thence comes also the noun dvaXvoK;, which is similarly rendered 
“resolution” or “return”. But dvdXvaiq is properly used in con¬ 
nection with the solution of set problems, while dvaA.i)TiKf] is used in 
connection with the return of the division of the forms to the origin 
of that division. For every division, which is called by the Greeks 
pcpiapoq, seems (to be) a kind of descent from some finite unity 
down into an infinite number of individuals, that is to say, from the 
most general to the most specific, while every recollection, which is 
like a return back, starting from the most specific and ascending to 
the most general, <is called> dva^uTiKp. Thus it is the return and 
resolution of individuals into forms, of forms into genera, of genera 
into ouaiai, of oualai into the Wisdom and Providence with which 
every division begins and in which every division ends. 

A. You have said enough about <the etymology> of 
dva?iUTiKf|. Pass on to other matters.] 

N. Let us then make an “analytical” or regressive collection of 
each of the two pairs of the four forms we have mentioned so as to 
bring them into a unity. The first, then, [and] fourth are one since 
they are understood of God [alone]. For He is the Principle of all 
things which have been created by Him, and the end of all things 
which seek Him so that in Him they may find their eternal and 
immutable rest. For the reason why the Cause of all things is said to 

125 

526A 

526B 

526C 

Concerning 

dvaA.UTiKf) 

2 

126 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the Principle 
526D 
of all things 

527A 

Concerning 
the End of 
all things 

527B 

527C 

create is that it is from it that the universe of those things which have 
been created after it (and) [by it] proceeds by a wonderful and divine 
multiplication into genera and species and individuals, and into 
differentiations and all those other features which are observed in 
created nature ; but because it is to the same Cause that all things 
that proceed from it shall return when they reach their end, it is 
therefore called the end of all things and is said neither to create nor 
to be created. For once all things have returned to it nothing further 
will proceed from it by generation in place and time (and) genera 
and forms since in it all things will be at rest and will remain an 
indivisible and immutable One. For those things w^hich in the 
processions of natures appear to be divided and partitioned into 
many are in the primordial causes unified and one, and to this unity 
they will return and in it they will eternally and immutably remain. 

But this fourth aspect of the universe, which, like the first also, 
is understood to exist in God alone, will receive a more detailed 
treatment in its proper place, as far as the Light of Minds shall grant 
(us). 

Now what is said of the first and fourth, that is to say, that 
neither the one nor the other is created since both the one and the 
other are One — for both are predicated of God — will not be 
obscure, I think, to any who use their intelligence aright. For that 
which has no cause either superior to or equal with itself is created 
by nothing. For the First Cause of all things is God, whom nothing 
precedes (nor) is anything understood (to be) in conjunction with 
Him which is not coessential with Him. Do you see, then, that the 
first and fourth forms of nature have been reduced to a unity? 

A. I see it sufficiently and I understand it clearly. [In God, 
therefore, the first form is not distinct from the fourth. For in Him 
they are not two things but one ; in our contemplation, however, 
since we form one concept of God from consideration of Him as 
Beginning and another concept when contemplating Him as End, 
they appear to be as it were two forms, formed from one and the 
same simplicity of the Divine Nature as a consequence of the double 
direction of our contemplation.] 

N. [You see it correctly.] Well, then, ought we not also, in the 
same way, to reduce the second and the third to a unity ? For I think 
you will not have failed to notice that as the first and the fourth are 
with reason recognized in the Creator, so are the second and the 
third in the creature. For the second, as has been said, both is 

BOOK II 

created and creates and is understood (to be) in the primordial 
causes of created things, while the third form is created and does not 
create, and is found in the effects of the primordial causes. Thus the 
second and third are contained within one and the same genus, 
namely, created nature, and in it are one. [For forms are a unity in 
their genus.] Do you not then see that of these four forms two, 
namely, the first and the fourth, have been resumed into the 
Creator; and two, I mean the second and the third, into the 
creature ? 

A. I see it clearly [and I am filled with wonder at the subtlety of 527D 
nature. For these two forms are discerned not in God but in our 
contemplation (of Him), and are not forms of God but of our 
reason, resulting from our double consideration of (Him as) Begin¬ 
ning and End, nor is it in God that they are reduced to one form but 
in our contemplation which, in considering the beginning and the 
end, creates in itself, as it were, two forms of contemplation, and 
these again, it would seem, it reduces into a single form of 528A 
contemplation when it begins to consider the simple unity of the 
Divine Nature. For Beginning and End are not proper names of the 
Divine Nature but of its relation to the things which are created. For 
they begin from it and that is why it is called Beginning; and since 
they end in it so that in it they cease, it is rightly called by the name 
of End. On the other hand, the other two forms, I mean the second 
and the third, not only come into being in our contemplation but are 
also found in the very nature of created things, in which the causes 
are separated from the effects and the effects are united to the causes 
because they make one with them in a single genus, I mean, in the 
creature]. 

N. So the four become two. 

A. I do not deny it. 

N. But suppose you join the creature to the Creator so as to 528B 
understand that there is nothing in the former save Him who alone 
truly is — for nothing apart from Him is truly called essential since 
all things that are are nothing else, in so far as they are, but the 
participation in Him who alone subsists from and through Him¬ 
self — , will you deny that Creator and creature are one? 

A. It would not be easy for me to deny it. For it seems to me 
ridiculous to resist this reduction. 

N. So the universe, comprising God and creature, which was 
first divided as it were into four forms, is reduced again to an 
indivisible One, being Principle as well as Cause and End. 

127 

128 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. Concerning the universal division and unification of uni¬ 
versal nature I see that enough has been said for the time being. For 
the subdivisions of each of the forms we shall consider in their 
528C proper places [— of the second and third, that is ; for I should not 
care to say that the first and fourth admit subdivision — ] ; and 
therefore I think we should pass on to the other matters that have 
still to be discussed. 

N. What is your opinion : is there any other line of investigation 
of the problems we have set ourselves than to inquire now into the 
second form of nature, seeing that we have considered the first to 
the best of our ability in the first book, in which the discussion 
turned rather on the ten genera of all things (and) the fact that they 
cannot be predicated literally of the creative Cause of all things, 
than on the Cause of all things itself? For we have decided that what 
must be said about that (Cause) should be postponed until we come 
to consider the fourth form [though we do not promise even there to 
say anything of the Divine Nature in a proper sense or a worthy 
manner, but to speak, in so far as it itself gives us power (to do so), 
528D of the return of all things to itself through the primordial causes, just 
as in this second inquiry the task particularly commended to our 
attention, if God will aid us, is [to say something] concerning the 
procession of the creatures from the one First Cause of all things 
through the primordial essences, which before all things were 
529A created by itself in itself through itself, into the various genera of 
nature and the various forms and individuals (extending) to infinity. 
And do not be surprised if you find something said in this book 
about the return of the creatures to their Beginning and End. For 
the procession of the creatures and the return of the same are so 
intimately associated in the reason which considers them that they 
appear to be inseparable the one from the other, and it is impossible 
for anyone to give any worthy and valid account of either by itself 
without introducing the other, that is to say, of the procession 
without the return and collection and vice versa]. 

A. The order of discussion demands nothing dse than that 
after considering the first [question] we should turn to the second. 

N. Of the universal nature [then], as has already been said, the 
second form to be distinguished is that which is created and creates 
and which is to be understood, I think, only of the primordial causes 
of things. Now these primordial causes of things are what the 
529B Greeks call TrpcoTOTUTra, that is, primordial exemplars, or Tipoopia- 
paia, that is, predestinations, or predefinitions. They are also called 

BOOK II 129 

by the same 08ia deX^^axa that is, divine volitions. They are 
commonly called ibtai also, that is, species or forms in which the 
immutable reasons of things that were to be made were created 
before (the things themselves) existed [concerning which we shall 
speak more fully in the course of the (present) work, and support (our 
reasons) by the testimonies of the Holy Fathers. And] not in¬ 
appropriately [are they called so], for the Father, that is to say, the 
Principle of all things, pre-formed in His Word, that is. His only- 
begotten Son, the reasons of all things that He wished to be made 
before (they came into being) in their genera and species and 
individuals and differences and the other things which either can be 
and are considered in the created creature, or cannot be and are not 529C 
considered in it because of their exalted nature — and yet they are. 

But before we pass on to the contemplation of the primordial 3 
causes, I thought we should introduce into this discussion of ours, if 
you agree, the opinion of the venerable Maximus concerning the 
division of all things that have been created. For if the manifold 
division of all things and their reunification is given a manifold 
demonstration the way will be more easily opened towards a 
knowledge of the primordial causes which were created by God first 
of all [especially as his division does not seem to disagree with our 
own aforementioned division at any point except that he subdivides 
the sensible creature, which we placed as the third form of nature 
< because in it for the most part appear the effects of the causes, into 529D 
three species, and does not distinguish our fourth form from our 
first> , as the sequel will show ; and that subdivision of the sensible 
creature we will, with the help of God, reserve for the subject of our 
third inquiry]. 

In the 37^^ chapter of the Ambigua he writes : “The saints who 

receive many of the Divine Mysteries which are handed down from 

those who were the followers and ministers of the Word, and thence. Concerning 

directly instructed in the knowledge of the things that are, by 530A 

transmission to themselves through those who preceded them, say the division 

, , , . 1 • ^ of substanct 

that the substance of all things that have been made is separated into 

five divisions.” 

[Do you notice with what a weight of authority he commends 
the source of his division? For it is from the Word itself, that is, 
from the Son of God who is the fount of all perfect doctrine — 
naturally, since He is the Wisdom in which all the wise participate — , 
through His followers, that is, through the disciples who both 
beheld Him living in the flesh and heard Him teach, that he declares 

130 

PERIPHYSEON 

(that division) to take its origin ; and that through the successors of 
the Apostles in doctrine and wisdom by direct communication, that 
is, without any other intervening authority, it was handed down to 
his own times.] 

“Of these the first” [he says] “they declare to be that which 
divides from the uncreated nature created nature in general, which 
530B receives being through generation. For they say that God by His 
goodness made the clear disposition of all existing things” at one 
and the same time. [And a little later :] “But the second (is that) by 
which the universal” and simultaneously (created) “nature which 
receives its being from God through creation is divided into 
intelligibles and sensibles.” Then “the third, by which the sensible 
nature is divided into heaven and earth, and again the fourth by 
which the earth is divided into paradise and the inhabited globe, and 
the fifth by which man himself, who, well and beautifully through 
generation superadded to the (sum of) things that are as a most 
effective agent of the continuity of all, in everything naturally 
530C establishing in himself a mediation between all extremes effected by 
every difference, is divided into male and female ; possessing 
naturally by the mediations of all the extremes, through the 
property of proper parts which exerts a copulative force over the 
extremes of the individual parts, the potentiality of the unification 
of them.” For part of himself, as the same Master says in another 
place, he possesses (in common) with the sensibles inasmuch as he is 
a body, part with the intelligibles inasmuch as (he is) a soul ; and 
thus he contains within himself all creation. 

And a little later : “This is why man is introduced last among 
the things that are, to be a kind of natural link everywhere 
mediating between the extremes through their proper parts, and 
reducing to a unity in himself things which in nature are widely 
disparate” [ — by the extremes he here means the invisible creature 
and the sensible creature, which by natural difference differ from 
one another as though by a very wide space. For they are opposed to 
one another as the two extreme terms of created natures ; but human 
530D nature supplies a middle term between them, for in it they are joined 
4 to one another, and from being many become one. For there is no 
creature, from the highest to the lowest, which is not found in man, 
and that is why he is rightly called “agent (of continuity)” of all 
things. For into it flow together all things which have been created 
by God, producing a single harmony from diverse natures as from 
531A different sounds — ], “so that, by the unification which brings all 

BOOK II 

things to God as Cause, he, starting from what before was his 
proper division” and “proceeding thence through the intermediaries, 
by successively combining with them, to God, should reach the end 
of his ascent into the heights, which passes from all things through 
union (in Him) in whom there is no division”. 

Thus far we have quoted, not continuously but with some 
words omitted, the passage of the venerable Master in which he 
begins with the division of the substance of all things that have been 
made from the supreme Cause of all, and ends with the differences 
of universal substance in man, who was made in the image and 
likeness of God. For man [as we have said and shall < very often > 
say again] was created with a nature of so high a status that there is 
no creature, whether visible or intelligible, that cannot be found in 
him. For he is composed of the two universal parts of created nature 5 
by way of a wonderful union. For he is the conjunction of the 
sensible and the intelligible, that is, the extremities of all creation. 

For in nature there is nothing lower than body and nothing more 
exalted than intellect, as St. Augustine testifies in his book, “De 
uera religione”, where he says the following : “Between our mind by 
which we have an understanding of the Father Himself, and the 
Truth through which we understand Him, no creature intervenes.” 

[In these words of the most holy Father we are given to understand 
that human nature, even after the Fall, did not wholly lose its status, 
but still retains it. For the Master did not say “no creature 
intervened” but “no (creature) intervenes”. So not even now in our 
feeble condition have we wholly abandoned God nor have been 53 ic 
abandoned by Him, for still between our mind and Him no nature 
intervenes. For the leprosy of the soul or of the body does not 
deprive us of the mental vision by which we have an understanding of 
Him and in which the image of our Creator is preeminently 
established.] Do you see, then, how the division of all substances 
reaches its term in human nature? 

A. I see it clearly, and am filled with admiration at the status of 
our nature among all the things that have been made, for, convinced 
by the reasons you have given, I see that in it there is a wonderful 
kind of composition of all created substances. 

N. Since, then, you have a clear perception of the natural 
division of all, beginning from (the division of) Creator and creature 
and ending in man, whose creation crowns the divine operation, 531D 
perfecting as it were the six days’ work, let us now look at the 
gathering together into the One which begins from man and ascends 

132 

PERIPHYSEON 

532A 

6 

Concerning 
the unifica¬ 
tion of 
substances 

532B 

532C 

532D 

533A 

Concerning 
the abolition 

through man to God Himself, who is the beginning of all division 
and the end of all unification, in the light of what is said by the 
above-mentioned Father Maximus. [For, as we said before, correct 
reason does not allow us to treat division by itself to the exclusion of 
dva>iUTiKf), but demands that we should consult the truth about 
both together.] He says, then : “Starting from his proper division — ” 
by which he means : Since the division of substances, which took its 
beginning from God, and, descending by degrees, reached its end in 
the division of man into male and female, (and) again the reunifi¬ 
cation of the same substances ought to begin from man and ascend 
through the same degrees to God Himself, in whom, as (Maximus) 
himself says, there is no division because in Him all things are one ; 
so the unification of natures will begin from man, through the grace 
of the Saviour, in whom, as the Apostle says, there is neither male 
nor female when human nature shall be restored to its pristine state. 
For if the first man had not sinned he would not be suffering the 
division of his nature into the two sexes, but would be remaining 
without change in his primordial reasons in which he was created in 
the image of God, as the aforesaid Master explains in these words; 
for he says : 

“This is why man is introduced last among the things that are, ... 
everywhere about to extend that property in respect of (being) male 
and female which certainly does not depend — being contrary to the 
primordial reason contained in the divine plan for the generation of 
man — upon the most impassible linking up of his nature (which is 
in accordance with) Divine Virtue, so as to show that, according to 
the divine intention, there would be simply man, not to be divided 
by the names of male and female, (in accordance with) the reason 
through which he was first also made, not divided into those 
sections which now exist in him, through the perfect unification with 
the proper... reason through which he subsists.” 

[In these words he shows very clearly the intention of the divine 
plan for the creation of man had He not foreknown that he would 
sin. For he would be “simply man” created in the simplicity of his 
nature, multiplied in intelligible numbers, as the holy angels are 
multiplied, but, oppressed by the guilt of his disobedience, he 
suffered the division of his nature into male and female, and since he 
was unwilling to keep to the divine mode of multiplying himself he 
was degraded by a just decree to the bestial, and to the corruptible 
proliferation out of male and female ; and this division has taken the 
beginning of its unification in Christ Jesus, who truly showed in 

BOOK II 

Himself an example of the restoration of human nature, and 
exhibited a likeness of the resurrection that is to come. 

“Not divided”, he says, “into those sections which now (exist) 
in him.” By the sections (that exist) in man after sin he means not 
only the division into male and female but also the division of one 
form into the manifold varieties of qualities and quantities and 
differences. For the diversity of men among themselves by which the 
form of each is distinguished from the others and the measure of 
stature is varied does not proceed from nature but from the defect 
and diversity of places and times, of lands, of waters, of airs, of 
diets, and of the other circumstances of this sort of their birth and 
breeding. Of the diversity of manners and opinions it is superfluous 
to speak for it is obvious to all that these took their origin from the 
division of nature after sin. 

“Through the perfect unification”, he says, “with the proper 
reason through which he subsists.” (This is) as if he said: Man 
would not suffer the division of his nature if he were not in a state of 
sin for the reason that he would inseparably adhere to his perfect 
reasons in which he was created in the image of God, that is to say, 
in the primordial causes in which he subsists if he were not of his 
own will tearing <himself> away from them. For man does not 
subsist in these (circumstances) in which he now appears to be, but 
in so far as he exists he is contained within the hidden causes of 
nature after which he was first created and to which he is destined to 
return.] 

And since after the unification of man, that is, of his two sexes, 
into the original unity of nature in which there was neither male nor 
female but simply man there will immediately follow the unification 
of the inhabited globe with paradise, he says: “Then, by bringing 
together, by the holiness of his own way of life, paradise and the 
inhabited globe, he would make the earth one, not divided in him by 
difference of its parts, but rather so gathered together that none of 
its parts suffers loss.” This statement sounds very obscure. For it is 
not easy to see what he is trying to say : whether (that) the inhabited 
globe, when all substances are unified, will be joined with paradise 
in such a way that there will be no diversity of parts in them but all 
will be paradise — for in the reason of unification this must always 
be observed, that what appears to be inferior moves towards what is 
superior, that is, better, but true reason does not allow that what is 
better passes into the worse [that is to say, returns in the renewal of 
natures ; otherwise it will not be a unification but a division]. Just as 

133 

of sex and 
the unifica¬ 
tion of all 
natures first 
in Christ and 
then in the 
whole of 
human 
nature at the 
end of the 
533IB 
world 

533C 

8 

533D 

534A 

PERIPHYSEON 

the unification of human nature recalls the division of the two sexes 
into the simplicity of man because man is better than sex, for male 
and female are not names of his nature, but of its partition through 
disobedience, whereas “man” is the special name of his nature ; — or 
(that) the inhabited globe and paradise will be brought together into 
that one earth which is the second species of the sensible creature 
divided into heaven and earth in such a way that even the earth will 
534B [not only] be without variety of parts but [also] will be recalled into 
a simplicity of nature so as to be believed to be a spiritual rather than 
a corporeal nature <such as it would be if man were not in a state 
of sin> , and (so as to) let us understand the words “not divided in 
him”, that is in man [for in man all things are unified] “by the 
difference of its” [the earth’s, that is] “parts” [in the sense that] as 
there will be no diversity of parts in man because no (element of) 
composition will remain in him, so also the earth’s nature will be so 
united with him as to seem one with him and in him. For he says : 
“but rather so gathered together that none of its parts suffers 
annihilation”, that is, separation. For where there is true simplicity 
there is not found the variety of any annihilation, that is, of 
534C segregation. This interpretation appears to be fully borne out in 
what follows ; for he continues : “Then, by uniting heaven and earth 
through the perfect similarity of his life in respect of virtue to that of 
the angels in so far as that is possible for men, he would make the 
sensible creature one (and) everywhere inseparable from itself in 
him” [that is, in man] “not at all separated spatially by distances, 
(man) having become a weightless spirit and not held down by any 
gravity of the body... nor hindered from ascending to the heavens 
through the perfect dopaala” — that is, sightlessness or blindness 
— “towards those things of his mind which purely attains to God by 
approaching Him in wisdom.” Here we are given to understand that 
when man is recalled into the original grace of his nature which he 
abandoned by transgression, he will gather again to himself every 
sensible creature below him through the wonderful might exercised 
534D by the Divine Power in restoring man. For when, as he says, “the 
human mind purely attains to God”, it will experience the divine 
dopaala, that is, the not-knowing of all the creatures which he shall 
wholly surpass now that he has attained to God Himself and 
contemplates Him in all things. For the whole man, as he says, will 
become “weightless spirit” and will not be “held down to the earth 
by any weight of the body nor hindered from ascending to the 
heavens”. 

BOOK II 

135 

“Then,” he says, “by joining the intelligibles and the sensibles 
in addition to these” — that is, to the unifications of natures that 
have been mentioned — “through the equality of his knowledge 
with (that of) the angels, he will make all creatures one single 
creature, not separated in him in respect of knowledge and ignorance, 
for he will have a gnostic science of reasons in the things that are, 
equal to that of the angels without any difference, by means of 
which the infinite outpouring from above of the gifts of the true 
Sophia, as much as is meet, supplies henceforth purely and directly 535B 
to those who are worthy the unknown and inexplicable knowledge 
of God.” The profundity of this sentence appears to me unfathom¬ 
able [and especially where he says “in respect of knowledge and 
ignorance, for he will have a gnostic science equal to that of the 
angels”], and not without reason. For in what went before he 
seemed to teach nothing else than a certain unification into unity of 
all the sensibles and intelligibles so that nothing would remain in 
them that was separable, nothing that was corporeal, nothing that 
was variable, but that by a wonderful return the lower natures 
would always pass into the higher ; but now he seems to say that the 
unification of natural substances is in the intellect alone, but not in 
the things themselves, that is to say, that it is not those things which 
through generation into divers genera and divers forms and infinite 535C 
individuals received from the Creator’s Providence their intelligible 
or sensible diversity [for not otherwise do we understand that there 
is a unification of created substances in the angels than by their 
gnostic science alone, but not by the gathering together of the things 
themselves into one. For they know the reasons of all created 
natures in themselves by a single apprehension of the intellect as 
there is in the wisest human soul a single and inseparable knowledge 
of the various arts, so that ignorance, whether in angels — for even 
among them we read of some who are not purged of all ignorance — 
or in rational souls, brings about no segregation of natures, whereas 
gnostic science is the cause of their unification. For the under¬ 
standing of things is what things really are, in the words of 
St. Dionysius: “The knowledge of the things that are is the things 
that are”], but their primordial causes and reasons, that are 535D 
gathered into a certain unification, and that by an act of the 
intelligence, not in the thing itself. 

But before we come to the contemplation of this question, if 
there is anything to be said about it, I think the rest of Maximus’ 
theory of the aforesaid unification of things must be given. 

136 

PERIPHYSEON 

536A “And the end,” he says, “uniting in all these through love the 

created to the non-created nature — O the wonder of the divine 
clemency towards us ! — would manifest it as one and the same in 
the state of grace : the whole man wholly encompassed by the whole 
of Divinity and made everything that God is excepting similitude of 
essence and receiving the whole of Him from Himself’, namely from 
God, “about to possess God as the most singular prize of his ascent, 
God, that is, as the end of the motion of the things that move, and 
the secure and immutable stability of the things which are borne 
towards Him, and the infinitely and inimitably existing end and 
limit of every limit and statute and law and reason and intellect and 
nature.” 

9 Therefore it was to this end, as far as we are given to 
understand from the discourse of the aforesaid master, that man 
was made among the primordial causes in the image of God ; that in 
him every creature, both intelligible and sensible, of which he is 
composed, as of various extremes, should become an inseparable 
unity, and that he should be the mediating term and unification of 
all creatures. For there is no creature than cannot be understood (to 
be) in man, whence also in the Holy Scriptures he is wont to be 
called “every creature”. For in the Gospel it is written “Preach the 
gospel to every creature”, and in the Apostle, “Every creature 
groaneth and travaileth until now.” And if he were not in a state of 
sin there would not be in him the division of the sexes, but there 
would be only man ; the inhabited globe would not in him be 
separated from paradise, but the whole of earthly nature would in 
him be paradise, that is to say, a spiritual earth and way of life; 

536C heaven and earth would not in him be segregated — for he would be 
wholly heavenly, and nothing earthly, nothing heavy, nothing 
corporeal would appear in him ; for he would be and would multiply 
to the number pre-determined by his Creator, as the angels both are 
and multiply — ; the sensible nature would not in him be distinct 
from the intelligible, for he would be all intellect, ever and immutably 
attached to his Creator and in no way inferior to his primordial 
causes in which he was created ; and no creature which is created in 
him would in him suffer any division. But because the first man had 
refused to remain in such a happy state, and fell from it through 
pride, and the unity of human nature was dissipated into infinite 

536D divisions and variations, the divine clemency ordained that there 
should be born a new Man in the world, [of the world, that is, a man 
born of men for the sake of men], in whom that nature which in the 
old man was divided should be called to its pristine unity. 

BOOK II 

So the same Maximus (says) : “Seeing then that by nature, as 
created in his proper principle — I mean God — , man is not moved 
but among those things that are beneath him, over which he himself 
is the divinely appointed principle, not by nature but by will he was 537A 
moved to folly (and) used the natural power for the unification of 
separated things with which he was endowed through generation 
rather for the separation of things that should be unified..., ‘The 
natures are made anew and God becomes man’ so that He may save 
man from destruction, and by re-uniting through Himself universally 
in everything the fissures of nature which are contrary to nature, 
and by showing forth universally the foreshown reasons of the 
things that are divided, by which the unification of the separated 
things is wont to be brought about. He might fulfil the great plan of 
the God and Father, summing up”, that is, gathering together, “into 
Himself all things which are in heaven and which (are) on earth ; in 
whom also they were created. So, by the unification of all things 
universally to Himself, beginning from our division. He is made 537B 
perfect man from us and in us and for us, possessing all our 
characteristics completely... not as a consequence of the marriage- 
bed... thereby showing, as I think, how there was also another 
manner of man’s propagation into multiplicity foreknown to God if 
the first man should keep the commandment and should not cast 
himself down into bestiality by turning his own powers to evil uses 
and be thrust into the difference and division of his nature into male 
and female, which, as I have said, he certainly did not require in 
order to become man. But those things without which it is perhaps 537C 
possible for him to exist need not endure for ever. For in Christ 
Jesus, says the divine Apostle, there is neither male nor female.” 

[Do you see how much he insists that the cause of the division 10 
of human nature must be attributed to the sin of the first man ? For, 
“those things”, he says, “without which it is perhaps possible to 
exist need not endure for ever”, as though he were to say explicitly : 
Seeing that if man had not fallen into sin it was possible for him to 
endure without the division of his nature — for this is not a part of 
his nature but happened to him as a consequence of sin — , what 
need, then, requires that after the unification of nature into its 
primitive status that division should endure ? For as before sin it was 
possible to be without it, so it will be possible after his reintegration 
to abide eternally.] 

But so as not to go in detail through his discourses in which he 
most clearly teaches that the unification of the whole creature which 

137 

138 

PERIPHYSEON 

537D 

538A 
That it was 
in the male 
sex that the 
Lord ap¬ 
peared to His 
disciples 
after the 
resurrection 
although He 
arose without 
sex 

538B 

Concerning 
the difference 
between 
paradise and 
the inhabited 
globe 

538C 

11 

would be effected in man if he were not in a state of sin is achieved 
through all things in Christ [whose resurrection precedes that of all], 
I shall select from many passages a few which are relevant to the 
present discussion. First, then, [he shows] that the Lord Jesus united 
in himself the division of (our) nature, that is, male and female. For 
it was not in the bodily sex but simply in man that He rose from the 
dead. For in Him there is neither male nor female, although it was in 
that masculine sex in which He was born of a Virgin and in which 
He suffered that he appeared to His disciples after His resurrection 
so that their faith in the resurrection might be confirmed. For 
otherwise they would not recognize Him if they did not see the 
shape that was known to them. For they had not yet fully received 
the Holy Spirit which taught them all things. 

Then, after the resurrection. He united in Himself the inhabited 
world to paradise. For on His return from the dead into paradise He 
conversed in this world with His disciples, clearly showing them that 
paradise is not other than the glory of the resurrection which first 
appeared in Him and which He would bestow upon all the faithful ; 
and teaching (them) that our habitable globe has not any difference 
in paradise in respect of the reason [of its nature ; for it is not by 
nature that they are separated but by the qualities and quantities 
and other variations, things that were added subsequently to this 
habitable earth as the consequence of the general sin of human 
nature in general for its punishment, and, what is more, also for its 
correction and education]; and, “that the earth, being one, [is] 
indivisible with itself, preserving the reason [of its nature in] which it 
is free from division by difference”. For it is not by matter or spatial 
intervals that paradise is distinguished from this inhabited globe but 
by diversity of conduct and difference in (degree of) blessedness. For 
the first man also, had he not become a sinner, could live happily in 
the inhabited globe since there is one and the same reason in the 
principal causes of the inhabited globe and of paradise, as our Lord 
most clearly showed in Himself after the resurrection. For at once 
He was both in paradise and abode with His disciples. For it is not 
to be believed that in a local sense He came from some other place 
[that] He might appear before His disciples and departed into 
another place when He was not appearing [— He who after 
resurrection had passed beyond the nature of places and times not 
only by His Divinity but also by His Humanity ; for I should find it 
hard to believe that spiritual bodies were confined within place or 
time, as (I should) not (believe) that they are diversified by qualities 
or quantities or any describable forms. For they are natures of the 

BOOK II 

139 

utmost simplicity, as can be particularly well deduced from the 
evidence of pure fire which, while pervading all bodies of the 
sensible world, is of such subtlety that it is not retained in any place 
and yet is seen to reveal its action in all things — ], but at one and the 
same time in one and the same place appeared to them for a season 
in that shape in which He had suffered so as to nourish their faith 
until [they should be illuminated] by the power of true knowledge 
with which afterwards they were transfused, and then, when the 
interval of His momentary appearance was over. He would at once 
return to the intelligible and invisible dopaala of the spiritual body, 
that is, (its) invisibility, which surpasses all time [as we said before] 
and all place; or, what appears to be more likely. He in no way 
departed from the glory of the resurrection in place or time or 
quantity or quality [for there is no one who doubts but that spiritual 
bodies are without all these] when, in that form in which He 
appeared to the world when He was living in the world for the 
world’s salvation. He revealed Himself to His disciples after the 
resurrection. For human reason yields where the Divine Power 
alone prevails. [For that saying of His, “Behold, I am with you 
always, even unto the end of the world”, sufficiently and clearly 
indicates that not only as the Word by which all things are fulfilled 
and which is above all things, but also according to the flesh which 
He received into the unity of His Substance or Person and which He 
raised from the dead and which He changed into God, He exists 
always and everywhere, though not circumscribed by place or time 
or any (other) means. For in some wonderful and ineffable way He 
is both above all the heavenly essences and is with the Father in that 
Humanity which is unified with the Word of the Father and is God 
and reigns throughout the world ; and appears to those who love 
Him either invisibly or visibly. He does not leave heaven and yet He 
rules the earth. He sits at the right hand of the Father in the height, 
governing all things ; He ministers salvation to human nature in the 
depth. Do not therefore imagine that the Humanity of Christ which 
after the resurrection was transformed into his Divinity (is) in place. 
The Divinity of Christ is not in place : so neither is His Humanity. 
Be sure that it is the same with time, with quality, with quantity, 
with circumscribed form. For it is most piously believed and most 
clearly understood that all these are absent from the whole Humanity 
of Christ, that is, from His body. His soul, and His intellect, after 
the triumph of the resurrection; and to that same glory He shall, 
after the general resurrection, bring His chosen, <who> shall be 
one in Him and with Him.] So Christ was both in paradise and 

538D 

539A 

539B 

That the 
Humanity of 
Christ after 
His resur¬ 
rection is not 
confined in 
place any 
more than 
His Divinity 

539C 

140 

PERIPHYSEON 

539D 

540A 

12 

540B 

That the 
expulsion of 
the first man 
from para¬ 
dise was not 
a conse¬ 
quence of 
the divine 
anger but 
rather a 
means of 
correction 

540C 

at the same time in the world, showing that in both world and 
paradise there is one [natural] reason, (and) uniting the world and 
paradise in Himself. For in the world it is not the corporeal and 
spatially extended masses and the manifold varieties of its divers 
parts that right reason contemplates and venerates, but its natural 
primordial causes, united in themselves and most beautiful, to 
which, when [its] end comes, it shall return and abide for ever [in 
them]. 

[Now we hold that the end of this sensible world will be nothing 
else but its return into God and into its primordial causes in which it 
naturally subsists.] For, as our reason teaches us, this world would 
[not] have burst forth into a variety of [both] sensible species and 
the divers multiplicities of their parts if God had not foreseen the 
fall and ruin of the first man when he abandoned the unity of his 
nature; so that at least, after his fall from spiritual to corporeal 
things, from eternal to temporal, from incorruptible to perishable, 
from the heights to the depths, from the spiritual man to the 
psychical man, from a simple nature to the division of the sexes, 
from the status and multiplication of the angels to the bestial [and] 
contemptible and corruptible generation according to the body, he 
should, admonished by such a punishment, understand the wretch¬ 
edness of his plight and [by penitence and laying aside of his pride 
and by observance of the divine laws which he had transgressed] 
plead his return to the first state of his honour. For it is not to be 
believed that the most divine clemency of the Creator thrust forth 
sinning man into this world as though actuated by anger or desirous 
of revenge — for sound reason shows that these accidents are absent 
from the Divine Goodness — , but as a kind of ineffable teaching 
and incomprehensible clemency, so that man, who, by the judgement 
of his free will, had refused to maintain himself in the status of his 
nature, might, having learnt from his punishments, seek the grace of 
his Creator, and by becoming through it obedient to the Divine 
Laws which he had previously in his pride neglected, with care and 
prudence [humble and mindful of his former neglectfulness and of 
his fall through pride] might return to his first state, from which, 
protected by grace and the free judgement [of his will] he would not 
fall again or wish to fall or be able to fall. 

But let us return to the unification of natures in Christ. “Then”, 
says the aforesaid Master, “by His ascension into heaven. He 
straightway united heaven and earth, and returning with this earthly 
body which is of the same nature as we” — changed, that is, into a 

BOOK II 

141 

spiritual substance — “to heaven, He revealed the whole of sensible 
nature to be one... Then, ... passing with soul and body, that is, with 
our human nature in its totality, through all the heavenly and divine 
intelligible orders in succession He united the sensibles and intel- 
ligibles, revealing that the convergence... of the whole creature in its 
very first reason (is) in Him perfectly inseparable and immutable. 540D 
And finally, in (addition to) all these, in respect of the understanding 
of Humanity” [that is to say, in respect of humanity itself], “He 
comes into the presence of God Himself, appearing for us, as it is 
written, before the face of His God and Father as Man, who as the 
Word can by no means ever depart from the Father... and first He in 
Himself united us with ourselves in Himself by taking away the 
difference between male and female and instead of men and women, 541A 
in whom the mode of division is most apparent, exhibited men as 
such properly and truly... bearing immaculate their image which 
marks of corruption do not touch at all.” 

[Do you see how openly he declares that man created in the 

image and likeness of God was entirely without difference of sex, 

and is still without it to the extent that the image and likeness of the 

Creator persists in him, and that that division was an accident 

affecting only his body, as a consequence of sin? For although Concerning 

spiritual sexes are understood to exist in the soul — for vouc, that is, spiritual 

^ sexes of the 

intellect, is a kind of male in the soul, while aia0r|ai(;, that is, sense, 
is a kind of female — , yet we do not recognize there any deviation 
from nature, but the mystery of Christ and the Church, and the 541B 
concept of a single understanding of Creator and creature.] 

“And with us”, [he says], “and for us, comprehending the 
whole creature by means of the intermediaries (which are) as it were 
the extremes of their proper parts. He also Joined together in 
Himself indissolubly paradise and the inhabited globe, heaven and 
earth, the sensibles and the intelligibles, since like us He has body 
and sense and soul and intellect, to which parts, as it were, 
associating in each case the extreme which in every respect is 
cognate to each, He recapitulated in the way already described all 
things divinely into Himself.” [Consider carefully the force of the 13 
words; for they are not without power. “Since”, he says, “like us 
He”, that is, Christ, “has body and sense and soul and intellect.” 

For human nature is constituted of these as of four parts, and 
Christ, as true Man, took them upon Himself and unified them in 541C 
Himself. For He was made perfect Man. For He left nothing of 
man, except sin, that He would not receive into the unity of His 

142 

PERIPHYSEON 

Substance and would not unify, that is, would not make one, in 
Himself. For in Him after His resurrection body and sense, soul and 
intellect are not four but one, and not a composite one, but simply 
one, “to which parts”, he says, “as it were, associating in each case 
the extreme which in every respect is cognate to each”, as though he 
were to say explicitly : Since Christ received the four parts of human 
nature and unified (them) in Himself, it is clear that He took upon 
541D Himself and unified in Himself the universal creature, that is, the 
intelligible and the sensible. For in man, which He received whole, 
the universal creature is created ; for to each part, as he says, 
“associating the extreme which is cognate”, calling bodies and all 
visible things cognate extremes. For these occupy the lowest 
542A extremity of the universal creature, and are cognate to one another, 
while the other (and) highest extreme is occupied by the intellectual 
essences, which are similarly cognate to one another. 

Therefore, for each part of human nature the cognate extremes, 
that is, natures of the same nature, are associated with Christ. For in 
receiving the body (which is), as it were, the fourth part of man. He 
attached to Himself the whole corporeal creature, while in assuming 
sense He combined with Himself the whole sensible and sense- 
employing creature. What is to be said of soul ? Did He not in (the 
soul) which He received associate in Himself not only the rational 
soul but also all nutritive and auctive life ? Concerning intellect none 
of the wise is in doubt. For to the human intellect which Christ 
542B assumed all the intellectual essences adhere. Do you not clearly see 
that the whole creation, I mean the intelligible and the sensible and 
the intermediate natures, is unified in Christ? And this is briefly 
stated by the Master in his conclusion :] “Showing that the whole 
creature together exists as a unity, like a man, fulfilled by the 
coming together of its parts to one another and looking towards 
itself through the totality of its subsistence in consequence of the 
knowledge, one and simple and without specification or differen¬ 
tiation, of the descent from that which is not, through which the 
whole creature is able to receive one and the same cause wholly 
undivided'' 

Up to this point we have been speaking about the divisions and 
unifications of substances, following the venerable Master — I mean 
Maximus — as far as is relevant to the present question, and now we 
542C must, if you agree, return to the subject proposed, that is, to the 
discussion of that form of universal nature which both is created 

BOOK II 

and creates, and which is constituted in the primordial causes ; for it 
was about this that we proposed to speak in this book. 

A. I should certainly agree if you would explain more clearly 
certain things that were said in the foregoing exposition, for they 
trouble me considerably. 

N. Tell me what those things are which, among the things 
which I have said, particularly trouble you, and of which you seem 
to require a clearer explanation. 

A. In the divisions of created substances according to Maximus 14 
nothing troubles me or seems to me particularly obscure or doubtful 
except the division of men into male and female, and (his opinion) 
that this did not proceed from the first creation of man in the image 542D 
of God but from the punishment of his sin, and that again after the 
general resurrection of all bodies which is to come at the end of the 
world the division will no longer remain but will return into the 
unity of the primordial creation of nature. For who is there who, 
hearing such things, would not be horrified and at once break out in 543A 
these words : “Then after the resurrection there will be no sexual 
division of male [and] female if each is to be totally removed from 
human nature ? Or what form will appear in man if no one has either 
the male or the female form ? Or what sort of recognition will there 
be if there is to be an extermination of both sexes and an amalgam 
of all men, whether spiritual and incorporeal or visible and corporeal 
(and) circumscribed by place and time, into a simple unification, not 
divided by difference of forms V — And this is something that has 
been left undetermined by you [and not discussed] although you 
appear to mean that in the bodies of the resurrection qualities and 
quantities will be rather spiritual than corporeal — , to say nothing 543B 
of how much this doctrine conflicts with the authority of all or 
almost all the holy masters of the Latin tongue, who unanimously 
declare that after the resurrection of all things each sex will have its 
integrity, so that man returns into the form of a man, woman into 
the form of a woman, with all the marks of their bodily parts by 
which each sex is particularly distinguished ; and so eternally 
remains, whether in glory or in punishment [ — if, that is, the 
punishment will be < corporeally > eternal as the glory is eternal, a 
question which we will discuss in the fifth book. For many think it 
unseemly to believe that suffering should be co-eternal with blessed¬ 
ness, although the words of the Gospel which says, “Depart, ye 
accursed, into everlasting fire”, seem to be against them]. 

143 

144 

PERIPHYSEON 

These things especially, as I have said, among the aforesaid 
543C divisions of the substances made by God, bring doubt upon me. But 
I confess that concerning the return and unifications whatever has 
been said by you is in all respects difficult and obscure for me. For I 
do not clearly see how the unification of both sexes of human nature 
came about in Christ when He first rose from the dead, or how it 
will come about in all men at the end of the world [ — for we believe 
that Christ rose again in the same sex in which He lived in the flesh, 
and that He remains in it eternally and will so remain ; for who will 
deny that He was of the male sex before He suffered and rose again ? 
Similarly we also believe that all men will rise again in the same sex 
in which they fall — ] ; how the habitable globe will be united with 
543D paradise ; [and] earth with heaven ; the whole sensible creature with 
the intelligible ; and all these will be joined together with God so 
that they [may be] one [and no diversity appear in them] ; and 
especially that which you promised would be explained by you, that 
544A is, how the return of all the aforesaid substances into the One and 
(their) unification are to come to pass, whether in the thing itself, 
that is to say, by the passage of all sensible things into intelligible 
things, so that when this sensible world has run its course all things 
may be of a spiritual nature and nothing corporeal or sensible 
remain; or whether it is only in the concept of the mind which 
contemplates the natural unity of all things in their reasons and 
primordial causes. For things which from the outside appear to the 
corporeal sense to be various and manifold in places, times, 
qualities, quantities and the other differences of sensible nature, in 
their reasons, according to which they were created by the Creator 
of all things and eternally subsist in the immutable condition of their 
nature and by certain rules of the Divine Providence, are seen by the 
pure intellect which inquires into the truth of all things, which finds 
544B out (all things) and which considers (all things) to be an indivisible 
unity, and are so. For to the extent that exterior natures, I mean 
sensible and corporeal, tend to be varied by times and places and the 
other accidents — because it is in these that their beauty is chiefly 
displayed and therefore by carnal minds [far removed from truth 
and unity and dissipated in the multiplicity of temporal things] they 
are intemperately and lustfully loved — , to the same extent interior 
natures, that is, the intelligible essences, inseparably show their 
simple and indivisible unity within themselves and among them¬ 
selves, and therefore delight the minds of the wise which contemplate 
the beauty of their harmony and fellowship [and to these when they 
return from the unstable and diverse variability of places and times 

BOOK II 

the contemplation of the sole unified and unchangeable truth is 
promised as a reward]. 544C 

For I do not think it is to be believed that the celestial powers, 
which Holy Scripture calls by various names, look upon this world 
from without or with corporeal senses. Nor, however, is it to be 
supposed that they are altogether ignorant of it, for the sacred 
history teaches that [all these visible things] are governed and 
administered through them [for through the angels the divine laws 
are executed, the behaviour of good men is corrected, ordered, 
brought back from wicked ways, trained in the manifold doctrines 
of Divine Providence, and called back to the original mode of their 
nature — ] ; but they behold this world which they rule < in so far as 
is permitted them> in the eternal causes which they themselves 
eternally contemplate, not divided by intervals of places, not 544D 
distinguished by different motions of times, not dispersed in the 
multiplicity of its parts, not (as) dissimilar by (reason of) the 
manifold differences of qualities and quantities, not (as) swollen by 
the size of its bulk, not extended by differing spaces of length and 545A 
depth and breadth, but (as) immutably subsisting all together and 
not compositely in its reasons. 

Therefore I would consider that these difficult questions, which 
by myself I cannot clearly discern, should be more clearly discussed 
by you. But I think it best to leave to your judgement in what order 
they should be broached, provided that broached they are, whether 
now or later. 

N. The (natural) order of things demands that all these matters 
which you say are not clearly apparent to you should be discussed 
elsewhere < although a few words may be said here in anticipation, 
for all these (questions) which seem difficult to you can be summed 
up by a single argument. For if Christ Who understands all things, 
(Who) indeed is the understanding of all things, really unified all 
that He assumed, who doubts but that what first took place in the 545B 
Head and principal Exemplar of the whole of human nature will 
eventually happen in the whole, as we shall consider in the fifth 
book?> . For the text of this present book makes no further 
demand than that to the best of our ability we discuss whatever the 
Light of Minds shall have granted (us) concerning the primordial 
causes. 

A. Proceed in what order you wish. For I think it is not 15 
inappropriate that the present questions about the quadripartite 

145 

146 

PERIPHYSEON 

division of universal nature should be expounded in the same order 
in which they were set out. 

N. I consider that we should take the beginning of our 
reasoning from the Divine Oracles. 

A. Nothing (would be) more proper. For it is necessary that 
from them every inquiry into truth should take its beginning. 

N. The most divine prophet, I mean Moses, at the very 
545C beginning of the book of Genesis says : “In the beginning God made 
heaven and earth.” On this passage all the commentators of Holy 
Scripture have exercised the keenness of their genius and have given 
various meanings to what the prophet, or rather the Holy Spirit 
through the prophet, wished to be signified by the name “heaven”, 
and what by “earth”. Some consider a compendious expression 
comprehending the whole [perfected] creature to be meant by these 
words (and) think that by the name of heaven the creation [and 
formation] of the whole spiritual and intelligible creature is intended, 
and (by the name) of earth the constitution of the whole corporeal 
and sensible creature by its most perfect definitions. Others try to 
teach (that what is signified is) the formlessness of each creature, the 
inception of the spiritual by the name of heaven, and that of this 
corporeal world by the appellation of earth. Others affirm that by 
545D these words is indicated the creation of the whole sensible creature, 
which is made up, as it were, of two principal parts, I mean heaven 
and earth, so that nothing about the creation of the spiritual 
creature is signified in this passage, but the prophet wished to 
describe the plenitude of the corporeal creature only. For by sure 
546A reasons they teach that between these two parts, heaven I mean and 
earth, as though between certain extreme limits distinct from one 
another (but) linked by their intermediaries, the universe of this 
sensible world by a certain natural harmony is composed and made 
into one. 

But it would be tedious and irrelevant to the subject of the 
present work to prolong the discourse with the many and diverse 
opinions of divers (authorities) [and it will seem superfluous to 
introduce the views of others on this kind of problem except where 
the utmost necessity requires (it)]. But as for myself, when I consider 
the interpretations of the many commentators, I think none is more 
acceptable, nothing more likely to be true, than that in the afore¬ 
mentioned words of Holy Scripture, that is, by the choice of the 
terms “heaven” and “earth”, we should understand the primordial 

BOOK II 

causes of the whole creature, which the Father had created in His 
only begotten Son, Who is given the name of “Beginning”, before 
all things which have been created, and that we should accept that 
under the name of heaven the principal causes of the intelligible and 
celestial essences have been signified, and under the appellation of 
earth those of the sensible things by which the universe of this 
corporeal world is made up. 

A. I too would prefer this interpretation to the others if I were 
not slightly troubled by that uncertainty which seems to arise in the 
aforesaid differences of interpretation. For, as it seems to me, there 
is little or no difference between the interpretation of those who 
consider that these words of Scripture describe the formlessness of 
both natures, I mean the intelligible and the sensible, and those who 
consider that they describe the primordial causes of the intelligibles 
and the sensibles. [For we say that formless matter and its formless¬ 
ness are a [kind of] cause of things. For in it they have their 
beginning, although formlessly, that is to say, imperfectly as yet, 
and are understood to be almost nothing, yet not to be entirely 
nothing, but to be in some fashion a beginning and to seek form and 
perfection.] 

N. Be more attentive then, and examine acutely the differences 
of things, and dispel the clouds of ambiguity wholly by the keenness 
of your attention. For you cannot, as I think, be unaware that the 
formlessness of things is not the same as the causes [and perfect 
principles] of things. For if being and not-being are the direct 
opposites of each other, and nothing is closer to true being than the 
created causes of created things and nothing closer to true not-being 
than formless matter — for, as Augustine says, the formless is next 
to nothing — , does it seem to you that the difference is slight 
between that which is close to true essence and that which approxi¬ 
mates to the privation of true essence which is called nothing [at 
all] ? [And we did not say that the formlessness of things is the cause 
of the essence and form and perfection of things but rather that it is 
the privation of the essence, form, and perfection of things. For the 
cause, if it be truly cause, most perfectly pre-encompasses in itself all 
things of which it is the cause, and perfects in itself its effects before 
they become manifest in anything, and when they break forth 
through generation into genera and visible species they do not 
abandon their perfection in it but fully and immutably abide (in it), 
and need no other perfection than it < alone> in which they subsist 
all at once and eternally.] 

147 

546B 

546C 

Concerning 
the differ¬ 
ence be¬ 
tween cause 
and formless 
matter 

546D 

547A 

148 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. Such a difference does not seem to me slight at all. For the 
primordial causes which have been most perfectly created in their 
immutable reasons by the One and Supreme Principle of all things 
which itself derives from nothing are far removed from the form¬ 
lessness of all things which not only do not yet arrive at the 
547B perfection of their form but are scarcely yet beginning to be and 
hardly yet emerging from not-being. For although the formlessnesses 
of things seem to occupy an intermediate position between being 
and not-being, beginning out of not-being to be — for they set out 
upon a kind of progress out of not-being towards being, but are 
understood not yet to have attained the perfection of their form and 
their essence — , they are considered to be nearer to not-being than 
to being. For the formlessness of things is nothing else but a certain 
motion which is departing from absolute not-being and seeking its 
rest in that which truly is ; the primordial causes, on the other hand, 
are so created in “the Beginning”, that is, in the Word of God which 
is truly said to be and is, that they do not by any motion seek their 
547C perfection in anything but that in which they immutably are, and (in 
which they) are perfectly formed. For in being ever turned towards 
the one Form of all things, which all things seek, I mean the Word 
of the Father, they are formed, and never anywhere depart from 
their formation, for the causes of places and times are in them ; but 
the things which are below them are so created by them in the lower 
orders of things that (the causes) may draw them to themselves and 
(that they) may seek the one Principle of all things, but they 
themselves by no means look towards the things that are below 
them, but eternally contemplate their Form which is above them, so 
that they do not cease to be eternally formed by it. For in themselves 
they are formless, and know that they themselves are perfectly 
created in their universal Form, I mean the Word. 

But which of those who have a right understanding will dare to 
547D say of the formlessness of things what can thus be said of the 
primordial causes? — especially as the unformed matter of things 
also is believed to flow from no other source than the primordial 
causes. For if the primordial causes are called primordial precisely 
because they are first created by the one creative Cause of all things, 
548A and (themselves) create the things that are below them — for we 
have already said that the primordial causes both are created and 
create — , what wonder if, as we believe and confirm with sure 
reasons that unformed matter is in the number of those things which 
are created after and through the primordial causes, we admit that 
this too is created by the primordial causes? 

BOOK II 

N. So primordial causes mean one thing, and unformed matters 
another ? 

A. This we are compelled to concede for the reasons already 
given. [Proceed to the consideration of what follows.] 

N. Similarly they also translate in various ways what follows : 
“But the earth was waste and void”, — or, according to the 
Septuagint : “invisible and non-composite,” — “and darkness (was) 
over the face of the abyss.” For some think that by the phrase 
“earth waste and void” or “invisible and non-composite” is figura¬ 
tively signified the formlessness of the visible creature, and by the 
word(s) “dark abyss” that of the invisible essence. For every 
corporeal and sensible creature is composed of matter and form, 
and therefore matter, lacking form, is called formless, which means 
lacking form, and invisible and non-composite, or waste and void, 
but when it receives form it is said (to be) visible and composite and 
solid and perfect, being circumscribed within the certain limits of its 
proper nature ; but the invisible creature, that is, the intelligible and 
rational, is called formless before it turns towards its proper Form, 
that is to say, towards its Creator. For to achieve perfection it is not 
enough for it to have subsistence [from] essence and essential 
difference — for every intellectual creature is composed of these 
two — , without the perfection of being turned towards the only 
begotten Word, I mean the Son of God, Who is the Form of all 
intelligible life. For otherwise it remains imperfect and without 
form. 

Others think that the earth that is waste and void or invisible 
and without composition refers to this hulk of the earthly body (as it 
was) first created, waste and void, as they think, because it was not 
yet decked out with the divers genera and species of buds, fruits, and 
animals, invisible either because it was everywhere covered with an 
abundance of the moist nature or because man who would have the 
ability of beholding it had not yet emerged through generation from 
the primordial causes [but they say that there was darkness over the 
abyss because the air which enveloped the abyss on all sides was not 
yet infused with light and therefore was not able to illuminate the 
abyss (which was) established within it]. And although St. Augustine 
seems to oppose this interpretation, it is not altogether rejected by 
us since it is that of St. Basil. For it is not for us to adjudicate 
between the interpretations of the Holy Fathers, but to acknowledge 
them with piety and veneration. However, it is not forbidden us to 
select that which seems after rational consideration to accord the 

149 

16 

Various 
opinions 
548B 
about the 
void earth 
and the dark 
abyss 

548C 

548 D 

549A 

150 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the creation 
of the prim¬ 
ordial causes 
of sensible 
things 

549B 

better with the Divine Oracles. But if one should say that these words 
of the prophet refer to nothing other than the primordial causes he 
will not appear to deviate from the truth. For is it so incredible that 
the TTpcoTOTUTTov, that is, the principal exemplar, of corporeal nature 
which is what is meant by the name of “earth” and which God in the 
Beginning, that is, the Father in the Son, had eternally and most 
perfectly created before this sensible world should be called void 
and waste ? — void because it was void of every sensible thing in its 
effects until it issued forth into the genera and species of sensible 
nature in places and times; waste because the understanding of the 
prophet who was initiated into the Divine Mysteries had as yet 
beheld no quality, no quantity, nothing filled out by corporeal 
matter, nothing extended in place, nothing moving through time. 
For these words, I mean “waste and void”, signify rather the most 
complete and immutable perfection of the primordial nature (that 
was) created before all things in the Word than the mutable and 
imperfect and as yet formless procession of this sensible world, 
extended in places and times, and coming into being through 
generation, and seeking to be formed in the divers individuals of the 
sensible creature. 

For waste and void are often used even in praise of corporeal 
things. For the whole space which is set in the midst between the 
terrestrial globe and the choirs of the stars and extreme circum¬ 
ference of the world is divided by those who are learned in (the 
nature of) the world and in divine Scripture into two parts. The 
549C lower part, from the earth to the moon, is called air, that is, spirit, 
the upper [from the moon to the stars of the outermost sphere] (is 
called) ether, that is, pure spirit \ <but both> are called by the 
Greeks Koucpoc;, “void” or “waste” by the Latins. But it is agreed 
that that < upper region> is ever the purest and brightest. [For it 
is] the most serene [and rests in an eternal silence save for the 
harmonious symphonies of the planets and surpasses every mortal 
and earthly sense by the high pitch of its tones and semitones and 
gliding with the motions of the subtlest fire], flooded with everlasting 
light except for the little portion occupied by the earth’s shadow 
[which is called night] ; and this is why it is said to be void. And not 
unreasonably, for it is void of all earthly and gross mass and is filled 
549D by no corporeal heaviness. For the globes of the planets are of the 
utmost lightness and are spiritual; are weighed down by no earthly 
quality (and) cast no shadow. For the moisture of the moon and the 
grime which appears on her are not the product of the purity of her 

BOOK II 

151 

nature but of [the vapours of the earthly mass [which the Greeks call 
dipiSec;] and of the proximity of the moist abyss. Also the cloudiness 
and obscurity of this more corporeal air come not from itself but 
from the propinquity of waters and earths. [For where the humidity 
of the moon is born, there also (is born) the cloudiness of the air.] 
Again, thunders and lightnings, showers, rains, snow, ice (and) the 
various blasts of the winds take their origins from no other source 
but the vapours of earth and water. 

What wonder, then, if the primordial causes of visible things 
are figuratively signified by the term “waste and void earth” on 
account of their excessive subtlety and the ineffable simplicity of 
their intelligible nature before they flowed forth through generation 
into the genera and species and sensible individuals [in which, as 
though in corporeal clouds, they appear to the senses], when the 
aforementioned regions of the visible world, because of their subtlety 
and all but incorporeality, are not inappropriately called waste and 
void, as one of the poets says : “Thou shalt hurl thy body with a leap 
through the void air,” and Virgil in (his) twelfth (book) : “Then the 
man’s stone itself hurtling through the waste void”? The same 
reasoning (underlies) the other interpretation which says that the 
earth was invisible and incomposite. For what else could that 
invisibility of the mystical earth more reasonably signify than the 
obscurity of the primordial causes of the corporeal creature not yet 
manifest by any light of colour (or) distinction of forms (and) 
moreover surpassing even the purest intellects? Rightly also are the 
primordial causes called incomposite. For they are simple and 
entirely lacking in any composition. For there is in them the 
inexpressible unity and the indivisible and incomposite harmony 
which go beyond every combination of parts whatever, whether 
(these be) dissimilar or similar. What shall I say of the primordial 
causes of the intelligible essence? Is it not most appropriate that 
they should be called by the Holy Spirit by the name of a dark 
abyss? For they are called “abyss” on account of their unfathomable 
depth and their infinite diffusion through all things, which is 
perceived by no sense (and) comprehended by no intellect ; and they 
have earned the name of “darkness” because of the ineffable 
excellence of their purity. For even this sensible sun often brings 
darkness upon those who look into it, since they are unable to face 
its excessive brilliance. Thus there was darkness over the abyss of 
the primordial causes. For before they entered into the plurality of 
the spiritual essences no created intellect could know of them what 
they were, and darkness is still over this abyss because it is perceived 

550A 

17 

550B 

550C 

Concerning 
the prim¬ 
ordial causes 
of the 
intelligibles 

550D 

551A 

152 

PERIPHYSEON 

18 

An inquiry 
concerning 
the causes 

551B 

551C 

551D 

by no intellect except that which formed it in the beginning. But 
from its effects, that is, from its processions into intelligible forms it 
is known only that it is, but not understood (as to) what it is. 

But whether that mystical invisible earth and the dark intelli¬ 
gible abyss of the first causes itself will be for ever an invisible earth 
and the abyss will remain eternally dark, or whether at a certain 
time [namely after the end of the visible world] they will come into 
the knowledge of intelligible and rational essences, (is a question 
which) requires no little investigation. 

A. Rather the greatest. And I earnestly beg you not to pass it 
by without examination. 

N. Tell me, please, what you think : Do the primordial causes 
of things, which we think to be signified by the words “earth” and 
“abyss”, and to be called invisible and dark on account of their 
incomprehensible and excessive depth, cease to be invisible and 
incomprehensible once they proceed through generation into the 
genera and species, individuals and differences of things (which are) 
comprehensible either to sense or to intellect, or do they remain for 
ever in the excellence of their proper nature in which they were 
created in the beginning before all things, and do not become 
subject to any sense or intellect, so that at the same time as they are 
manifest to senses (and) to intellects after a certain mode in the 
things of which they are the causes, they do not abandon the 
excellence of their incomprehensibility but ever abide, as it were, in 
a kind of darkness, I mean in the most secret recesses of the Divine 
Wisdom? 

A. I should believe that they are always invisible and dark. For 
if the Wisdom of God the Father itself, in which all things were 
made and truly subsist and without which it is understood that there 
is nothing, remains in itself incomprehensible and invisible — for it 
is the inaccessible light which passes all understanding — , what 
wonder if the causes of all things, which are created in it and 
through it and for it, should be believed to be eternally invisible and 
incomprehensible and to remain for ever without change? And we 
can make [that] conjecture from the example of our own nature. For 
that which our intellect once rationally conceives in itself [and 
brings to the condition of pure and perfect understanding] it always 
retains in itself at the same time as it expresses it outwardly by 
certain signs. For instance, if the wise mind has grasped the true 
knowledge of some sensible or intelligible thing, that knowledge 

BOOK II 

153 

remains fixed in it at the same time as it does not hesitate to express 
it first by means of phantasies to the thought, then to the senses, [then 
in verbal signs and other indications by which the mind is wont to 
reveal its secret undertakings so that step by step they descend into] 
the knowledge of other minds by natural and artificial progressions. 552A 

N. The principal causes, then, both proceed into the things of 
which they are the causes and at the same time do not depart from 
their Principle, that is, the Wisdom of the Father, in which they are 
created, and, if I may so express it, just as [remaining] in themselves 
invisibly by being eternally concealed in the darkness of their 
excellence, do not cease to appear by being brought forth into the 
light, as it were, of knowledge in their effects. 

A. These things can be reasonably argued. [But I should like to Another 

know whether or not the principles of things which are called by the ^^n- 

cerning the 

names of the primordial causes understand themselves before they causes 
flow forth into those things of which they are the causes. 

N. This can be answered in a few words. For if God made in 
His Wisdom everything that He made, as the Scripture witnesses 552B 
which says, “Thou hast made all things in Thy Wisdom”, who may 
doubt but that all things that were made in Wisdom, as Wisdom 
knows herself and the things that are made in her, (so) not only 
know themselves but also do not lack knowledge of the things of 
which they are the principles? For it is not to be believed that 
anything was created in the Divine Wisdom which is not wise and 
does not know itself. But these things we must consider more 
diligently elsewhere. 

A. So let it be. [For it requires an explanation (that is) neither Another 
brief nor perfunctory. If the primordial causes have wisdom of 
themselves because they are created m Wisdom and subsist eternally ^^e causes 
in that which admits nothing unwise [in itself], how is it that from 
the wise causes many unwise things proceed? For not all things that 
flow forth from them are wise. For we hold that two natures 552C 
participate in wisdom, the intellectual in angels and the rational in 
men. But the other things which can be comprehended by the senses 
or by the intellect we consider (to be) devoid of wisdom <although 
one might reply briefly that it is not strange that the causes of 
unwise things subsist in wise exemplars when we see that the origins 
of darkness naturally inhere in the rays of the sun and that while 
these allow no darkness to be in themselves, yet they produce it as 
an opposite of themselves, as it were, from the causes that inhere in 
them> ].] 

154 

PERIPHYSEON 

19 

Concerning 
the super- 
eminence of 
552D 
the Divine 
Spirit 

553A 

N. What, then, is the meaning of what follows : “And the Spirit 
of God was borne above the waters” ? Was this perhaps added lest it 
should be thought that the primordial causes, by the excellence of 
their nature, surpass not only the power of the intellectual and the 
rational creature but also any cognition by intellect on the part of 
their Creator ? “And the Spirit of God”, he says, “was borne above 
the waters”, as though he was saying: The abyss of the primordial 
causes, (which is) infinite and incomprehensible and therefore justly 
called invisible and dark, does not so far elude by the depth of its 
obscurity every intellect and reason that it cannot even be compre¬ 
hended or surpassed by the Spirit of God. For God made them in 
the beginning as a kind of foundations and principles of all the 
natures which are from Him, and He comprehends them in His 
supereminent (and) infinite gnostic power, and His Spirit is borne 
above them [not by movement through space but by the eminence of 
its knowledge]. 

This also can be said: “The Spirit of God was borne above the 
waters.” For we ought not to believe that the primordial causes of 
all (things) are of such excellence that no higher cause precedes them 
so as to surpass them. For there is one and the same cause of all 
(things) out of which and through which (and) in which and for 
553B which the causes and preceding [origins] of all things were first 
created, and therefore not inappropriately Scripture [testifies] that it 
is borne above all things [because it precedes the order of the 
universal creature which takes the beginning of its being from it and 
in it finds its end] — not that in it one thing is created sooner or later 
than another in a temporal sense, for all things are eternally in it and 
were created by it at one and the same time — but because the 
Divine Providence brought forth from non-existence [into] existence 
the universe of created nature in an order (which is) ineffable and 
incomprehensible to every intellect ; and (because) some things are 
preferred to others by reason of a kind of dignity of their essence, so 
that those things which are believed and understood to be in the 
553C immediate and proximate presence of the Universal Cause of all, I 
mean God himself, without, that is, the interposition of any higher 
creature, are rightly called the first principles of the created universe ; 
after which the rest descend one after another, from the highest to 
the lowest [that is, from the beginning of the intelligible creature to 
the lowest of all, which is body]. 

So the Spirit of God is borne above the dark abyss of the 
primordially created causes of all (things) because only the Creator 

BOOK II 

155 

Spirit is supereminent over created causes in the excellence of His 
knowledge and is the one and only cause which precedes and excels 
over all the causes which He had created, and the first Source of all 
things which flow forth from Him into infinity and return to Him 
again; and if we have a right understanding of the Holy Spirit, 
Himself flows forth from none other than the Father. For from Him 
through an ineffable generation is the Son in Whom, as in the 
Beginning, He made all things ; from Him in procession is the Holy 553D 
Spirit Who is borne above all things. For the Father wills, the Son 
makes, the Holy Spirit perfects. 

[Nor does this appear to conflict with the divine word which 
says that the Father made all things in the Son. For it is not one 
thing for the Father to will all (things) and another for the Father to 554A 
make all (things) in the Son, but it is one and the same thing for the 
Father to will and for the Father to make. For His will is His act. 

And the same must be understood both in the case of the Son and in 
that of the Holy Spirit. For their act is not other than their will, nor 
is there one will of the Father, another of the Son, another of the 
Holy Spirit, but one and the same will, one love of the three 
Substances of the one essential Goodness by which the Father 
moves Himself to make all things in the Son (and) to perfect all 
things in the Holy Spirit ; and the whole of that which the Son 
makes and the Holy Spirit perfects is referred to the Father as maker 
and perfecter because from Him are all things. For from Him 
through generation is the Son Who makes all things, from Him 
through procession is the Holy Spirit Who perfects all things: the 
supreme Trinity Whose being is understood from the things that 
are, and Whose Wisdom is known from the things that are wise, and 554B 
Whose Life is most clearly demonstrated from the things that move. 
Therefore it is, and is wise, and is living.] 

But if it be read as it is reported to have been translated by a 
certain Syrian who, as St. Basil says, “was as far from worldly 
wisdom as he was near to the doctrine of the things that are true”, 

“And the Spirit of God fermented the waters”, it becomes easier to 
understand. For the Holy Spirit fermented, that is, nourished in the 
fermentation of the Divine Love, the primordial causes which the 
Father had made in the Beginning, that is, in His Son, so that they 
might proceed into those things of which they are the causes. For to 
this end are eggs fermented by birds, from whom this metaphor is 
drawn, that the inward invisible power of the seeds which is latent in 
them may break forth through the individuation of places and times 

156 

PERIPHYSEON 

into visible forms and corporeal beauties by the operation of fire 
554C and air upon the humours and the earthly matter of the seeds. 

20 A. Nor is this repugnant to a sound intellect. But I should like 
you to make a concise and clear dvaKecpa^ialcoaK;, that is, recapi¬ 
tulation, so that I may the more plainly and distinctly understand 
which words of the passage of Holy Scripture specifically signify the 
first causes of nature, (and) which the Cause of all causes. 

N. Be ready, then, to attend more carefully to these (words). 

A. I am ready. 

N. Understand that the first causes, which St. Dionysius calls 
the beginnings of all things, are signified by these words both in a 
general and in a special sense: “In the beginning God made heaven 
and earth”, that is : In His Word God created all at once the causes 
554D of the intelligible and of the sensible essences. But what the prophet 
pronounced generically he then wished to divide specifically. There¬ 
fore understand that the causes of the sensible things of which this 
world is made and which because of the excessive sublety of their 
nature cannot be contemplated by the mind’s eye, and because of 
555A their extreme purity are free from all bodily grossness, are signified 
by the words, “Now the earth was invisible and incomposite” — for 
so the Seventy translated it — or according to the Hebrew original, 
“Now the earth was waste and void.” 

Next, understand that the first beginnings of the celestial and 
intelligible essences, which because of the excessive profundity and 
subtlety and obscurity of their condition surpass all understanding, 
are signified by these words, which accord with both interpretations : 
“And darkness was over the abyss.” But seeing that the Cause of all 
causes and the Beginning of all beginnings and the unique Source 
from which all (things) which are in heaven and earth flow forth by 
555B the inaccessible and incomprehensible excellence of its light, more 
than surpasses and more than knows all (things) which it created in 
the primordial causes, understand that its superessentiality and 
superexcellence are signified by these words: “And the Spirit of 
God was borne above the waters.” For that which Theology has 
revealed specifically of the Holy Spirit sound faith both believes and 
understands generally of the Most High and Holy Trinity. For the 
holy and indivisible Trinity, by the excellence of its essence and 
wisdom, is borne above the infinite abyss which it created. 

But should you wish to follow that Syrian whom St. Basil 
praises so highly in his Hexameron, who, in place of what other 

BOOK II 

157 

translators put down, namely, “And the Spirit of God was borne 
above the waters,” translated in the Syrian tongue which is akin to 
the Hebrew, “And the Spirit of God fermented the waters”, or, 
“And the Spirit of God fertilized the waters”, you will find that the 
divine goodness, surpassing by the height of its clemency the dark 
abyss of the primordial causes and fermenting and fertilizing it so 
that from the hidden and unknown recesses of their nature they 
might issue forth into the faculty of knowledge through generation, 
and through the multiple procession into genera and forms and 
proper species of sensible and intelligible substances into their 
various and innumerable effects, is intended by these words: “And 
the Spirit of God fermented the waters.” 

And from this understand that the most high and unique Cause 
of all (things), I mean the Holy Trinity, is openly revealed by these 
words: “In the Beginning God made heaven and earth,” that is to 
say, the Father under the name of God, and His Word under the 
name of Beginning, and the Holy Spirit a little later where (the 
Scripture) says: “The Holy Spirit was borne above”; for Holy 
Scripture did not here mean any other spirit. Thus you have, if I am 
not mistaken, both the primordial causes and the Cause of causes 
openly and distinctly declared in these pages from the divine word. 

A. I have certainly, and I readily agree [that by the name of 
God is indicated the Father, (by the name) of Beginning the Son, (by 
the name) of Spirit of God the Holy Spirit ; while by the word 
“earth” are indicated the causes of visible (things), by the word 
“abyss” those of intelligible (things), and the [super] eminence of 
the Divine [Nature], that is, the transcendence of the Cause of 
causes, is intimated by the symbol of superlation or fermentation or 
fertilization]. 

N. Before, then, we come to consider the sixfold quantity of 
the primordial causes distinguished by the divine word into the six 
intelligible first days, we should, I think, if you agree, say a few 
(words) about the first and supreme Cause of all, I mean, about the 
Holy Trinity. 

A. There is nothing I should more eagerly ask for, nothing I 
would more willingly hear, nothing I would more wholesomely 
believe, nothing more profound that I could understand, than what, 
after true and credible investigations, is said of the universal (and) 
ineffable Source of all (things). For there is no other health for 
faithful souls than to believe in what is truly said of the One 
Principle of all (things), and to understand what is truly believed. 

555C 

555D 

556A 

Concerning 
the Supreme 
556B 

Cause of All 

158 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. Tell (me), then, please : What do you understand when you 
hear it said by the divine word : “In the Beginning God made”? 

A. Nothing else than what we have agreed upon, that the 
Father made all things in Eiis Word. For when I hear “God” I think 
of God the Father, (and) when (I hear) “Beginning” I understand 
God the Word. 

N. What is it [that the theologian says], “In the Beginning God 
made”? Do you understand that the Father first brought forth His 
Word and then made heaven and earth in Him ? Or perhaps that He 
556C brought forth His Word in eternity and in eternity made all things in 
Him, so that the procession of the Word from the Father through 
generation in no way precedes the procession of all (things) from 
nothing in the Word through creation ? [And to put it more clearly : 
Were the primordial causes not always [in] the Word of God in 
Whom they are made, and was there the Word when the causes were 
not? Or are they co-eternal with Him and was the Word never 
without the causes created in Him, and does (the fact that) the Word 
precedes the causes created [in Him] mean nothing else than that the 
Word creates the causes, while the causes are created by the Word 
and in the Word?] 

That the 
Word pre¬ 
cedes all 
(things) not 
temporally 
but causally 
556D 

557A 

A. I should hesitate to agree with the former alternative, for I 
do not see how the generation of the Word from the Father can in a 
temporal sense precede the creation of all (things) by the Father in 
the Word and through the Word ; but I think these to be co-eternal 
with each other, I mean the generation of the Word and the creation 
of all (things) in the Word. For one rightly understands that there is 
no accident or temporal motion or temporal process in God. But I 
see nothing inconvenient in granting the second proposition, that is, 
that the generation of the Word by the Father does not in 
any <temporal> sense precede the creation of all things in the 
Word by the Father, but is co-eternal with it. For the prophet also 
says, addressing the Father, “Thou hast made all things in Thy 
Wisdom.” For in one act the Father brought forth His Wisdom and 
made all things in it. And in another place the same prophet says, 
(speaking) in the person of the Father : “My heart brought forth the 
good Word, I speak my works unto the King,” as though he were to 
say openly: When my Word is born out of the recesses of My 
Essence I make in Him My works which I give to Him as King. 
Again the same prophet (says, addressing) the Father: “With Thee 
is the Beginning [in the day of Thy power], as though he had said: 
With Thee and in Thee is eternally the Beginning of all (things), that 

BOOK II 

is, Thy Word. If, then, the Beginning is eternally in the Father and 
with the Father there was never (a time when) it was without being a 
Beginning ; but it always was the Beginning ; and because it is not an 
accident of it to be the Beginning, it was never without those things 
of which it is the Beginning. 

“In the day of Thy power.” <“In the day”,> that is, in the 
knowledge of the generation by Thee of the intellectual and rational 
creature; “of Thy power”, that is, of Thy Wisdom. For the day of 
the Power of the Father is here not inappropriately understood (as) 
the knowledge of the ineffable birth of God the Word from God the 
Father [in so far as it is given to the creature to understand that 
which passes all understanding, and access is permitted to the 
inaccessible Light by means of theophanies [ <that is> divine 
manifestations] which the divine word instils into, and, in a manner 
ineffable and known to none, implants in pure intellects so that they 
possess in themselves some condition of true knowledge of that 
which in itself is altogether unknowable]. For the Power of the 
Father is the Wisdom of the Father in which He made all (things). 

But that knowledge [of the divine generation] is in me <at 
present> by faith, in the angel by vision, or rather, neither in me 
nor in the angel is it by vision. For “who shall relate His gener¬ 
ation?” For no man, nor any of the celestial powers, can know of 
the generation of the Word from the Father how it is or of what 
kind it is, just as no man or angel knows what [or who] it is who 
begat or [who it is or] what it is that was begotten, but [only] He 
Who begat knows what He begat and how was begotten that which 
was begotten, and (only) He Who begat knows of Himself what He 
is and the manner and the character of that which He begat from 
Himself. Similarly that which is begotten knows of itself what it is 
and the manner and the character of its begetting, and of Him who 
begat it knows who and what He is [for if no one knows the Father 
save the Son and him to whom the Son is willing to reveal (Him), 
does it not follow that no one knows the Son save the Father and 
him to whom the Father is willing to reveal (Him)? — provided we 
understand by that, revelation through theophanies? For it is 
impossible for the Essence of Father, Son, or Holy Spirit, and (their) 
Substance(s) to be revealed to the creature directly as they are. The 
same must be understood concerning the manner and quality of the 
divine generation], — that is, if it is proper to apply the terms 
“who” and “what” to the Divine Nature, which is more than person 
and more than substance; (and) if, similarly, manner and quality 

159 

557B 

557C 

Concerning 
the Begetter 
and the 
557D 
begotten 

558A 

160 

PERIPHYSEON 

may be predicated of that Nature which surpasses every manner and 
every quality and the other things that are spoken of as accidents, on 
which we reached agreement in the first book. 

<(The passage) continues :> “In the splendours of the saints 
out of the womb before the daystar I have begotten Thee.” The 
558B order of the words (should be) : Out of the womb I have begotten 
Thee in the splendours of the saints before the daystar. Understand 
“womb” here to be the secret recesses of the Father’s substance out 
of which the only begotten Son, Who is the Word of the Father, was 
born, and from which He is always being born, and in which, while 
He is always being born. He always remains ; of which it is said in 
the Gospel: “No man hath seen God at any time, but the only 
begotten Son Who is in the recesses of the Father shall Himself tell 
of Him.” For He Who is eternally and immutably in the Father is 
not separated from the Father, as He Himself says: “I (am) in the 
Father and the Father in me.” 

So the Father out of His womb has begotten His Son in the 
Concerning splendours of the saints. For with the birth of the Son from the 
doursof*the being the splendours of the saints, that is, the 

saints cognitions of the elect and their [substantial] predestinations [in the 
558C Word of God], Who, as the Apostle witnesses, predestined us for 
His Kingdom before the secular ages (began). He did not say 
“before the eternal ages” [for the eternal ages are the co-essential 
eternity of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit in which the 
substantial splendours of the saints and the primordial causes of all 
things are eternally created, and the effects of those same causes 
were foreseen and fore-ordained], but “before the secular ages” [in 
which the causes, made at one and the same time and eternally in the 
Beginning, in a certain order of secular ages, similarly predefined 
and foreknown, proceed under the administration of Divine Provi¬ 
dence into their effects, whether visible or invisible]. For we believe 
that the predestinations and precognitions of the saints which the 
Psalmist calls brightnesses and the reasons of all (things) visible and 
558D invisible are co-eternal with the Father and the Son. For, says 
Augustine, “in the dispensation of the Word of God they are not 
made but eternal”. By “not made” he means (not) yet made at times 
559A and in places through generation, but made eternally in the Word 
with the creation of the primordial causes. For “in the Beginning 
God made heaven and earth.” And elsewhere he says : “The Word 
of God, through which all (things) are made, in which all (things) 
immutably live, not only (the things) that have been but also (the 

BOOK II 

161 

things) that shall be — in Him, however, they neither have been nor 
shall be, but only are, and all are one, or rather, is one.” Also [John 
the Theologian] in the Gospel : “That which was made in Him was 
the life.” 

So in the splendours of the saints the Father from His womb 
has begotten His Son, that is, in His only begotten Son He has 
begotten the knowledge of the saints that were to be, and indeed 
created <them> . For the knowledge of the saints in the Wisdom 
of the Father is their creation. For the understanding of all 
things < in God> is the essence of all things [because with God it is 559B 
one and the same thing to know before they are made (the things) 
which He makes, and to make the things which He knows. God’s 
knowing and God’s making are therefore one. For by knowing He 
makes and by making He knows. The knowledge does not precede 
the thing made nor does the thing made precede the knowledge, 
since all are once and for all co-eternal save for the status of creator 
and created]. For God did not get to know all (things) after they 
were made, but before they had been made he knew all (things) that 
were to be made, and — what is more wonderful — all things are 
precisely because they were foreknown. For the essence of all 
(things) is nothing but the knowledge of all things in the Divine 
Wisdom. For in Him we live and move and have our being. For, as 
St. Dionysius says, the knowledge of the things that are is the things 
that are. 

So the splendours of the saints are their substantiations, clear 
and known to God, in the Divine Wisdom and in the primordial 
causes ; and all this precedes the daystar, that is, both the Nativity of 
the Word from the Father, and the splendour of the knowledge of 
the saints, and indeed of all natures, in their principal causes 
[precedes the daystar]. But (the question) what is the daystar whose 
rising all these things are understood to precede is treated in many 
different ways by the wise, and it would be tedious even to mention 
their opinions. [For that which is said through (the mouth of) the 
prophet Isaiah, “How did he fall from heaven, the early arising 
lightbringer’ is clearly understood of the devil, and of his body 
which is known to consist chiefly <in> the impious and apostates 
and heretics. But the daystar of the Psalmist, while it seems to some 
to signify the devil, to others (seems) to signify that very bright star 
which is wont to precede the rising of the Sun, the star before whose 
appearance above the horizon tradition relates that Christ was born 
of a virgin according to the flesh, as the holy Father Augustine 

559C 

Concerning 
the Daystar 

559D 

560A 

162 

PERIPHYSEON 

writes in his “Decades”. But as the Scriptures can be interpreted in 
an infinite number of ways, tell me, I pray, and explain that which is 
most convenient to the present discussion, /or / (myself) do not see 
(clearly) enough (which is best). 

21 N.] But for me the simplicity (of the text) is sufficient [for the 

occasion] [for the ingenuity of others is not relevant (here)]. 

[It seems likely that] this mysterious and prophetic daystar, 
before whose rising the splendours of the saints in the only begotten 
Word of God are understood to be, [signifies] this visible world, by 
that figure of speech which in Greek is called auv£K5oxf) is 
interpreted conceptio. By this [figure] the part is signified by the 
whole and the whole by the part. So before this visible world 
560B proceeded through generation into the genera and species and all 
the sensible individuals, God the Father, before the secular ages 
(began), brought forth His Word, in Whom and through Whom He 
created in their full perfection the primordial causes of all natures, 
which, under the administration of Divine Providence, in a wonder¬ 
ful harmony, in their natural course bring to perfection, by their 
processions through generation at certain places and times and in 
the multiple differences of genera and species, this visible world 
from the start at which it begins to be to the finish at which it ceases 
to be [not by the destruction of its essence but by mutation of its 
qualities and quantities]. And do not be surprised that this whole 
world is mystically signified by that part of it which is the daystar, 
since it is through the sun to which the daystar always clings — for it 
560C never moves far from it but either rises a [short] while before its 
rising or sets [a little after its setting] — , that one sees this same 
sensible world, as Solomon says : “What is it that was ? The same as 
that that shall be. What is it that shall be? The same as that which is 
to be made. There is nothing new under the sun.” 

[For] here we [reasonably] understand the sun (to mean) the 
whole visible creation. For not only is it that part of this world that 
is encompassed within the sun’s orbit, I mean the earth and the 
nature of the waters and the air with the lower part of the aether 
where the globe of the moon revolves, that is meant by these words 
of the theologian, but also the upper regions of the world (that 
extend) from the path of the sun to the extreme circumference of the 
celestial sphere. For in all these things “under the sun”, that is, 
560D under heaven, there is nothing new, whether (by this) one under- 
stands that there is nothing new in the course of (our) present life 
which has not appeared before in the natural order of things — for 

BOOK II 

163 

nothing else is perceived and understood at any given time by either 
sense or intellect save the recurrence of the same things — or, as 
Maximus understands this passage of Scripture, that which was 
before this world the same shall be after the world, that is, only 
those things that are eternal existed before this world and will 
exist < after it> , and there is nothing new under the sun, that is : 
Whatever new thing there is under this heaven is nothing. 

For this whole world is called new because it is not eternal 
<and arose in time> and therefore is nothing. For it will perish 
with all that is in it [as the Psalmist witnesses when he says: “The 
heavens are the work of Thy hands. They shall perish.” — Now, if 
the greatest and most beautiful part of the world, which heaven is 
recognized to be, and of which we are not ignorant that it 
circumscribes the other parts, is to perish, do you suppose that 
anything in the other parts which are within (it) and inferior (to it) 
will be able to endure? For in every compact body when the things 
which contain perish those that are contained cannot remain. — But 
because it cannot be totally reduced to nothing since it is made by 
God and everything that is made by God abides for ever, what in it 
will perish and what will not perish must be inquired into by a 
careful investigation and must be left for another time. For the time 
being follow the subject that is in hand]. 

A. You argue cautiously and observantly. 

N. So the principal causes of all things are co-eternal with God 
and with the Beginning in which they were made. For if God does 
not in any way precede the Beginning, that is, the Word begotten by 
Himself and from Himself, and the Word itself does not in any way 
precede the causes of things that are created in it, it follows that all 
these, I mean, God the Father and the Word and the causes created 
in it, are co-eternal. 

A. They are not in all respects co-eternal. For while we believe 
that the Son is in all respects co-eternal with the Father, those things 
which the Father makes in the Son we call co-eternal with the Son, 
but not in all respects co-eternal. They are co-eternal in the sense 
that the Son was never without the primordial causes of natures 
created in Him, and yet these causes are not in all respects co-eternal 
with Him in Whom they are created. For (things) made cannot be 
co-eternal with their maker because the maker precedes the (things) 
which he makes. For those (things) which are in all respects co¬ 
eternal are so united to one another that neither can endure without 

561B 

561C 

That all 
things are 
co-eternal 
but not in all 
respects co¬ 
eternal with 
the Word 

164 

PERIPHYSEON 

the other because they are co-essential. But since the maker and the 
(thing) made are not co-essential, they are not necessarily co-eternal. 
56 ID They are, however, necessarily correlative and simultaneous, for a 
maker without a (thing) made is not a maker, and a (thing) made 
without a maker is not a (thing) made. Hence it follows that our 
reason for saying that the primordial causes of things are co-eternal 
562A with God is that they always subsist in God without any beginning 
in time, (and our reason for saying) that they are not in all respects 
co-eternal with God is that they receive the beginning of their being 
not from themselves but from their Creator. But the Creator 
Himself receives the beginning of His being from no one because He 
alone is true eternity, without any beginning and any end since He 
Himself is the Beginning of all things and their End. [For that is not 
true eternity which receives the beginning of its being from something 
else, but is a participation of true eternity which is dvapxo(;, that is, 
without any beginning. But every creature begins to be, because 
there was (a time) when it was not. It was in its causes when it was 
not in its effects. Therefore it is not in all respects co-eternal with 
true eternity.] 

But if within the very Cause of all causes, I mean in the Trinity, 
there is understood (to be) some kind of precedence — for the Deity 
which begets and which sends forth is prior to the Deity which is 
562B begotten and the Deity which proceeds from the begetter and the 
begotten, although it is one indivisible Deity — , is it surprising or 
incredible that the Cause of all causes should precede all things of 
which it is the Cause, and (yet) that they have been in it immutably 
and eternally without any beginning in time? If, then, the Father 
precedes the origins of the things which He made in the Son in the 
way in which a maker precedes (the things) which he has made, and 
the Word precedes (the things) which the Father has made in it in 
the way in which the art of the artist precedes those reasons which 
are created in it by the artist, why should not the Holy Spirit Who is 
borne above the abyss of the primordial causes which the Father has 
created in the Word be understood to precede [those (things) above 
which it is borne]? Therefore the Holy Spirit, by virtue of His 
eternity, surpasses and precedes the mystical waters which He 
eternally ferments and fertilizes in Himself. 

562C 22 But if these are reasonable answers to the question concerning 

the creation of the beginnings, I beg you to explain clearly what is 
the special role, so to say, which seems to be attributable to the 
Father, what to the Word, what to the Holy Spirit. For although the 

BOOK II 165 

operation of the three Substances of the Divine Goodness is 
believed and understood to be one and the same and common (to 
all), yet it must be said that it is not without any difference (in each) 
or property (of each). For there are things which are attributed by 
God’s holy word to each of the Persons as though by proper right, 
examples of which are doubtless known to you [but, to make use of 
a few examples, let us hear from the mouth of God the property of 
the Father : “When the fulness of time had come God sent His Son, 
made of a woman, made under the Law the property of the Son : 

“Who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal 
to God and yet emptied Himself, receiving the form of a servant’’, 
and so forth ; the property of the Holy Spirit in administering the 
Incarnation of the Word is shown in the Gospel when the angel says 
of the Holy Mother of God, “That which is born in her is of the 
Holy Spirit”]. 

N. Your thought seems to me to be pursuing its investigation 
along right lines. For it does not, in my opinion, deviate from the 
truth, and therefore I shall attempt an inquiry into that which you 
ask of me, under the guidance of Him Who enlightens and 
encourages us to inquire of Him. It seems to me, then, that the 
divine word attributes to God the Father the property of creating 
natures in their causes. For it says: “In the Beginning God made 
heaven and earth,” (and) again in another place : “Thou madest all 
(things) in (Thy) Wisdom,” (and) again: “Thou Who madest the 
world out of unformed matter,” and in another place: “All things 
whatsoever the Lord willed He made in heaven and earth, in the sea 
and in all the depths,” and (there are) a thousand other (instances). 

But it (also) asserts that it is in the Word that the substantive 
reasons of things are created, as these [same] passages which have 
been quoted witness : “In the Beginning God made heaven and 
earth,” and, “Thou madest all things in (Thy) Wisdom.” For 563B 
Beginning is not one thing and Wisdom another and the Word 
another, but by all these names the only begotten Son of God in 
Whom and through Whom all things are made by the Father is 
properly signified. The Apostle also says: “In Whom we live and 
move and have our being” [(and) again: “He is the image of the 
invisible God, the Firstborn of every creature, in Whom all (things) 
are created in the heavenly (regions) and on earth, whether visible or 
invisible, whether Thrones or Dominations or Principalities and 
Powers. All were created through Him and in Him”]. Finally, the 
distribution of all the causes which the Father created in His Word 

Concerning 
the proper¬ 
ties of the 
three Persons 

562D 

563A 

166 

PERIPHYSEON 

generically and essentially we find allotted by the [same] divine 
word to the Holy Spirit. For if to Him, as the Apostle witnesses, is 
563C given the sharing-out and distribution of divine gifts, why should He 
not also be given the division of the primordial causes (which are) 
substantially created in the Word of God? For he says : “To one is 
given through the Spirit the speaking of wisdom, [to another the 
speaking of knowledge] according to the same Spirit, to another 
faith in the same Spirit, but to another the gifts of healings in the 
same Spirit, but to another the working of miracles, to another 
prophecies, to another the discerning of spirits, to another (divers) 
kinds of language, to another interpretations of discourses. But all 
these are operated by one and the same Spirit, Who dispenses to 
each as He wills that which is proper (for each).” This we can also 
demonstrate from the Book of Genesis where it is written : “And the 
Spirit of God fermented the waters.” For what is to be understood 
by the Spirit of God fermenting, fertilizing (and) nourishing the 
563D waters of the primordial causes except the distribution and ordering 
of those things which in the Word are made simply, as of one form 
and one (substance), into the differences of all the genera (and) 
564A wholes [and] parts and individuals? [And if no one of 

sound faith and right understanding hesitates to affirm that the 
spiritual gifts which the prophet Isaiah prophesied would rest upon 
the Head of the Church, which is Christ, are distributed by no other 
than the Holy Spirit upon God the Incarnate Word, what wonder if 
upon the Church, which is His Body, the same Spirit should divide 
and bestow not only the gifts of grace through Christ, but also the 
gifts of nature through the same Christ? 

Moreover upon every creature visible and invisible He bestows 
the gift of essence so that those things which possess only being 
should be, to living things the gift of life by which they live, to 
sentient things the gift of sense by which they perceive sensibly, to 
rational beings the gift of reason by which through the act of 
reasoning they inquire into and find out the natures of things truly 
564B and diligently, to intellectual beings the gift of intellect by which 
they revolve in an ineffable motion and marvellous return about 
their God, about the Cause, that is, of all gifts, in a manner beyond 
knowledge and surpassing every creature.] For the symbolic candle¬ 
stick of the prophet Zechariah, to say nothing of that of Moses 
[which symbolizes the same thing], signifies the Church. But its 
lamp which is placed above it is the Light of the Father and of truth 
“which lighteth every man that cometh into the world”, our Lord 
Jesus Christ Who, because He was conceived and born and 

BOOK II 

manifested in the world for us and out of us in the nature of our 
flesh, is called the lamp above the candlestick of the Church ; for by 
nature it is the substantial Wisdom and Word of God the Father, 
upon Whom rest first (of all), humanly speaking, because He is the 564C 
Head of the universal body of the Church, the gifts of the Holy 
Spirit, which are usually signified by the number seven. 

For the divine gifts which are distributed through the Holy 
Spirit to the Church, since their distribution by the one Spirit starts 
from the Church’s Head, I mean Christ, are usually signified by the 
name of the Spirit Himself. For by nature He cannot be called a gift 
but the Distributor of gifts, and He is called sevenfold for the reason 
that He divides among the Church universally and particularly the 
plenitude of the divine gifts to which the number seven refers. And 
rightly so ; for the Spirit Himself is co-essential with [the Father 
and] the Son in respect of His Divinity, upon Whom [I mean, upon 
the Son] in His Humanity He causes the divine gifts which He 
distributes to rest. “And,” says [the prophet], “the Spirit of God 564D 
shall rest upon Him,” as though he said openly : And there shall rest 
upon Him the gifts which the Spirit of God divides: “the spirit of 
wisdom and understanding; the spirit of counsel and strength; the 
spirit of knowledge and piety ; and He shall be filled with the spirit 565A 
of the fear of the Lord”, and all these spirits, that is to say, all these 
gifts of the Spirit, the Head of the Church, which is Christ, first 
receives in His Humanity and then shares through His Spirit with 
[His Body] (, that is,) the Church. But the Holy Spirit Himself, as 
He essentially subsists [in] the nature of God the Father, so also 
essentially is [in] the nature of the Son since as substance He 
proceeds from the Father through the Son ineffably born, and 
therefore the gifts which He distributes are not only His but the 
Father’s from Whom He proceeds and the Son’s from Whom and 
through Whom He proceeds. 

And do not suppose that the manifold gifts of the Spirit by 
which the manifold seeds of sin are expelled from the Church and 
utterly destroyed are the only ones distributed through the Spirit. 565B 
For wisdom takes away unwisdom, understanding removes stupidity, 
counsel destroys indiscretion, strength dissolves weakness, science 
abolishes ignorance, piety drives out impiety and the wickedness of 
the works (that are wrought) in it, fear banishes the blindness of 
contempt ; but also in addition to these gifts of grace by which the 
Church is purified and edified as well as illuminated and perfected, 

[the donations] of all good (things) which are both of (the Church’s) 

167 

168 

PERIPHYSEON 

essence and its natural accidents come, as none of the faithful doubts, 
from no other source than the Cause of all good (things), I mean, 
from the Father, from Whom are all things, through the Son, in 
Whom are all things; and [their] distribution is [through none 
other] but the Holy Spirit, Who divides all [among all as He wills]. 

565C “Every good gift and every perfect boon”, says the theologian, 
“cometh down from the Father of Lights.” What is more explicit, 
what more obvious ? From no other source, he says, than the Father 
of Lights, that is, from the Father of all good (things), those which 
are of nature as well as those whichr'are of grace. For well does he 
call lights all the gifts which come down from the unbegotten Light 
through the begotten Light, and [through] the proceeding Light to 
the limits of the capacity [of nature and of the bountifulness of 
grace] are divided in the substance of every essence, whether general 
or specific or individual. For that which the Apostle appears to say 
as though to man alone, “O, man, what hast thou that thou didst 
not receive?”, can be universally addressed to every creature 
whether visible or invisible. For there is no created nature which 
has <anything> but that which it has received from the creative 

565D <nature> . For [as we said before] if it is, it receives from that its 
being; if it lives, from that its life; if it is sentient, from that its 
sensible perception; if it enjoys reason, from that its reason; if it 
possesses intellect, from that its intellect; and a thousand other 
things of that kind. If, then, nothing is known to be in the nature of 
created things except what is given by the Creator, it follows that the 
creature, whether in essence or accident, is nothing else but the 

566A < gifts and> boons of the Creator. But the divine word reserves the 
distribution of boons, as a kind of property, to the Holy Spirit. 
Therefore all things which the Father makes in the Son the Holy 
Spirit distributes and divides as the property of each as He wills. 

Do you then see how the divine word is understood to give to 
each of the Substances or Persons of the Divine Goodness as it were 
its (special) property? For to the Father it gives the making of all 
things, to the Word it gives the coming into being eternally in Him 
of the primordial causes of things universally, essentially (and) 
simply, to the [Holy] Spirit it gives the distribution of the primordial 
causes made in the Son and the fertilization into their effects, that is 
to say, [into] the genera and species, the individuals and differences, 
whether of the celestial < and spiritual> essences which (either) are 
wholly without body or adhere to the very pure and spiritual bodies 

566B (which are) made from the simplicity of [the general] elements, or of 

BOOK II 169 

the sensible (beings) of this visible world, (whether) of the universal 
or of the particulars which occupy separate places and move 
through times and are differentiated by quality and quantity. [For 
one would not unreasonably agree that the primordial causes are 
without body at all, whether visible or invisible, and without quality 
or quantity in themselves. But we call an invisible body the simple 
subsistence of each of the elements of this world, considered in itself, 
while the celestial essences, that is to say, the angelic powers, 
although they are not unreasonably regarded as being outside this 
sensible world by reason of the excellence of their intelligible nature, 
yet, to go by the opinions of the holy fathers, must not be thought 
entirely lacking in bodies of a spiritual kind. For they must be 
believed to be subject to the human senses, to which they often 
become manifest, in spiritual bodies (which are) not foreign (to 566C 
themselves) but which are their own and with which they are always 
associated.] 

(It is) not that the operation of the indivisible unity of the 
divine Substances is divided — for that which the Father does so 
does the Son and [so] does the Holy Spirit — , but that the divine 
word appears to distribute to each of Them certain (special) Concerning 
properties [and it is right to understand that they possess them. For 
in the Holy Trinity while the unity of a common operation is Trinity, 
recognized, the property of distinct operations is not excluded. For common and 
if there is in (the Trinity) unity of Essence and difference of Particular 
Substances, I do not see why a common operation and different 
(operations) should not also be believed and understood (to 
exist) in it, so that the common operation be attributed to the 
common Essence without denying threefold action to the Trinity of 566D 
Substances]. 

A. I see (this) clearly, and it seems to me probable and to 23 
accord with the Divine Oracles. But would you please confirm what 
has been said about the properties of the divine administration by 
some similitude taken from our own nature, since it is said to be in 
the likeness of God. 

N. I would not easily believe that you are unaware of the 567A 
trinity in our own nature. 

A. Please tell me what it is. 

N. Do you remember the conclusion we reached in our dis¬ 
cussion in the preceding book? Did we not decide that there is no 
nature which is not understood to fall under these three terms which 

170 

PERIPHYSEON 

by the Greeks, as we have often said, are called ouala, 5uva|ii(;, 
evergeia, [that is] essence, power, operation? 

A. I certainly remember and most firmly have (it in mind). 

N. Therefore our nature, which is called human because all 
men participate in it, consists of essence, power, and operation? 

A. I should think that no one of those skilled in theology 
would have any doubt about that. 

N. How does it seem to you? Is not our nature, according to 
Holy Scripture, created in the image and likeness of God? 

A. You must be mocking me. He who doubts this is not a man. 

567B N. Do you think that the God Who created our nature in His 
image is a body or a spirit? 

A. Concerning this too it would be ridiculous to hesitate, for 
“God is a spirit, and those who worship Him worship in spirit and 
in truth”. 

N. Therefore it is not in the body but in the soul that the image 
of God is stamped on our nature? 

A. This also is very true. 

On faith N. God is Trinity and Unity, that is, three Substances in one 
Essence and one Essence in three Substances or Persons. For as the 
Greeks say plav oualav ipciq UTroaTaaeu; or ipla TrpoacoTia, that is. 
One Essence three Substances or three Persons, so the Romans (say) 
unam essentiam tres substantias or tres personas ; but [they appear] 
to differ in that we do not find the Greeks saying plav UTToaiaaiv, 
567C that is, one Substance, whereas the Latins most frequently say unam 
substantiam tres personas. <The Greeks say> opooOaiov opoa- 
ya0ov 6p608ov, that is, of one essence, of one goodness, of one deity 
[or one essence, one goodness, one deity. But these terms which 
among the Greeks signify the indivisibility of the Divine Nature do 
not go easily into Roman speech, and never do so exactly, I think ; 
and therefore their meaning is only translated in separate words by 
Tueplcppaai^, so that their sense only is understood while the 
translation is not word for word]. 

A. All this the catholic faith of the universal Church professes 
and as far as possible understands, but where does this lead us? 

N. Nowhere else but that we may inquire as best we may how 
567D the trinity of our nature expresses [in itself] the image and likeness 
of the creative Trinity, that is, what [in it] more appropriately 

BOOK II 

applies to the Father, and what to the Son, (and) what to the Holy 
Spirit. [I say more appropriately because although the whole trinity 
of our nature is an appropriate image of the whole Divine Trinity, 
the whole (of it) bearing the image of the Father, the whole (of it) 
the image of the Son, the whole (of it) the image of the Holy Spirit, 
yet there is in it (something) that as it were in a more special sense 
seems, I think, capable of being connected with each Person 
severally. For even (considered) in itself our trinity is present as a 
whole in each (of its members). For its essence is both power and 
operation, its power both essence and operation, its operation both 
essence and power, in the same way as the Father is both in the Son 
and the Holy Spirit, the Son both in the Father and the Holy Spirit, 
the Holy Spirit both in the Father and the Son.] 

A. Nothing seems to me more likely than that the essence of 
our nature is accommodated to the image of the Father, its power 
(to that) of the Son, its operation (to that) of the Holy Spirit. For the 
paternal Substance which brought forth from itself the filiated 
Substance and the proceeding Substance is not unreasonably called 
the principal Substance — not that the one Essence of the Holy 
Trinity is [separable] — for it is one and indivisible — , but being one 
it is yet not without difference of substance. For it is the Deity which 
begets and the Deity which is begotten and the Deity which 
proceeds, though He be one indivisible Deity, even though it is not 
indistinguishable in differences of substance. 

Also, the power (of our nature) not inappropriately appertains 
to God the Son, for He is often called by the divine word the Power 
of the Father; but to take a single instance out of many, hear the 
Apostle : “For the invisible things of Him are seen to be understood 
by means of the things that are made, and so are His everlasting 
Power and His Eternity;” for in this passage we understand the 
Power of the Father (to be) the Father’s Wisdom [I mean, the Son], 
while the Eternity (we understand to be) the Holy Spirit, according 
to the venerable master Maximus. [For that the Holy Spirit is 
customarily called by the name of Power in the Scriptures the 
Gospel testifies when the Lord says, as He is healing the woman 
(who is) aipoppoouaa, that is, afflicted with an issue of blood : “I 
perceived power go out of Me,” that is, the Holy Spirit which 
dispenses the gifts of healing]. 

What should I say of the essential operation of our nature? 
Does it not most aptly appertain to the Holy Spirit, to Whom is 
attributed, as His (special) property so to speak, the operation of the 

171 

568A 

Concerning 
the image 

568B 

Concerning 
the Deity 
which is 
Three and 
One 

568C 

172 

PERIPHYSEON 

568D 

569A 

569B 

The 

definition of 
exterior 
sensation 

569C 

powers and the distribution of the divine gifts both universally (to 
all) and particularly to each? 

Thus, in the essence of our nature is recognized the property of 
the paternal Substance; in its power (that of) the Substance of the 
Son ; in its operation (that oQ the Substance of the Holy Spirit. 

N. I think your reply does not disagree with the truth ; but 
consider: What is your opinion of that very much spoken-of trinity 
of our nature which is understood (to consist) of intellect and reason 
and sense? Is it something different from the one we have just 
mentioned or are this and that one and the same, and not two 
(trinities) in our nature (which i$) one and the same ? Now by sense I 
mean not the exterior but the interior. For it is the interior which is 
co-essential with reason and intellect, while the exterior, although it 
seems to belong more to the soul [than to the body], yet does not 
constitute the essence of the soul but, as the Greeks say, is a kind of 
conjunction of soul and body. For when the body perishes and life 
departs it disappears entirely. For if it remained in the soul and 
belonged to its substance, then (the soul) would make use of it even 
without the body, but since in fact without the body it neither does 
nor can do so, one is left with the conclusion that it neither remains 
in the body when it perishes nor does it continue with the soul when 
she ceases to control the body. [For even that definition by which 
St. Augustine wished to define exterior sense clearly does not (make 
it) belong to the substantial parts of the soul. “Sense”, he says, “is a 
passion of the body of which the soul as such is not unaware.” Also 
another (definition) according to which “sense is the (paviaola of 
sensible things assumed through the instruments of the body” 
similarly does not seem to attach it to the nature of the soul, but 
makes it a kind of messenger between body and soul.] 

And if one examines more carefully the semasiology of the 
Greek language one will find that the word has two senses. For in 
that language intellect is called vouq, reason ^loyoq, and sense 
5iavoia ; (but) this (does) not (mean) exterior but interior (sense), 
and it is of these three that the essential trinity of the soul 
constituted in the image of God subsists. For (the trinity of the soul) 
is intellect and reason and the sense that is called interior and 
essential, while the exterior which we have described as a link 
between body and soul [is called] aiaGriau;, and the instruments in 
which it resides (are called) alo0r|Tf]pia for aioGfiaewq Tfjpia, that 
is, the guardians of sensation, for in them sense is guarded and 
functions; and they are five in number: sight, hearing, smell, taste. 

BOOK II 

173 

touch. And it ought not to worry you that the fivefold instrument is 
named after the fivefold sense. For a very frequent usage both in 
common speech and in Holy Scripture calls the seat of the senses by 
the names of the senses themselves. For the eye is called sight and 
the ear hearing and the other senses also have their instruments 
! named after them. But sense is called fivefold not because it is in 

: itself divided into five parts — for it is simple and uniform and 

I resides in the heart as its principal seat — but because it is through 
the fivefold instrument of the body, as though through the five gates 
I of a city, that it receives within likenesses of sensible (things) 

I originating from the qualities and quantities of the outside world 

[and from the other things by which the exterior sensation is 
formed] and like a gate-keeper and messenger announces to the 
presiding interior sense whatever it lets in from outside. 

A. It does not worry me [that the names of the senses are given 
to their instruments] nor am I unaware, as I think, of the difference 
between the two (kinds oO sense which you have clearly distinguish¬ 
ed ; and with such power of comprehension as my feeble intellect 
possesses I shall say what I perceive about the aforesaid trinity of 
our nature. 

j There seem to be two trinities in which our nature is shown to 

1 subsist in so far as it is made in the image of God, but if the truth be 
consulted they are found to differ from each other not in reality but 
only in name. For vouq and ouala, that is, intellect and essence, 

I denote the highest part of our nature [or rather, its highest motion. 

! For, as you yourself understand, it is not one thing for our nature to 
be and another thing for it to move. For its essence is its motion-in¬ 
rest and rest-in-motion about God [and the creature]. But when it 
moves about God, Who surpasses all things, this is called its highest 
motion ; while when it turns about the primordial causes which are 
closest to God and come next after Him, it is understood, as it were, 
to moderate its motion somewhat ; but when it attempts to perceive 
I the effects of the primordial causes, whether visible or invisible, it is 
recognized to be going through its lowest motion — not because 
what is the same substantial motion can itself become greater or 
less, but because it is thought of as being least or moderate or 
greatest according to the status of the objects about which it turns]. 
Therefore the essence of our soul is the intellect which presides over 
the totality of human nature [because it is carried about God above 
every nature (and) beyond knowledge]. 

569D 

570A 

570B 

Concerning 
the three 
motions of 
the divine 
image 

174 

PERIPHYSEON 

570C But Xoyoq or dbva^iiq, that is, reason or power, signifies, as it 
were, the second part [not unreasonably, since they are carried 
about the principles of things, which are first after God]. The third 
part, however, is denoted by the names of 5idvoia and evepyeia, 
that is, sensation and operation, [and occupies, as it were, the lowest 
place in the human soul ; not unreasonably, for it revolves about the 
effects of the primordial causes, whether they be visible or invisible]. 
So, we should understand that there are not two substantial trinities, 
but one and the same, created in the likeness of the Creator. 

But I wonder why I do not see that life-principle which is called 
by the Greeks 0p87rTiKf| and ai)^r|TiKf] and by our (writers) nutritive 
and auctive — for it nourishes the body and gives it increase — 
570D included by you either as a fourth substantial part of our nature or 
within the substantial trinity, but as it were wholly omitted as 
though it did not belong to the constitution of our nature at all. 

N. Do not wonder, for it is not without reason that we have 
done this, since our discourse is not at the moment concerned with 
the whole of human nature, which is seen to consist, as it were, of 
571A five parts, that is, body [and] vital motion, sense and reason, and 
intellect ; but only with that part in which the image and likeness of 
the Creator is seen, that is, with intellect, reason, and interior sense, 
or, so to say, with essence, power, (and) operation. For it is in this 
triad that the image of the most high and holy Trinity is known to be 
expressed. 

For concerning the vital motion [by which the soul] nourishes 
and unifies and quickens and administers the body as well as giving 
it increase [and concerning the body itself which occupies the lowest 
position in the whole creation] there will be a place for discussion 
elsewhere when < in the fourth book> the discourse will be, under 
God’s guidance, of the sensible natures. For since it is recognized 
that this part lies outside the property of our intelligible essence in 
571B which we are created in the image of God, it has for this reason been 
ignored by us for the present since it is a certain motion [outside our 
nature (as it was) primordially created] [subjoined to, and as a 
penalty for sin added to] our substantial operation which is called, 
as we have said, interior sense ; by which, that is, (by which) motion, 
it administers those things which have been added to human nature 
after sin, I mean this body, corruptible and mortal and variable in 
places and times, divisible into the number of its parts, extended in 
spaces, susceptible to increases and decreases, subject to diverse 
qualities and quantities, prone to every irrational motion, the shelter 

BOOK II 

of the soul while it is still carnal (and) involved in all kinds of 
disasters as punishment for its disobedience and pride, and all the 
other things which are spoken of and known by experience concern¬ 
ing the unhappiness of human nature thrust from the happiness of 571C 
paradise into this life. 

So the motion by which human nature administers those things 
which are joined to it in retribution for violation of the divine 
command — but by retribution I do not mean the vengeance of an 
angry God but the chastening of a merciful one — is not unreason¬ 
ably left outside the bounds of our essential trinity. [And do not 
suppose that we wish by these words to teach that the aforesaid 
trinity of human nature created in paradise in the image of God was, 
before it sinned, without any body at all. Far, far be it from us to 
believe this or in any way think it ! For the Creator made our souls 
and bodies all at once in paradise — by bodies I mean celestial (and) 
spiritual bodies such as they will be after the resurrection. For it 
must not be doubted that the puffed up, mortal, and corruptible 
bodies with which we are now encumbered take their origin not 571D 
from nature but from sin.] 

Therefore, that which has grown on to our nature in conse¬ 
quence of sin, once (our nature) is renewed in Christ [and restored 
to its former state, it will be without — for that cannot be co-eternal 
with nature which is attached to it on account of sin — ] ; and it is 
not unreasonable, I think, that it should not be counted among the 
constituent parts of its substance < — not that even that which has 572A 
been superadded will perish, but it will pass into that which was 
created in the beginning, and will become one with that, not as two 
(entities) but an incorruptible and spiritual One, through the grace 
of God the Word Who had descended not only into that which is of 
our nature but also into that which was superadded so that He 
might restore in Himself all that is ours, and so that He Who made 
both might make the things which are naturally part of us one with 
those that were, in addition, attached to them from above> . 

A. Certainly it is not unreasonable, but in strictest accord with 
what a rational nature would find by a valid and subtle investigation. 

But as yet I do not see where this (leads). 

N. Be patient. For it is no trivial inquiry that we are embarked 
upon nor one which can be investigated or brought to a conclusion 
except by many devious approaches of a most precise reasoning if, 
indeed, it can ever be wholly concluded. For no mortal sense, 572B 

175 

176 

PERIPHYSEON 

however shrewd its inquiry may seem, can give assurance of this 
without incurring the charge of rashness [because he who undertakes 
to find the solution by himself surpasses his own powers. For if it is 
found it is not he who searches but He Who is sought and Who is 
the Light of our minds Who finds it]. For, unless I am mistaken, we 
are inquiring how we can argue from the substantial trinity of our 
nature created in the image of God to that most high Trinity [which 
is God], and the distribution to each of the Persons of their proper 
operations, so to speak, in created nature. 

A. This it is which we are now seeking and nothing else; and 
the proper procedure requires that we should seek the truth in this 
way [for it is by arguing from the image that the very truth of which 
572C it is the image must be sought], which the more diligently and 
painstakingly it is sought, the more ardently it is preferred and the 
more clearly it is revealed. For of what avail is speed if the pure 
contemplation of truth eludes it, and what harm is there in slowness 
if it lead to the Divine Countenance? 

N. Let us then begin our reasoning from the words of the 
venerable Maximus, not making use of continuous extracts from the 
discourses but availing ourselves of their sense. 

A. Proceed upon the path of reasoning by whatever means you 
wish. 

Concerning 
the three 
motions of 
the soul 
572D 

N. There are three universal motions of the soul, of which the 
first is of the mind, the second of the reason, the third of sense. And 
the first is simple and surpasses the nature of the soul herself and 
cannot be interpreted [that is, it cannot have knowledge of that 
about which it moves] ; “by this motion the soul moves about the 
unknown God, but, because of His excellence, she has no kind of 
knowledge of Him from the things that are” as to what He is [that is 
to say, she cannot find Him in any essence or substance or in 
anything which can be uttered or understood; for He surpasses 
everything that is and that is not, and there is no way in which He 
can be defined as to what he is]. 

The second motion is that by which she “defines the unknown” 
573A God “as Cause” of all. For she defines God as being Cause of all 
things ; and this motion is within the nature of the soul, “and by it 
she moves naturally and takes upon herself by the operation of her 
science all the natural reasons (which are) formative of all things, 
which subsist as having been eternally made in Him Who is known 
only as Cause” [for He is known because He is Cause], that is, she 

BOOK II 177 

expresses (them) in herself through her knowledge of them, and the 
knowledge itself is begotten by the first motion in the second. 

The third motion is “composite, (and is that) by which” the 
soul “comes into contact with that which is outside her as though by 
certain signs and re-forms within herself the reasons of visible 
things”. It is called composite not because it is not simple in itself as 
the first and second are simple, but because its first knowledge of the 573B 
reasons of sensible things does not come from (the things) themselves. 

For first (the soul) receives the phantasies of the things themselves 
through the exterior sense, (which is) fivefold because of the number 
of the corporeal instruments in which and through which it operates, 
and by gathering them to itself (and) sorting them out it sets them in 
order; then, getting through them to the reasons of the things of 
which they are the phantasies, she moulds them [I mean the reasons] 
and shapes them into conformity with herself. 

[And let it not trouble you that a little earlier we defined Concerning 
exterior sense as the phantasy of sensible things while now we teach 
that it is the means by which the phantasies of those same sensible 
things reach the interior sense. For this third motion begins to move 
as a consequence of being informed of the phantasies of exterior 573C 
things by means of the exterior sense. 

For there are two kinds of phantasies, of which the first is that 
which is born at first of sensible nature in the instruments of the 
senses and is properly called the image expressed in the senses ; while 
the second is that which is formed next out of this image, and it is 
this phantasy which properly bears the customary name of exterior 
sense. And that (which comes) first is always attached to the body, 
that (which comes) after to the soul. And the first, although it is in 
the sense, is not sensible of itself, but the second is both sensible of 
itself and receives the first.] 

But when this third motion abandons the phantasies of sensible 
things and clearly understands the reasons stripped bare of all 
corporeal imagery and in their own simplicity, it transmits the 
reasons of visible things freed from every phantasy back to the first 573D 
motion through the intermediate motion as the simple operation of 
something which is also (itselQ simple, that is to say (it transmits 
them as) universal reasons by a universal operation. But the first 
motion itself carries back whatever it perceives from the third 
through the intermediate, and from that intermediate immediately 
in the modified forms of created things, to that which, unknown 
immediately in itself [as to what it is], is yet known by the fact that it 574A 

178 

PERIPHYSEON 

574B 

574C 

Concerning 
the first 
motion 

574D 

is the cause of all things, and to the principles of all things, that is, to 
the principal causes which are created by it and in it and distributed 
by it. [That is, he understands that they proceed from God through 
them into all things that are after them and through them return to 
Him again.] 

Therefore the motion of the soul which is purged by action, 
illumined by knowledge, perfected by the divine word, (the motion) 
by which she eternally revolves about the unknown God, and 
understands that God Himself is beyond both her own nature and 
that of all things, absolutely distinct from everything which can 
either be said or understood and everything which cannot be said or 
understood — and yet which somehow exists — , and denies that He 
is anything of the things that are or of the things that are not [and] 
affirms that all things that are predicated of Him are predicated of 
Him not literally but metaphorically, is called vou(^ by the Greeks 
but by our writers intellectus or animus or mens; and it exists 
substantially, and is understood to be the principal part of the soul. 
For the essential being of the soul is not other than her substantial 
motion. For the soul subsists in her motions and her motions subsist 
in her. For she is by nature simple and indivisible, and is differen¬ 
tiated only by the substantial differences of her motions. For if, 
according to the tradition handed down by the holy fathers, the 
celestial essences, which the Divine Oracles also call the celestial and 
angelic powers, are substantially nothing else but intelligible, eternal 
[and] unceasing motions about the Beginning of all things, from 
Whom and through Whom and in Whom and towards Whom they 
move and subsist [for the motion of the celestial powers about their 
Beginning is circular, that is to say, <it starts> from Him as their 
Beginning, it passes through Him by means of the created causes, (it 
moves) in Him as in the natural laws which are in Him and beyond 
which it neither wills (to stray) nor can (stray) nor can will to stray, 
(and) returns to Him as its end, and such a motion exists in the 
understanding alone ; for they understand that they are from Him 
and that their intellect moves through Him and in Him, and they 
know for certain that they have no other end than Him], what is to 
prevent us from understanding in a similar way that human 
intellects unceasingly revolve about God, seeing that they are from 
Him and through Him and in Him and for Him [for they revolve in 
the same intelligible circle], especially as the Divine Oracles declare 
that man is made in the image of God, which we do not find 
explicitly said of the angels? < However, we are left to infer this 

BOOK II 

from their intellectual nature. > Also we read that the celestial 
powers stand in the presence of God and minister to Him, but the 575A 
Catholic Faith witnesses that human nature became God in the 
Word of God and sitteth at the right hand of God and reigneth. 

But that which the Lord promises to all men generally after the 
resurrection of all, “They shall be as angels of God in heaven,” is to 
be understood, I think, as a sharing in the same status of nature and 
as an equality of immortality and (as meaning) that they shall lack 
all corporeal sexuality and every corruptible mode of generation. 

For it is not unreasonable to believe that man’s first state before sin 
in paradise, that is, in heavenly bliss, was equal and, as it were, of 
the same nature with (that of) the angels. [For the divine word refers 
to both these natures, I mean the angelic and the human, when it 
says: “Who made the heavens in intellect,” that is, in order that 
they might be intelligences in essence and substance.] But since man 575B 
when he was in honour abandoned his intellect and became equal to 
the beasts who lack wisdom and was made like them, he withdrew 
far from his angelic status and fell into the misfortune of this mortal 
life. But after the Word was made flesh, that is, (after) God was 
made man, there is fulfilled what is written in the psalm : “What is 
man that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that Thou 
visitest him?” [marvelling, that is, at the exaltation of the first state 
of human nature] “Thou madest him” < it says> “a little less than 
the angels” [that is. Thou hast permitted him to be made less 
because of his pride, and Thou hast left him of his own proper will 
to fall into the disgrace of an irrational life. For by a figure of speech 
God is said to do what He allows to be done] ; “Thou hast crowned 575C 
him with glory and honour and hast set him above the works of Thy 
hands. Thou hast subjected all things under his feet.” 

Do you see how deeply human nature has been humiliated in 
the first man after sin, and how highly, through grace, it has been 
exalted in the second man, I mean, in Christ? For man is not only 
restored to the first state of his nature from which he fell, but is even 
lifted up <in his Head, which is Christ> above all the celestial 
powers. For where sin was abundant grace was more abundant. 

If therefore human nature, renewed in Christ, not only attains 
the angelic status but is even carried up beyond every creature into 
God, and if it would be impious to deny that that which was done in 
the Head will be (done) in the members, what wonder if human 
intellects are nothing else but the ineffable and unceasing motions 575D 
— in those [I mean] who are worthy — about God, in Whom they 

179 

180 

PERIPHYSEON 

576A 

Concerning 
the failure of 
reason in (the 
contempla- 
576B 
tion oO 
deified souls 

576C 

Concerning 
the second 
motion 

live and move and have their being? [For they have their being 
through the reasons by which they exist, they move through the 
reasons of the powers by which they are able to exist well, they live 
through the reasons by which they exist eternally. Thus they have 
being and well being and eternal being in God.] 

A. Not only do I admit but I also understand that the most 
excellent motion of the soul about the unknown God beyond every 
creature is most rightly called, and is, intellect. But how or in what 
sense the intellect, while confined to the limits of human nature, can 
ascend above itself and above every creature so as to be able to 
perform its substantial motions about the unknown God Who is far 
removed from every created nature < should, I think, be investi¬ 
gated > . 

N. In this part of (our) contemplation which concerns the 
intellectual and rational substances, when it comes to the question 
how created nature can ascend beyond itself so as to be able to 
adhere to the creative Nature, every inquiry of those who study the 
potentiality of nature fails. For there we see not a reason of nature 
but the ineffable and incomprehensible excellence of Divine Grace. 
For in no created substance does there naturally exist the power to 
surpass the limits of its own nature and directly attain to Very God 
in Himself. For this is of grace alone, not of any power of nature. 

[This is why the Apostle confesses that he does not know how 
he was rapt into paradise, saying : “I know the man (was) rapt but I 
do not know how, whether in the body or out of the body.” For it is 
not in the natural motions of the soul that I see in the body or out of 
the body any power by which I can be rapt into the Third Heaven. 

< But> only God knows, and it is only by His grace that I know for 
certain I was rapt. For no nature can of itself ascend into that place 
of which the Lord says: “Where I am, there (is) my servant also.” 

< Therefore, just as it passes all intellect how the Word of God 
descends into man, so it passes all reason how man ascends into 
God.> ] 

A. Although your reply is brief it is sufficient <and> clear; 
so turn your attention to what comes next, the consideration of the 
second motion of the soul. 

N. The second motion of the soul, as we have said, is that 
which is contained within the bounds of its nature and defines the 
Very God as Cause, that is, it knows only this about the God Who is 
unknown as to what He is, (namely), that He is the Cause of all 

BOOK II 

things that are, and that the primordial causes of all (things) are 
eternally created by Him and in Him ; and it impresses the knowledge 
of those causes, when it has understood them, upon the soul herself, 
whose motion it is, as far as her capacity allows. [For as from what 
is below her the soul receives the images of sensible things, which the 
Greeks call (pavxaalai, so from what is above her, that is, from the 
primordial causes, she implants within herself the cognitions which 
are usually called by the Greeks 0£O(pav8iai and by the Latins 
diuinae apparitiones, and through them, through the first causes, I 
mean, she receives some motion of God] — not that it understands 
what they are substantially — for this is beyond every motion of the 
soul — but it has the general knowledge that they are and that they 
flow forth by an ineffable process into their effects ; and this is the 
motion which is called by the Greeks Xdyoq or Suvapig, but by our 
(writers) ratio or uirtus, and it is born of the first motion, which is 
intellect. 

For just as a wise artist produces his art from himself in himself 
and foresees in it the things he is to make, and in a general and 
causal sense potentially creates their causes before they actually 
appear, so the intellect brought forth from itself and in itself its 
reason, in which it foreknows and causally pre-creates all things 
which it desires to make. For we say that a plan is nothing else but a 
concept in the mind of the artist. 

The second motion of the soul, then, is the reason, which is 
understood as a kind of substantial seeing in the mind and a kind of 
art begotten of it and in it, in which it {ortknows and pxt-creates the 
things which it wishes to make ; and therefore it is not unreasonably 
named its form, for (the intellect) in itself is unknown but begins to 
become manifest both to itself and to others in its form, which is 
reason. [For just as the Cause of all things cannot in itself be 
discovered as to what it is either by itself or by anyone else, but 
somehow comes to be known in its theophanies, so the intellect, 
which ever revolves about it and is created wholly in its image, 
cannot be understood as to what it is either by itself or by anyone 
else, but in the reason which is born of it begins to become manifest. 
But as to my saying that the Cause of all and the intellect are not 
understood by themselves [as to what they are], the reason for that 
will be considered a little later.] Concerning the second motion, 
what it is and whence it takes its origin, enough has been said, I 
think. 

A. Enough, certainly. 

181 

576D 

577A 

577B 

Concerning 
the differ¬ 
ence be¬ 
tween 

intellect and 
reason 

577C 

182 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the third 
motion 

577D 

578A 

578B 

N. There remains, then, the third motion, which functions in 
the particular reasons of particular things, which are created simply, 
that is, as a whole, in the primordial causes ; and which, although it 
takes the beginning of its substantial motion from the phantasies of 
sensible things which are communicated to it through exterior sense, 
attains, by the most precise discrimination of all things through 
their proper reasons, to the most general essences and to the less 
general genera, then to the species and to the most specific species, 
that is, the individuals, countless and unlimited, but limited by the 
immutable proportions of their nature ; and this is the motion which 
in Greek is called 5iavoia or evepyeia, but in Latin sensus or 
operatio — by squsus I mean that which is substantial and interior — , 
which similarly proceeds from the intellect through the reason. For 
everything which the intellect by its gnostic view of the primordial 
causes impresses upon its art, that is, its reason, it distributes 
through the sense which proceeds from it and is called after its 
operation, into the particular reasons of individual things, which 
were created in the causes primordially and as a whole. 

All essences are one in the reason ; in sense they are divided into 
different essences. Therefore reason receives the most unified know¬ 
ledge of all the essences from the most unified unity of their 
principles through the < descending> intellect ; but sense separates 
that unity by means of differences. Similarly, reason knows through 
intellect the genera of things after a uniform and simple mode in 
their universal causes and in themselves; but that most universal 
simplicity which in itself is indivisible and is liable to no differences 
and is subject to no accidents and is not extended by spatial intervals 
and is not composed of any parts and is not varied by any motion 
through place or time, sense breaks up into the diverse genera and 
differences and a thousand other things. Those things which from the 
point of view of reason are one in their genera are the same in 
different forms as those which, on the other hand, by the operation 
of sense are differentiated from one another by natural distinctions. 
[That is to say, the intellect itself < through the medium of reason> 
(and) through the sense which is consubstantial with itself, infallibly 
investigates and discovers and comprehends by sure rules the 
manner in which they are divided by their natural motions under the 
rule and ordinance and administration of Divine Providence into 
the manifold differences of nature.] 

What shall I say of the unlimited number of individuals which, 
as much as they become multiple by the operation of sense, whether 

BOOK II 

it is in sense itself or in nature (that they are multiple), so much are 
they one when by the reason they are considered in their forms 578C 
under a universal and simple mode? 

And to sum up : whatever the soul through her first motion, 
which is the intellect, knows under one form [and as a whole] 
concerning God and the primordial causes she implants, still [under 
one form and] as a whole, in her second motion, which is reason; 
but whatever she receives from the natures that are above her, 
through the intellect, after it has been formed in the reason, this 
whole she distributes through sense into the separated genera, into 
the diverse species, into the multiple individuals, in the effects 
below, and, to speak more plainly, whatever the human soul, 
through her intellect in her reason, knows of God and the principles 
of things as a unity she always retains as a unity; but whatever, 
through the reason, she perceives to subsist in the causes as one and 
under a uniform mode, this whole, through sense, she understands as 578 D 
multiple and under a multiform mode < in> the effects of the causes. 

But she most clearly knows through her intellect that from the one 
Cause of all things all things start upon their movement towards 
multiplicity without abandoning the simplicity of the unity by which 
they subsist in it eternally and immutably, and (move) towards it as 
the end of their whole movement, and end in it. 

The three motions of the soul, that is, intellect which is also 
called (her) essence, and reason which (is called her) power, and 579A 
sense which (is called her) operation, have been sufficiently discussed, 
as I think. 

A. Most clearly and abundantly. 

N. Contemplate, then, and, dispelling all mist of ambiguity, 24 
understand with the sharpness of your mind how clearly, how 
explicitly the substantial Trinity of the Divine Goodness is revealed 
in the motions of the human soul to those who study them carefully, 
and manifests itself to those who seek it piously as though in a most 
limpid mirror of their own made in its image, and although it is 
removed from every creature and is unknown to every intellect 
descends through its image and likeness (to become), as it were, 
known and comprehensible and in some measure present to [the 
eyes of] the intellect [and of its own accord cleanses the mirror 
which reflects it so that it may shine forth from it most brilliantly 579B 
(as) one essential Goodness in three Substances; for this Unity and 
Trinity, because it eludes every intellect on account of the infinity of 

183 

184 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the likeness 
of the Most 
High Trinity 
579C 
in the 
human trinity 

579D 

its exceeding brightness, would not appear in itself (and) by itself 
unless it impressed the traces of knowledge of itself upon its image]. 
For the likeness of the Father shines forth most clearly in the 
intellect, that of the Son in the reason, that of the Holy Spirit in the 
sense. For as we call the Son the art of the almighty Artist, and not 
unreasonably, since in Him, as in [His] Wisdom, the almighty 
Artist, the Father Himself, has made all things whatsoever He 
desired and preserves (them) eternally and immutably in Him, so 
also the human intellect, through the act of knowing, creates, by a 
wonderful operation of its science, whatsoever it most clearly and 
unambiguously receives from God, and from the principles of all 
things in its art, as it were, I mean, in its reason, and by means of the 
memory stores (it) in its most secret recesses. But as whatever the 
Father, the omnipotent Maker of all things, created at one and the same 
time primordially, causally, uniformly, universally in His art which is 
His Wisdom and His Power, in His Word, in His only begotten Son, 
He divides through the Holy Spirit Who proceeds from Him and 
from the Son into the innumerable effects of the primordial causes, 
whether they have flowed forth into intelligible essences and differ¬ 
ences which surpass every corporeal sense or into the various and 
multiple display of this sensible world diversified by the divisions of 
places and times; so everything which the intellect, that is the 
principal motion of the soul formed by her gnostic contemplation of 
intelligible things, creates and stores in the art of its reason, it 
divides through the interior sense of the soul into the discrete and 
unconfused knowledge of individual things, whether intelligible or 
sensible. For everything which the intellect considers in the reason 
universally it divides into the discrete cognitions and definitions of 
things through the sense particularly. 

So you see that the Father in His Son created universally, and 
through His Holy Spirit has distributed and distributes and will 
distribute particularly, whatsoever He wished ; and learn that in the 
580A likeness of the three Persons of the Divinity everything that our 
intellect can understand [concerning God and the causes of things], 
after a universal mode it creates [that is, it forms] by an act of 
science through knowledge in the reason; and after a particular 
mode, through the sense which is consubstantial with it, divides 
unconfusedly [that is, accommodates its knowledge to each (parti¬ 
cular) by the most careful observation of distinction(s)] by the 
power of its contemplation into the individual definitions of the 
things which in the reason it gathers together. 

BOOK II 

A. These things are becoming clear to me in some measures, 
but I do not yet see what difference there is between the operation of 
the creative and uncreated Trinity and the act of the trinity (which 
is) created and creates. [I say creates] because we do not doubt but 
that the trinity of our nature, which is not the image of God but is 
made in the image of God — for the only true image of the invisible 
God, and in nothing dissimilar (from Him), is the only begotten 
Word of God (which is) co-essential with the Father and the 
Spirit — , is not only created out of nothing but also creates the 
senses which are subjoined to it, and the instruments of the senses, 
and the whole of its body — I mean this mortal (body). For (the 
created trinity) is made from God in the image of God out of 
nothing, but its body it creates [itself], though not out of nothing 
but out of something. For, by the action of the soul, which cements 
together the incorporeal qualities [and] takes [from quantity] as it 
were a kind of substrate [for these qualities] and places it under 
(them), it creates for itself a body in which she may openly display 
her hidden actions (which) in themselves (are) invisible, and bring 
(them) forth into sensible knowledge, as has already been discussed 
in the first book and will be examined yet more closely when we 
have come to consider the activity of the primordial causes. 

But now I ask you to embark upon the question before us. 

N. The solution to this problem seems to me very simple, and 
to require hardly any effort. For the most high Trinity, creative of 
all things and by nothing created, made from nothing all that it 
made. For it is the prerogative of the Divine Goodness to call forth 
from non-existence into existence what it wishes to be made. For the 
name bonitas takes its origin from the Greek verb pod) [that is] “I 
cry out.” But Pod) and KaXib [that is] ‘T cry out” and ‘T call” have 
the same meaning. For he who calls very often breaks out into a cry. 
So it is not unreasonable that God should be called Bonus and 
Bonitas, because with an intelligible cry He cries out that all things 
should come from nothing into essence, and therefore God is called 
in Greek, KaXoq, that is, good, 5id to “Trdvia Ka?i8i eXq oualav” 
[that is] “for the reason that He calls all things into essence.” For all 
things which subsist naturally have been called by the Creator from 
nothing into essence through the fivefold motion of universal 
creation. For some are called merely to subsist essentially, some to 
subsist and live, in some sense is added to their substantial life, in 
some reason is piled upon sentient life, in some intellect is super¬ 
imposed for (the sake of) perfection of the abovementioned natural 

185 

580B 

That the 
human soul 
creates this 
mortal body 

580C 

Concerning 
the differ¬ 
ence between 
the operation 
of the divine 
and of the 
human trinity 

Why God is 
called Good 

580D 

581A 

186 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the twofold 
operation of 
the soul 

581B 

581C 

motions. [And the first motion is (found) in [natural] bodies, the 
second in that life by which trees and plants both live and grow, the 
third [in] the irrational animate beings, the fourth in human (nature) 
as its property, the fifth is <at present> seen (only) in the angelic 
nature.] And by these five stages in the creation of things out of 
nothing the Goodness of the most high and holy Trinity is seen and 
its ineffable operation manifested. 

But the trinity which is created in our nature in the image of the 
Creator creates nothing out of nothing, for that belongs to God 
alone and to no creature. But its action is seen to be twofold. For 
either it explores by its rational and intellectual motions those things 
which its Creator created out of nothing, and deposits in the 
innermost recesses of its reason the things which by the clear 
observation of its intellect it gets to know in nature, and it either 
gathers together into a unity its cognitions of all the things which it 
can know [for instance, by the operation of its science it unifies 
genera in essence, species in genus, individuals in species] ; or divides 
them into many, distributing each cognition to the particular thing 
of which it is the cognition [that is to say^ to take the same example, 
dividing by a gnostic operation essence into genera, genus into 
species, species into individuals]. And this is the principal and 
highest activity of the rational nature. 

But the second is that which, as we have said, is known in its 
creation of its body, and is revealed in its careful control of it. For 
first it takes its matter from the qualities of sensible things and, with 
no temporal interval intervening, applies to it <form and> vital 
motion by which it both quickens and nourishes that matter and 
carries it forward through place and time to the increased dimensions 
of its perfect stature. Also it provides it with the exterior sense 
through which it receives the phantasies of all things which reach it 
from without, and the other things which can be thought and 
understood with reference to the ceaseless care and uninterrupted 
activity of the soul for her body and for bodily matters, either when 
in waking she is present in the senses or when she is withdrawn from 
them in sleep, and by discussing with herself the images of things 
which she had absorbed through the senses or by fashioning images 
of the images or by distributing through the hidden channels of the 
veins and nerves which the Greeks call Tiopoi or dpispiai bodily 
nourishments which she receives from outside for the building up of 
her body. For as the most high Trinity moves (and) controls (and) 
orders by the rules of its Providence the totality of everything 

BOOK II 

created which it created out of nothing, and allows nothing of the 
things that it has created to perish, that is, to return entirely to 
nothing; so the trinity of our nature exerts providence over the 
totality of its body and the [safety] of all its senses, and quickens 
[and] moves [and] preserves it as much as [its] mortal fragility 
allows. 

But see that you do not begin to conjecture from these reasons 
that the creation of the soul preceded by any temporal interval the 
creation of the body < which was a spiritual creature before man 
sinned> . For only by the status and excellence of her nature does 
the soul precede the body, not in place or time. For at one and the 
same time in that one man who was made in the image of God were 
created reasons of all men in respect both of body and of soul. 

For by no means does the essence of the soul precede the 
essence of the body by intervals of times, as neither does the essence 
of the body (precede) the essence of the soul. And do not think that I 
mean that that first essential body created in paradise [ — but as yet 
it was only in its reason that it was created, as also the soul. For in 
that general and universal man made in the image of God all men, in 
respect of body and soul, not only have, in potency only, been 
created once and together, but all in him also have sinned before 
they proceeded < spiritually like the angels> into their proper 
substances, that is, before each appeared in his distinct form in a 
rational soul and spiritual body — which, that is, the body], (as) 
incorruptible, would have adhered eternally and coeternally to the 
soul had it not sinned, (the body) in which all men will rise again, is 
created by the soul. For that body was substantially created by the 
one Creator of all things immediately at the same time as the 
rational soul in heavenly bliss [or rather for heavenly bliss]. [Now, I 
say “substantially” because the true substance of every creature is 
its reason, fore-known and pre-created in the primordial [causes], 
by which God defines it (saying), “It shall be thus [and] not 
otherwise.” And I also said “for <heavenly> bliss” because I do 
not see how man [should surrender] (that) bliss had he ever fully 
and perfectly savoured it as it really is. For, as I think, he turned to 
himself before he turned to God, and that was why he fell.] But I do 
not hesitate to say that this corruptible and material body which was 
taken from the mud of the earth < as we said above> after sin and 
as a punishment for sin, so that in it the negligent soul might be 
trained to keep the commandments <and to manifest her opera- 
tions> , was created and is daily being created as though by some 

187 

581D 

582A 

25 

582B 

Concerning 
the co- 
eternity of 
the first body 
582C 

and the soul 

188 

PERIPHYSEON 

proper action of the soul. For it ought not to surprise you that Holy 
582D Scripture declares that God took clay of the earth and from it 
formed a body for man, because it is not unreasonable that the 
action of the creature should be referred to Him from Whom every 
natural action originates, since even among the celestial essences, 
descending step by step from the first order which begins imme- 
583A diately after God to the last, whatever (ministration) the higher 
order performs and completes upon the order below it by some 
action of its own is wholly referred to Him from Whom every 
natural motion springs and every natural action descends from the 
highest to the lowest. For although the Cause of all things, being 
immutable, does not through itself but through the creature which is 
subordinate to it create (or) move (or) govern the totality of 
universal nature which it has established, yet the whole dispensation 
of the Divine Providence is referred to it because it is the Cause of 
all things. 

What shall I say of the orders of the Church (as it is) 
constituted in this present mortal life, (and of) which the order of 
583B bishops is at the head ? Is not everything which the other orders who 
come after (the bishop) may have performed in the offices to which 
they are appointed referred to him because it is from him that the 
subordinate orders receive the functions that they must carry out? 
For by him is allotted to each his symbolic ministry, and the 
spiritual operation of the whole Church is referred through him to 
that Cause of all good and mystical acts, I mean God. 

What wonder, then, if the first man, (who was) made in the 
image of God and (who) transgressed the divine commandment and 
for that reason (was) driven from the bliss of paradise, should create 
for himself from the clay of the earth a fragile and mortal habitation 
on the advice of the Divine Providence, so that, since he had in his 
pride refused to occupy and preserve the heavenly and spiritual 
body created by God Himself, he should in his degradation make 
583C for himself, as a punishment for disobedience, a mortal mansion 
taken from earthly matter, and by this punishment be brought to 
repentance and seek in chastened mood, by getting to know himself 
again and by mortifying himself, to return to the first state of his 
nature? 

26 Nor is Scripture silent about this. For concerning the fact that, 
immediately after the transgression, human nature, which before its 
sin had been simple, was after its fall divided into two sexes it says : 
“And they sewed fig-leaves together and made for themselves 

BOOK II 189 

TU8pi^(b|iaTa,” clearly intending by the symbol of the leaves the what is 

fragile and corruptible state of this mortal body, which man wove ^neant by the 

f i2~leaves 

for himself after his fall. For our mortal bodies are very like the 
broad leaves of the fig. For as those leaves cast a shadow (and) shut 
out the rays of the sun, so our bodies both cast upon our souls the 
darkness of ignorance and keep out the knowledge of truth. 

But these leaves, I mean our earthly bodies, have a way of 583D 
encircling us on all sides and of overshadowing us with the sweetness 
of earthly and deadly delights like a kind of fruit and of causing us 
to be deceived in them. 

And in order that you may learn that the creation of our mortal 
body is most explicitly referred to Him by Whose design is done 
whatever is read concerning our training and renewal and salvation, 584A 
hear the words of the same Scripture : “The Lord God also made for 
Adam and his wife tunics of skins and clothed them with them,” 
where it is not unreasonable that we should understand that by the 
tunics of skins is signified nothing else but what the Tiepi^wpaxa 
(signify), namely our mortal bodies, which, in accordance with the 
righteous judgement of the Creator, the first human beings made for 
themselves after their transgression. And surely it must seem to you 
more reasonable to say that mortal man made mortal flesh for 
himself than that God Himself by His own action created it rather 
than permitting it and advising it? For God is immortal and 
whatever is made through Him is immortal. For everything mortal 
that is seen to be in this sensible world, being both fragile and 
transitory, is either made by ourselves when we are led astray by our 584B 
irrational motions or is permitted to be made on account of our sin, 
for use and example in our mortal life, whether by the good powers 
who minister to us <and lead us to perfection> or by the evil 
powers who hinder our natural course from reaching its proper end 
which is appointed after certain times. For no philosopher among 
those who practise philosophy correctly doubts but that the vital 
motion works in the seeds to the end that they may through 
generation develop into visible forms; but the vital motion itself 
does not always show its potentiality for action equally in each 
genus, either because of certain accidents which are not congenial to 
the seeds and are born of contrary qualities, or because of hostile 
powers which operate, as we have said, against their natural 
motion ; to discuss which now' would be a lengthy (task) and an 
unnecessary (one) since it has been discussed by many. 

190 

PERIPHYSEON 

584C 

584D 

27 

585A 

585B 

Concerning 
man’s like- 

[But perhaps someone will ask : “That first incorruptible body 
which would have remained attached to the soul if she had not 
sinned, where is it now? For what is incorruptible cannot perish.” 
To this there is a short answer : Until now it lies hidden in the secret 
recesses of human nature, but in the age to come it will appear when 
this mortal (body) will be changed into it, and “this corruption will 
put on incorruption”. Hear then the Apostle: “It is sown a psychic 
body, it will rise a spiritual body. It is sown in weakness, it will rise 
in power. It is sown in ignominy, it will rise in glory,” (the glory,) 
that is, of immortality and incorruptibility, whether in the good or 
in the evil. For I take this statement to have a general application to 
every human body. For in all, the glory of eternal immortality will 
be equal, though not (the glory) of bliss. For the whole <pri- 
mordial> nature < together with what has been added to it> will 
be restored <into unity> ]. 

A. Enough, I think, has been said about this incidental ques¬ 
tion, and we must return to the consideration of that trinity in which 
we have been created in the image and likeness of God, and 
carefully consider whether that image copies throughout all things 
the likeness of that of which it is the image or whether it is dissimilar 
in anything, and does not in every respect attain to a perfect image. 
For so far as it imitates, thus far it is rightly called image ; but if it 
deviates at any point it falls short of the reason of a perfect image. 

N. We believe that man was most perfectly created in the 
image and likeness of God and that in paradise before his sin he fell 
short (of that) in nothing except in respect of subject. For God, 
subsisting through Himself and receiving subsistence from nothing 
that precedes Him, brought Man in His image and likeness out of 
nothing into essence. Therefore, once it has been noted that God, 
being dvap^oc;, that is, without beginning, possesses His Essence 
through Himself, while man, created out of nothing, has a beginning 
of his creation, not only in the primordial causes in which all things 
were created at once, but also in the processions into the diverse 
essences and species, whether intelligible or sensible, all other things 
which are said and understood of God through the excellence of His 
Essence are wholly seen in His image through < nature > and 
grace. For the Creator (Who is) invisible and incomprehensible and 
passes all understanding created His image similar to Himself in all 
these things. For even our intellect is not known as to what it is in its 
essence either by itself or by any other save God <Who alone 
knows what He has made> ; but as concerning its Creator it knows 

BOOK II 

only that He is but does not perceive what He is, so concerning itself 
it only determines that it is created, but how or in what substance it 
is constituted it cannot understand. For if in any way it could 
understand what it is it would necessarily deviate from the likeness 
of its Creator. [For] the TTpcoioiuTTov, that is, the Principal Exemplar, 
is God through nature, while the image is God through grace. The 
TTpcoTOTUTTOV is diffused through all things, distributing to all things 
their essence; the image, purified [illumined (and) perfected] by the 
light of grace, pervades all things, forming a knowledge of them in 
itself. The TTpcoToiUTiov penetrates all things [that it has made], 
dividing its gifts to each in the proportion proper for each ; the 
image surveys all things, giving glory to the Bestower of good things 
for His innumerable gifts [He has bestowed upon all — for some 
gifts, < which are properly called data,> are substantial, others are 
added to substance; and as the TTpcoTOiuTiov created His image so 
that in it He might reveal some knowledge of Himself, so the image 
made for itself an image in which it might manifest its motions 
(which) in themselves (are) hidden. For the soul is the image of God, 
the body the image of the soul]. 

And concerning the other things which are to be understood 
and declared concerning the similitude of the image anyone who 
desires fuller knowledge may read the book of St. Gregory Nuaaeu^ 
“On the Image”. 

A. These (things) I readily accept. But I see another difference 
besides that of substance which appears to divide the image from its 
Principal Exemplar. 

N. Please tell me what it is. 

A. Does the difference seem to you slight between the nature 
which knows of itself both that it is and what it is, and that which 
knows of itself only that it is but does not understand what it is ? For 
you will not deny, as I think, that God himself understands of 
Himself what He is, whereas we do not deny that the other essences 
and substances, (which are) created, cannot understand of themselves 
<what they are> lest we should appear impudently to oppose 
Gregory Nazianzen the Theologian, who declares without hesitation 
(and) with sound reasons that no created essence can be defined by 
itself or by another, even though endowed with reason and intellect, 
as to what it is. Do you see, then, that the dissimilarity between the 
image and its Principal Exemplar, that is, between the human 
intellect and God the Creator is not only in respect of subject but 

191 

ness to God 
and the 
mind’s 
585C 

ignorance as 
to what it is 

585D 

586A 

586B 

192 

PERIPHYSEON 

That God 
does not 
know of 
Himself 
What He is 
586C 

586D 

587A 

also for the reason that the Principal Exemplar itself knows what it 
is, while the image does not understand how to define substantially 
either itself as to what it is or its Exemplar which it copies? 

N. I see that you have been misled by an appearance of true 
reasoning, and it is not surprising. For unless one has keenly and 
carefully examined from all sides the things in which you seem to be 
mistaken, they will be considered as not only likely but true. 

A. Please explain where I am mistaken. 

N. Do you believe that the Divine Essence is infinite or finite? 

A. To hesitate over that would be impious and very foolish, 
especially as it ought to be believed and understood that it is not 
Essence but More than Essence and the infinite Cause of all 
essences, and not only infinite but the Infinity of all infinite essence, 
and More than Infinity. 

N. You speak correctly and in accordance with catholic doc¬ 
trine. It is, then, in every respect infinite? 

A. I have granted this and do not regret having granted it but 
most firmly declare that it is not otherwise. 

N. See that you do not retract. 

A. You need have no fear of that. 

N. So when we ask of this or that, “What is it?”, does it not 
appear to you that we are seeking for nothing else but a substance 
which either has been defined or is capable of being defined? 

A. Nothing else (but that). For this word, “What”, when it is 
interrogative, seeks nothing else but that the substance which it 
seeks be somehow defined. 

N. If, then, no wise man asks of all essence in general what it is, 
since it cannot be defined except in terms of the circumstances which 
circumscribe it, so to speak, within limits, I mean place and time 
[quantity and quality, connection, rest, motion, condition] and the 
other accidents by which the substance [itself], by reason of (being) 
subject, unknown and indefinable through itself, is shown only as 
subsisting, but not as to what it is, what man learned in the 
discipline of the divine word would presume to inquire of the Divine 
Substance what it is when he understands very well concerning it 
that it cannot be defined, and is not any of the things that are, and 
surpasses all things that can be defined? 

BOOK II 

193 

[[Hear the Nazianzen :] “If... the accumulation of the things 
which are both understood and said by us about that” which is 
being sought “is nothing whatever of the things that exist according 
to being itself as it is and is spoken of, but if that to which these 
relate — since it contains them while it is in no way contained by 
them — is something other than they, (then) let every soul refrain 
from rashly rushing into any speech of the matters that concern 
God” to define Him (thereby), “... but let her reverence in silence 
only the truth of the Divine Essence (which is) ineffable and beyond 
understanding and the summit of all science.” If, then, there is no 
one (even) among the wisest who can know the reasons of the 587B 
substance of existing things as those (reasons) were (first) established, 
who would dare to find in anything a definition of God?] 

A. I would not presume to question this either. For I know 
that (His Substance) is altogether infinite. 

N. If, then, God knows [of Himself] what He is, does He not 
define Himself — for everything which is understood by itself or by 
another as to what it is can be defined [by itself < or by another> ] 
— and therefore is not altogether infinite [but partially (so) if by the 
creature only He cannot be defined whereas by Himself He can be, 
or, if I may say so, subsists (as) finite to Himself, infinite to the 
creature]? And if this be admitted, it will necessarily follow that 
either God is not universally infinite, if it is only by the creature that 
He does not admit definition and not by Himself ; or that, in order 
to be universally infinite. He does not admit definition at all, either 
from the creature or from Himself 

That God 
cannot be 
defined 
either by 
587C 

Himself or 
by another 

A. I think that the obscurity of this reasoning is impenetrable 
and were it not that He Who is being sought Himself extends His aid 
to those who seek Him I could easily believe that there is no way of 
entering upon it. For if God does not define Himself, or if He could 
not define [Himself], who would deny that ignorance and impotence 
are admitted into His Nature — ignorance if He does not understand 
< of Himself> what He is, impotence if He is unable to define His 
Substance? [For He will be seen to be impotent when He can find 
nothing in which to define Himself] 

On the other hand, if He both understands and defines what He 
Himself is, this will show that He is not altogether infinite since only 
by the creature can He not be defined, because by no means is He 
understood by it, but by Himself He is both defined and known as 
to what He is. 

194 

PERIPHYSEON 

587D N. Do not be troubled but rather be of good heart. For this 
discussion is drawing us towards an understanding of ourselves, and 
teaching us the things which it is right to think and understand and 
declare about our God, He being our Guide. [For the more obscure 
[and wearisome] it will be thought at the beginning of the inquiry, 
the more lucid and fruitful it will turn out to be. “For”, says 
St. Augustine, “by some divine providence it cannot be that religious 
588A minds who devoutly and seriously seek themselves and their God, 
that is, the Truth, should lack the ability to find it.”] 

A. I am not troubled but rather, and with justification, 
concerned about the obscurity of the problem that confronts us; 
and I do not think that its solution will be an easy one. 

N. Let us go back, then, to (the problems) which were debated 
between us in the first book, and, unless I am mistaken, were 
completely solved. 

A. Please tell me what they are. 

N. Do you remember that it was settled between us to a 
certainty that none of the categories which are included in the decad 
can by any means be literally predicated of the Divine Nature? 

A. That was conceded and established beyond question. 

N. We shall not, then, have to work as hard as you think to 
resolve the difficulty of this problem, if we look keenly at the valid 
588B conclusions of the first book. For their subtle and penetrating 
usefulness will now be shown to bear most fair [and useful] fruit. 

A. If this turns out to be the case, it is certainly necessary (that 
we should do so). 

N. [It will certainly be so.] The train of our reasoning seems to 
require that we should briefly recall to our memory the categories 
themselves. 

A. No other way of inquiry suggests itself But I should like 
you to recapitulate them in interrogative form. 

N. Consider carefully, then, this order of interrogation : What ? 
How great? Of what kind? In relation to what? In what position? 
With what possession ? Is it in place ? Is it in time ? Does it act ; or is 
it acted upon ? Or, if you prefer the Greek terms : il ; jioaov ; ttoiov ; 
TTpoq tI ; K8Ta0ai dpa; [exeaBai dpa;] ttou ; ttote ; TipdiTSi dpa f] 
Traaxei; Of these (interrogatives), then, there is none that can 
properly be asked of God because none of them is understood in 

BOOK II 

195 

Him either by Himself or by any other. [For these can properly be 
considered only in things which are shown to fall within the scope of 
intellect or sense.] For if you ask of God what He is will you not be 588C 
seeking a proper defined substance? And if one should reply (that 
He is) this or that, will he not seem to be defining a certain and 
circumscribed [substance] ? But if anyone were to assert this of Him 
as a truth, or if He Himself understands this of Himself, He will 
rightly occupy the first place of the categories [which is allotted to 
certain and defined subjects in which and about which all accidents 
are associated and contained] and thus the first category will be 
predicated of Him not figuratively but literally. For if the Divine 
Nature, whether by the intelligible creature or by itself, is understood 
(to be) in some defined essence, it is not altogether infinite and 
uncircumscribed [and free from all accident], and therefore is not 588D 
believed to be truly removed from everything which is said and 
understood, since it is understood (to be) within certain limits of a 
defined nature. For nothing of which it can be predicated or 
understood as to what it is can overstep the limit of the things that 
are, but will rightly be considered to be as though a part in a whole, 
or a whole in its parts, or a species in a genus, or a genus in its 
species, or individuals in a species, or a species in its individuals, or 
some collection of all these things out of many into one ; and this is 589A 
far from the simple and infinite truth of the Divine Nature, which is 
nothing of the things that are. For it is neither whole nor part, 
although it is called whole and part because by it every whole and 
every part, and all wholes and all parts, are created. Similarly it is 
neither genus nor form nor species nor individual nor ouaia, 
whether the most general or the most specific ; and yet all these are 
predicated of it because from it they receive their ability to subsist. 
Moreover it is called the totality of all these although by the infinity 
of its excellence it surpasses the totality of all creation, because by it 
the total totality is created. 

How, therefore, can the Divine Nature understand of itself 589B 
what it is, seeing that it is nothing? For it surpasses everything that 
is, since it is not even being but all being derives from it, and by 
virtue of its excellence it is supereminent over every essence and 
every substance. Or how can the infinite be defined by itself in 
anything or be understood in anything when it knows itself (to be) 
above every finite (thing) and every infinite (thing) and beyond 
finitude and infinity? So God does not know of Himself what He is 
because He is not a “what”, being in everything incomprehensible 

196 

PERIPHYSEON 

both to Himself and to every intellect; and since Truth Itself in 
intelligible language proclaims in pure intellects that this is most 
truly said of God, no one of the men of pious learning or of the 
adepts in the Divine Mysteries, hearing of God that He cannot 
understand of Himself what He is, ought to think anything else than 
that God Himself, Who is not a “what”, does not know at all in 
589C Himself that which He Himself is not. But He does not recognize 
himself as being something. Therefore He does not know what He 
Himself is, that is. He does not know that He is a “what”, because 
He recognizes that He is none at all of the things which are known in 
something and about which it can be said or understood what they 
are. For if He were to recognize Himself in something He would 
show that He is not in every respect infinite and incomprehensible 
[and unnameable]. Thus He says: [“Why do you ask My Name? 
For it is wonderful.” Or is not this Name indeed wonderful, which is 
above every name, which is unnameable, which is set above every 
name (that is) named whether in (this) world or in the world to 
come ? If, then. He disapproves the asking of His Name because it is 
589D unnameable above every name, what if one were to inquire of His 
Substance, which, were it in any finite thing, would not be without a 
finite name? But as He subsists in nothing because (He is) infinite. 
He lacks all naming because He is unnameable]. 

For nothing that is understood to be substantially in anything 
in such a way that it can be literally predicated of it what it is 
exceeds its proportion and measure. For it is enclosed within some 
proportion by which it is limited (and) is circumscribed by some 
590A measure which it cannot overstep. For if it occupies the lowest place 
in the nature of things, in which all bodies are contained, it cannot 
descend further below the measure of its nature because below (it) 
there is nothing ; and it cannot ascend above (it) because it is limited 
to that vital motion from which it receives nourishment and growth, 
and therefore it is not carried beyond itself. On the other hand, if it 
subsists at the highest level of all creation, it is necessary that it 
should be confined within its limits so that it may be recognized as 
intellectual. For it cannot ascend to any creature above itself 
because there is seen to be nothing among created things that is 
higher than itself ; likewise it cannot be thrust further down because 
of the substances that come after it. Finally, if it should occupy a 
place posed in the midst, it would neither be permitted to fall to the 
(regions) below it nor to extend to the (regions) above, but would 
hold to its natural position at the centre. [And therefore there is no 

1 

BOOK 11 

197 

creature, whether visible or invisible, which is not confined in 
something within the limits of its proper nature by measure and 590B 
number and weight.] 

But God understands that He is in none of those things but That God is 
recognizes that He [is] above all the orders of nature by reason of 
the excellence of His Wisdom, and below all things by reason of the and 

depth of His Power, and within all things by the inscrutable without all 
dispensation of His Providence, and encompasses all things because things 
all things are within Him, and without Him there is nothing. [For 
He alone is the measure without measure, the number without 
number, and the weight without weight. And rightly so ; for He is 
not measured or numbered or ordered by anything or by Himself, 
and He understands that He is not confined by any measure or 
number or order since in none of these things is He substantially 
contained, for He alone truly exists in all things, being infinite above 
all things.] 

And do not oppose my [statement] that the order of bodies 
cannot be extended into the natures that are above it [on the ground 590C 
that] we believe that all bodies shall pass into incorporeal qualities 
and substances. For when this happens they will cease to be bodies. 

But at present, as long as they are bodies, they cannot overstep 
either the upper or the lower limits of their nature. But this part of 
philosophy will be more carefully treated when we come to consider 
the return of things [into their causes]. Now [however] let us [attend 
to] the topic before us, that is, the proposition that God does not 
understand what He is ; [and] do not be afraid to say openly how it 
seems to you, whether what we are trying to teach [about this] seems 
plausible to you. 

A. I confess that what you have said of this wonderful Divine 
Ignorance by which God does not understand what He is, although 
obscure, yet does not seem to me false, but true and likely. For you 
do not teach that God does not know Himself but only that He does 590D 
not know what He is ; and rightly so, because He is not a “what”. 

For He is infinite both to Himself and to all things that are from 
Him [and therefore there is most clearly and beautifully revealed in 
this form of ignorance the supreme and ineffable Wisdom. For the 
foolishness of God is wiser than men.] 

N. What then? If one asks of God how great He is or of what 
kind, will “so great” or “such” seem to you the right reply ? For I do 
not mean that quantity [and quality] of which the Prophet says: 591 A 

! 

198 

PERIPHYSEON 

591B 

That no 
category can 
be predicated 
of God 
literally 

591C 

That in the 
genera of 
things there 
is found 
neither 
“what ?’’ nor 
“how much ?’’ 
nor “of what 
kind?” 

591D 

''Great (is) the Lord and exceeding worthy to be praised, and there is 
no end of His greatness/' See how profoundly the theologian speaks: 
"Great", he says, (is) "the Lord," — but lest anyone [should suppose] 
that He is limited by finite quality he at once adds: "and there is no 
end of His greatness." Also, lest anyone should hold that there is in 
Him finite quality, he does not simply say, "and worthy to be praised", 
but adds, "exceeding" . But "exceeding" is said of what exceeds every 
proportion. So, as I say, lam not referring to that infinite quantity nor 
to that quality which is "exceeding" — for it is not inappropriate that 
these be thought of God — but to the quantity and quality which are 
said (to be) in the subject as accidents. 

A. Not right at all. For where defined substance or, as I might 
say, a defined subject is not found, there it seems to me very foolish 
and ridiculous to seek for or assert quantity and quality; and 
therefore since in God neither He Himself nor any other mind is 
able to discover any defined substance or, so to say, defined subject 
with reference to which it can be said or understood what He is, is it 
not abundantly clear that no finite or infinite quantity (and) no 
finite or infinite quality can be recognized in Him by Himself or by 
another ? For if He transcends every finite and infinite substance by 
the infinite and more than infinite excellence of His proper Power, 
who will not at once and without any hesitation break out with an 
open acknowledgement and exclamation that no finite or infinite 
quantity or quality is attributable to Him or that He is a “what” of 
any kind whatsoever? [For where a “what” is found, there at once is 
a “how much” and an “of what sort” ; but where there is no 
“what”, there “how much” and “of what sort” cannot be found. If, 
then, in the genera of things neither a “what” nor “how much” nor 
“of what kind” nor any accident is understood (to be), because 
they are simple, but these are sought for only in individuals, who but 
a fool would dare to seek for a “what” or “how much” or “of what 
kind” in God?] 

N. What then? Do you think there is in Him relation, which is 
called by the Greeks jrpoc; ii? 

A. I would not say that either. For I have no doubt but that 
where defined substance cannot be understood, there there can be 
no relation. [For it does not exist by nature but by a kind of link and 
possession of two or more subjects. For that in the Trinity of the 
Divine Goodness the Father is said to be (the father) of the Son and 
the Son (the son) of the Father under the form of relation seems to 

BOOK II 

199 

me to signify rather a permanent possession than a chance relation¬ 
ship. For it is not an accident in the Father to possess the Son or in 
the Son to possess the Father.] 

N. It seems superfluous, as I think, to speak severally of the 
other categories. For if God Himself understands Himself (to be) in 
no defined substance or quantity or quality or relation, to whom 
will it not be clearer than day that no position or possession, [no] 592A 
place or time, [no] action or passion at all is an accident in Him; 
and that therefore none of these things can be understood (to be) in 
Himself either by Himself or by another? For if defined substance is 
not found or understood (to be) in Him, it is foolish to doubt but 
that none of the accidents of defined substance are in Him as 
accidents. For where a defined subject is lacking, there no accident 
is understood to be associated or separated [or in any way distinct 
from the nature of the subject]. But, to speak in short of each (of the 
categories) which we treated at length in the first book, who would 
attribute position to the Divine Nature when even (that Nature) 
itself recognizes no position in itself? For position is either of parts 
in the whole, for example, the position of the human body is the 592B 
order of the members by which every member is confined within its 
own order; or the attitude of the whole body is called position, for 
example, it stands, it sits, it lies. But none of those who practise 
philosophy aright is ignorant that the Power of the Divine Essence is 
quite without any of these (positions). For it is not a whole nor a 
part [nor] is it sitting down as though weary nor lying down as 
though prostrated nor does it come to a stand after any motion. 

[The Son is said to sit at the right hand of the Father. The Son Concerning 
in His totality. Word and flesh, is the Right Hand of the Father, the 
Power of the Father, the Strength of the Father. Therefore the Son 
is Himself the Right Hand of the Father. Therefore in sitting He sits which is the 
in Himself, remaining consubstantial with the Father, judging all 
things, at rest. For Stephen He stands battling with His hosts, 
endowing them with power that they may conquer on earth. The 
Right Hand of the Lord made power, bestowing upon them the 
reward of sitting with Him in heaven. See how He sits, how He 592C 
stands. This position is mystical, not corporeal, not local, but 
spiritual. Learn that such is the position of the Divine Nature.] 

Who would attach possession to it when it perceives no 
possession in itself? For itself is sufficient possession to itself, and 
no virtue is in it as an accident since in itself, as being most simple, 
subsist virtue and more-than-virtue and the source of all virtues, and 

200 

PERIPHYSEON 

592D 

593A 

593B 

Conclusion 
that God 
recognizes 
no category 
in His nature 

whatever substance possesses virtue that possession comes to it from 
no other source than the participation in the general virtues which 
the causal Virtue of all virtues has created in their primordial 
principles. 

The Divine Nature is without any place, although it provides 
place within itself for all things which are from it, and for that 
reason is called the Place of all things; but it is [not] unable to 
provide place for itself because it is infinite and uncircumscribed 
and does not allow itself to be located, that is, defined and 
circumscribed, by any intellect nor by itself. For from it, being 
infinite and more than infinite, all finites and infinites proceed, and 
to it, being infinite and more than infinite, they return. 

There is no time for that Nature which knows that it has no 
beginning nor end nor any motion by which everything moves that 
moves from a beginning towards an end and into its end. It knows in 
itself no increases which occur at particular places and times, nor 
any decreases, for in itself it is full and perfect. 

What is to be said of acting and being acted upon? Would it 
not be inappropriate and incongruous were one to think that acting 
and being acted upon were accidents to that Nature which in itself 
perceives no motion towards acting, and nothing capable of being 
acted upon? For not as with us substance is one thing (and) the 
accident, that is, acting and being acted upon, of substance is 
another, (not) so does it recognize in itself a sort of composition of 
substance and accidents. For it is without the latter and knows that 
they are not in it. For it is most simple, and foreign to all 
composition. For its Will, which is Itself substantially [and more 
than substantially and more than Will], is its activity and its 
passivity. For it is said to act because it wills all things to be made 
and they are, but it is said to be acted upon because it wills to be 
loved by all [and it loves itself in all, for it is substantial and true 
Love and more than substantial Love], and whoever love it love it 
whether they know they love or do not know, that is, whether by an 
intelligible and rational motion they love it under the guidance of 
grace, or by the simple appetite of nature. For there is nothing that 
has been created by it that does not have desire for it. 

Do you then see that it is not without reason that God is said to 
know that nothing which is embraced within the terms of the ten 
Categories subsists in His Nature, seeing that it is shown wholly to 
surpass them all by the depth of its Power and by its infinity? For 

BOOK II 

that which is infinite is infinite in every respect and in every manner, 
in essence, in power, in operation, at both extremes, I mean the 
upper and the lower, that is, in respect of its beginning and its end. 
For it is incomprehensible in essence and unintelligible in power and 
uncircumscribed in operation ; and it is infinite without beginning 
above and without end below, and to speak plainly and more truly, 
it is infinite throughout all things. 

A. I see (it) clearly, and I see that it is true as well as supported 
by the conclusions of sound reasoning. But I very much wonder why 
ignorance is attributed to God, from Whom nothing is hidden either 
in Himself or in the things which are from Him. 

N. Pay attention, then, and examine carefully what has been 
said. For if you have considered with an open mind the force of 
things and words, you will most surely find, unclouded by any 
doubt, that no ignorance is attributed to God. For His ignorance is 
an ineffable understanding; and in order that we may attempt to 
prove this from what has been said, mark carefully the force of the 
words. 

Do you think that when we say that God [does not know] of 
Himself [what He is] we mean anything else [than] that He 
understands that [He] is not in any of the things that are? For how 
can He recognize in Himself that which cannot be in Himself? [For 
if the reasons of nature which He Himself in Himself, that is, the 
Father in the Son, created are in Him an indivisible unity and admit 
no definition of proper substance by proper differences or by 
accidents — for these they suffer in their effects, not in themselves — , 
what must we think of His ineffable and incomprehensible Nature 
itself? Who would suppose that there was in it anything that was 
defined by a limit, extended in space, separated into parts, or 
composed of substances and accidents ?] Therefore this ignorance is 
the highest and truest wisdom. 

What we are saying is like what one of us might say of himself: 
“I do not understand at all that I am an insensible stone deprived of 
all vital motion,” that is, I fully understand that I am not an 
insensible stone deprived of all vital motion. Again: “I do [not] 
understand that any man [living in the flesh] is deprived of sense and 
reason” [because I know that no man living in the flesh is deprived 
of sense and reason]. Again: ‘T do [not] understand that irrational 
motion subsists naturally in my soul” [that is, I most certainly know 
that no irrational motion subsists naturally in my soul]. And this we 

201 

593C 

On the 
ignorance of 
God which 
593D 
is true 
wisdom 

594A 

Analogies 

which 

demonstrate 
knowledge 
under the 
form of 
ignorance 

594B 

202 

PERIPHYSEON 

594C 

594D 

595A 

Concerning 
the Son’s 

can demonstrate from Holy Scripture. For also in the Gospel we 
read that the Lord will, at the Judgement that is to come, reply to 
the reprobate, “I know you not,” that is, I know you not in the 
reasons of all things which the Father created in Me [because I 
understand that you are not in them], not in so far as I substantiated 
you naturally, but in as much as you have fallen away from the laws 
of your true nature. For it is not that which I made in you that I do 
not know, but that which I did not make, and therefore I do not 
punish or command to depart from Me that which I know in Me, 
but that which I do not know in Me is what I punish and command 
to depart from Me. [So God does not know, in the wicked [and in] 
sinners, that which He did not make, namely their evil and irrational 
motions.] 

There is also another kind of ignorance in God, wherein He is 
said not to know the things which He has foreknown and predestined 
before they have been revealed to experience in the evolution of 
created things. Thus He himself says in the Gospel : “But concerning 
that day and that hour nobody knows, neither the angels in heaven 
nor the Son of Man but only the Father.” What is surprising in these 
words is not that knowledge of the future Judgement is concealed 
from human minds which are still encumbered with mortal flesh, 
nor even is it to be altogether denied that the angels are said to be 
still capable of ignorance, since Holy Scripture declares that they are 
still learning, according to St. Dionysius the Areopagite in the 
7^^ chapter of the “Celestial Hierarchy” where he says : “The 
theologians explicitly declare that the inferior orders of the celestial 
essences are fittingly instructed by those that are above them in the 
theurgic sciences, while those that are higher than all are illuminated 
in the doctrines by the Divinity itself in so far as that may be... and 
that Jesus Himself gives them direct instruction, revealing to them 
first of all His humane goodness. For He says : T preach justice and 
the Judgement of salvation.’ ” Again (St. Dionysius) says : “I marvel 
that even the first of the celestial essences and those that at the same 
time excel them all reverently seek the divine illuminations, as do the 
intermediary orders. Thus, do they not ask : ‘Wherefore are Thy 
garments red?’ But they first deliberate among themselves before 
asking, showing indeed that they are learning and seeking the 
theurgic science.” If, then, as this father says, the celestial powers 
are learning, they are not free from all ignorance, and if so, we 
should not be surprised that at present [they] can be ignorant of the 
future Judgement. But that the Lord should say of Himself: “Nor 
the Son of Man but the Father only” raises a very difficult problem. 

BOOK II 

For how can the Son not know what the Father knows, particularly 
about the Day of Judgement, for judgement belongs specifically to 
the Son? For the Father, as He Himself says, does not judge 
any man but has given all judgement to the Son. However, the 
obscurity of this problem has been most eloquently and ingeniously 
dissipated by St. Epiphanius, Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, in the 
book which he wrote “On Faith”, where he says that the Father 
alone knows the future Judgement not only by foreknowledge but 
by experience, for the Father knows the Judgement by experience 
since it was already a reality when He gave all judgement to the Son 
[for the Father completely effected the Judgement when He gave all 
(judgement) to the Son]. The Son, on the other hand, both knows 
and does not know the Judgement. For He knows it by fore¬ 
knowledge but not yet by experience; and the reason why He does 
not know it by experience is that judgement, that is, the segregation 
of the reprobate from the elect, is not yet an accomplished fact, for 
the harvest of the Church is still a mixture of wheat and tares. 
< <But> we are not unaware that St. Augustine interprets this 
text in the figurative sense that the Son of Man is said not to know 
the day of Judgement because He does not allow us to know it.> 

Hear also the ignorance of the Apostle which is described in the 
“Acts of the Apostles”, where Paul reviles the high priest Annanias 
and says: “Brethren, I did not know that he is the chief of the 
priests. For it is written, ‘Thou shalt not revile the chief of thy 
people.’” Do you suppose that the Apostle, most wise and most 
learned in the Law, did not know as well as the other Jews that 
Annanias was the chief priest? That is quite unthinkable. But the 
reason why he said that he did not know (it) was that he did not see 
that he had been ordained by God. “Brethren,” he says, “I did not 
know that he is the chief of the priests” because I know that he has 
not been established either by God or in accordance with the Law, 
but by the superstition of the Jews, and so I do not know that he is 
the chief of the priests because I truly know that he is not so. For did 
I know that he was the true and legitimate chief of the people, then 
certainly I would not revile him. But since I do not know that he is 
in truth the chief, therefore I do not repent of reviling him. 

Take another example of the ignorance of the same (apostle). 
“I know”, he says, “a man rapt into the Third Heaven; I do not 
know (that it was) in the body and I do not know (that it was) out of 
the body ; God knows.” “I do not know,” he says, “(that it was) in 
the body” because I know (that it was) not in the body, “and I do 

203 

ignorance of 
the Day of 
Judgement 

595B 

595C 

Concerning 
the ignorance 
of Paul 

595D 

204 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
the rapture 
of Paul 

596A 

Concerning 
the three 
modes of 
God’s 
Ignorance 

I 

596B 

II 

596C III 

nil 

not know (that it was) out of the body” because I know that I was 
[not] rapt out of the body. For I was not rapt into the Third Heaven 
by the soul’s operations through the bodily senses nor by her 
operations outside the body, but I most clearly know that (it was) by 
the operation of Divine Grace without the help of any creature that 
I was rapt above every creature. Therefore I do not know (that it 
was) in the body or (that it was) out of the body, because I know 
that it was neither in the body nor out of the body that I was rapt. 

And, lest we should linger too long over the same topic — for 
time itself will run out before the examples of the Divine Ignorance 
whether in Holy Scripture or in the nature of things (are exhaust¬ 
ed) — , it is, I think, sufficient to know only this : that there are three 
principal forms of the Divine Ignorance. The first (is that) by which 
God does not know evil because His knowledge is simple and 
formed only by the substantial good, that is, by Himself. For He 
alone is through Himself the substantial Good, whereas other goods 
are good by participation in Him. Therefore God does not know 
evil. For if He knew evil, evil would necessarily be in the nature of 
things, because God’s knowledge is the cause of all things that are. 
For God does not know the things that are [because] they subsist 
[but they therefore subsist] because God knows them. For the cause 
of their being is the divine knowledge, and therefore if God knew 
evil, evil would be understood (to exist) substantially in something 
and would be a participant in the Good, and vice and wickedness 
would proceed from virtue and goodness ; which right reason shows 
to be impossible. 

The second form is (that) by which God is said not to know 
[other things] besides those of which he both has created and knows 
the reasons eternally in himself. For the things of which He 
naturally has the power, of those things he essentially possesses the 
knowledge. 

The third is (that) by which it is said that God does not know, 
as we said above, the things that are not yet manifestly apparent [in 
their effects] by experience of their actuality and operation, although 
He possesses in Himself, created by Himself and known to Himself, 
their invisible reasons. 

To these I add a fourth form which the order of our discourse 
required us to discuss at this point : (that) by which God is said not 
to know that He is in the number of the things which have been 
made by Him, which the philosophers try to include within the 

BOOK II 205 

decad of the Categories ; and therefore we must say generally that in 
none of the things which are comprehended by the philosophers 
within the ten genera of things, nor in any of those things which a 
closer inquiry discovers outside them, whether they exist as substance 
or as accident, nor in any of those that cannot be discovered in any 
substance or accident, whether they exist in the hidden reasons or in 
possibilities or in impossibilities, does God understand that He 596D 
subsists; for He knows that He is none of them, but understands 
that He excels (them) all by His ineffable essential Power and More- 
than-Power, and by His incomprehensible Infinity. 

Now, the reason why I said that a closer inquiry could discover 29 
certain things in nature in addition to those which are comprehended 
within the Ten Categories — for those too have been discovered by 597A 
the philosophers — was that no one of the less able should suppose 
that a thorough investigation of things could [not] get further than 
the above-mentioned quantity of Categories. For their reason 
comprehends more general genera. For they are in motion and at Of the more 
rest, and rest and motion are brought together under universal 

.... - r*- r- genera within 

essence, which allows division of itself to infinity. For that substance ^^ich 

which has the first place among the Categories is finite and subject the Ten 

to accidents, but that universal essence admits in itself no accident. Categories 
^ . . ^ .. ,,... ... , are contained 

For while it is receptive of accidents m its subdivisions which extend 
as far as the individuals, in itself it is simple and subject to none of 
the accidents <and in it there is a division into that most general 
motion which is subject to no Category, by which all things proceed 
from nothing into being, and the rest in which all things shall 
establish the end of their motions, which is likewise subject to no 597B 
category> . 

But as to what I further said, that there are in the nature of 
things certain things which are known neither in substance nor in 
accidents, understand that this was said with reference to the 
reasons which at present are not manifest in anything either to sense 
or to intellect, whether as substance or as accident. 

Again, that possibles and impossibles are reckoned in the 
number of things none of those who practise philosophy aright will 
dispute ; and these are said to be for no other reason than that the 
possibles can come into being in something even if they are not, 
while the impossibles are contained within the virtue of their 
impossibility alone. For their being consists in the impossibility of 
their appearing in any intelligible or sensible thing. < And let this 
be an example of the possibles : A certain man has the possibility of 597C 

206 

PERIPHYSEON 

597D 

Conclusion 
of the inquiry 
into God’s 
Ignorance 
598A 

598B 

begetting offspring but, restrained by love of virginity, scorns the 
getting of offspring ; and this of the impossibles : It is impossible for 
a rational animal to be irrational, and vice versa. > But if anyone 
wishes to make a full study of these, let him read Aristotle Ticpi 
cpprivsiac; [that is, “De Interpretatione”], in which the philosopher 
has devoted his discussion exclusively or mainly to them, that is, to 
the possibles and impossibles. 

So let us now turn to what is left to be considered, if you think 
that the forms [of the Divine Ignorance] by which God is said not to 
know have been sufficiently discussed. 

A. Sufficiently and more (than sufficiently) ; and I see that it is 
not necessary to dwell upon them further. For it is plainer than 
daylight that the Divine Ignorance is to be understood as nothing 
else than the incomprehensible and infinite Divine Knowledge. For 
what the Holy Fathers, I mean Augustine and Dionysius, most truly 
say about God — Augustine [says] that He is better known by not 
knowing, Dionysius that His ignorance is true wisdom — should, in 
my opinion, be understood not only of the intellects which reverently 
and seriously seek Him, but also of Himself. For as those who 
pursue their investigations along the right path of reasoning are able 
to understand that He is within none of the things which are 
contained within nature, but know that He transcends them all, and 
therefore their ignorance is true wisdom, and by not knowing Him 
in the things that are they know Him the better above all things that 
are and are not : so also it is not unreasonably said of (God) Himself 
that to the extent that He does not understand Himself to subsist in 
the things which He has made, to that extent does He understand 
that He transcends them all, and therefore His ignorance is true 
understanding ; and to the extent that He does not know Himself to 
be comprehended in the things that are, to that extent does He know 
Himself to be exalted above them all, and so by not knowing 
Himself He is the better known by Himself. For it is better that He 
should know that He is apart from all things than that He should 
know that He is set in the number of all things. 

N. You understand correctly, and I perceive that you have a 
clear and unwavering view of what reason teaches about these 
matters ; and you no longer see, I think, any difference between the 
image and its principal Exemplar except in respect of subject. For 
the most high Trinity subsists substantially through itself and is 
created out of no cause, while the trinity of our nature is made by it. 

BOOK II 

207 

Which through Itself is eternal, out of nothing, in Its image and 
likeness. 

And if any dissimilarity but this is found between the image and 
the principal Exemplar it has not come from Nature but is an 
accident produced by sin ; and not from the envy of the creative 
Trinity but from the fault of its created image. For everything 
which < is said> or understood of God with regard to the power of 
His essence can be said and understood of His image in those in 
whom it is purified, illuminated, and perfected with regard to the 
grace of creation, with the above-mentioned exception that the 
Divine Nature is God by the excellence of its Essence, while human 598C 
nature is God by the munificence of Divine Grace; and that the 
former is creative and created by nothing while the latter is created 
by it and creates those things which being below it adhere to its 
nature. I mean this mortal body attached to the soul after it had 
sinned, which is called also an image of an image < as we have often 
said> . For as God created the soul in His image, so the soul makes 
the body as a kind of instrument somehow similar to herself. 

But we must return to the consideration of the Divine Trinity 
which is the Cause of all things, if you are satisfied with what has 
been said on these matters. 

A. I am quite satisfied. 

N. So in (the matter of) the most high and unique Cause of all 
things, from which and in which the beginnings of the whole 
creation, that is, the primordial causes, both are and have been 
created, I think it must be asked whether, being Unity and Trinity — 
for the Divine Goodness is One Essence in Three Substances and 
Three Substances in One Essence, or according to the usage of the 
Roman tongue we must say. One Substance in Three Persons and 
Three Persons in One Substance — , it has within itself the causes 
differentiated <as are the Substances> from one another, that is, 
whether, as there is predicated of it One Essence in Three Substances, 
so also it is to be believed and understood that there is one essential 
Cause in three subsistent Causes and three subsistent Causes in one 
essential Cause; and I think it would not be incongruous with the 
orthodox faith to expound in our contemplations what, without 
straying from the Faith, can be thought and taught of such a theory. 

An inquiry 
into the 
598D 

Cause of all 
things 

599A 

A. On the contrary, most congruous, and necessary for the 
salvation of faithful souls. 

208 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. What then? Ought we to believe, as well as, to the best of 
our ability, understand and teach, this of the Cause of all things, 
that it is both one essential Cause in three substantial Causes and 
three substantial Causes in one essential Cause? 

A. I see nothing against believing and teaching this. For if God 
is the Cause of all things, does it not follow that the Cause of all 
599B things should be recognized as God? But if God is the Cause and 
the Cause is God, does it not follow that whatever we ought to 
believe of God we should also similarly, without any discrepancy, 
have no hesitation in understanding of the Cause? For if the 
Catholic Faith professes one God existing through Himself in three 
Substances subsisting through themselves, what stops us from 
saying in the same way that there is one Cause existing through itself 
in three Causes subsisting through themselves? 

N. A pious and orthodox (opinion). Therefore there is one 
Cause in three Causes and three Causes in one. 

A. This has now been conceded and granted. 

30 N. Let us then now return to theology, which is the first and 
highest part of wisdom ; and rightly so, for it is concerned wholly or 
for the most part with speculation about the Divine Nature. And it 
is divided into two parts, I mean into affirmation and negation, 
599C which are called in Greek dTrocpanKf] and KaiacpaTiKT], one of which 
we employed in the first book, where by sound arguments we denied 
that the ten categories and all the genera and species and individuals 
and accidents of things can be literally predicated of God ; and again 
in the present book we were brought back to the same (part) again, I 
mean d7ro(paTiKf), by the course of our inquiry when we said that 
God Himself understands that in His Essence (there is) none of the 
things which are and are not, because He surpasses all essence, and 
that He does not know of Himself at all what He Himself is because 
He is in no way defined ; nor how great He is nor of what sort He is 
because nothing in Him is accident, and in nothing is He understood ; 
and thus He absolutely denies that He is comprehended in the things 
that are or in the things that are not. [And ignorance of such sort 
surpasses all knowledge and all understanding.] 

599D But now we are attempting to examine the other, I mean 
KaiacpaTiKTi, under the guidance of Him Who is being sought and 
Who seeks to be sought and comes to meet those who seek Him and 
desires to be found. And this is the part which contemplates what is 

BOOK II 209 

to be said as though literally of the Divine Nature, and cautiously 
and reasonably understood. 

A. I am sufficiently convinced about the negative part by what Concerning 
has gone before ; but now I await eagerly your explanation of the ’^axacpanKf) 
affirmative. 

N. It has already been clearly concluded between us, not 
without caution as I think, that everything that we are given to 
understand of God on the authority of the Catholic Faith those who 600A 
practise philosophy piously ought in like manner to profess of the 
Cause of all things. 

A. This has been unshakeably established. 

N. Do we believe, then, of the Unbegotten and Begetting 
Divinity and the Begotten Deity and the Proceeding Deity that even 
although it is one and indivisible Divinity it yet admits substantial 
differences? For we accept and religiously believe and use the 
authority of St. Dionysius the Areopagite and other Fathers to 
prove that in the Father the Deity (is) unbegotten, in the Son the 
Deity (is) begotten, in the Holy Spirit the Deity proceeds. 

A. Anyone who hesitates here is far from the truth. 

N. There is, then, a substantial Cause (which is) unbegotten 
and begets ; and there is a substantial Cause (which is) begotten 
<and does not beget> ; (and) also [there is] a substantial Cause 
which proceeds <and is not unbegotten nor begotten nor beget- 
ting> ; and the three < substantial> Causes are one, and one 600B 
essential Cause. 

A. This is the necessary conclusion of the foregoing arguments. 

N. Therefore in the Universal Cause there is a predicating 
Cause and there are subsequent Causes. For the Father precedes the 
Son and the Spirit, since from Him the Son is begotten and the Holy 
Spirit proceeds; and therefore the Father is not inappropriately 
believed (to be) the Cause of Causes. For He is the Cause of the 
Cause that is born and of the Cause which proceeds. For fatherhood 
precedes sonship, and none of the truly wise would say that sonship 
precedes fatherhood. Hence even the Son Himself says of Himself, 

“The Father is greater than I.” For the Father, not in nature but as 
cause, is greater than the Son. For the Father is the Cause of the Son 
but the Son is not the cause of the Father. [And here we are not 600C 
considering the mutual relationship of the names, but the power of 
the substances. For we look at the possession of relations in the 

210 

PERIPHYSEON 

600D 

60IA 

601B 

Substance or Persons from one point of view, at the generation or 
procession <from the Unbegotten> from another. In the former 
(we see) how they are named in relation to each other, in the latter 
how they differ from each other.] So the Son is from the Father, but 
not the Father from the Son. For in God it is not the relations of 
human generations that are considered, but the substantial pos¬ 
sessions of ineffable Substances. 

The Father is indeed greater than the Son as Cause. For the 
holy word of God considers first the possession of fatherhood with 
regard to the Son, and then that of sonship with regard to the 
Father; and so that you may more certainly both believe and 
understand this, have recourse to the authority of Gregory the 
Theologian, who in his First Discourse on the Son, where he is 
disputing with the Arians, wisely teaches that the Father is greater 
than the Son as Cause “making the distinction that the Son exists 
from the Father but the Father does not subsist from the Son”. But 
in saying this we do not reject the interpretation of those who assert 
that it was with reference to His Humanity that Our Lord said of 
Himself, “The Father is greater than I”, for either interpretation 
may be accepted without straying from the Faith. 

A. Yes. For although they are not of equal subtlety and 
profundity, yet neither conflicts with the Catholic Faith. 

N. Therefore the Father’s natural subsistence and His being 
the Cause of His Son are not the same thing; for it is not the 
Father’s Nature that is the Cause of the Son. The Nature of the 
Father and of the Son is, of course, one and the same because both 
have one and the same Essence, and therefore it is the same thing for 
the Father to be the Father and to be the Cause of the Son ; for it is 
not in respect of His Nature, which is one and the same [in the 
Father and in the Son] [for it is not in respect of nature], that these 
names are predicated of the Father and the Son, but in respect of the 
possession of the Begetter with regard to the Begotten, and of the 
preceding Cause with regard to the Cause that follows, just as it is 
not in respect of His Nature that it is said of the Son that He is the 
Son or the Begotten Cause, but in respect of the possession of 
sonship [with regard to the Father] and of that of the Begotten 
Cause with regard to the Begetting Cause. 

A. This was already argued in the first book, and is not 
unreasonably repeated again now. 

BOOK II 

211 

N. Therefore the Father is the Cause of the Son and of the 
Holy Spirit, while the Son is the Cause of the creation of the causes 
in the Beginning whereas the Holy Spirit is the Cause of the 
distribution of the same [causes]. 

A. I also see that to admit this does not conflict with the truth, 
but even as I consider and believe these arguments concerning the 
threefold Cause of all things, another difficulty occurs to me. For I 
am not sure whether the Father alone is the Cause of the Holy Spirit 
or the Father and the Son, in which case, as the Catholic Faith 
professes that He proceedeth from the Father and the Son, so also 
we should believe that He has two Causes of His [procession]. For if 
the Holy Spirit proceeds from two Persons or, as the Greeks say, 
from two Substances, what would be strange or contrary to the 
Faith in professing that He proceeds from two Causes? And I beg 
you to solve this difficulty for me. 

N. Truly, truly [[it is]] a most obscure problem [and] one in 
which I am involved as well as you; and unless the Light of Minds 
reveals it to us, the [zeal] of our reasoning will achieve nothing 
towards revealing it. The difficulty is [, moreover,] brought to a 
peak by the fact that the Symbol of the Catholic Faith according to 
the Greeks [handed down from the Council of Nicaea] professes 
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father only [according to the 
evidence of Epiphanius the Bishop of Cyprus in his book “De 
Fide”] ; but according to the Latins, from the Father and the Son — 
although in some commentaries of the Greeks we find that the same 
Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son ; so, recoiling from 
the difficulty of the present inquiry I am dashed against the waves of 
contrary opinions. For I ask myself what I must do about it : 
whether we should respect it in silence [as being beyond the power 
of our thought] or attempt by some means, so far as the divine 
illumination [in] our mind is alight, cautiously to formulate between 
us a definition, and then examine it. 

A. Have no fear. For He Who is sought does not abandon 
those who seek Him, nor refuse to those who pursue their investi¬ 
gation in a spirit of piety and humility the possibility of finding 
Him. For He Himself says: “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall find ; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For 
everyone who asketh receiveth and everyone who seeketh findeth 
and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.” 

31 

Another 
inquiry into 
the Cause of 
all things 

601C 

601D 

602A 

212 

PERIPHYSEON 

602B 

That it is a 
common 
thing for 
many causes 
to be born 
of a single 
cause 

602C 

602D 

N. First, then, I think we must speak of the factors in this 
problem which seem to contradict each other. 

A. There is no other way of inquiry. [For no one will bring 
together the points that agree until he has separated the points that 
conflict.] 

N. Do you think that it is in accordance with the true faith that 
we should believe that the Son is born from one Cause, namely the 
Father, but that the Holy Spirit proceeds from two, namely the 
Father and the Son? For reason does not easily accept that one 
cause should flow from two — especially in a Nature which is simple 
and more than simple and, to speak more truly, is Simplicity itself, 
which is without any division or plurality — , but it can be proved 
from many examples that many causes break forth from a single 
cause. For it is perfectly clear to all those who practise philosophy 
aright that many species are born of a single genus, many numbers 
from the monad, many radii from the centre. The different species in 
their turn which are born of one genus become the causes of the 
individuals [from which and in which are born multiplicities and 
quantities and qualities and differences] ; the numbers which proceed 
from the monad are the causes of diverse proportions [and the 
proportions of proportionalities, the proportionalities of harmo¬ 
nies] ; the radii which proceed from one centre are recognized (as) 
the causes of angles and sides, of breadths and depths [which in their 
turn are the causes of the geometrical bodies]. 

What shall I say of the fiery element which, although considered 
in itself and through itself is one and simple, is the cause of heat as 
well as of light? Moreover, heat is the cause of burning in burning 
(objects) while light is the cause [of shining] in objects that shine. 
[The shine gives birth to the diverse colours.] The element of air is 
the origin of diverse voices ; the diverse voices become the origins of 
diverse tones. The element of water, although in itself it is simple 
and one, is the cause of diverse humours, which in their turn emit 
from themselves diverse qualities [of odours, tastes, (and) freshness]. 
From the one earth are born the diverse quantities of diverse bodies 
— by quantity I here mean not the incorporeal quantity, but 
material bulk which, as no one disputes, is a composition of diverse 
parts — ; and it is very easy by the same reasoning to find other 
examples of this kind in the nature of things visible or invisible. 

A. That the Son is born from one Cause, that is, from His 
Father, no one of the faithful doubts; but whether the Holy Spirit 

BOOK II 

proceeds from one Cause, namely the Father, or from two, that is, 
from the Father and the Son, I would not dare hastily either to 
affirm or deny ; and therefore it is not sufficiently clear to me that it 
is in conflict with the professions of the True Faith as I have very 
often found the Holy Spirit called the Spirit of the Father and of the 
Son. For He is the Spirit of both because He proceeds from the 
Father through the Son, and He is the Gift of each because He is 
given from the Father through the Son, and He is the Love of each 
because He unites the Father and the Son, as St. Augustine teaches 
in the books which he produced concerning the most high and true 
Trinity, where he searches by a wonderful investigation into its 
image in human nature and most ingeniously demonstrates it, 
proving that the trinity of our inner nature, that is, of the rational 
soul, created in the image of God, consists of the mind, which is the 
chief part of the soul ; and its knowledge of itself by which it knows 
itself; and the love by which it unites itself and its knowledge of 
itself. For the human mind begets from itself as a kind of offspring 
of itself the knowledge of itself by which it knows itself, and the 
knowledge of itself is equal to itself because it knows itself as a 
whole, in the likeness of God the Father Who begets from Himself 
His Son Who is His Wisdom by which He knows Himself, and (His 
Son) is equal to Him because He understands Him as a whole, and is 
co-essential with (the Father) because Whom (the Father) begets He 
begets from Himself. 

From the human mind proceeds an appetite by which it seeks 
itself so that it may bring forth knowledge of itself ; and when this 
appetite or search attains to the perfect discovery of knowledge it is 
made into the love which unites the mind and its knowledge of itself, 
and is equal to the mind and the mind’s knowledge because it loves 
itself as a whole and its knowledge of itself as a whole, and is 
co-essential with the mind and with the knowledge because the love 
which unites the mind and its knowledge proceeds from nothing else 
but the mind itself ; after the image of the Holy Spirit Who, 
proceeding from the Father, unites the Father and the Son in a bond 
of ineffable charity. 

But why you should say : “The reason does not easily accept 
that one cause should flow or proceed from two causes’’, I do not 
yet see clearly, though, unless I am mistaken, I fully understand why 
you put the word “flow’’ in place of the word “proceed’’. For the 
Holy Spirit is called both river and water in Holy Scripture. Hence 
the Lord Himself also says : “He who believes in Me, as the 

213 

603A 

Concerning 
the trinity of 
the inner 
man accord- 
603B 
ing to 
Augustine 

603C 

214 

PERIPHYSEON 

Scripture says, there shall flow out from his belly streams of living 
water” which “if anyone shall drink he shall never thirst again,” as 
was said to the woman of Samaria. Moreover, none of the wise 
603D denies that that source in paradise which is divided into the four 
cardinal rivers, interpreted typologically, signifies the Holy Spirit, 
from Whom, as from their principal and unique and inexhaustible 
source flow the four cardinal virtues in the paradise of the rational 
soul, I mean prudence, temperance, courage, and justice, and from 
these in their turn flow forth all the streams of all the virtues, which, 
when they have irrigated and fertilized the surface of human nature, 
604A flow back into them again. Rightly then is the Holy Spirit said to 
flow, whether from the Father alone or from the Father and the 
Son, because He is the Source and Origin of all the virtues, and by 
an ineffable course through the hidden channels of our nature they 
return to Him. 

N. You have a correct understanding of the spiritual rivers. 
But please tell me what prevents you from understanding clearly 
what was said by us, namely, “Reason does not easily accept that 
one cause should flow from two”. 

A. I see many examples that prevent me. For even the examples 
which you have introduced from the four elements of the world 
adequately teach, as I think, that one cause can be made from two 
causes. For although fire is the source of heat and light, it is seen to 
604B be born of two causes. For the fiery element is made from warmth 
and dryness, and these two qualities are as two causes which beget 
out of themselves one. The same must be said of the other elements 
as well. For although they are the causes of their effects, yet the 
natural philosophers have said that they are born of double causes 
prior to themselves. For as fire is composed of the warm and the 
dry, as we said just now, so air is composed of the warm and the 
moist, water of the moist and the cold, and earth of the cold and the 
dry. What then ? Is it to be denied that one cause may flow from two 
causes, when these examples, to say nothing of the others, are 
sufficient to prove this? 

N. I rather wonder, and it is something worthy to be wondered 
at, why, while you have a clear and reasonable view of everything 
else, you are misled by these examples. 

A. Tell me, pray, in what and how I am deceived. 

604C N. Have you not been convinced by the philosophers that this 
visible world consists of four universal and simple elements, namely. 

BOOK II 215 

fire, air, water, and earth, each one of which possesses its proper and 
unique quality? For fire has warmth, air moisture, water coldness, 
earth dryness. 

A. These things have been very well known to me [almost] 
from my infancy. 

N. Say, then : What is that fire, to take one example, which 
appears to be one cause flowing from two causes, according to you ? 

Is it that which, simple and invisible and incomprehensible through 
itself, penetrates and moves all visible things, or that (which is) 
visible and corporeal and tangible and fed on material things? 

A. I would not say that it is that (which is) simple and 
incomprehensible and which fills and makes all bodies, for it [is] 604D 
both the primordial cause [of sensible things] and one of the four 
causes of all bodies; but it seems to me that it is the sensible and 
material fire that proceeds from warmth and dryness as though 
from two causes. 

N. Did you not admit earlier that warmth is the proper quality 
of no other element but fire alone, and dryness of none other but 
earth alone? For each is given its own, that is to say, each one of the 
[substantial] elements is given its own proper quality. 

A. I have already admitted (this). For the philosophers do not 605A 
allow me to understand otherwise. 

N. Say, therefore : Is fire one thing and warmth another, or are 
they one and the same? 

A. They seem to me to be two things. For fire is a substance, 
whereas warmth is the quality of that substance, and its proper 
quality. 

N. What then? Is the substance the cause of its quality or the 
quality the cause of the substance or is neither the quality the cause 
of the substance nor the substance of the quality, seeing that they 
are not of the same genus? 

A. I agree with your last suggestion. For although the quality 
is contained within the substance — for no quality subsists through 
itself — , yet I would not say that the substance is the cause of the 
quality because every species follows its own genus since it is born of Concerning 
its genus and is immutably preserved within it ; and therefore every 605B 
substance flows down from general being, but every quality from substances 
general quality. 

216 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. So fire, because it is a substance, descends from no other 
cause but the most general being. Similarly warmth, because it is a 
quality, proceeds from no other cause but the most general quality. 

A. Who ever disputes this conclusion would seem to reject the 
reasons of philosophy. 

N. Why, then, did you dare to assert that fire, whether simple 
or material, flows as one cause from two causes, that is, from 
warmth and dryness, when you see that not only can its substance 
not be born of the foreign quality which is dryness and is proper to 
the eartly substance, but cannot even be born from its own, which is 
warmth ? 

A. I see now that I was mistaken in saying that warmth and 
605C dryness subsist as two causes of one cause, that is, fire. And yet I 
know that many have been led into the same error through not 
sufficiently discerning the differences [and natures] of qualities and 
substances. And now I see no way of escape. For if I say that fire 
and warmth are one and the same, you will at once refute me by 
asking : Why in that case do you think that (what is) the same thing 
is the cause of itself? For I said that fire was composed of warmth 
and dryness. If I say that this visible world consists not of the four 
substantial elements but only of four simple qualities, namely, 
warmth, moisture, cold, and dryness — this too is what many 
believe — , you may perhaps ask me: If then this whole world with 
its bodies, from the highest to the lowest, consists of four qualities, 
605D in what substances are those qualities contained? For true reason 
teaches us that if they are qualities they cannot subsist through 
themselves. And I shall not be able to find the answer, that is, by 
what substances these primordial and general qualities by which the 
world is constituted are supported ; and I shall be compelled by the 
force of true reasons to admit four substantial elements of the world 
606A in which subsist the four principal qualities by combination of 
which all composite bodies are made. But there still remains one 
reason why it seem.s possible for me to abide by my opinion wherein 
I said that one cause may flow from many. 

N. I should like you to reveal what that one is. 

A. Do not all philosophers who treat of this world unanimously 
teach and seem clearly to demonstrate that all composite bodies are 
made up of the four simple elements and their four proper qualities ? 
And if that is the case the composition of every body is effected not 
by two causes only, but by many. 

BOOK II 

217 

N. This might have been a way of escape for you if you were to 
assert with good reason, that these bulks of bodies, composite and 606B 
corruptible and susceptible to dissolution, are the causes of other 
effects below them. But as it is, since there is nothing lower than the 
composite body it cannot be the cause of any nature coming after it 
or of any nature equal to it; and we are now dealing with causes, 
whether primary or secondary [and interrelated] : and no cause can 
truly or correctly be called a cause — since it is not truly a cause — 
which cannot break out into its effects. [For it altogether lacks 
effects of its own by virtue of which it could be called a cause.] But 
corruptible bodies are not the cause of any effect since they do not 
beget any nature out of themselves because they occupy the place 
(which is) the last and lowest of all natures and next to nothing. But 
spiritual bodies are <still> simple and therefore indissoluble [and 
permanent] until this whole world with its parts, having attained its 
end, is done away. And these incorruptible and indissoluble bodies 606C 
are said and understood (to be) nowhere but in the four principal 
and general elements (which) in themselves are most pure and 
simple. But the other bodies, which are seen to be composed of the 
qualities of these, since they can be composed and decomposed, are 
not reckoned by the wise among the causes but among the last 
effects, which make nothing out of themselves. 

Moreover, the four elements of the world, most simple and 
most pure and eluding the bodily sense, are traced back to one 
cause, simple and indivisible and known only to the understanding 
of the most perfectly wise, that is, to the most general being of all 
substances proceeding into visible effects, which always abides in 
itself. And it is not inappropriate to understand the same thing of 
their four primordial and proper qualities. For although these seem 606D 
to be contrary to one another — for warmth is opposed to cold, to 
moisture dryness — yet they return to one cause, most secret and 
accessible to the reason alone, I mean to the most general quality of 
all qualities, from which by a wonderful operation of nature they 
proceed into the making of these bodies which are corruptible and 
susceptible to dissolution; and in which, by the ineffable pacific 
concord of universal nature, they agree together, with all contrariety 607A 
removed. 

A. By this last conclusion I see that I am wholly fenced around, 
and that no way of escape remains ; and so I am compelled to agree 
with the first opinion which you set forth, so that I too say : “Reason 
does not easily accept that one cause may flow from two.” 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. What, then, shall we say ? Ought we to profess that the Holy 
Spirit, Whom as Catholics we shall confess to be the infinite and 
inexhaustible and most munificent and more than munificent Cause 
of the distribution of the gifts of the Divine Goodness, whether of 
those which are of substance or of those which are of grace, 
proceeds from one Cause, that is, the Father, or from two Causes, 
the Father and the Son? 

A. Those examples which we took from the nature of things 
altogether prohibit (us) from saying the latter [that is, (they require 
607B us to say) that He proceeds not from two causes but from one], 
unless perhaps one could say that the reason of the most high and 
[at once] ineffable Divine Trinity surpasses the examples of created 
nature. 

N. If anyone says this he will at once have to be asked : By 
what means then can we inquire into and investigate the Trinity in 
Unity and Unity in Trinity of the Divine Goodness so as to have 
some likely belief of it by which we may adore it, and such 
understanding of it as we are capable of, unless under its guidance 
and precept, “seek and ye shall find”, we begin our ascent to it by 
employing as steps examples from the nature which has been created 
by it ? — especially as the divine Paul testifies : “For” [he says] “the 
invisible things of Him,” that is, of the Father, “are seen by the 
creature of the world through understanding the things that are 
made. Also his everlasting Power,” that is, the Son, (is seen or 
understood by the creature in this way), “and His Eternity,” that is, 
607C the Holy Spirit. For that is how the blessed Maximus explains this 
passage from Holy Scripture. 

A. How if one should say that the Father and the Son are not 
two causes but the one indivisible Cause, since the Son Himself 
says : “I and the Father are one” ? 

N. To this too must be given the answer : “The three Causes in 
the Divine Goodness which we are now discussing are sought not in 
the Essence, which is one and the same, but in the Trinity of 
Substances or Persons of that Essence.” For He is not confusing the 
duality of the Persons when He says: “I and the Father are one.” 
For He does not say: “I and the Father am,” but “are one,” 
showing the unity of the Essence as well as the difference of the 
Substances. And if He were to say : “I and the Father and the Spirit 
are one,” we should understand this not otherwise than as the 
607D Trinity of the three Substances subsisting in the Unity of the same 

BOOK II 

219 

Essence, and although we do not find this said, yet we understand 
that it is very true. For Father and Son and Holy Spirit are one, and 
the one (is) three. For from the Father the Son is begotten, and from 
<the same Father> the Spirit is proceeding; and therefore when I 
hear from the preaching and teaching of Holy Scripture that (God 
is) begetting and begotten and proceeding, I understand, as much as 
it is granted me (to do so), three Substances or Persons of one 
Essence. For it is impossible that Begetter, Begotten, and Proceeding 
should be one, but natural reason suggests that they are three as 
substances while they are one in essence. For Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob also are one in their natural essentiality but three in their 
substantial difference ; and the seeker after truth will very easily find 
this example in all genera and species and individuals. 

A. Please reveal what you have conceived in your mind 
concerning this present very difficult inquiry, lest we linger so long 
over the same topics when we ought to be hurrying on to expound 
the others that remain. 

N. Tell (me), pray: Does it seem to you that the ray is born 
from fire, and that brightness proceeds from the ray? 

A. Anyone who says this is not deviating from a careful 
consideration of the nature of things, as I think. For fire, although 
through itself it is invisible, begets from itself a visible ray, which 
again would be through itself invisible (while) subsisting in the 
simplicity of its nature, if it did not mingle with corporeal and gross 
natures. 

For the philosophers say that the sun’s ray is incomprehensible 
to the senses of animals, which cannot perceive the subtlety of its 
nature ; but as it gradually descends from the body of the sun to the 
lower elements it begins little by little to manifest itself : first in the 
ether, which is the purest, it (only) just begins to shine because the 
ether’s nature is very similar to itself ; but as it proceeds further into 
the parts of this upper air, little by little it becomes clear; and after 
that, the grosser the natures it penetrates in its downward path the 
more brightly does it shine and present itself to the comprehension 
of the bodily senses. But from the ray itself is emitted a brightness of 
the utmost splendour which fills the whole world and which is 
reflected from the surface of all bodies and reveals the diverse 
species of the colours. This too, on account of its natural tenuous¬ 
ness, would elude the corporeal senses did it not mingle itself with 
more corporeal elements. 

608A 

Concerning 
the one 
Essence and 
the three 
substances 

32 608B 

Concerning 
fire and ray 
and bright¬ 
ness 

608C 

220 

PERIPHYSEON 

608 D 

609A 

609B 

Concerning 
the Trinal 
and One 
Cause 

609C 

N. So it is, and an inquiry into natures teaches thoroughly that 
it cannot be otherwise. Must we then say that that brightness which 
proceeds from the fire through the nascent ray has two causes? For 
although it proceeds from the fire through the ray, yet the fire only 
is its cause, not the ray. For as the ray itself would not subsist 
through itself if it were not born of its cause, which is fire, so there 
would be no brightness through the ray if it did not first proceed 
from the cause of the ray. You see, then, that no reason requires that 
the brightness proceed from two causes, although it is understood to 
flow from the fire through the ray; but nature, our teacher, herself 
declares that from one and the same cause both the ray is born and 
the brightness proceeds, and that therefore the brightness proceeds 
from the fire as well as from the ray. 

And consider carefully the force of the same example yet 
further. The ray itself, born of fire, does not by being born depart 
from, or in any way abandon, the fire that begets it, but is begotten 
in such a way that the fiery force which begets it always and 
everywhere inseparably and immutably remains in it, whole in the 
whole (ray) and the whole (ray) in the whole (of it), and (they are) a 
one (that is) two and two (that are) one. And although the 
brightness seems to come out of the ray, yet it proceeds not from the j 
ray itself as ray, but from that force out of which the ray is born and 
which wholly penetrates and fills both the whole of the ray and the 
whole of the brightness. 

And by means of this natural example we can ascend to the 
Cause of all things which is trinal and one because it is believed and 
understood to be Trinity in Unity, so that we know that the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Spirit are three Causes and one Cause — 
for the Three are One — ; the Father (is) the begetting Cause of His 
only begotten Son born of Him, Who is the Cause of all the 
primordial causes which have been created in Him [by the Father] ; 
but the Father (is) also the Cause of the Holy Spirit Who proceeds 
from Him < through the Son> ; and the Spirit is the Cause of the 
division and multiplication and distribution of all the causes which 
have been made in the Son by the Father into their general and 
specific and individual effects by nature and by grace. And although 
we believe and understand that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the 
Father through the Son, we ought not to accept that the same Spirit 
has two causes, but one and the same Cause, namely the Father, 
both of the Son Who is born of Him and of the Holy Spirit Who 
proceeds from Him < through the Son> . For as we say that the 

BOOK II 

221 

I brightness proceeds from the fire through the ray because the whole 
of the fire itself subsists in the whole of the ray and from it through 
the ray the brightness is emitted, so too the Catholic Faith teaches 
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son 
because the Father Himself Who is the principal and sole Cause of 
the procession of the Holy Spirit is wholly in the whole of the Son 
just as the Son also is wholly in the whole of the Father, and from 

; the Father through the Son the Holy Spirit proceeds; and as the 
whole of the fiery force remains in the whole of the ray which is 
begotten of it, and the whole of the ray itself and the whole of the 
fiery force of which it is begotten exist in the whole of the brightness, 
and the whole of the brightness, proceeding from the fiery force 
through the ray, exists in the whole of the ray itself [and] the whole 
• of the force itself from which it proceeds, so the whole of the Father 
Who begets (is) in the whole of the Begotten Son, and the whole of 609D 
: the begotten Son is in the whole of the Father Who begets, and the 
’ whole of the Father Who begets and the whole of the begotten Son 
; are in the whole of the Holy Spirit Who proceeds from the Father 
r' through the Son, and the whole of the Holy Spirit Who proceeds 
i; from the Father through the Son (is) in the Father from Whom He 
f proceeds and (in) the Son through Whom He proceeds, and the 

II Three are One through the Trinity understood in Unity. 

And all this the Son himself made man and incarnate most 
^ clearly shows when He says : “I (am) in the Father and the Father in 
i Me,” where He leaves it to be understood, as though He were 
: explicitly saying : And as I (am) in the Father and the Father in Me, 610A 
so [both] I and the Father are in the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit 
is in Us because He is co-essential and co-eternal with Us, and We 
Three (are) One — that is, three substantially, essentially one. And 
see how the Son Himself refers the Holy Spirit to the Father alone as 
His unique Cause, where He says: “But the Paraclete, the Holy 
Spirit Whom the Father sends in My Name.” [For He did not say : 
“Whom I send in My Name” but “Whom the Father sends in My 
Name”, although in another place He also says that He Himself 
sends the Spirit when He says: “If I go away I shall send Him to 
you.”] The sending of Him is His procession. But His procession 
from the Father < through the Son> is substantial only, not local, 
not temporal, but in the Name of the Son because he is the Spirit of 610B 
the Father and of the Son. 

Again, in another place He says to His disciples : “It is not you 
who speak but the Spirit of the Father Who speaketh in you.” The 

222 

PERIPHYSEON 

Psalmist also requests the Holy Spirit from the Father when he says : 
“And take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.” Holy Scripture is full of 
these and similar evidences. 

610C 

610D 

611A 

33 

The question 
whether, as 

A. All these things I clearly and fully perceive and faithfully 
accept because they altogether agree with the truth, and I am really 
astonished to see how that problem which at first seemed to us 
almost insoluble has in the end been most evidently solved by 
arguments taken from examples and evidences, and so has been 
made clear, which we hardly hoped for. And, as it seems to me, we 
can prove the same thing from the analogy of the trinity within our 
nature. For the mind begets the knowledge of itself and from it 
proceeds the love of itself and of the knowledge of itself, by which 
itself and its knowledge of itself are united. And although the love 
itself proceeds from the mind through (the mind’s) knowledge of 
itself, yet (it is) not the knowledge itself (which is) the cause of the 
love, but the mind itself, from which the love begins to be even 
before the mind itself arrives at perfect knowledge of itself. For the 
mind already loves to know itself before it brings forth from itself 
like an offspring the knowledge of itself — not that the human mind 
at any time did not know itself or love itself, for these three are one 
in nature or essence, and the one three as contemplated by reason — 
for the reason considers being, knowing, and loving as three in the 
one and simple nature of the soul ; for mind is, and knows itself, and 
loves itself and its knowledge of itself — , but because as a penalty 
for the transgression of human nature in the first man it happens 
that the mind does not know that it knows itself although naturally 
it knows itself, and does not know that it loves itself although 
naturally it loves both itself and its knowledge of itself ; and 
therefore it seeks by the powers of reason nothing else but to learn in 
what way and how much it knows itself and loves itself and its 
knowledge of itself, and when this whole is converted to the 
knowledge and love of its Creator, (then) the most perfect image of 
Him is achieved. And this is the greatest and perhaps the only step 
towards knowledge of the truth, namely, that human nature should 
first know and love itself and then refer the whole of its knowledge 
of itself and the whole of its love of itself to the glory and knowledge 
and love of its Creator. For if it does not know what is at work in 
itself, how can it desire to know the things that are above it? But 
while we have been debating this question, another has overtaken it 
in my mind, which I think I must not dismiss. 

N. What is that? 

BOOK II 

223 

A. Whether, as we believe, following the Creed in the Roman 
version, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father through the 
Son, so we could profess that the Son is born of the Father through 
the Spirit, although we do not find this written in the Creed itself 
either according to the Greeks or according to the Latins, nor 
openly taught in Divine Scripture, as I think. 

N. The Catholic Faith instructs us to confess that in the 
ineffable and supernatural profusion of the Divine Goodness, by 
which the Son is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds from the heart, 
that is, from the secret recesses, of God the Father, the same Holy 
Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, or from the Father 
through the Son. But that the Son is born of the Father through the 
Spirit I have found neither in that Creed in either language nor in 
any other scripture ; and why this (is so) I have never [until now] 
asked myself, nor read anyone who asked or answered it. But when 
Holy Scripture and the Creed (which was) delivered by the Holy 
Synod of Nicaea, the city of Bithynia, and safeguarded against all 
heresies, are consulted concerning the taking of human nature by 
God the Son, that is, concerning the Incarnation of the Word, it is 
most openly revealed to us and taught without any ambiguity that 
the Word was conceived from the Holy Spirit. Also the angel says to 
Mary : “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee and the Power of the 
Most High shall overshadow thee.” And to Joseph the same (angel) 
says; “Joseph, son of David, do not put away thy wife. For that 
which is born in her is from the Holy Spirit.” From these and 
similar evidences are we not given to believe and understand that the 
Son was conceived and born in the flesh from the Holy Spirit? 
Therefore we do not doubt that in the divine profusion the Holy 
Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son, but in the taking 
on of flesh the Son was conceived and born from the Holy Spirit. 

the Holy 
Spirit pro¬ 
ceeds from 
the Father 
61IB 

through the 
Son, so the 
Son is born 
of the Father 
through the 
Holy Spirit 

611C 

But you will find that according to another theory too the Son 
is conceived and born from the Holy Spirit and through the Holy 
Spirit. For when each of the faithful submits to the sacrament of 61 ID 
baptism, what else is there performed but the conception and birth Concerning 
of the Word of God in their hearts from the Holy Spirit and through baptism 
the Holy Spirit ? Daily then is Christ conceived, born, and nourished 
in the womb of Faith as in the womb of a most chaste mother. 

And perhaps the reason why it is declared by the Nicene Synod 
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone is to prevent 
public discussion of such a subject. For if a careful student of the 612A 
holy word of God hears that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the 

PERIPHYSEON 

Father through the Son his studies in divinity will soon prompt him 
to ask: “If, then, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father through 
the Son, why is it not equally true that the Son is born of the Father 
through the Spirit? But if the Son is not born of the Father through 
the Spirit, why should it be said that the Holy Spirit proceeds from 
the Father through the Son? For why should that which as 
Catholics we believe of the Holy Spirit not be < believed like- 
wise> of the Son ?” < — unless, perhaps, bearing in mind the force 
of the analogies from nature which were mentioned above, one 
should say: “We see that the brightness proceeds from the fire 
through the ray, but not that the ray is born of the fire through the 
brightness. Similarly the natural order of contemplation teaches 
that the interior sense is sent forth from the mind through the 
612B reason, but not that the reason is begotten by the mind through that 
sense.” But it may be that examples from nature do not supply 
adequate doctrine and affirmation concerning the generation and 
procession of the Divine Substances — > . And for this reason that 
which is recited in the Creed according to the Greeks is entirely 
unaffected by this problem and unconnected with it. For it says that 
the Son is 8k tou 7raTp6(; Y8vvr|0£VTa, that is, “begotten of the 
Father , but that the Spirit is 8k tou Tuaipoc^ 7rop8u6p8vov, that is, 
“proceeding from the Father”. 

But should one consult the Holy Fathers who in the Latin 
Creed have added concerning the Spirit : “Qui ex patre filioque 
procedit”, they would give a reasonable reply, as I believe, and 
would not be silent concerning the cause of that addition. And 
perhaps they have been consulted and have given their reply, but 
their opinion on the matter has not yet come into our hands, and 
therefore we make no rash definition about this kind of question, 
unless perhaps someone should say: “Not without reason was this 
addition made, for it is supported by many passages of Holy 
Scripture. For the Lord Himself says: ‘Whom the Father sends in 
My Name.’ For it is apparent that whom the Father sends in the 
Son’s Name the Son sends. And the Son Himself also calls the Holy 
Spirit the Spirit of Truth. The Truth, however, is the Son, as He 
Himself testifies : ‘I am the Way and the Truth and the Life.’ If then 
the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Truth, it follows that He is the Spirit 
of the Son. [Also when He is healing the alpoppoouaa, that is, the 
woman afflicted with an issue of blood. He says : ‘I perceived power 
go out of Me ;’ and that which we quoted a little earlier : ‘If I go 
away I shall send Him to you.’] Also the Apostle (says): ‘God sent 

612C 

Concerning 
the proces¬ 
sion of the 
Holy Spirit 
from the Son 

BOOK II 

the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, in Whom we cry Abba Father.’ 
Also the Psalmist (says) : ‘By the Word of God the heavens were 
established, and all the virtue of them by the Spirit of His mouth.’ 
Who among Catholics would not be able to prove from these and 
similar evidences that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and 
the Son?” 

A. I am not too preoccupied with this question. For in 
whichever way one recites the Church’s Creed I accept it without 
endangering sound faith: that is, whether one should say that the 
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone or from the Father and 
the Son, provided that we both believe and understand that the 
same Spirit proceeds substantially from one Cause, that is, from the 
Father. For the Father is the Cause of the Son Who is born of Him 
and of the Spirit Who proceeds from Him. But I should still like to 
ask you whether it is from the Essence or from the Substance of the 
Father that the Son is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds. 

N. You will easily be released from doubt about this once you 
clearly know the difference between the Essence and the Substances 
of the Divine Goodness. 

A. Concerning the difference between the Divine Essence and 
the Substances the divine word handed down from the Holy Fathers 
of both tongues, that is, the Greek and the Latin, has instructed me. 
St. Dionysius the Areopagite and Gregory the Theologian and their 
most subtle commentator Maximus say that there is a difference 
between ouaia, that is, essence, and uTioaiaaK;, that is, substance ; 
understanding by ouaia that one and simple Nature of the Divine 
Goodness, and by uTuoaiaoK; the proper and individual Substance 
of each of the Persons. For they say : piav ouaiav sv ipiaiv 
UTToaidaeaiv, that is. One Essence in Three Substances. Also 
St. Augustine and the other Holy Fathers who write in Latin 
expound their belief in the Holy Trinity by saying : One Substance in 
Three Persons, indicating the Unity of the Divine Nature by the 
name of Substance, and the threefold property of the Substances by 
the names of three Persons ; and this is accepted by the modern 
writers among the Greeks too ; for they say : piav UTToaiaaiv, that 
is. One Substance, and three TipoacoTia, that is. Three Persons. For 
all believe the same thing even if they express it in different terms. 
So, following the Greeks we say : The ouaia of the Father and of the 
Son and of the Holy Spirit is one and the same, but the UTioaiaaK; is 
not one and the same. For the Father has His own proper 
UTToaiaaiq which belongs neither to the Son nor to the Holy Spirit 

225 

612D 

34 

613A 

613B 

The differ¬ 
ence between 
Essence and 
Substance 

613C 

226 

PERIPHYSEON 

but to the Father alone. Likewise the Son (has) His own UTroaiaaig 
which belongs neither to the Father nor to the Holy Spirit but to the 
Son alone. And of the Holy Spirit in the same way it must be said 
that He has His proper UTroaiaoK; which belongs neither to the 
Father nor to the Son but to the Holy Spirit alone. And the teaching 
of the Latin version is no different from this when it declares that 
there are Three Persons in One Substance. Therefore the Father 
subsists through Himself and the Son subsists (through Himself) 
and the Holy Spirit subsists (through Himself); and the Three 
Substances subsist in One Essence, because the Three are One. 

N. I think that this is to be counted among the beliefs of those 
who share the orthodox Faith. So now you can plainly see the 
answer to the question you have asked. For you said that you were 
uncertain whether it was from the Essence or the Substance of the 
Father that the Son is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds, as though 
you had openly asked whether it is from the one and common 
Essence or Nature of the Three Substances or Persons that the Son 
is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds, or from the proper Substance 
or Person of the Father. For the Essence of the Divine Goodness is 
neither the proper Substance of the Father nor of the Son nor of the 
Holy Spirit, but is the one and common Nature of the Three 
Substances; while the Father has His own proper Substance, as 
likewise the Son also and likewise the Holy Spirit possess their 
proper Substances. 

If then the Divine Essence, which is one and the same, is neither 
the Father nor the Son nor the Holy Spirit, but is the Nature which 
They have in common, it follows that it is not from that (Nature) 
that the Son is born or the Holy Spirit proceeds. For if the Son is 
born of that (Nature), He is not born of the Father ; for, as we have 
said, it is not the Father. Similarly, if the Holy Spirit proceeds from 
that same (Nature), He does not proceed from the Father. But if the 
6I4B Catholic Faith most firmly and most wholesomely both believes and 
teaches that the Son is born of the Father while the Holy Spirit 
proceeds from the same Father, does it not follow that we should 
believe and understand that it is from the Substance of the Father 
that both the Son is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds ? Therefore it 
is not from the Essence but from the Substance of the Father that 
both the Son is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds. For even in the 
case of human beings we do not say that sons are born from their 
common nature but each from his proper nature. Now, by the 
proper nature of each I mean the individual substance of each 

613D 
Whether it 
is from the 
Essence or 
the Sub- 
tance of the 
Father that 
the Son is 
born and the 
Holy Spirit 
proceeds 
614A 

BOOK II 

person. For if men were born of their common nature no father 
would have his own son and no son would have his own father. 

But these are things which are contemplated at a deeper and 35 
truer level than they are expressed in speech, and understood more 
deeply and more truly than they are contemplated, and are deeper 614C 
and truer than they are understood to be ; for they pass all 
understanding. For whatever things are said or contemplated or 
understood of the Holy Trinity of the most simple Goodness are but 
traces and theophanies of the Truth, not the Truth itself, which 
surpasses all contemplation not only of the rational but also of the 
intellectual creature. For it is not that kind of unity or trinity which 
can be thought of or understood from any creature, or be shaped by 
any phantasy however clear and close to the truth it may be — for all 
these things deceive as long as this is made the end of our 
contemplation — , because it is more than unity and more than 
trinity. But we are charged to say something of it and to contemplate 
it and to understand it as far as, under the guidance and tutelage of 
the holy word of God, our intellect may approach it, so that we may 
somehow have matter for our praise and benediction of it. 614D 

For the holy word of God affirms that even the highest angels 
and the powers that are nearest to it veil, as it were, with their wings 
their feet and their faces, thereby telling us that the heavenly powers 
which are eternally and immutably in the presence of the most high 
Trinity and Unity fear the things that are above them and contem¬ 
plate them with reverence. For their wings are the contemplations 
by which they are represented (?) to veil their feet and their faces, 615A 
fearing to behold the manner in which the Holy Trinity and 
Indivisible Unity is poured down through all things from the highest 
to the lowest, and how it passes all understanding, and is removed 
from every creature, whether visible or invisible, into the infinite 
heights of its Nature. And yet purified human beings as well as 
angels are always and incessantly seeking to behold it, a thing which 
in itself they cannot contemplate, and it is this which is signified by 
the flight of the medial wings. This is why Scripture says: “Upon 
Whom the angels desire to gaze.” 

For that which they seek to know is infinite, and that which 
they seek to grasp is incomprehensible, and that which they desire 
passes all understanding and transcends every creature. But to this 
end the most high and divine Unity moves in intellects whether 
angelic or human: that they may find matter for praise of it and 615B 
such understanding of it as is permitted to the creature, beholding 

PERIPHYSEON 

the Trinity in Unity, as St. Gregory the Theologian says in his first 
discourse On the Son. “Wherefore,” he says, “the Monad, after 
moving from the beginning into the Dyad, comes to rest in the 
Triad a passage which the blessed Maximus expounds as follows : 
“For He moves in the mind, whether angelic or human, which 
receives Him and, through Him and in Him, makes inquiries about 
Him, and, to put it more clearly. He teaches it as undivided at the 
first encounter, the monadic principle that no difference should be 
admitted into the First Cause, He then leads” the reason “on to 
receive in addition the divine and ineffable fertility of that Cause, 
saying in a mystic and hidden way that it” (i.e.,) the intellect, “must 
never suppose that the Good is infertile of the Word and Wisdom or 
of the sanctifying Power, and of co-essences in substances — but not 
so as to understand that the Divine is a composite of these, as if they 
were its accidents, and to believe that it did not subsist in them. The 
Divinity is therefore said to move as being the Cause of the inquiry 
into the mode of its existence. For without illumination sight of the 
Divinity is one of the impossible things. Again, it is said also to 
move through the partial revelation of the more perfect under¬ 
standing of it in Holy Scripture, beginning from the confession of 
the Father, and moving on to the recognition of the Son with the 
Father, and to the acceptance of the Holy Spirit together with 
the Father and the Son, and compelling the instructed to the 
joint adoration of perfect Trinity in perfect Unity, that is to say. 
One Essence and Divinity and Power and Operation in Three 
Substances.” 

Having therefore, as far as the feebleness of our thought will 
allow, in a measure investigated, though not rashly defined, the 
most high Cause of all causes, we must return to the primordial 
causes with which our discourse is concerned. 

A. Certainly we must. For we have dealt sufficiently with these 
matters. 

N. The primordial causes, then [ — as I had also said in what 
went before — ] are what the Greeks call iSeai, that is, the eternal 
species or forms and immutable reasons after which and in which 
the visible and invisible world is formed and governed ; and 
therefore they were appropriately named by the wise men of the 
Greeks TipcoTOTUTra, that is, the principal exemplars which the 
Father made in the Son and divides and multiplies into their effects 
through the Holy Spirit. 

BOOK II 

They are also called Trpooplajiaxa, that is, predestinations. For 
in them whatever is being and has been and shall be made by Divine 
Providence is at one and the same time and immutably predestined. 

For nothing naturally arises in the visible and invisible creation 
except what is predefined and pre-ordained in them before all times 
and places. They are also customarily called by the philosophers 
Be^ifipaia, that is, divine volitions, because everything that God 
wished to make He made in them primordially and causally; and 
the things that are to be have been made in them before the ages, 616B 
and therefore they are said to be the principles of all things because 
all things whatsoever that are perceived or understood whether in 
the visible or in the invisible creation subsist by participation in 
them, while they themselves are participations of the one Cause of all 
things, namely, the most high and holy Trinity ; and they are said to 
be through themselves for the reason that no creature is interposed 
between them and the one Cause of all things; and while they 
subsist immutably in it they [are] the primordial causes of other 
causes which come after them, to the uttermost bounds of the whole 
of nature, even multiplied to infinity — to infinity, I mean, not in 
relation to the Creator, but to the creature; for the limit of the 
multiplication of creatures is known only to their Creator < because 
He Himself and none other is> . 

Therefore the primordial causes which the divine sages call the 616C 
principles of all things are Goodness-through-itself, Being-through- 
itself, Life-through-itself, Wisdom-through-itself, Truth-through- 
itself, Intellect-through-itself, Reason-through-itself, Power-through- 
itself, Justice-through-itself, Health-through-itself, Magnitude- 
through-itself, Omnipotence-through-itself, Eternity-through-itself, 
Peace-through-itself, and all the powers and reasons which once and 
for all the Father made in the Son and after which the order of all 
things is woven from top to bottom, that is, from the intellectual 
creature which is next to God after God to the lowest order of all 
things in which bodies are contained. For whatever things are good 
are good by participation in the Good-through-itself, and whatever 
things subsist as beings and substances subsist by participation in 616D 
Being-through-itself, whatever things are alive possess life by parti¬ 
cipation in Life-through-itself, similarly whatever things are wise 
and understanding and rational are wise and understanding and 
practise reason by participation in Wisdom-through-itself and 
Understanding-through-itself and Reason-through-itself. And the 
same applies to the rest. For there is not found in the nature of 

PERIPHYSEON 

617A things any power, whether general or specific, which does not 
proceed by an ineffable participation from the primordial causes. 
But lest anyone should suppose that what we have said of the 
primordial causes rests on the support of no authority, we have 
thought it not inappropriate to insert into this work some (passages) 
from the book of the Holy Father Dionysius On the Divine Names. 

A. There is no more apt insertion that you could make, nor 
any that goes better with sound reason than the unshakeable and 
tried authority of the Holy Fathers. 

N. He says, then, in the eleventh chapter of the aforesaid book 
of his: “But what, you ask, (is it) at all which is called Being- 
through-itself, or Life-through-itself, or whatever we have expound¬ 
ed (to be) absolute and primary being...? We say this: It is not a 
tortuous (problem) but a straightforward one, and has a simple 
617B explanation. For we do not say that Being-through-itself, (which is) 
the cause that (all things) are, is some divine or angelic essence — for 
it alone is the superessential principle and” < subsistence> “of all 
things that are and the causative (principle) of their essence — nor 
that there is any other lifegiving divinity save the superdivine Life 
which is the Cause of all things which live and of the life which 
proceeds (from it)... but by Being-through-itself and Life-through- 
itself and Deity-through-itself we mean, (speaking of them) indeed 
as principles” and “as Godlike things and causes, the one Principle 
beyond principle and being, and the (one) Cause of all things ; but 
(speaking of them) as participable, providential Powers proceeding 
from the unparticipating God..., Deification-through-itself, things 
that have their proper existence in themselves participate, and are 
and are called existent and living and divine, and other things of this 
sort. Therefore He is said to be the Good Substantiator even of the 
first (orders) of them, ... then of their parts, then of the things which 
617C participate in them as wholes, then of those which participate in 
them partially. And what is to be said of these? When indeed certain 
of our holy masters say that He that is more than Good and more 
than God is the Substantiator of Goodness-through-itself and of 
Divinity, calling the gift of making the Good and of making God, 
which proceeds from God, Goodness-through-itself and Divinity; 
and the outpouring of the making-of-beauty-through-itself Beauty- 
through-itself and Beauty in its totality and partial beauty, and the 
things which are wholly good..., and whatever other things are 
spoken of or shall be spoken of in this manner and show that the 
Providence and Goodness in which beings participate proceed and 

BOOK II 

231 

overflow in an abundant outpouring from the God Who is unparti¬ 
cipating, so that the loving Cause of all things transcends all things, 
and the Superessential and Supernatural... is in every respect 617D 
beyond the things which exist after whatever mode of existence or of 
nature?” 

And from chapter five of the same book : “All principles of 
existing things, since they participate in being, both are, and are 
principles; and first they are, and then they are principles. And if 
one likes to say that the principle of living things as living is Life- 
through-itself, and of like things as like Likeness-through-itself, and 
of unified things as unified Unification-through-itself, and of ordered 618A 
things as ordered Order-through-itself, and of any other things 
which by participation in this or that or both < or> many, are this 
or that or both or many, you will find that the participants-through- 
themselves are first participants in Being and first take their 
existence [from] that Being, then are principles of this or that, and 
that it is by their participation in Being that they both are and are 
participated in. But if it is by their participation in Being that they 
are, much more (is this the case with) the things which participate in 
them.” 

And a little later: “For in the Monad every number... is 
presubstantiated, and the Monad possesses in itself every number 
under a unitary mode, and every number is one in the Monad, but 
the further it issues from the Monad the more it falls into division 
and multiplicity. And all the lines of a circle co-subsist at the centre 618B 
in their first unification, and the point holds in itself all simple lines 
unified in the mode of unity with one another and with the one 
principle from which they proceed ; and while at the centre they are 
wholly unified, when they are distant a little from it they are a little 
divided, and when they recede further from it (they are) more (so) ; 
and, (to put it) plainly, the closer they are to the centre the closer 
they are to unification both with it and with one another, and the 
further (they are) from it, the further they are from one another also. 

But as in the whole nature of all things all the reasons of nature as 
individuals are brought together in one unconfused unification, so 
also in the soul under a unitary mode are the powers of the whole 
body which provide for all things separately. It is not unreasonable 
therefore that, ascending from imprecise images to the causal 
(principle) of all things, we should with a vision that penetrates 6I8C 
beyond earthly things contemplate all things in the causal (principle) 
of all things, and the things which are opposed to one another as 

232 

PERIPHYSEON 

under one form and as unified. For it is the Principle of existing 
things, from which proceed both Being itself and everything what¬ 
soever that exists, every beginning, every end,” < and> “all life, all 
immortality, all wisdom, all order, all harmony, all virtue, all 
protection, all gathering together, all distribution, all understanding, 
all reason, all sense, all condition, all rest, all motion, all unification, 
all judgement, all friendship, all agreement, all division, all deter¬ 
mination, and all other” <several> “things which, deriving their 
existence from Being, impress it upon everything that exists.” 

And a little later: “For if the sun of our world, although the 
essences and qualities of sensible objects are many and diverse while 
itself is one and shines upon them all with a uniform light, yet 
renews and nourishes and protects and perfects and distinguishes 
618D and unites and cherishes and makes fertile and augments and 
changes and gathers together and establishes and moves and 
quickens all things, and if each of them partakes of the same sun in 
the manner appropriate to itself, and if the one sun predefines as a 
unity in itself the causes of the many things that participate in itself, 
then we should be all the more ready to allow that the Cause of the 
earth and of it and of all things, preformed on high in itself the 
exemplars of all existents in one superessential unity, and it then 
619A brings forth the essences by an emanation from Essence. Now by the 
exemplars we mean the reasons in God which substantiate existing 
things and were preformed after a unitary mode, (and) which the 
divine word calls predestinations and divine and good volitions 
which determine and make the existents, (and) after the pattern of 
620A which the Superessential has both predestined and brought forth all 
existent things.” 

And now I think we should bring this book to an end. 

A. Let it be so. 

PERIPHYSEON 

BOOK III 

N. In the Second Book almost the entire purport of our 
reasoning was directed towards setting down in writing what seemed 
to us likely to be true, and what we had, I think, brought to a clear 
explanation and fortified with the irrefutable conclusions of true 
reason, concerning the second aspect or, if I may so call it, form or 
species of universal Nature. 

Now the second aspect of universal Nature consists in that part 
of it which both is created and creates, in which we are taught both 
by the authority of the Holy Fathers and by the Truth itself, when 
reason is applied to it, to consider the principles of all things, that is 
to say, the primordial causes or, as they have often been called, the 
predestinations of things that are to be created or the divine 
volitions ; and in which also the trend of the discourse required that 
we should include something about incidental problems in order to 
elucidate the main one. For there is no main problem, I think, which 
does not involve incidental problems when it is being investigated by 
a diligent mind [ — for it would be impossible to solve it other¬ 
wise — ], especially as it became necessary and inevitable in the 
course of discussing the principles of things, that is, the primordial 
causes, to introduce what it came into our mind (to say) about the 
one principle of all things also, that is, about God, Who only is the 
one and first Cause of all causes and the Cause beyond causality and 
the Goodness beyond being, by participation in Whom all principles 
and all causes of all things subsist, while He Himself participates in 
none because He has no principle at all whether superior to Him or 
co-existent with Him that it not coessential with Him. For who shall 

1 619A 

Recapitula¬ 
tion of the 
Second Book 

619B 

619C 

PERIPHYSEON 

rightly say anything about the created causes unless he first has a 
clear view of the unique Cause of all things which subsists by Itself 
and is created by nothing prior to Itself? — in so far as it is given 
(us) to utter the unutterable or comprehend the incomprehensible 
(or) understand that which passes all understanding. 

Also, in addition to these matters we made some preliminary 
remarks about the Return of mutable and dispersed things through 
the various divisions and parts of nature which make up [this] world 
619D back into their principles from which they proceed and in which 
they immutably subsist when the end of all things shall come, and 
rest shall come to all things in motion, after which nothing will 
move. 

Of these, then, and other matters the composition of the second 
discourse is made up. The questions that follow upon them require, 
unless I am mistaken, that the Third Book shall consist, under 
God’s guidance, of whatever the Divine Light shall reveal to our 
620A minds concerning the third aspect of universal Nature, that is, 
concerning that part of creation which is created and does not 
create. 

A. In no other way should we embark upon the discussion, as I 
think. For if the First Book deals with that nature which creates all 
things and is created by nothing and which is recognized in God 
alone, and the second, in logical succession, with that which both is 
620B created and creates and is recognized in the origins of things, does it 
not follow that the third also should take the subject of its 
composition from the third (nature), which is created and does not 
create? 

But before we pass on to the elucidation of this part of Nature I 
should like to know for what reason you decided to represent that 
nature which is separated from the universe of all natures because of 
its excellence and infinity as though (it were) the first part of that 
universe. For the universe is completed by the numbers of its species 
and parts, and therefore does not extend to infinity. For above and 
below it is bounded by limits; for, starting from the intelligible 
creature [which is established in the angels] and, to go higher, from 
620C the primordial causes than which right reason has discovered 
nothing higher save God alone, it descends through the natural 
[orders] of the intelligible and celestial essences and of the visible 
essences which compose this world as far as the lowest of the whole 
creation, which [is occupied] by bodies and the growth <and> 

BOOK III 

235 

decline of bodies and [is brought about] by departures and replace¬ 
ments through the coming together of the universal elements into 
particulars and their dissolution into universal once again. 

But the nature which creates the whole universe, being infinite, 
is not enclosed by any bound above or below, for it bounds all 
things and is bounded by nothing. And no wonder, since it may not 
be bounded even by itself because it knows no boundary at all. 

Since, being beyond nature, it escapes all comprehension by itself, 
how much more (will it elude) any defined or definable intellect ? — 620D 
unless perhaps someone should say : “There is this one way in which 
it bounds itself : by its knowledge that it cannot be bounded. There 
is this way in which it comprehends itself : by its knowledge that it 
cannot be comprehended. There is this way in which it understands 
itself : by its knowledge that it is /^possible for it to be understood 
in anything.” For it transcends everything that is or can be. And 
since this is the case, and none of those who correctly practise 
philosophy would be so rash as to dispute these arguments, why it is 
included by you among the divisions of the universe I am at a loss to 621A 
see. 

N. Among the divisions of the created universe I certainly 
would not place it, but for placing it among the divisions of that 
universe which is comprehended by the term universal Nature I have 
not one but many reasons. For by that name, “Nature”, is usually 
signified not only the created universe but also that which creates it. 

For the first and greatest division of universal Nature is into that 
which creates the established universe and that which is created in 
that established universe. No wonder, for this division of nature 
persists uniformly throughout all the universes to infinity. For the 
first division of the universal Good is into that one and supreme 
Good (which is) immutable in itself and substantial, from which 621B 
every good flows, and that good which is good by participation in 
the supreme and immutable Good. The same principal division is 
similarly (found) in the universal Essence, the Universal Life, the 
universal Wisdom, and the universal Power. For in these and in 
others like them is the first discrimination of that Nature which 
through itself by itself in itself truly and immutably is Essence and 
Life and Wisdom and Power from that nature which by participation 
in the supreme Good either has being only, or has both being and 
life, or has being and life and sense, or has both being and life and 
sense and reason or has both being and life and sense and reason and 
wisdom. 

236 

PERIPHYSEON 

Do you see how the Creator of the whole universe takes the 
first place [in the divisions]? — not without reason, for He is the 
Beginning of all things and is inseparable from every universe that 
He has created and (is that) without which it cannot subsist. For in 
621C Him are all things immutably and essentially; and He is the 
Division and Collection of the universal creature, and Genus and 
Species and Whole and Part although He is neither genus nor 
species nor whole nor part of anything, but all these are from Him 
and in Him and (return) to Him. For the monad also is the 
beginning of numbers and the leader of their progression, and from 
it the plurality of all the numbers begins and in it is consummated 
the return and collection of the same. For all numbers subsist as a 
whole and immutably in the monad, and in all of them it is the 
whole and the part, and of the whole division it is the beginning 
[although it is itself in itself neither number nor a part of it]. It is the 
621D same with the centre of a circle [or of a sphere], with the sign for a 
figure, with the point on a line. Since then the division of the whole 
universe starts from its Cause and Creator, we ought to regard Him 
not as the first part or species but as that from which every division 
and partition originates, since of every universe He is the Beginning 
and Middle and End ; and although those things are predicated and 
understood of Him, that is, although He occupies the first place in 
the divisions of universes, yet there is no one of those who devoutly 
622A believe and understand the truth who would not persistently and 
without any hesitation declare that the creative Cause of the whole 
universe is beyond nature and beyond being and beyond all life and 
wisdom and power and beyond all things which are said and 
understood and perceived by any sense, since He is the causal 
Beginning of all those things, and the essential Middle which fulfils 
(them), and the End in which they are consummated and which 
brings to rest every motion and imposes tranquillity, and the 
boundary which bounds all things that are and all things that are 
not. 

A. To these conclusions of lofty and cautious reasoning I 
gladly give way and acknowledge that they are likely to be true. But 
before you come to consider the effects of the primordial causes 
from which especially the first and unique creative Cause of all 
things is wont to be named, it would be convenient to know the 
natural order (of the causes). For up to now I think that they have 
been mentioned in a confused and indiscriminate sequence. For, if I 
622B am not mistaken, it will help inquirers not a little towards a perfect 

BOOK III 

237 

knowledge of them and of their effects if we start by making clear 
the natural order in which they were established by their Creator. 

N. The order of the primordial causes has been very clearly set 
out by that industrious investigator of the Divine Providence 
St. Dionysius the Areopagite in his Book on the Divine Names. For 
he asserts that the first gift and participation of the Supreme 
Goodness, which participates in nothing since it is Goodness- 
through-Itself, is that goodness-through-itself by participation in 
which whatsoever things are good are good, and that is why it is 
called goodness-through-itself, because it participates in the Supreme 
Goodness-through-itself. For the other goods do not through 
themselves participate in the supreme and substantial Good but 
through that which is through-itself the first participation of the 
Supreme Good. And this rule is uniformly observed in the case of all 
the primordial causes, that is, that they are in themselves the 
principal participations of the One Cause of all things Who is God. 

But since the first aspect of the supreme and true nature is that 
by which it is understood as the supreme and true Goodness while 
the second is that by which it is understood as the supreme and true 
Essence, the second place among the primordial causes is not 
inappropriately occupied by essence-through-itself, and since this is 
the first participation of the supreme and true Essence, all things 
after it that have essence receive their essence by participation in it, 
and therefore are not only goods but existents. 

The third aspect of the Divine Nature is that by which it is 
understood as the supreme and true Life, and therefore life-through- 
itself is reckoned third among the primordial causes, and this, the 
first subsisting participation-through-itself of the supreme and true 
Life, was created in order that all things after it that have life have it 
by participation in it. Hence it is that goods and existents and living 
things are of the same nature. 

The fourth aspect is that by which it is known as the supreme 
and true Reason. Therefore reason-through-itself is seen to have the 
fourth seat among the primordials and the first participation of the 
supreme and true Reason, and the origins of all reasonable beings 
after it, that is, of all things that participate in reason. 

The fifth aspect of the Divine Nature concerns the supreme and 
true Intellect. For intellect is that which has intellectual knowledge 
of all things before they are made, and therefore fifth in the order of 
the primordials is known intellect-through-itself, by participation in 

Concerning 
the Order of 
the Primor¬ 
dial Causes 

I 

622C 

II 

III 

622D 

IV 

623A 

V 

PERIPHYSEON 

238 

which all things that have intellectual knowledge have intellectual 
knowledge and are intellects, whereas it itself is established as the 
first participation of the supreme and true Intellect. 

VI The sixth aspect of the Divine Nature is constituted in the true 
and supreme Wisdom. Hence wisdom-through-itself is not inap¬ 
propriately set in the sixth place among the primordial causes, for it 
is the first participation in the supreme and true Wisdom, but is 
created to be the cause of the possession of wisdom for all those who 
by participation in it possess wisdom after it. 

VII The seventh aspect of the true and supreme Nature is that 
623B which regards its supreme and true Power, and therefore power- 

through-itself occupies the seventh seat among the primordials and 
is the first participation of the supreme and true Power, whereas the 
other kinds of powers after it are participations of it. 

VIII The eighth degree of contemplation is that in which the pure 
mind beholds the supreme and true Blessedness of the Divine 
Nature, of which the first participation is blessedness-through-itself, 
in which all blessed beings that are blessed after it participate as in 
the eighth of the primordials. 

viiii Ninth in order (is) the aspect of divine and supreme Truth, of 
which the first participation is truth-through-itself, after which and 
through which, as the ninth of the primordials, all truths are true. 

X The tenth place is occupied by eternity-through-itself, which is 
623C participation in the supreme and true Eternity, and after 

which and through which all eternal things are eternal. 

The same can be said of Magnitude, of Love and Peace, of 
Unity and Perfection. For through these primordial causes there 
descend from the supreme Cause of all things whatever partakes of 
magnitude, love, peace, unity, perfection. 

This is enough, I think, to explain what we mean. For all the 
principles of all things, extending to infinity, divinely reveal them¬ 
selves everywhere to the contemplations of the mind under aspects 
uniform with those that have been mentioned, whether in things 
which can be understood and receive a name, or in those which can 
be perceived by the intellect alone but cannot be signified, or in 
623D those which are neither comprehended by the intellect nor expressed 
by names because they elude every sense and every mental concept, 
for they are hidden by the excessive brightness of their transcendence. 

BOOK III 

239 

For they abide in Him of whom the Apostle said, “Who alone hath 
immortality and dwelleth in inaccessible light”. 

Nor is it strange that the primordial causes should extend to 
infinity. For as the First Cause of all things, from which and in 
which and through which and for which they are created, is infinite, 
so neither do they know any end to limit them but the will of their 
Creator. 

And be it noted that this sequence of the primordial causes 
which you ask me to set out distinctly in a definite order of 
precedence is constituted not in themselves but in the aspects, that 
is, in the concept of the mind which investigates them and which 
conceives in itself such knowledge of them as is permitted and 
arranges that knowledge methodically so that it should be possible 
to say something about them which should be sure and defined by a 
pure understanding. For in themselves these first causes are one and 
simple and none knows the order in which they are placed or are 
distinguished one from another. For this is something that happens 
to them in their effects, and as in the monad although in the sphere 
of reason alone all the numbers subsist in it, yet no number is 
distinguished from another number — for they are one and a simple 
one and not a one that is a composite of many, for it is from the 
monad that every multiplication of numbers proceeds to infinity 
whereas the monad is not composed from the multiples that issue in 
progression from it as though it were made up of the collection of 
them into one — , similarly the primordial causes when seen by the 
intellect to be substantially existing in the Beginning of all things, 
that is, in the only begotten Word of God, are a simple and 
indivisible One, but when they proceed into their effects that are 
multiplied to infinity they acquire their numerable and ordered 
plurality — not that the Cause of all things is not Order or Ordering, 
or that order-through-itself is not included among the principles of 
things, for every ordered thing is ordered by participation in it ; but 
because all order in the supreme Cause of all things and in the first 
participation in it [is] one and simple and is distinguished by no 
differences, and in it no order clashes with any other since they are 
an inseparable one from which the multiple order of things descends. 
Therefore the order of the primordial causes is constituted in the 
judgement of the mind which contemplates them in so far as 
knowledge of them is granted to those who discourse on the divine 
causes. For a devout and pure-minded philosopher may start from 
any one of them at will and let his mind’s eye, which is true reason. 

624A 

An example 
concerning 
the Primor¬ 
dial Causes 

624B 

624C 

PERIPHYSEON 

240 

[embrace] the others in any order of contemplation, observing all of 

them that he can, and conclude his contemplation at any one of 

them whatever, just as in the present case the humble capacity of our 

contemplation began the enumeration of the primordial causes from 

Goodness, as though they were constituted in a definite order, and 

ended the example in that which is called perfection-through-itself 

as though it were constituted in the fifteenth place — for it was by 

way of example that to the best of its contemplative power it 

624D selected these principal causes and set them in the order that seemed 

good to it, not because they are so constituted by their own nature, 

for there all things are one and simple and simultaneous, but 

because to those who inquire into them and wish to have something 

to say about them for the sake of example, they are wont to appear 

by the illumination of the divine radiance in theophanies of 

themselves as this or that and as many and infinite — and, to make 

625A things clearer by this example from sensible nature, consider 

Another carefully the centre and the circle circumscribed about it and the 
example . , , 

Straight lines that are begun from the centre, produced to the 
circumference, and made to end there. 

A. I have often regarded it either inwardly in the mind by 
imagination or outwardly in a visible and corporeal figure subject to 
the senses. 

N. Have you not noticed how all the lines are united at the 
centre so that none of them can be distinguished from the others? 
No wonder, for all are one in it and are in no way distinct from one 
another so that the centre is reasonably defined not as the place 
where the lines come together in one but as the source and simple 
and indivisible principle from which either by nature or by art the 
multiplicity of the lines proceeds. For the centre is the common 
625B starting-point of the lines in which they are all one. 

A. I am fully persuaded of this also on geometrical grounds. 
But all these things are perceived more by the mind than by the 
sense whether one wishes to argue about such matters inwardly by 
imagination or outwardly by sense. 

N. You say well. For these and like matters are judged by the 
sheer sharpness of the mind. You see, if I am not mistaken, at the 
beginning of the progression of the lines from that unity which lies 
at the centre how the lines are so closely linked to one another that 
they can scarcely be distinguished from one another; but as they 
extend further from the centre the spaces between them begin 

BOOK III 

gradually to widen until they reach the circle which bounds them, 
where their “diastemata”, that is, the spaces that are formed 
between the lines, attain their greatest width ; and these are equal to 625C 
one another so that none of them is found to be wider or narrower 
than another, as also in the lines there is found one and the same 
length so that none of them is longer or shorter than another, a 
natural and reasonable equality being preserved in both, I mean, in 
the width of the intervals and in the length of the lines. 

A. So it is and so I plainly understand. 

N. Suppose you want to discover the number of the intervals 
and lines and reduce them to some order? Are you able in any 
specific way to discover some specific interval or line from which, be 
it interval or line, the natural or proper beginning may be made? 

A. When I look for one I find none. For such equality prevails 
among them that no interval or line can be distinguished [by] any 
difference or property from any other. For even that circle which 
gathers them all into its circumference is so self-identical that no 625D 
part of it is distinguishable from another either by nature or by art. 

For it displays a continuous quantity and therefore starts from no 
definite beginning and ends in no constituted term, but the whole of 
it wholly is both beginning and end. Therefore circular motion is 
rightly called by the Greeks dvapxoq, that is, without beginning; 
and over the other motions, that is, the straight and the oblique, it 
holds the primacy. 

N. In none of this are you mistaken, in my opinion. For right 626A 
reason does not teach otherwise. Do you then see that there is no 
law relating to figures to restrain or prevent you from starting to 
order and number the whole figure from any interval or line ? For so 
does reason demand, and therefore as many beginnings and endings 
of numbering and ordering can be made as there are intervals and 
lines. 

A. Here again is a conclusion that I do not resist; but I am 
waiting to know where it leads. 

N. To no other end than that we should see more clearly than 
light that the greatest theologians and their successors can, without 
reasonable objection, both make a start of their contemplation of 
the primordial causes from any one of them at all and set the term of 
their contemplation in any one of them as each may wish so that as 
many as there are of the primordial causes, or rather, to speak more 626B 
cautiously, as many as they are formed in whatever way they are or 

241 

PERIPHYSEON 

can be formed in the intellects of those who contemplate them, so 
many are the ways of ordering and numbering them that offer 
themselves of their own accord by a wonderful dispensation of the 
Divine Providence to those who practise philosophy rightly in 
accordance with their capacity for contemplation and in accordance 
with the inclination of each ; and although they operate in various 
and marvellous modes of divine science and divine theophanies in 
the minds of those that contemplate (them), in themselves the 
primordial reasons of all things that are subsist eternally as an 
immutable unity in the Word of God in which they are made all one 
and the same beyond all ways of ordering and numbering. 

A. Now I see clearly the end you intended in your reasoning. 
For, as I think, you intend to say nothing else than that in the 
principles of nature themselves there is no order to look for [that is 
626C their nature]. And rightly so : for who would reasonably 

look for order or number in those things which are created by the 
Creator of all things because of the loftiness of their nature beyond 
every order and every number, seeing that the beginnings of all 
number and all order are in themselves united with one another and 
cannot be seen apart in the eyes of any lower nature? For it is not 
inappropriate to believe that only the gnostic power of their Creator 
can number, distinguish, multiply, set in order, (and) divide them. 
But because by some means unknown and supernaturally discovered 
they take shape in their theophanies in the minds of those who 
contemplate them, in them too <they are seen> to be able to be 
multiplied and divided and numbered, I mean in [the intellects] of 
626D those who contemplate them in so far as they are able; and the 
result of this is that in themselves they, that is, the primordial 
causes, admit no order [that is known] to any intellect or sense, 
while in the mind that theorizes, that is, contemplates them, many 
different ways of ordering them are, as it were, conceived by the 
intellect in the reason and born as certain images that resemble 
them. But although this is so I would not believe that it is without 
627A some special reason that you began your enumeration of the 
principal causes from goodness-through-itself. For it is not the way 
of those who dispute in an orderly manner to waste time in saying 
anything without reason. 

N. You would perhaps not be so rash as to say this if you knew 
that I am of the number of those who dispute devoutly and perfectly 
and in no way deviate from the path of true reasoning, but since I 
find that I scarcely have a place among the least of the followers of 

BOOK III 

243 

the great philosophers, I must not make any rash promise concerning 
my advances along the highest ascents of contemplation. For it 
often happens that those who begin to enter upon those ascents 
without the help of a better and purer mind either stray and lose 
their way or, when they can go no higher, fall back to the lower 
levels or, honouring these ascents in silence, too cautious to suppose 
it reasonable that they should reach the higher levels, they have 627B 
remained silent. For it is for those who are most perfect and who are 
enlightened by the splendours of the divine radiance, and are thus 
brought to the most sacred shrines of the celestial mysteries, to scale 
the highest “bimata”, that is, steps, of divine contemplation and 
behold without any error the form of truth fully revealed without 
any cloud obscuring it. But since these (shrines) are set beyond our 
powers of penetration and since, weighed down by the weight of the 
corporeal senses, we are not yet able to attain them, lest we should 
seem to be indolent in our God’s affairs and to be burying the 
Lord’s talent in the earth and neglecting to make the Lord’s money 
yield profit and deserving the sentence of the wicked servant, we 
shall, to the extent that the inward light bestows itself upon the 
capacity of those that seek it, say whatever seems to us to be most 
like the truth concerning the subject of our discussion, at every point 
observing the rule of humility and not esteeming ourselves to be 627C 
what we are not. For it is written : “do not become proud, but stand 
in awe.” 

This was the reason, then, that brought me to start the 2 
principles of things from goodness-through-itself particularly — for 
it was not without the authority of the Holy Fathers and especially 
of Dionysius the Areopagite that I saw goodness-through-itself to 
be the most general of the divine gifts and in some manner to 
precede the others. For the Cause of all things, the creative 
Goodness which is God, created that cause which is called goodness- 
through-itself first of all for this purpose : that through it all things 
that are should be brought from non-existents to essences. For it is a 
property of the Divine Goodness to call the things that were not into 627D 
existence. For the Divine Goodness and More-than-Goodness is 
both the essential and superessential cause of the universe that it has 
established and brought to essence. Therefore if the Creator through 
His goodness brought all things out of nothing so that they might be 
(essences), the aspect of goodness-in-itself must necessarily precede 
the aspect of being-through-itself. For goodness does not come What the 
through essence but essence comes through goodness ; for this too is 

PERIPHYSEON 

244 

628A 
between 
goodness and 
essence 

628B 

628C 

very clearly stated by Scripture, which says: “And God saw all 
things and behold, (they were) indeed good.” For it does not say: 
And God saw all things and behold they were indeed (essences) ; for 
of what value would being alone be if well-being were taken away? 
For all things that are, are in so far as they are good, but in so far as 
they are not good, or rather, in so far as they are less good, to that 
extent they are not, and so, if goodness is wholly removed, no 
essence remains. For simply being or eternally being, if well being 
and eternally well being are altogether removed, are wrongly named 
[on the one hand] being, [on the other] eternally being. Therefore, if 
goodness is withdrawn we cannot properly speak of essence or 
eternal essence. And lest perchance you should say to this : Can we 
not in the same way declare that if being is altogether removed no 
goodness will remain, (for) when that which exists passes away no 
good will remain; here is a stronger argument: Not only are the 
things that are good, but the things that are not are also called good, 
and furthermore the things that are not are said to be better than the 
things that are. For the further they transcend essence by reason of 
their excellence, the nearer they approach the Superessential Good, 
namely God, whereas the more they participate in essence the 
further they are separated from the Superessential Good. Now, as I 
think, those things are said not to be which by virtue of their 
excessive excellence and indivisible unity and simplicity can be 
apprehended neither by sense nor by intellect, while those things are 
thought to be which submit to intellects or senses and are confined 
by differences and properties within some fixed and definite sub¬ 
stance, and being subject to accidents and to variation and to 
dispersal in places and times, cannot exist at once and all together. 

Do you then see how much more general is the goodness of 
good things than is their essence? For there is one species <of 
goodness> in the things that are, another in the things that are not ; 
and that is why, beginning from the more general gifts of the Divine 
Beneficence and proceeding through the more special gifts, I have, 
with Theology as my guide, established a certain order in the 
primordial causes. 

3 A. Now I understand that (the point from which) you have 
begun your consideration of the principles was not unreasonably 
(chosen). For everyone who employs the method of division correctly 
ought to begin from the most general and proceed through the more 
general, and so, as far as his contemplative power enables him, 
arrive at the most specific ; and this I see for myself, and, unless I am 

BOOK III 

245 

mistaken, understand in those principles of nature which you gave 
first, regarding them from within. For as goodness is, as it were, a 
kind of genus of essence while essence is believed to be a kind of 
species of goodness, so essence is the genus of life. For all things that 
are, are divided into those things which live < through themselves> 
and those which do not live through themselves — for not every 
essence lives < through itself> or is life — , and therefore of the 
things that are there is one species in those which live < through 
themselves> or are life, the other of those which neither partake of 
life < through themselves> nor are life. And the same can be seen 
in the succeeding (causes). For life is a kind of genus of reason. For 
all things that live are either rational or irrational, and therefore the 
rational is one species of life, the irrational the other. Of reason also 
the two species are well known, wisdom the one, science the other. 
For the proper definition of wisdom is that power by which the 
contemplative mind, whether human or angelic, contemplates the 
eternal and immutable things of God, whether it concerns itself 
about the First Cause of all things or about the primordial causes of 
nature which the Father created at once and all together in His 
Word ; and this species of reason is called by the wise theology. But 
science is the power by which the contemplative mind, whether 
human or angelic, discourses on the nature of the things which 
proceed from the primordial causes through generation and which 
are divided into genera and species by means of differences and 
properties, whether it is susceptible to accidents or free from them, 
whether joined to bodies or altogether free from them, whether it is 
distributed over places and times or, outside place and time, is 
unified and indivisible by reason of [its] simplicity; and this species 
of reason is called physics. For physics is the natural science of 
natures which are susceptible to senses and intellects ; and the 
discipline of morals always follows it. 

And if one observes carefully one will find that the same rule 
applies either to all or to many of the primordial causes, not, as I 
think, because among the primordial causes some are more general 
while others are more special — for such inequality where the 
utmost unity and the utmost equality prevail would be, as I think, 
impossible — , but because in their effects the mind of him who 
contemplates, and the divisions that are inherent in nature, find that 
of some there are more, of others fewer, participations. For of 
goodness-through-itself there are more participations than of 
essence-through-itself ; the one is participated by the things that are 

628D 

Concerning 
the divisions 
of the pri¬ 
mordial 
causes 

629A 

629B 

629C 

246 

PERIPHYSEON 

629D 

and the things that are not, the other only by the things that are. It 
would not be untrue to think of the other principles in the same way. 

For essence is participated by things that live and things that do not 
live, but life only by things that live. Life is participated by rational 
and irrational beings, but reason by rational beings only. Reason is 
participated by wisdom and science, but wisdom only by those 
intellects which revolve about God, beyond every nature of things 
visible and invisible, and beyond themselves in an eternal and 
ineffable motion, and about the principles of nature. 

630A 

And therefore it is not in the principles of nature themselves 
that genera or species, multiplicity or paucity are to be observed, but 
in the participations of them, that is, not in the causes themselves, 
which as they are made in the Word of God are (all) one and 
immutable and equal, but in their effects, by which the world, visible 
and invisible, is filled. In those there is absolute equality and no 
diversity ; but in these there is a manifold and unlimited variety of 
differences. But what participation is I do not yet understand, and 
without understanding this nobody can have a clear knowledge of 
what has been said above, as I think. 

Concerning 

Participation 

N. Everything that is is either participant, or participated or 
participation, or <both> participated and participant at once. 

That which is only participated is that which participates in nothing 
above itself, which is understood to be true of the Supreme Principle 
of all things alone, that is, of God. For He is participated by all 
things which come from Him, some immediately through themselves, 
others through interposed mediations. 

630B 

But that which is only participant is that which participates in 
what is naturally established above it but is not participated by 
anything situated below it because below it no order of nature is 
found ; such are bodies, for no nature subsists by participation in 
them — for we do not count their shadows among things that 
subsist. By bodies I here mean not those simple, invisible, and 
universal ones but those that are composed of them and are subject 
to the senses and to corruption, that is, to dissolution. 

But all the rest that are established between them, below the 

One Principle of all things descending through the natural gradations 
ordained by the Divine Wisdom as far as the extremity of universal 
nature which the bodies occupy, are both participant and partici¬ 
pated, and are so named. For the most excellent things, between 
which and the Supreme Good above them no creature is interposed. 

BOOK III 

247 

participate in God immediately, and are the principles of all things, 
that is, the primordial causes that are constituted in and after the 630C 
One <Universal> Principle; and the essences that follow after 
them subsist by participation in them. Do you see how the first 
order of the created universe is both participant in the One Principle 
of all things and participated by the creatures that come after it? 

The same must be understood of the other orders. For every order 
that is established between (that which is only participated and that 
which is only participant) from the highest downwards, that is, from 
God to the visible bodies, both participates in an order above it and 
is participated in one below it, and therefore is both participant and 
participated. 

But participation is understood of all. For as between the terms 
of numbers, that is, among the numbers when they are constituted 
under one principle, the proportions are similar, so between all the 
natural orders from the highest to the lowest the participations by 630D 
which they are related are similar; and as between the numerical 
proportions there are the proportionalities, that is to say, similar 
principles of proportion, in the same way the Wisdom that is the 
Creator of all things has constituted between the participations of 
the natural orders marvellous and ineffable harmonies by which all 
things come together into one concord or amity or peace or love or 
whatever other name can signify the unification of all things. For 
just as the concord of numbers has been given the name of 
proportion but the bringing together of the proportions is called 631A 
proportionality, so the distribution of the natural orders has been 
given the name of participation but the bringing together of the 
distributions is called universal Love, which in a kind of ineffable 
amity gathers all things into one. Participation, therefore, is not the 
taking of some part, but the distribution of the divine gifts and 
graces from the highest to the lowest through the higher orders to 
the lower. For first there is given both a gift and a grace to the first 
order immediately after the Supreme Good of all things, for 
example [the gift] of being, the grace of well-being. But this first 
order distributes being and well-being to that which follows it, and 
thus the distribution of being and well-being flows down by degrees 
from the Supreme Source of all good gifts and graces through the 
higher orders to the lower as far as the lowest of all. [And here it 
must be noted that well-being is to be understood in two ways : one 631B 
by which all the things that are, are said to be good because they are 
made by the Supreme Good, and are only to the extent that they 

PERIPHYSEON 

participate in goodness, the other by which all things that are 
naturally good are adorned by the gifts of the virtues so that their 
natural goodness may be apparent. For although it is chiefly and 
primarily to the rational and intellectual creature that the gifts of 
grace which are usually designated by the word “virtues” are 
distributed, yet none of the natures, not even the lowest, must be 
thought to be denied participation in a divine grace proportionate to 
itself. For as all things participate in goodness so they also 
participate in grace, in goodness that they may be, in grace that they 
may be both good and beautiful.] 

63 1C The same must be accepted in regard to life, to sense, to reason, 
to wisdom, and to the rest of the divine gifts and graces. For in the 
same way they are distributed through the higher to the lower, so far 
as they reach ; for not all gifts descend to the lowest, for while being 
and well-being are naturally distributed as far as the lowest (level) of 
the created universe, life does not extend to the lowest order. For 
bodies neither live through themselves nor are life, but they receive 
the (gift of) living [through] the order that is above them, the order 
which is constituted in the nutritive and augmentative life and which 
flourishes in the seeds. What shall I say of sense and reason and 
intellect? Is it not clear to all that sense descends as far as the 
irrational animals, while reason and intellect do not go beyond the 
rational and the intellectual? 

631D Now between “dationes” and “donationes” the difference is 
this : “dationes” are and are said to be the distributions by which 
every nature subsists, while “donationes” are the distributions of 
grace by which every subsisting nature is adorned. Therefore nature 
is a “datio”, grace is a “donatio”. For every perfect creature 
consists of nature and grace. Hence it comes about that every 
essence is called a “datum”, every virtue a “donum”. Therefore 

632A Theology says, “Every good ‘datum’ and every perfect ‘donum’ 
comes down from above, descending from the Father of Lights.” 
But Holy Scripture often puts “datum” for “donum” and “donum” 
for “datum”. [Know also that virtue (or power) is to be understood 
in three ways : for there is substantial power, since everything that 
subsists subsists by a certain natural trinity, essence, power, and 
operation, which we discussed sufficiently in the first book; the 
second kind of power is that which contends with the corruption of 
nature, as health contends against sickness, science and wisdom 
against ignorance and folly ; the third is that which is opposed to 
vice, as humility to pride, chastity to lust, and this kind is evident 

BOOK III 

249 

wherever the irrational motion of the free will of the intellectual 
nature obtrudes. For to the extent that evil multiplies the species of 
the vices, to the same extent goodness brings up to resist them the 632B 
defences of the virtues.] 

And notice that participation is given a more significant and 
expressive and more easily understandable name by the Greeks, in 
whose language pexoxfi and peiouaia signify participation, pexoxf| 
as if pexa- exouaa, that is, “having after” or “having second”, 
pexouaia also as pexa- ouaia, that is, “after-essence” or “second 
essence”. From this it is very easy to understand that participation is 
nothing else but the derivation from a superior essence of the 
essence that follows [after it] and the distribution from that which 
first possesses being to that which follows it in order that it may be ; 
and this we can demonstrate from examples drawn from nature. 

For the whole river first flows forth from its source, and 4 
through its channel the water which first wells up in the source 632C 
continues to flow always without any break to whatever distance it 
extends. So the Divine Goodness and Essence and Life and Wisdom 
and everything which is in the source of all things first flow down 
into the primordial causes and make them to be, then through the 
primordial causes they descend in an ineffable way through the 
orders of the universe that accommodate them, flowing forth 
continuously through the higher to the lower ; and return back again 
to their source through the most secret channels of nature by a most 
hidden course. For thence is all good, all essence, all life, all sense, 
all reason, all wisdom, all genus, all species, all beauty, all order, all 
unity, all equality, all difference, all place, all time, and everything 632D 
that is and everything that is not and everything that is understood 
and everything that is sensed and everything that surpasses sense 
and understanding. 

[For the motion of the supreme and threefold and only true 
Goodness, which in Itself is immutable, and the multiplication of its 
simplicity, and Its unexhausted diffusion from Itself in Itself back to 
Itself, is the cause of all things, indeed is all things. For if the 
understanding of all things is all things and It alone understands all 
things, then It alone is all things ; for that alone is the gnostic power 
which knows all things before they are, and does not know all things 633A 
outside Itself because outside It there is nothing, but It possesses all 
things within Itself. For It encircles all things and there is nothing 
within It but what, in so far as it is, is not Itself, for It alone truly is ; 
for the other things that are said to be are Its theophanies, which 

PERIPHYSEON 

250 

likewise have their true subsistence in It.] Therefore God is every¬ 
thing that truly is because He Himself makes all things and is made 
in all things, as St. Dionysius the Areopagite says. 

Concerning 

Theophanies 

633B 

633C 

633D 

For everything that is understood and sensed is nothing else but 
the apparition of what is not apparent, the manifestation of the 
hidden, the affirmation of the negated, the comprehension of the 
incomprehensible, [the utterance of the unutterable, the access to 
the inaccessible,] the understanding of the unintelligible, the body of 
the bodiless, the essence of the superessential, the form of the 
formless, the measure of the measureless, the number of the 
unnumbered, the weight of the weightless, the materialization of the 
spiritual, the visibility of the invisible, the place of that which is in 
no place, the time of the timeless, the definition of the infinite, the 
circumscription of the uncircumscribed, and the other things which 
are both considered and perceived by the intellect alone and cannot 
be retained within the recesses of the memory and which escape the 
sharpness of the mind. And we can acquire a hint of this from 
examples from our own nature. For our own intellect too, although 
in itself it is invisible and incomprehensible, yet becomes [both] 
manifest and comprehensible by certain [signs] when it is mate¬ 
rialized in sounds and letters and also indications as though in sorts 
of bodies; and while it becomes externally apparent in this way it 
still remains internally invisible, and while it breaks out into various 
figures comprehensible to the senses it never abandons the incom¬ 
prehensible state of its nature ; and before it becomes outwardly 
apparent it moves itself within itself ; and thus it is both silent and 
cries out, and while it is silent it cries out and while it is crying out it 
is silent; and invisible it is seen, and while it is being seen it is 
invisible ; and uncircumscribed it is circumscribed, and while it is 
being circumscribed it continues to be uncircumscribed; and it 
becomes embodied at will in sounds and letters, and while it is being 
embodied it subsists bodiless in itself ; and when it makes for itself 
out of airy matter or out of sensible figures certain vehicles, as it 
were, by means of which it can convey itself to the senses of others 
so that it may quickly reach their external senses, it then abandons 
these vehicles and penetrates by itself absolutely alone into the 
heart’s core and mingles itself with other intellects and becomes one 
with those to whom it is joined ; and when it acts abroad it ever 
remains within itself, and when it moves it is at rest, and when it is at 
rest it moves — for it is moving rest and resting movement — and 
while it is being joined to others it does not relinquish its own 

BOOK III 

251 

simplicity. And (there are) many other examples that in a marvellous 
and ineffable way can be evoked from the nature that was made in 
the image of God. But these are enough to illustrate by example the 
diffusion of the Divine Goodness through all things from the 
highest downwards, that is, throughout the universe that was 
established by It; and this ineffable diffusion both makes all things 
and is made in all things and is all things. 

A. Certainly they are enough and are in generous measure, in 
so far as it is possible to express by similitudes what is inexpressible 
and remote from all similitude. For this similitude that you have 
taken as an example from our intellect falls short in this respect, as I 
think, [from that of which it is a similitude]: that the intellect, as 
you say, [both makes and] takes [those] vehicles in which it is 
conveyed to the senses of others from matter that was created 
outside itself, whereas the Divine Goodness, outside of which there 
is nothing, does not take the matter for its manifestation from 
something, but from nothing. 

But when I hear or say that the Divine Goodness created all 
things out of nothing I do not understand what is signified by that 
name, “Nothing”, whether the privation of all essence or substance 
or accident, or the excellence of the divine superessentiality. 

N. I would not easily concede that the divine superessentiality 
was nothing [or could be called by so privative a name]. For 
although it is said by the theologians not to be, they do not mean 
that it is nothing but that it is more than being. For how could the 
Cause of all things that are be understood to be no essence when all 
things that are show that it truly is — although by no demonstration 
of the things that are is it understood what it is ? Therefore, if it is on 
account of its ineffable excellence and incomprehensible infinity 
that the Divine Nature is said not to be, does it follow that it is 
nothing at all, when not-being is predicated of the superessential for 
no other reason than that true reason does not allow it to be 
numbered among the things that are because it is understood to be 
beyond all things that are and that are not? 

A. What then [pray] am I to understand when I hear that God 
made all things that are from nothing? 

N. Understand that the things that exist have been made from 
the things that do not exist by the power of the Divine Goodness ; 
for the things that were not received being. For they were made 
from nothing because they were not before they came into being. 

634A 

5 

Of what sort 
634B 

of nothing 
God made 
all things 

634C 

PERIPHYSEON 

[For that word “Nothing” is taken to mean not some matter, not a 
certain cause of existing things, not anything that went before or 
occurred of which the establishment of things was a consequence, 
not something coessential or coeternal with God, nor something 
apart from God subsisting on its own or on another from which 
634D God took as it were a kind of material from which to construct the 
world ; but it is the name for the total privation of the whole of 
essence and, to speak more accurately, it is the word for the absence 
of the whole of essence; for privation means the removal of 
possession. But how < perhaps someone may ask> could there be 
privation before there was possession? For there was no possession 
before all things that are received the possession of subsistence.] 

635A A. By the name, “Nothing”, then, is meant the negation and 

absence of all essence or substance, indeed, of all things which are 
created in nature? 

N. Such is the case, as I think. For almost all the commentators 
of Holy Scripture agree in this, that the Creator of the universal 
creature made whatever he willed to be made not out of something 
but out of nothing at all. 

A. I feel myself to be surrounded on all sides by the dark 
clouds of my thoughts. In such matters at least nothing is left for me 
but faith alone which the authority of the Holy Fathers transmits. 
But when I try to achieve a clear intellectual perception concerning 
the things which I retain by faith alone I am repulsed, my attention 
being daunted by the excessive obscurity, or rather, the excessive 
brightness, of the very subtle reasons that elude me. 

635B N. Please tell me where you are now in doubt and what 
disturbs you so much that you cannot, as you say, arrive at any clear 
intellectual perception, or where our reasoning falters since it 
cannot bring you to any sure definition or knowledge of things. 

A. I beg of you to be indulgent and patiently bear with the 
delays my slowness causes. For I would believe that these very 
subtle inquiries into things would not easily so appear to the inward 
eyes of even better men than me that they would be able to attach 
themselves to a firm conviction at once, especially as the things that 
are at the moment dark to me seem to derive from those which have 
already long ago been, as it were, brought out into the light. For 
concerning the primordial causes of all things it was agreed between 
635C us that they were made by the Father in His only-begotten Word, 
that is, in His Wisdom, all together and once for all and eternally, so 

BOOK III 

that as that Wisdom of the Father is eternal, and coeternal with the 
Father, so also all things which are made in it are eternal, except that 
they are all made in that which is not made but is begotten and is 
their maker; for in the establishing of the universal creature, as the 
will of the Father and the Son is one and the same, so is the 
operation one and the same. Therefore in their primordial causes all 
things are eternal in the Wisdom of the Father but not coeternal 
with it ; for the cause precedes the effects. For as the concept of the 
artificer precedes the concept of his art, while the concept of the art 
precedes the concept of the things that are made in it and through it, 
so the concept of the Father Artificer precedes the concept of His 
Art, that is, of His Wisdom in which He created all things, then the 635D 
concept of that Art is followed by the knowledge of all things that 
are made in it and through it. For everything that true reason finds 
to precede by whatever kind of precedence must precede in accord¬ 
ance with the natural sequence, and therefore the Artificer of all 
things God the Father precedes His Art as Cause. For the artificer is 
the cause of his art but the art is not the cause of its artificer, but the 636A 
art precedes all things that subsist in it and through it and from it ; 
for it is their cause. Hence it is concluded that in the Wisdom of the 
Father all things are eternal, but are not coeternal with it. 

N. These things have already been discussed [between us] 
and < have been> brought to an unshakeable mental conviction 
that agrees with true reason and the testimonies of the Holy Fathers. 

A. Do you not see, then, that it is not without reason that I am 
disturbed, and tossed about on the conflicting waves of thoughts 
which are inconsistent with one another? For how can these things 
be reconciled with one another ? For if all things that are, are eternal 
in the creative Wisdom, how are they made out of nothing? For how 
can that be eternal which before it was made was not, or how can 
that which begins to be in time [and with time] be in eternity? For 636B 
nothing that participates in eternity either begins to be or desists 
from being, whereas that which was not and begins to be will of 
necessity desist from being what it is. For nothing that is not 
without a beginning can be without an end. Therefore I cannot 
discover how these opinions do not contradict each other. 

How can it be (true) both that all things are eternal in the 
Wisdom of God, and that they are made out of nothing, that is, that 
before they were made they were not? — Unless perhaps someone 
were to say that the primordial causes of things are always eternal in 
the Wisdom of the Father, but that the unformed matter in which 

PERIPHYSEON 

254 

and through which they proceed through generation into their 
effects, into the genera and species with which the world is filled, is 
not eternal. But whoever should say this will be forced to admit that 
matter which is made from nothing is not to be reckoned as a cause 
among the eternal causes of nature, and if he concedes this he will 
636C have to grant the necessary conclusion that not all but some things 
are eternal in the Wisdom of the Father. But none of those who 
practise philosophy correctly will deny that unformed matter is to 
be reckoned in the number of all things that were made by God in 
[His] Wisdom ; for how anyone can say that the causes of all things 
are eternally created in the Word of God, but that unformed matter 
does not have its own cause I do not see. Then, if matter is included 
in the number of the established universe it necessarily follows that 
its own cause will not be excluded from the number of the causes 
which are eternally created in the Wisdom of God. 

Concerning 

Unformed 

Matter 

636D 

637A 

637B 

N. Concerning unformed matter, which the Greeks call \jXr\, 
none of those who are learned in Holy Scripture, if with right reason 
he considers the establishment of natures, doubts that it is established 
by him who established all both as a cause among causals and 
among the effects of the causes according to their proportions. For 
He Who made the world from unformed matter also made unformed 
matter out of nothing at all. For there is not one author of the world 
that is made out of unformed matter and another of that matter 
previously created out of nothing at all, but one and the same 
Creator of both, since all things that are, whether unformed or 
formed, proceed from the same Beginning. For the universe is 
created from the One [just as all numbers burst forth from the 
monad and all radii from the centre]. For in this especially the error 
of the pagan philosophers who have dared to treat of the making of 
this world is principally condemned : that they said that unformed 
matter is coeternal with God, and that from it, as though it subsisted 
apart from Himself and coeternal with Him, God took the raw 
material for His works. For it seemed to them unworthy that 
unformed matter should be created by God. For how, they ask, 
could the unformed come from the Form of all, the variable and 
mutable from Him Who is immutable and invariable in anything in 
Himself, that which is subject to various accidents from Him to 
Whom no accident occurs, that which admits intervals of places and 
times and quantities from Him Who is not extended by intervals of 
places and times, similarly that which is receptive of divers qualities 
and figures from Him Who is subject to no quality, the corruptible 

BOOK III 

from the Incorruptible, the composite from the Simple, and other 
objections of that sort, blinded by the mists of their false reasoning? 

But we, studying the truth of Holy Scripture and following in the 
steps of its divine interpreters, both believe by faith and, as far as it 
is permitted us, apprehend by our understanding that both the 
formlessness of all things and the forms and everything that is in 
them either as essence or as accident are established by the one 
Cause of all things. 

For the Creator of the universe, omnipotent and in nothing 6 
deficient and reaching out to infinity, could and did create not only 637C 
the things that are similar to Himself but also things dissimilar. For 
if He were to have established only His likeness, that is, the things 
that truly exist as eternal, immutable, simple, inseparably unified, 
incorruptible, immortal, rational, intellectual — knowledge, wisdom 
— and the other powers, he would seem to have failed in the 
creation of things dissimilar [and opposite], and would not be 
Judged the Maker of absolutely everything that reason teaches that it 
is possible to make. 

Now the things that are dissimilar [and opposite] to Him are 
said to be and are all things which are opposed to the aforesaid 
powers, not as being their negatives but from the unlikeness [and 
opposition] of their nature. For to perfect essence [in like manner 
ordered through differences and properties into genera and species, 
and uniformly ordered through each species without confusion] is 
opposed the imperfection and mobility of matter as yet unformed; 
to eternal things temporal things ; to immutable, mutable ; to simple 637D 
things composites ; and all other things that stand to one another as 
diametrically opposed. All these, then, I mean the similars and the 
dissimilars, have one and the same Artificer, Whose omnipotence 
does not fail in the operation of any nature. 

Furthermore, the beauty of the whole established universe 
consists of a marvellous harmony of like and unlike in which the 
diverse genera and various species and the different orders of 638A 
substances and accidents are composed into an ineffable unity. For 
as instrumental melody is made up of a variety of qualities and 
quantities of sounds which when they are heard individually and 
separately are distinguished from one another by widely differing 
proportions of tension or relaxation, but when they are attuned to 
each other in accordance with the fixed and rational rules of the art 
of music give forth through each piece of music a natural sweetness, 
so the harmony of the universe is established in accordance with the 

256 

PERIPHYSEON 

uniform will of its Creator out of the divers subdivisions of its one 
nature which when regarded individually clash with one another. 

So now that these facts have been established it is not surprising 
638B that, as you say, you are tossed about on the conflicting waves of 
thought which contend with one another. For it is agreed and 
incontrovertibly established that all things that are and that are not 
flow together from the one Principle of all things whether in the 
Primordial Causes which were eternally made once and for all in the 
only begotten Word of God ; or in the unformed matter from which 
the primordial causes of the visible creation received the occasions 
for their appearance through generation; or in their effects by 
which, under the ministration of the Divine Providence, this world 
is running out its course in the material order from its beginning to 
its end, as the Lord says : “My Father works until now, and I work.” 
But how these things which appear to contend with each other are 
reconciled in the unifying embrace of the understanding, that is, 
how all things are at one and the same time both eternal and made, 
638C seems not only to you but also to me to merit a most careful 
investigation by the reason. 

7 

How the 
established 
universe is at 
once eternal 
and made 

A. Certainly it merits it. For I think there is no more profound 
question than this that seekers after the truth should investigate. 
For, as we said above, things made are opposed to things eternal, 
and therefore if made they are not eternal, if eternal <they 
are> not made. For how it can be argued that the same things are 
both eternal and made does not occur to me. Hence there is nothing 
left, as I think, but [either] to respect [it] in complete silence in 
deference to its excessive profundity or for you to begin your 
investigation if it seems to you that there is anything about it to be 
investigated. 

N. I think we should do both, so that on the one hand we 
should not shirk it so long as our attention, enlightened by God, is 
not repulsed by the excessive brightness of its subtlety lest we incur 
638D the blame of idleness or apathy; but on the other hand where it is 
beyond our reach and does not suffer itself to be observed and 
elucidated by minds that are still weighed down by their earthly 
habitation it should be respected in the silence of our hearts and our 
lips lest we should give some rash explanation of it. 

A. So let it be ; and embark upon this inquiry without delay. 

8 N. I consider that we should begin by speaking of the propo- 
sition that all things are eternal in the only begotten Word of God. 

BOOK III 

257 

A. I do not wish otherwise. For our reasoning must begin from 
what goes before. Eternity goes before making. Therefore we must 
begin from that. 

N. Pay attention, then, and see that you do not concede 
anything incautiously lest you repent again of what you have 
conceded. 

A. Proceed. I am paying attention so as not to concede 
anything rashly. 

N. How does it seem to you? Is God receptive of accidents? 

A. Far be it from those who have a wholesome perception of 
the truth to say or think such a thing. For His Nature is simple and 
more than simple, and free and more than free from all accidents. 

N. Then nothing in God is an accident? 

A. Nothing at all. 

N. Then it was not an accident in Him to establish the 
universe, and yet Holy Scripture is not silent about His having 639B 
established it [and openly exclaims [saying] : “In the beginning God 
made heaven and earth”, and the other things that are read of the 
works of the first six days.] 

A. God both established the universe of creatures, and it was 
not an accident in Him to have established it. 

N. Then He was not [subsisting] before He created the universe. 

For if He were, the establishment of things would be an accident in 
Him. 

A. We believe that God is prior to the universe not in time but 
solely for the reason that the cause of all things is understood (to be) 
Himself. For if He were prior in time, it would be an accident in 
Him to make the universe [in time]. But since He is prior to the 
universe which He created solely for the reason that He is its Cause, 
it follows that the creation of the universe is not in God as accident 
but is in accordance with a certain mysterious reason on account of 
which caused things subsist always in [their] cause. 639< 

N. If, then, God is prior to the universe which He established 
for no other reason than the sole fact that He is the Cause while it is 
the caused, and every caused thing always subsists in its cause — for 
otherwise neither is the cause cause nor the caused caused — and it 
is not an accident in God to be causal — for always He is Cause 
[and was and will be], always therefore do the caused things subsist 

PERIPHYSEON 

in their Cause [and had subsisted and will subsist] — , then the 
universe, since it is caused, that is, participates in its cause, is eternal 
in its cause. Therefore it is evident that the universe of the whole 
creation is eternal in the Word of God. 

A. This conclusion I cannot contradict since without any 
639D uncertainty I see that all numbers eternally and uniformly subsist in 
the monad and all radii in their centre, and although in the actual 
process of counting the numbers and drawing the radii they take the 
forms of different kinds of numbers and figures, yet they still abide 
as one form in their principles, I mean in the monad and in the 
centre, and it is understood that neither were the principles ever 
without them nor was there a beginning to their being made in the 
principles, and while they flow forth from them as many, yet they do 
not cease to be in them under the form of one because of their 
640A eternity and immutability. 

N. You have used an example that is most apt and most true. 
Moreover the testimonies both of Holy Scripture [and] of the Holy 
Fathers allow that all things are eternal in God, “in Whom”, says 
the Apostle, we live and move and have our being”. [For we have 
our being in God because the reason of our being is excelling and 
pre-exists in Him ; we move in God because the reason of our well¬ 
being pre-exists in Him through the powers of our good deeds; 
finally we live in God because the reason of our eternal life and 
existence pre-exists in Him. And lest anyone should suppose that we 
are one thing and our reasons are another, he did not say. In Whom 
our reasons live and move and have their being, but He said : “In 
Whom we live and move and have our being.” For in so far as we 
are, we are nothing else but those reasons of ours which subsist 
640B eternally in God.] 

St. Augustine [also], expounding in his minor works the 
fourfold principle of the divine operation, affirms that in the 
dispensation of the Word of God the ages are not made but are 
eternal, and here he wishes it to be understood that not the ages 
merely, but all things by which the ages are brought about and 
fulfilled. [“The divine operation”, he says, “which created and 
governs the ages, is distinguished by a fourfold principle : first (there 
is the fact) that in the dispensation of the Word of God the ages are 
not made but are eternal ; for, according to the Apostle, before the 
beginning of secular time He predestined us for His kingdom.”] 
Again, in another place [writing on the Trinity] he says : “The Word 
of God through Whom all things are made, wherein all things live 

BOOK III 

immutably, not only the things that have been but also the things 
that shall be ; and yet in Him they neither have been nor shall be but 
only are, and all are one, or rather all is one.” Again in the 
Hexemeron he says of God the Word : “In one way the things that 
were made through Him are under Him, in another way the things 
that He is are in Him”, [as though he were saying openly: In one 
way they are under Him when, made through generation, they 
appear in genera and species, in places also and times, visibly 
through matter; in another way they are in Him when they are 
understood eternally in the primordial causes of nature which are 
not only in God but also are God. And that is why he says, “the things 
that he is” ; not that the things which are in God and are said to be 
God on account of the unity of their nature are other than those 
which come into the world through generation, but because one and 
the same nature is considered in one way in the eternity of the Word 
of God, in another way in the temporality of the world He has 
constituted.] 

St. Dionysius the Areopagite also in his chapter on the Perfect 
and the One says, speaking of God : “He is called the One because 
He is universally all things... for there is not one of the things that 
exist that is not a participant of the One”; and a little later: 
“Therefore this too must be understood : that in the One the species 
of each is preconceived ; the One is said to unify the things that are 
unified and is the exemplar of all things, and if you remove the One, 
there will be neither a universe... nor anything else of the things that 
exist. For the One precedes and embraces all things in its uni¬ 
formity.” 

If we take together these and similar examples and testimonies, 
we are given to understand most clearly that all things are not only 
eternal in the Word of God but also are [the Word] Itself. But it is 
stated in plainest terms by the testimonies of Holy Scripture that all 
things are made at once as well as being eternal in the Word of God, 
for John the Evangelist says, “All things were made through Him 
and without Him was made nothing.” See how he says quite openly 
that all things were made in the Word; but lest any one should 
suppose that they were only made and not eternal he continues: 
“That which was made was life in Him” — as though he had said : 
That which was made, whether in the primordial causes or in their 
effects, was life in that Word in Whom the reasons of all things are 
eternal. Also the Apostle : “In Whom are created all things that are 
in heaven and in earth, whether visible or invisible, whether thrones 

640C 

640D 

641A 

641B 

PERIPHYSEON 

260 

or dominations or principalities or powers ; all are created from 
Him and through Him and to Him.” “For”, as the Blessed 
Maximus says, “having the reasons of the things that have been 
made presubstantiated in His good will, he substantiated in accord¬ 
ance with them, out of that which is not, the visible and invisible 
creation ; and at their appropriate times made and is making in His 
Word and Wisdom... both universal and particular beings. For we 
believe that He prescribed the reason for the creation of the angels, 
the reason for each of the essences and powers that fill the world 
above us, the reason for the creation of men, the reason for each of 

641C the things that takes its being from God... recapitulating”, that is, 
summing up, “all things in Himself, in Whom is being and 
permanence and from Whom and to Whom is the becoming of 
things that become: things at rest and things in motion participate 
in God. For all things, because of their coming into being from 
God, participate in God according to their proper capacity, whether 
through intellect or through reason or through sense or through 
vital motion or through their opportunity for being and possessing, 
as is the opinion of Dionysius the Areopagite, the great and divine 
revealer.” 

Therefore none of the faithful or of those who devoutly 
investigate Holy Scripture ought to doubt that all things are at once 
both eternal and made in the Word — for both right reason and the 
authority of Holy Scripture agree unanimously in this — and that 
the things that are eternal are not other than the things that are 

641D made but the same things are at once both eternal and made. But 
you do well to demand from me an explanation as to how we can 
understand eternal things to be made and made things to be eternal, 
since it does not seem to you to accord with right reason that the 
same thing should be eternal and made, and perhaps I myself have 
not yet made it quite clear how it does accord. 

642A A. Begin, then, with the investigation and explanation of what 

can be said on this question. 

9 N. My opinion is that the reasons of all things, so long as they 
are understood in the very nature of the Word, which is super¬ 
essential, are eternal. For whatsoever is substantially in God the 
Word, since nothing but the Word Itself is eternal, must (themselves) 
be eternal, and therefore we conclude that the Word Itself and the 
multiple and most primary reason of the whole created universe are 
one and the same thing. We can also say this: The most primary 
reason of all things, which is simple and multiple, is God the Word. 

BOOK III 

261 

For it is called by the Greeks Logos, that is, Word or Reason or A6yo<; 
Cause. Therefore that which is written in the Greek gospel, ev dp^ti 
f|v 6 ^.oyoc;, can be interpreted “In the beginning was the Word”, or : 642B 
“In the beginning was the Reason”, or: “In the beginning was the 
Cause”. For nobody who makes any one of these statements will be 
deviating from the truth. For the only-begotten Son of God is both 
Word and Reason and Cause, Word because through Him God 
uttered the making of all things — in fact He is the Utterance of the 
Father and His Saying and His Speech, as He Himself says in the 
gospel, “And the speech which I have addressed to you is not Mine 
but His that sent Me” — as though He were saying openly : I Who 
am the Speech of the Father, I Who have addressed you, am not of 
Myself but of the Father Who speaks Me and begets Me out of the 
secret recesses of His Substance, and Who, through Me, that is, in 
begetting Me, makes all things — ; Reason because He is the 
principal Exemplar of all things visible and invisible, and therefore 
is called by the Greeks Idea, that is, species or form — for in Him 642C 
the Father beholds the making of all things He willed to be made 
before they were made — ; and Cause because the origins of all 
things subsist eternally and immutably in Him. 

Since, then, the Son of God is both Word and Reason and 
Cause it is not inappropriate to say : the creative Reason and Cause 
of the established universe, simple and in itself infinitely multiple, is 
the Word of God, and to put it the other way : The Word of God is 
the creative Reason and Cause of the established universe, simple 
and in itself infinitely multiple ; simple, because the universe of all 
things is in Him an indivisible and inseparable One, or rather the 
indivisible and inseparable unity of all things is the Word of God 
since He is all things; and not unreasonably understood to be 
multiple because He is diffused through all things to infinity, and 642D 
that diffusion is the subsistence of all things. For He spreads 
mightily from end to end and sweetly disposes all things. Also in the 
Psalm: “His speech runneth swiftly.” 

By “speech” the prophet meant the Word of the Father which 
runs swiftly through all things in order that all things may be. For its 
multiple and infinite course through all things is the subsistence of 
all things. Hence St. Dionysius in the chapter on the Perfect and the 
One says: “It is perfect not only as perfect-through-itself (and) 643A 
separated in the form of unity in itself by itself and all through all 
most perfect, but also (as) more-than-perfect by reason of its 
transcendence over all things and because it sets a limit to every 

PERIPHYSEON 

multitude and yet extends beyond every limit and is not confined or 
comprehended by anyone, but is extended (both) in all things at 
once, and beyond all things by virtue of its unfailing gifts and 
infinite operations. Again, it is called perfect both because it is 
incapable of being increased and is ever perfect, and because it is 
incapable of being diminished as transcending and overflowing all 
things in a single and incessant generosity that is through itself 
overfull and undiminished.” 

Therefore in itself it remains universal and simple, since in it all 
643B things are one; and yet it reaches from end to end and runneth 
swiftly through all things, that is, without expenditure of time it 
makes all things and is made in all things, and while in itself it 
subsists as One, Perfect and More-than-perfect and separate from 
all things, it extends itself into all things, and that very extension is 
all things. Moreover, it seems to be what is signified by the name of 
that celestial essence “Cherubim”, for Cherubim is interpreted 
“Effusion of Wisdom”, as we are told by those who are learned in 
Hebrew lore, of which the most subtle interpretation is : the 
Wisdom’s fusion, or extension or running or whatever other name is 
used for the infinite multiplication of the Word, is not as if it were 
into things which existed before the Word and Wisdom of the 
Father was diffused or was extended or ran, but that that very 
effusion or extension or running precedes all things and is the cause 
of the existence of all things and is all things. For who, taking 
643C thought for the truth, would believe or think that God had prepared 
for Himself places through which He might diffuse Himself, He 
Who is contained in no place since He is the common place of all 
things and therefore, as Place of places, is held by no place ; or that 
He had prepared for Himself intervals of place or time through 
which He might extend Himself or run His course. He in Whom 
there is no interval and Whose eternity transcends all times ? Or who 
would say something which would be still harder to believe, I mean 
that spatial and temporal or any other sort of quantitative intervals 
had been prepared for God Himself as though by another principle 
so that He might fill them by the diffusion of Himself or traverse 
them in His running or give them solidity by the extension of 
Himself? For not only to say such things of the ineffable and 
643D superessential nature but even to think them or depict them in false 
imaginings [is] most ridiculous and most harmful. For there is no 
worse nor more disgraceful death for the rational soul than to 
conceive of the Creator of all things in terms of such monsters and 

BOOK III 

263 

abominable idols, when the Truth Itself [in] the intellects of those 
who devoutly seek and love their Creator declares with intelligible 
voice generally concerning all things that are and that are not, that 
is, things that can be comprehended by sense or intellect and things 
that surpass sense or intellect of which the essence is that they are 644A 
without any comprehensible essence, that they have no other 
subsistence than as participation in the one only Cause of all. 

But everything which is participated is prior both to the 
participation in itself and to the things that participate in it. 
Therefore God is prior to whatever things participate in Him and 
the participation in Him that is their essence. Hence the great 
Dionysius the Areopagite in the Book of the Celestial Hierarchy, 
that is, of the (Celestial) Episcopate, in the fourth chapter, says: 

“First of all, that is a true saying that by universal goodness the 
superessential divinity has brought forth into being the essences of 
the things that are by substantiating them. For this is the property of 
the Cause of all things and of the Goodness beyond all things : to 
call beings into communion with Himself to the limit of the capacity 
of each of the things that are. All things, therefore, participate in the 
Providence which flows forth from the Divinity that is superessential 644B 
and cause of all things. For perhaps they would not exist except by 
taking upon themselves the being and principle of all things that are. 
Therefore all things that exist participate in its being — for the being 
of all things is the divinity that is beyond being — , while the things 
that live (participate) in the same life-giving power that is beyond 
life, and rational and intellectual things in the same Wisdom, 
perfect-through-itself and more-than-perfect, that is beyond all 
reason and intellect.” 

You have heard from the highest theologian, Dionysius the 
Areopagite, most famous Bishop of Athens, on the participation of 
the Divine Essence [an opinion in which he most clearly shows that 
all things that are and that are not [are to be understood as] nothing 
else but participation in the Divine Essence, and that that partici¬ 
pation is nothing else but the taking upon themselves of the same 
Divine Essence. “For”, he says, “perhaps they would not exist 644C 
except by taking upon themselves the being and principle of the 
things that are.” So their participation in the Divine Essence is their 
taking of it upon themselves, and the taking is the effusion of Divine 
Wisdom which is of all things the substance and essence and 
whatever is understood to be in them naturally]. Hear him also on 
the procession of God through all things and His permanence in 

PERIPHYSEON 

Himself in the letter which he wrote in reply to the pontiff Titus who 
was asking him what was the House of Wisdom, what her Bowl, and 
what her Food and Drink. “The Divine Wisdom”, he says, “sets 
forth two sorts of food, the one solid and edible, the other moist and 
flowing forth ; and offers in a bowl her providential goods. Now the 
bowl, being rotund and having out-curving lips is a symbol of the 
Providence of all these things which is at once diffused through all 
things and encompasses all things, without beginning and without 
644D end. But since while proceeding into all things it remains in itself 
and rests established in the similitude of its nature which is 
immutable and most perfect, irreversibly the same and unchanged, 
so stands the bowl. But Wisdom is (also) said to be building a house 
for herself, and to be setting forth therein both the solid foods and 
the beverages and the bowl, from which it is clear to those who 
interpret the divine symbols in a godly manner that a perfect 
providence is the cause of being and of the well-being of all and 
645A proceeds into all things and comes into being in all things and 
contains all things, and yet because of its pre-eminent self-identity it 
is not anything in anything through anything, but transcends all 
things, being and staying and remaining both identically and 
eternally itself in itself, and always self-identical and keeping itself 
so and in no way becoming separate from itself or separated from its 
proper base and immutable abode and goodness; but working well 
in itself its entire and most perfect providential acts, both proceeding 
upon all things and abiding in itself and ever at rest (and ever) in 
motion.” 

[Notice what he says : “proceeds into all things and comes into 
being in all things”, and he declares this in another place too, 
saying : “We must also be bold to say this in the interest of truth that 
He Himself Who is the Cause of all things by His noble love of all 
things, throughout the transcendence of His loving-kindness, passes 
beyond Himself by His providential acts towards all things that are, 
645B and as it were cherishes (them) by His goodness and affection and 
love, and transcends them all (and), separated from all things, yet 
condescends to be in all things in accordance with His mind¬ 
surpassing superessential, and irreversible power.” 

These passages are also supported by the opinion of the same 
Dionysius which he took from the Theological Commentaries of the 
most Holy Hierotheus : “The Cause of all things and the perfective 
divinity of Jesus which maintains the parts in harmony with the 
whole and which is neither part nor whole, and (yet) is whole and 

BOOK III 

265 

part as it unites in itself every part and whole and transcends and 
excels them, is perfect in what is imperfect, for it is the Principle of 
Perfection, but is imperfect in the perfect, for it is beyond perfection 
and before perfection; it is the Form that produces forms in the 
formless, for it is the Principle of Form ; formless in the forms for it 
is More-than-Form. (It is) the Essence that surpasses all the essences 
without being contaminated by them ; and it is superessential for it 
is separated from all essence. It appoints all beginnings and all 645C 
orders, and it is set above every beginning and every order. And it is 
the measure of all the things that are, and of duration, (yet is) 
beyond duration and before duration. It is complete in all things 
that are incomplete, more than complete in multitudes. It is secret, 
ineffable, beyond intellect, beyond life, beyond essence. In a mode 
transcending nature it contains the supernatural, in a mode trans¬ 
cending essence it contains the superessential.”] 

These (passages) are sufficient, as I think, for those of a good 
understanding to learn that the permanence of the Divine Goodness 
< in itself> is the immutable Cause of all things, while its procession 
and ineffable motion bring about the effects of all things, and 
furthermore that participation in it [and the assumption (of it)] is 
nothing else but the essence of all things. And observe carefully how 
he says, “That a perfect providence is the cause of being and the 645D 
well-being of all.” This Providence over all things, then, is not one 
thing and the Cause of all things another, but one and the same God 
is both the most perfect Providence over all things and the Cause of 
the being and of the well-being of all things. But that which follows, 

“and proceeds into all things and comes into being in all things”, 
that is, in the totality which it makes, “and contains all things”, so 
fully succeeds in solving the knottiness of the present question that 646A 
reason, when consulted, can find no other manner of solving it, as I 
think. For if He Who is the Cause of the being and of the well-being 
of all things both proceeds into all things and is made in every 
creature and contains all things, what else is there for it but that we 
should understand that the Wisdom of God the Father of which 
such things are predicated is both the creative Cause of all things 
and is created and made in all that it creates, and contains all the 
things in which it is created and made? For in all things whatever is 
rightly understood to be is nothing else but the manifold power of 
the creative Wisdom which subsists in all things. For if in your mind 
you take away the creative Wisdom from all things which it creates 
they will be reduced to nothing [at all] and there will remain no 

PERIPHYSEON 

646B essence, no life, no sense, no reason, no intellect, and no good at all 
— which is what St. Augustine also in the books of his Confessions 
seems to mean when he addresses his speech to the Truth itself, that 
is, to the Divine Wisdom: “And I examined”, he says, “the other 
things within Thee and I saw that they were not altogether being and 
not altogether not being : not altogether being because they are not 
what Thou art, nor altogether not being because they take their 
being from Thee.” By these words he maintains that every creature 
whatsoever considered through itself is nothing, but that whatever 
in it is understood to subsist subsists by participation in the creative 
Truth. For if every truth is true by reason of the Truth and only the 
Truth is permanent while all else moves, [then] in all truths only the 
Truth subsists. [Now I said “moves” because (all else) does not 
subsist through itself but tends towards nothingness; however, by 
646C virtue of the provident Truth which subsists in it it is prevented from 
falling into nothingness but stands fast.] 

If then the Word of God itself both makes all things and is 
made in all things — and this can be proved from the words of the 
aforesaid Dionysius and others — , what wonder [if] all things which 
are understood to subsist in the Word itself are believed and known 
to be at the same time eternal and made? I find no reason why that 
which is predicated of the Cause should not also be predicated of the 
caused. Therefore all things that are are not inappropriately said to 
be both all eternal together and made, if there is made in them that 
very Wisdom [which makes them, and the Cause in which and 
through which they are both eternal and made is (itself) in them 
eternal and made]. 

A. I am indeed bewildered and struck dumb as a dead man 
with stupefaction. For although I am attracted to these arguments 
646D because they seem true and are corroborated by the evidences of the 
Holy Fathers and of Holy Scripture, nevertheless I draw back in 
hesitation and am rapidly overwhelmed by the thick clouds of my 
thoughts. My mind is not keen enough to consider and rightly 
investigate the profundity of the present problem. For when I heard 
that “Who madest the world out of formless matter”, I used to 
647A think nothing else but that the world, (both) visible and invisible, 
having been made out of the formless matter which God created out 
of nothing at all as a kind of augury of His action is being described, 
and that there was (a time) when the totality of the whold world was 
not, and therefore in the beginnings of its creation it proceeded out 
of nothing at all into formless matter, and thereafter, through the 

BOOK III 

267 

genera and species and the individuals as well, it arrived at a certain 
perfection known to its Creator alone ; and that this (process) was 
not distributed over periods of time is shown by the Holy Father 
Augustine in his Hexemeron. For it is not in time that formlessness 
precedes form but in the natural order in which the cause comes 
before the effect. For sound and speech issue together from the 
mouth of the speaker, and yet sound [comes] before speech, 
[though] not by time but by cause. For speech is made of sound and 
certainly not sound of speech. Thus the formlessness and the 647B 
formation of all things and their perfection, distinguished by a kind 
of natural precedence and sequence but not by temporal intervals, 
were once for all and at the same time brought forth by the 
Creator’s will out of nothing into essence. And this was my belief 
and my understanding, such as it was. 

But now I hear differently from you things which disturb me 
greatly and turn me relucantly from what I hitherto firmly held (to 
be true) as I thought. For the present line of reasoning, as I think, 
seeks to teach nothing else but that those things which I used to 
think were made from nothing and were certainly not eternal — for 
there was (a time) when they were not, as I think, and thus they had 
received what they had not (previously) possessed — are at the same 
time eternal and made, which I think to be surely a contradiction, 
and reasonably so; for [these] seem to be opposed to each other: 647C 
eternal things to things that are made, and things that are made to 
eternal things. For things that are eternal never begin to be, never 
cease to subsist, and there was not a time when they were not, 
because they always were ; but things which are made have received 
a beginning of their making — for they began to be — because there 
was a time when they were not, and they will lose the being which 
they began to possess. For, if right reason be consulted, nothing 
which begins [in time] to be is permitted to endure for ever, but it is 
necessary that it should towards the end in which that which has 
a beginning of its being in time is compelled to perish. [And let no one 
suppose that I mean to teach the return [to nothing] of the things 
which in time come into being in the world from matter through 
generation — for this would be the utmost evil — but I mean their 
dissolution into those things out of which they were composed and 
in which they subsist. For even the bodies of men and of the other 647D 
animals when they suffer dissolution are said to perish, although 
they are not reduced to nothing but return to the universal elements 
from which all things are made.] And this is understood generally of 

268 

PERIPHYSEON 

the totality of this visible world, and not unreasonably. For since it 
received a beginning of its being, so it will inevitably receive an end 
of its essence. For as there was (a time) when it was not, so there will 
648A be (a time) when it will not be, as the Psalmist testifies when he cries 
to the eternal Creator of things, “The heavens are the works of Thy 
hands. They shall perish but Thou shalt endure. And they shall all 
grow old as a garment and Thou shalt change them as a covering 
and they shall be changed, but Thou Thyself art the same and Thy 
years shall not fail.” Also the Creator of all things Himself says, 
“Heaven and earth shall pass away but My words shall not pass 
away.” But if that part of the world which is greatest in extent [and] 
most beautiful [by reason of the sublimity of the stars, most pure by 
reason of the subtlety of its nature, sown with the fixed stars, 
harmonious by reason of the course <of the planets> , ever filled 
with light] were to perish, according to Scripture, is it to be 
supposed that the parts that are within it and that are much inferior 
to it will remain? For when the better things pass away it is 
impossible that the inferior things should not pass away, and when 
that which contains is removed right reason does not allow that that 
648B which is contained should endure. 

But these things we say with reference to the difference of the 
things that are eternal from the things that are made. For there is no 
small difference between those things which neither begin nor cease 
to be and those which begin to be and cannot endure for ever. 
Therefore it is not without reason that the perspicacity of those 
whose (capacity for) understanding such things is limited is repelled 
when they are told that eternal things are made and made things 
eternal. For I should not find it easy to believe that you would agree 
with those who try to convince themselves that many of the things 
that are made, nay, almost all of them, will endure for ever and thus 
are destined to be eternal. For instance, this universe which consists 
of heaven and earth, assembled out of the four elements into the 
form of a perfect sphere and called by the name of “world” is both 
made out of nothing, as they say, and shall endure eternally, with 
648C the exception of some of its lesser parts, namely, the corruptible 
bodies, which are subject to (the process of) coming into being and 
passing away, which they cannot deny will perish, whereas the 
heaven with its stars shall be for ever, whether it continues to 
revolve or ceases from movement. [For] in this their opinion varies, 
some affirming that there will be a coming to rest of the things that 
are in motion, others that the natural motion of the elements will 

BOOK III 

not ever cease ; the former abide by the text, “All things shall be in 
quietness”, which they apply to the coming to rest of mutable things, 
the latter, “Who shall cause the concert of heaven to sleep?” which 
they take to refer to the eternal motion of mutable things. For how 
can there be celestial harmony without motion of the ethereal sphere 
and all the stars, when music is ever in motion as geometry is ever at 
rest? Moreover, they unhesitantly declare that the earthly mass will 648D 
always possess its proper quantity, following the text, “A generation 
comes, a generation goes, but earth remains for ever”, with the 
exception that its outward appearance is everywhere in flux so that 
it may become more beautiful than it now is, and it is renewed as 
though by a new equalization of its parts, not so that that which 
now is shall perish but so that its quality and equality remains, 
changed into something better; and this they think should be 
applied to the heaven also, that is, that its beauty, which is now 
apparent to the bodily senses, shall at the end of the world be 649A 
concentrated without any loss of its global shape or ornament of 
! stars, since it is written, according to them, “There shall be a new 
heaven and a new earth. [For they consider the passing away of the 
heavens to refer not to the upper parts of the world but to the 
expanses of this air (which lie) beneath the moon, so that, as in the 
Flood they were whelmed in water, so in the end of the world they 
will be changed into flame.] But that the generation of animals and 
fruits and herbs, and the increase and decrease of all things that are 
contained within the orbit of the moon, shall abandon their 
variableness they not only do not deny, but even affirm. Moreover, 
they think that the expanses of air and of ether are destined to be 
allotted, (those) of the ether to the eternal possession of the blessed 
angels and men who resemble them, (those) of the lower air, which 
is diffused all about the earth, to the eternal prison-house and the 649B 
eternal flames whose burning is the local and visible torment of the 
devil and his members, that is, the apostate angels, and the impious 
men who resemble them, and thus, since they hold that every 
creature in place and time both is and shall be, they do not doubt 
but that places and times, that is, the expanses of the world and its 
motion which is marked by intervals and delays, shall endure for 
ever. 

By these and similar false opinions they attempt to establish 
that the things that were not [and began to be] can [be said] to be at 
the same time both made and eternal, because they shall always 
abide in the same state in which they were created in time ; and they 

270 

649C 

10 

649D 

650A 

650B 
A Prayer 

PERIPHYSEON 

think that those things that are not without a beginning are without 
an end, so that they are both made, because they began to be, and 
eternal, because they shall not cease to subsist. But neither would I 
suppose that you assent to such opinions, which right reason 
ridicules, nor that such was the eternity, or, to speak more truly, 
semi-eternity, which you intended by the arguments you have just 
put forward nor that it is thus that you thought that (things) are 
both made and eternal, but I perceive that it was from a more 
profound observation of natures that you penetrate beyond human 
opinions by some means unknown to us to the depths of the Divine 
Mysteries [by following in the footsteps of the Fathers who have 
examined these things more profoundly. 

For they say that the nature of this world shall remain for ever 
because it is incorporeal and incorruptible, whereas the other things 
of which it consists shall pass away, that is, everything in it which is 
composite ; and because there is in it no <sensible> body which is 
not composite, and every composite shall be resolved into those 
things from which it is composed, therefore the whole of this visible, 
corporeal, composite world shall be resolved, and only its simple 
nature remain]. 

N. I cannot deny that I was at one time deceived by the false 
reasonings of human opinions that are far from the truth, for 
deceived I was. For whilst still uninstructed I gave assent to all 
these, or almost all, seduced by some likeness of the truth, and by 
the carnal senses, as happens to many. But now, following in the 
footsteps of the Holy Fathers, and recalled from my errors and 
those of others by the ray of the Divine Light, and brought into the 
right way, I retract a little. For the Divine Clemency does not permit 
those who seek the truth in devotion and humility to stray or to fall 
into the pits of false opinions and therein perish. For there is no 
worse death than ignorance of the truth, no deeper pitfall than 
taking the false for the true, which is the property of error. For from 
these the basest and foulest monsters are wont to be fabricated in 
human thoughts, and when the carnal soul loves and pursues these 
as though they were real, turning its back upon the true Light and 
desiring but unable to embrace fleeting shadows, it is wont to plunge 
into the depth of misery. Therefore this should be our constant 
prayer : 

O God, our salvation and redemption. Who bestowed nature, 
grant also graces : Send forth Thy light upon those who grope in the 
shadows of ignorance in search of Thee ; Recall us from our errors ; 

BOOK III 

271 

Stretch forth Thy right hand to us feeble ones who without Thee 
cannot reach Thee ; Show Thyself to those who seek for nothing but 
Thee ; Shatter the clouds of empty phantasies which prevent the 
glance of the mind from beholding Thee in the way in which Thou 
grantest Thine invisible self to be seen by those who desire to look 
upon Thy face, their resting place, their end beyond which they seek 
for nothing for there is nothing beyond, their superessential Supreme 
Good. 

But go on to the rest of your opinion. 

A. What is left but to declare what particularly worries me, 
namely, how all things are eternal and made, how those things 
which are without beginning and end are limited by beginning and 650C 
end. For these are in mutual conflict, and how they should be 
reconciled I do not know if you do not tell me ; for I thought that 
only God is dvapxoc;, that is, without beginning — for He is the 
Beginning and the End which arises out of no beginning and 
concludes in no end — whereas all other things begin and tend each 
to its proper end, and therefore are not eternal but made. And 
incomparably more profound and wonderful than all this seems to 
me the assertion you made on the authority of St. Dionysius the 
Areopagite, namely, that God Himself is both the Maker of all 
things and is made in all things ; for this was never heard or known 
before either by me or by many, or by nearly all. For if this is the 650D 
case, who will not at once break out and exclaim in these words : 

God is all things and all things God? But this will be considered 
monstrous even by those who are regarded as wise when the 
manifold variety of things visible and invisible is considered — for 
God is one — , and unless you support these arguments by illustra¬ 
tions from things which the mind can comprehend there is no 
alternative but either to pass over subjects which have been merely 651 A 
raised without being discussed — which could not be done without 
my mind regretting it; for those who, being plunged in thickest 
darkness, hope for the rising of the light to come are not completely 
overwhelmed by sorrow ; but if the light they hope for is taken away 
from them they will sit not only in darkness but in great torment, for 
the good which they had hoped for is taken away from them — , or 
everything that you have said about these things is to be judged by 
those of limited understanding to be altogether false, and for them 
to relapse into their former opinions, which they were already 
abandoning only with reluctance, as being true, and rejecting these. 

272 

PERIPHYSEON 

Definition of 
arithmetic 

651B 

651C 

651D 

Therefore the path of reasoning must start from illustrations drawn 
from nature, which no one [unless] blinded by excessive folly rejects. 

N. Are you versed in the art of arithmetic? 

A. Unless I deceive myself I am. For I have learnt it from my 
infancy. 

N. Define [it], then, clearly and briefly. 

A. Arithmetic is the science of numbers not of those which we 
count, but of those by which we count. 

N. Cautiously and observantly have you defined arithmetic. 
For if you simply defined arithmetic as the science of numbers you 
would include all numbers in general, and so the definition would 
not stand. For that art does not treat of every sort of numbers but 
only takes into account those numbers which it knows to be by 
science alone and by intellect, and by which the other sorts of 
numbers are counted. For the wise say that it is not the numbers of 
animals, fruits, crops, and other bodies or things that belong to the 
science of arithmetic, but they assign to arithmetic only the intel¬ 
lectual, invisible, incorporeal (numbers) which are constituted in the 
science alone but reside in no subject [substantially < except 
themselves> ]. 

[For they are not perceived in the science or by the intellect or 
by the reason or by the memory or by the senses or by diagrams so 
as themselves to be one with those things in association with which 
they are seen. For they possess their proper substance (namely) 
themselves. For if they were of the same substance, the science and 
the intellect and the reason would not be judging by them but about 
them. But the art and the model cannot be the same thing. This can 
only be said of God the Word, Who is both the model and the art of 
His Father. 

Observantly, then, as I said, did you add : “Not of those which 
we count but of those by which we count.” For in no corporeal or 
incorporeal subject do we see them, but beyond every subject by the 
intellect alone in wisdom and science are they discerned, separated 
by the excellence of their divine nature from all the things which are 
counted by them. 

A. This I have often thought about, and have come to see it 
clearly, as I think. 

N. Is that art natural [then] ? 

BOOK III 

273 

A. Yes, [and] nothing could be more natural. For not only 
does it subsist as the immutable basis and primordial cause and 652A 
principle of the other three branches of mathematics, namely, 
geometry, music, astronomy, but also the infinite multitude of all 
things visible and invisible assumes its substance according to the 
rules of numbers which arithmetic contemplates, as the supreme 
philosopher Pythagoras, the first inventor of this art, testifies when 
he gives good reason for asserting that the intellectual numbers are 
the substances of all things visible and invisible. Nor does Holy 
Scripture deny this, for it says that all things have been made in 
measure and number and weight. 

N. If then you seek for natural examples of the aforementioned 
art, and indeed of the numbers which it contains, look carefully at 
its nature and its rules so that under the guidance of God you may 
arrive at the knowledge of those things which seem to you to be in 
conflict among themselves and to be irreconcilable with one another. 

A. I freely accept the examples of arithmetic. For it neither 
deceives nor is deceived. For although the less intelligent are often 
deceived in it, that is to be judged not as a fault in the art but as the ^^28 
disposition of those who treat it incautiously. 

N. You are not, then, in doubt, as I think, that of the numbers 
of which arithmetic is the science the Monad is the beginning? 

A. No one who doubts that is an arithmetician. For the 
Monad, [that is] unity, is the beginning and the middle and the end 
of all numbers, and the whole and the part and every quantity of all 
terms. 

N. Tell me, then : Are all numbers, which the reason can 
multiply at will, causally and eternally in the Monad? 

A. True reason does not teach otherwise. For they are in it 
causally because it subsists as the beginning of all numbers, and in it 
all are one and simply indivisible, that is, in a universal and multiple 
mode, in the reason only, but not in act and operation ; nor is the 
one an aggregate of many, but one deriving from its singularity 
(which is) both simple and multiple, so that both all numbers are in 
it all at once and simple, as in their cause, and it itself is understood 
(to be) in them all multiplied by an ineffable distribution, as their 
substance. For it is the cause and the substance of all numbers, and 
while it does not relinquish the stability of its own nature it pours 
itself out as multiplicity into all ; and they subsist in it eternally 
because their beginning in it is not in time. For there was not (ever) 

274 

PERIPHYSEON 

652D 

653A 

653B 

That the 
Movdc; is not 
only the be¬ 
ginning but 
the middle 
and end of 
653C 
all numbers 

unity without the manifold reasons of all the numbers. For who 
among men of clear intelligence would say that the Monad had had 
a beginning when he knows that it extends into infinity? For how 
can an infinite progression arise out of a finite beginning? For the 
infinite proceeds from the infinite [but nothing infinite from the 
finite]. 

[And if anyone should say, How can this hold good when even 
among the numbers themselves we see many infinites beginning 
from finites, for from the dyad, which is a finite number, all doubles 
derive and extend to infinity; similarly from the finite triad all 
triples take their origin and know no end to their multiplication, 
and, to speak briefly, there is no number, limited by its factors or 
merely by its units, from which some multiple does not flow forth to 
infinity; he must be answered as follows : All these numbers, finite 
in their parts, from which the multiples proceed into infinity are 
infinite in that Monad where all are one. Therefore he will either be 
denying that all numbers are in the Monad and will be affirming 
that they are finite in their multiplication from it, or if in the teeth of 
true reason he will not be able to affirm this he will be forced to 
profess that all numbers finite in their parts subsist as infinite 
<and> uniformly eternal in the Monad. For it is not where the 
source appears that the water begins to be, but it flows from 
somewhere much further afield through channels that are hidden 
and indefinable to the senses before it appears at the source, and 
therefore the place where it first rises to view is wrongly called the 
source, since for a long time previously it existed in hidden places of 
earth or ocean where it concealed itself from sight, for it is called 
“latex” from the fact that it is latent in the veins of the earth. In the 
same way too the numbers, whose multiplication or other propor¬ 
tions flow into infinity, take their origin not from these finite 
numbers which are the first to appear to the mind which contem¬ 
plates them, but from those eternal and infinite reasons in which 
they causally subsist. But they are in the Monad; in the Monad, 
therefore, they are infinite, and from it every infinite progression of 
numbers proceeds and in it ends.] 

And to use a stronger argument, consider carefully those who 
affirm that unity never had a beginning. If unity, which the Greeks 
call the Monad, is the beginning and middle and end of all numbers 
— for from it they proceed, through it they move, towards it they 
tend, in it they come to an end, and none of the wise doubt that this 
is so — , it will not be one unity from which the numbers proceed 

BOOK III 

275 

and through which they move and another towards which they tend 
and in which they come to an end, but one and the same that is both 
beginning and middle and end. Therefore, numbers which proceed 
from their beginning proceed from nowhere else than their end — 
for their beginning is not one thing and their end another, but they 
are one and the same unity — , and therefore it must be concluded 
that if they extend to an infinite end their extension must begin from 
an infinite beginning. But the infinite end of all numbers is unity; 
therefore the infinite beginning of all numbers is the same, and if all 
numbers eternally and immutably subsist in their beginning, they 
must necessarily subsist eternally and immutably in their end, and as 
there will be no end without things coming to an end in it, so there 
was no beginning without things beginning to proceed from it by act 
and operation of the intelligence. Therefore all numbers subsist 
eternally in the Monad and while they flow forth from it they do not 
cease to be in it since they cannot abandon their natural state. For 
whether by multiplication or by division, they proceed from it and 
return to it in accordance with the rules of the art which considers 
their reasons. But if this is so, no one who is not shameless will deny 
that the numbers eternal in unity subsist in their reasons, and 
anyone who considers carefully will not doubt but that the reasons 
themselves are eternal. 

N. I see that you are not ignorant of the art of arithmetic. For 
what has been said by you so far true reason proclaims and confirms 
that it is thus and not otherwise. But in order to establish on a firmer 
basis your doctrine of the eternity of the numbers in the Monad, 
give a brief and clear account of their reasons, which you assert to 
be eternal and immutable. 

A. The first progression of the numbers is from the Monad; 
and the first multiplication is Audq, that is, the number two, the 
second Tpictc;, the number three, the third thereafter the number 
four, then all the terms, each established in its own place. And the 
number two is the source of all parity which falls within (the view of) 
the intellect, but the number three is the source of all disparity. And 
from these, I mean from parity and disparity, all kinds of numbers 
are generated whether simple or composite. [The simple are the even 
and the odd, the composite those that are made up of both these, the 
evenly even, the evenly odd, the oddly even.] 

Do you see how impossible it is that this order of the 
progression of the numbers could be otherwise, or could be changed 
into a different mode? For no other number constituted in the 

653D 

654A 

654B 

276 

PERIPHYSEON 

natural order occupies the place of the first procession from unity 
except the number two, nor the second place except the number 
three, nor the third except the number four, and every number 
654C occupies its natural place which no number save that whose place it 
is is permitted to take. But in unity itself all numbers are at once 
together and no number precedes or follows another since all are 
one. And yet they would not immutably possess their natural order 
by means of which they are contained in their multiplications if their 
own eternally immutable cause in unity did not precede. Similarly in 
the case of doubles, which have the number two at their head, and of 
triples which the number three precedes, and of quadruples which 
start from the number four, and of all kinds of multiples, it must be 
understood that each of those starts from its proper beginning and 
tends towards infinity. But the double or the triple or the quadruple 
654D proportion or any other such proportion is not discerned specifically 
and distinctly in the unity, for in it all multiples are at once and are 
one, and are one multiple and simple : simple by nature, multiple by 
the reasons by which they receive their immutable order in their 
multiplications. What shall I say of the marvellous and divine 
constitution and proportion of the superparticulars and the super- 
partients and of the multiple superparticulars and multiple super- 
partients, which the species receive individually from the unity? 
655A What of the proportionalities which we contemplate in the propor¬ 
tions and differences of the terms, in which the ineffable and divine 
power is so constant that no one who penetrates the secrets of 
wisdom contends that they are not eternal? For if that is a right 
definition of the true which says, the true is that which abides for 
ever, and if what abides for ever is eternal, the reasons of the 
numbers are true because they abide for ever and immutably, and 
therefore they are eternal ; and if anyone diligently wishes to know 
of these things let him carefully read the books of the great Boethius 
on Mathematics. 

Again, on the subject of the eternity of the numbers in their 
beginning, that is, the Monad, here is a very brief argument : If unity 
655B is a unity of numbers, there never was unity without the numbers of 
which it is the unity. Also, if the numbers flow forth from the 
Monad as from some inexhaustible source and, however much they 
are multiplied, come to an end in it, they would surely not be 
flowing forth from it if before their flowing forth they had not 
subsisted in it as in their cause ; nor would they seek their end in it if 
they did not know by their natural motion that there were not 

BOOK III 

277 

eternally abiding in it their causes towards which they never desist 
from returning through the same stages by which they had flowed 
forth from it by the rules of analysis by which every inequality is 
recalled to equality. Now the rules of analysis will be found at the 
beginning of the second treatise on Mathematics of the great 
Boethius by any student who pursues the marvellous investigation 
of such natures. But if someone should say that both the unity of the 
numbers and the numbers themselves are inseparably one, since 655C 
they are suitably reckoned among the things that are inseparably 
one, this should not be denied, indeed, it should be admitted. But it 
should not therefore be believed or understood that they are eternal 
and without beginning. For there are many things which begin 
simultaneously to be and yet are not for that reason bound to 
subsist for ever < simultaneously > . For both matter and form, 
and voice and word begin simultaneously (and) end simultaneously, 
and yet they are not eternal. For if they were eternal they would 
neither begin nor cease to be, and much else of that sort. 

Let our reply be : The number six is not excluded from the unity 
and multiplication of the other numbers, especially as, alone among 
the cardinals, that is, among the first series of numbers from one to 
ten, it is perfect. For it is perfected by its parts, namely, the sixth and 
the third and the half. For the sixth is one, the third is two, the half 
is three, and these added together perfect the quantity of six. For 
one and two and three make six. 

There is another reason which in a wonderful way demonstrates 
the perfection of the number six according to which it perfects by its 
parts, when set in order, the first series of numbers. Its sixth part, 
one, occupies the first place of the numbers, its third, two, the 
second, its half, three, the third, its half and its sixth, which are three 
and one, the fourth, its half and its third, which are three and two, 
the fifth, all its parts added together, which are one two three, 656A 
complete the sixth, itself that is, its whole and its sixth, that is six 
and one, the seventh, its whole with its third, that is six and two, the 
eighth, its whole with its half the ninth, six and three, to which if one 
be added, in which the end of all numbers is constituted, the 
quantity of ten will be perfected. If, therefore, that perfect number, 
namely the number six, is constituted in the unity of the numbers, let 
him take care who says that it is not eternal, for in it the Creator of 
all things perfected His works. But here it must be noted that the 
number six is not perfect because in it God concluded all things 
which He wished to create, but He created His works in it because 

Concerning 
the eternity 
of numbers 

655D 

278 

PERIPHYSEON 

656B by the perfection of the number the perfection of His works should 
be revealed. Is it, then, credible or likely that this most mighty and 
divine exemplar in which God made His works had a temporal 
beginning, when in it not only the things which are in times but also 
the times themselves and the things which subsist beyond the times 
were constituted by the Creator of all things ? Therefore no man of 
sound wisdom would have any doubt about the eternity of the 
numbers if he made use of the argument concerning the number six 
only, for what is understood about its eternity must similarly be 
understood of the perenniality of the others. For not of the number 
six alone but generally of the totality of all the numbers was it said, 
God made “all things in measure and number and weight”. But if 
places and times are counted among all the things which God made, 
656C the intellectual numbers subsisting in their science alone necessarily 
precede the places and times in the perpetuity of their nature and are 
reckoned among the things which are at the same time eternal and 
made; they are eternal in the Monad, but made in their multi¬ 
plications. 

N. Of the eternity of the numbers in the Monad enough has 
been said. But it is necessary to investigate how they are made and 
where and from what. For by arguing from them we are trying to 
establish that all things that are from God are at the same time 
eternal and made. 

A. The eternity of the Monad and of all numbers in it I have 
expounded to the best of my ability. But how the intellectual 
numbers after which all things that can be numbered are numbered 
are made and where and from what is for you to explain. But I say 
656D this in the knowledge that it is easier for their eternity than for their 
being made to be able to be sought and found and demonstrated. 

N. You have a high opinion of me, as I see, since you assign to 
me the things that are harder to seek and find and demonstrate. 
However, it is my part to seek, but to find is His alone Who 
illumines the hidden places of darkness. His also is the demonstration 
because He [alone] can open the sense of those who seek and the 
intellect. For of what use is a demonstration from without if there is 
657A not illumination within? Therefore what was said by you just now, 
“eternal in the Monad but made in their multiplications”, provides, 

I think, a foretaste of this question, and if you understood what you 
said it is superfluous for you to seek what you understand, but if 
not, it must be sought for. 

BOOK III 

279 

A. I fully see that the numbers cannot be made save in their 
multiplications. For in the Monad they are eternal. But how or 
where or from what they become I do not yet see, and it is for that 
reason that I ask you to reveal the knowledge of these things. 

N. That all numbers are for ever in the Monad causally, that is, 
potentially, we do not doubt. 

A. To doubt of this [is] the mark of the less intelligent. 

N. But you understand, as I think, that the Monad subsists 
eternally in wisdom and knowledge. 

A. If I think otherwise I am a stranger to true knowledge of the 
Monad itself. 

N. You think, as I believe, that the numbers that are constituted 
potentially in the Monad are not other than those that flow forth 
actually into the genera and species of the intelligible numbers, but 
the same. 

A. They are not other but the same, though in a different 
mode. 

N. Tell me, pray, how in a different mode? 

A. They are in the Monad potentially, but in the genera and 
forms actually. 

N. You have answered correctly. Do you then see that the 
same numbers are eternal there where they are potentially in their 
cause, that is, in the Monad, but where they are understood to be 
actually, there they are made? 

A. You go too quickly. The path of reasoning must be trodden 
step by step lest we arrive at conclusions that are hasty and rash. 
Thus it must first be asked what is the “force” and what is the 
“power” of the numbers in the Monad and what is their “act” and 
what their “operation” in the genera and forms. 

N. “Force” is, as I think, the substantial virtue by which they 
subsist eternally and immutably in the Monad, while “power” is the 
possibility, innate in them, by which they are able to be multiplied 
and become manifest to intellects by certain terminological distinc¬ 
tions, quantitative diversities, differential intervals, (and) the 
wonderful equality and indissoluble harmony of proportion and 
proportionalities. “Act” is the motion of the mind in contemplating in 
itself and in them the multiplication of the numbers as they proceed 
from the Monad into the diverse genera and different species before 

657B 

657C 

Concerning 
the force and 
power of 
numbers 

Concerning 
the act and 
operation of 
numbers 

280 

PERIPHYSEON 

657D they reach the phantasies of cogitation, that is, in considering with 
the eye of the intellect beyond all quantity and quality and places 
and times the numbers themselves <in> the simplicity of their 
incorporeal nature which lacks all imagery; and, to give a brief 
definition : Act is the motion of the mind in regarding without any 
imagery the numbers under the most pure aspect of their nature. 
“Operation”, on the other hand, is the motion of the same mind when 
658A the pure numbers which it considers in itself it consigns to the 
memory, embodied as it were by certain corporeal phantasies, and 
sets them in order there and deals with their reasons more easily; 
and conveys them, made significant to the corporeal senses, to the 
knowledge of others. [And do not think that I mean that the 
numbers themselves are multiplied [and created] by the intellect or 
reason and not by the Creator and Multiplicator and Ordainer of all 
things Himself. For if the numbers suffered their first multiplication 
at the hands of any created intellect there would not be in them the 
immutability and harmony of their reasons. Therefore, it is not to be 
thought that the intellect creates the intellectual numbers because it 
contemplates them in itself — it is, however, to be believed that by 
the one Creator of all things they were made in the intellects whether 
human or angelic, and it is by Him also that they are eternally 
established in the Monad — but they descend through the intellects 
658B into knowledge.] For just as, to give an illustration, some project or 
some art in nature, while it is contained within the most hidden 
recesses of the intellectual nature, is all together and a simple unity 
without parts or divisions, without quantity or quality, without 
place or time, and altogether free from all accidents and barely 
known to the intellect alone — for the intellect is not the maker but 
the discoverer of the arts of nature, [though] it does not discover 
them outside itself but within itself — but when that art begins to 
descend by an intelligible progress into the reason from its secret 
places in which it is all one in the mind in which it is, soon it 
gradually begins to reveal by evident divisions and differences its 
hidden structure, though as yet in a most pure form free from all 
658C imagery — and this initial process of the art out of that science in 
which it originally subsists is directed by the act of the intellect itself 
through the intellect to the reason: for everything which comes 
forth from the hidden places of nature into the reason comes 
through the action of the intellect — , but then again, by a second 
descent, as it were, the same art, descending from the reason into the 
memory, gradually declares itself me re openly in phantasies (and), 
as it were, more distinct in certain forms ; but in a third descent it is 

BOOK III 

281 

poured down upon the corporeal senses, where by sensible signs it 
exhibits its powers by means of genera and species and all its 
divisions and subdivisions and particulars — so the intellectual 
numbers stream down from the Monad so that they somehow may 
shine forth in the mind, then by flowing forth from the mind into the 
reason they reveal themselves more openly ; next, descending from 
the reason into the memory they receive from the nature of the 
memory itself phantasmal appearances in which they clearly reveal 
the powers of their multiple forms to those that inquire into them, 
[then into the senses, lastly into figures]. 

Do you then see the three things which you had searched for, 
the How, and the Where, and the Whence? From the Monad. 
Where? In the intellect. How? By different stages : first they descend 
from themselves into the intellect ; from the intellect into the reason ; 
from the reason into the memory; from the memory into the 
corporeal senses ; and, if it is required for the benefit of students, by 
a final stage from the senses into visible figures. 

A. Plainly and most clearly do I see. 

N. So you are not unaware, as I think, that the numbers are 
both eternal and made: eternal in the Monad, but made in the 
multiplicity [in their descents], first, that is, they are made in the 
intellect of those who contemplate them in themselves, a mode of 
making which is far removed from the senses. For they are said to be 
made in the knowledge of those who understand them. For as long 
as they are in the Monad they surpass by their ineffable unity all 
understanding, except for that alone [namely the Divine Under¬ 
standing] /row which nothing is anywhere hid [for He is the under¬ 
standing of all things, indeed is all things]. For I am not now 
concerned with that Monad which is the sole Cause and Creator of 
all things visible and invisible but with that created Monad in which 
all the numbers subsist causally, uniformly, reasonably, and for 
ever, and from which they break forth into multiplicity. But 
secondly they are made in the reason, in which they are said to be 
made because in it they manifest themselves more clearly, though 
still through themselves [without any colour of phantasy]. Thereafter 
they are made in the memory and senses in certain phantasies. 

Now these phantasies are acquired either from the nature of the 
memory [that is, from that part of the soul which is given over to the 
forming of images] or extrinsically from the surface of bodies by 
means of the external senses. But those which come extrinsically are 

658D 

Concerning 
the divers 
degrees of 
659A 

the descent 
of the num¬ 
bers 

659B 

Concerning 
phantasy and 
phantasm 

282 

PERIPHYSEON 

phantasies properly so called, while those from the memory (are) 
659C phantasms. For instance, the image which through my sense of sight 
I take from a certain body [or colour or space] seen by me and 
implanted in my memory is a phantasy, while that image which I 
fashion from something never seen by me is a phantasm, and this is 
not unjustly called a false image because that which I regard either 
altogether does not exist or, if it does, is not as I imagine it. 

And here it must be noted, if we follow Saint Augustine’s 
teaching, that the phantasm comes from no other source but from 
the phantasy. For it is, as he says, an image of an image, that is, an 
image which is born of another image. [For instance, I have a 
phantasy of the sun which rises every day, which I have received 
from its discshaped appearance and I am repeatedly fashioning in 
my memory thousands of solar images in the likeness of that 
phantasy, greater or smaller according to the decision of my 
659D thought. And therefore they are false for they imitate nothing that is 
true.] For the Greeks have a different understanding of what a 
phantasm is. For they say that the phantasm is the knowledge which 
the mind has of sensible natures which it has acquired through the 
phantasies of them. 

A. You say, then, unless I am mistaken, that the numbers that 
are eternally established in the Monad are made in two ways. For 
either they are made simply by the intellect alone in the mind and in 
660A the reason, where they appear purely through themselves without 
any imagery ; or in the memory and corporeal sense, where they are 
embodied in certain images and made, as it were, out of and in a 
kind of matter. 

N. Thus it is. But in adding, “out of and in a kind of matter’’, 
you have not seen clearly enough. For the phantasies which they 
receive from the memory in the memory or from the sensible in the 
sense so as to be able to appear in them are not made from some 
matter but, incorporeal, are born of incorporeals. For they are not 
made from the matter of corporeal things but from the appearance 
which without doubt is incorporeal and from colours which are 
understood to be not bodies but about bodies ; and therefore 
nothing is more suitable or natural than that the intellectual 
660B numbers should reveal their virtue in things that are incorporeal and 
derive from what is incorporeal and by some ineffable means should 
be made and proceed into sensible generation. And taking into 
account the reasons of things, one could safely say that those 
phantasies in which the numbers reveal themselves to the inner eyes 

BOOK III 

283 

of those who number issue from no other source but from the 
intelligible numbers themselves. For if the numerousness of the 
sensible forms in which matter is contained so as to be perceptible to 
the senses — for through itself it is invisible and formless — takes its 
origin from the intellectual numbers, and from it, that is, from the 
numerousness of the forms, through the corporeal senses, the 
memory takes on form from the phantasies, there is nothing for it 
but that we should understand that there are two ways in which the 660C 
intellectual numbers flow forth from the Monad and after being 
made in the memory are multiplied, divided, compared, brought 
together, united by the keenness of the mind. For either, as we said 
above, they descend through the intellect into the reason and from 
the reason into the memory ; or they flow together through the 
forms of visible things into the corporeal senses and again from 
them into the same memory, in which they are made by receiving 
shapes of phantasy and become accessible to the inner senses, and 
therefore by whichever way the numbers become perceptible, they 
perceive the occasion for their appearance nowhere but in them¬ 
selves. So they are both eternal in the Monad and made by 
themselves in whatsoever part of nature they have appeared, that is, 
whether in the intellect or in the reason without any imagery, or are, 
as it were, made by making out of themselves certain phantasies in 
which they can appear in the memory formed from the forms of 
sensible things. 

A. Concerning numbers enough has been said. For by these 660D 
arguments it is established and clearly understood wherein they are 
eternal and wherein and how they become made, so that not without 
reason we see that they are both eternal and made. But I am eager 
to learn where this is leading. For this has been introduced not for 
its own sake but for the sake of teaching something else. 

N. I am surprised that you have so quickly forgotten your own 661A 
words. Did you not just now ask me for some examples from nature 
to bring you to an understanding of the things we were discussing, 
that is, how all things which are from God are at the same time both 
eternal and made, and especially how God Himself is both the 
Maker of all things and is made in all things? For this is the main 
point of all our present reasoning. 

A. Now I recall them. For baffled by the difficulty of the 
preceding discussion and by a theory of things that was hitherto 
unknown to me, I fell into an abstraction, as happens to many 
people. For who among the uninstructed and those who are not set 
upon the path to the highest peak of wisdom, in pondering such 

284 

PERIPHYSEON 

things does not suffer an eclipse of his mental faculties when he 
hears of the eternal creation of the numbers by the Creator of all 
things in the Monad; and of their procession into the genera and 
species in which they are said to be made because in them they 
become understood by intellects; then of their second birth, so to 
661B speak, in the rational nature, for in it they show forth their powers 
more clearly; then, by taking to themselves phantasies, nay, rather, 
theophanies [for it is not to be doubted that everything that is 
formed from nature in the memory takes its occasions from God], 
they are somehow made in the memory and the senses, made not 
from any matter but from themselves? [But now as a sleeper 
awakened I recall my words, and looking with a clearer eye upon the 
ray of the inner light I begin to understand what you have said. For 
you are trying, as I think, to teach that all numbers, issuing from the 
Monad as from a source, flow forth like two rivers rising from a 
single spring and separated into two channels, of which one 
661C descends through the inner channels of nature, that is, through the 
intellect and the reason, but the other through the outward forms of 
visible things and the senses, until they flow together into the 
memory in which they are formed as many.] 

13 But how things that are incorporeal and remote by reason of 
the excessive excellence of their nature not only from the senses but 
even from the memory and from all imagery can become manifest in 
the memory or the senses, that is, in images and in visible figures as 
if they were kinds of bodies I do not sufficiently see. 

N. [From this one example I think that you can understand the 
whole. For it is just as you have said: the numbers flow from the 
Monad and come together in the memory. But as to your not seeing 
sufficiently, here is my opinion :] The nature of spiritual things does 
not fall within the contemplations of the mind in such a way that we 
661D may render an itemized account of the things which are done from it 
or in it or through it. For many things are wont to appear in it which 
occur in a marvellous and ineffable way not according to its known 
[or unknown] laws but beyond all law by the Divine Will which is 
limited by no law; for it is the Law of laws and the Reason of 
reasons. For who can give an account, if he were asked, of how the 
662A soul of Moses was visibly manifest when the Transfiguration of the 
Lord took place? For no attention must be paid to those who think 
that he was resurrected in the body for the occasion so that with 
Elias he made his visible appearance on the mountain not through 
himself but in his body, and then went back again to the sepulchre. 

BOOK III 

285 

Who, then, is going to say how an incorporeal and invisible soul was 
visibly and, as it were, corporeally seen when it did not appear in its 
body or in any sensible matter [or by being transported from 
somewhere else]? But by some ineffable power known only to God 
invisible spirit is made through itself as though visible. What are you 
going to say of the soul of the prophet Samuel? How did it speak 
visibly to Saul ? For he too, like the Apostles, saw such things when 662B 
he was caught up in the Spirit. For no credence must be given to 
those who say that it was not himself, but some figment in his 
similitude, that appeared, deeming it unworthy that a holy soul 
should be summoned from the lower regions by the spells of a 
pythoness, not perceiving that the Divine Providence administers 
things through impure no less than through pure spirits. But it is 
agreed that the soul of Samuel through itself as though visibly, not 
in the body nor under some sort of similitude, prophesied to the 
king who consulted it. And if perchance this should seem incredible 
or doubtful to anyone, let him read St. Augustine in the Book on the 
Care of the Dead. 

But let us return to the most obvious examples from nature, 
about which none of those who practise philosophy rightly is in 
disagreement. 

A. Tell me, pray, what those are. 662C 

N. The wise say that the shapes of things are incorporeal. And 14 
they give the same opinion about the colours. For after consulting 
true reason they declare that they are incorporeal. 

A. Whoever is in doubt here has no place among the philo¬ 
sophers. 

N. If, then, shapes and colours are counted among the number 
of incorporeal things, tell me if you can how they are subject to the 
corporeal senses. For everything that is perceived through the eyes 
cannot otherwise be perceived save in coloured shape. 

A. I think that shapes and colours cannot appear through 
themselves, but appear in some matter which has been subjected to 
them. 

N. I am considerably surprised that you come so far short of 
philosophy. 

A. I do not know in what. 

N. Do you not see that you were wrong to say that shapes and 662D 
colours cannot be subject to the senses through themselves but in 

286 

PERIPHYSEON 

663A 

How bodies 
are made 
from incor¬ 
poreal things 

663B 

Concerning 

nothing 

663C 

some matter, when matter itself if it lacks shape and colour is 
entirely invisible and incorporeal? And therefore it is necessary for 
you to give an explanation how shapes and colours, although they 
are invisible natures, can be subject to the senses when they are 
considered in matter through itself, that is, without shape and 
incorporeal colour. Therefore it would be more reasonable for you 
to say that formless matter becomes manifest in colours and shapes 
than that shapes and colours become sensibly manifest in matter. 

A. I do not deny now that I was wrong, deceived by a habit of 
false reasoning ; and what I am to do now I simply do not know. 

N. Do you remember what we agreed about matter itself in the 
first book when we discussed its being made from the coming 
together of intelligible things ? For quantities and qualities, although 
through themselves they are incorporeal, [yet] when they come 
together they produce formless matter, which by the addition of 
incorporeal shapes and colours moves into various bodies. 

A. Certainly I remember. 

N. So bodies are born from bodiless things? 

A. I cannot say no, for it was deduced from reasons stated 
before. 

N. Bodies, then, are made not from nothing but from some¬ 
thing? For one would not say that the above-mentioned occasions 
of them were nothing, namely the quantities and qualities, shapes 
or species, the colours, the dimensions of length, breadth, height, 
and together with these the places and times, which if you withdraw, 
there will be no bodies; if you combine, bodies are at once made 
either universal as are the four greatest bodies of the world, or 
particular and distributed among the individuals, all of which you 
will not, I think, deny are composed from the four simple elements, 
since into them they are resolved again. 

A. I will not deny it. But I would say that these elements which 
are simple in themselves and by their composition make all bodies 
are made from nothing. 

N. What then are you going to say of the primordial causes of 
which we have spoken much? For it must be asked why they are 
called causes if they do not proceed into their effects. For if all 
bodies (come) from the elements but the elements from nothing, 
their cause will seem to be nothing and not those primordial causes 
which God the Father made in His Word : and if so, nothing will not 

BOOK III 

287 

be nothing, but it will be a cause. But if it is a cause it will be better 
than the things of which it is the cause, and it will necessarily follow 
either that the Word of God, in which the Father made all things, is 
nothing — which, in the sense of privation, will seem an impious 
thing to say [for negation of the Word in the sense of transcendence 
of nature, though not in the sense of privation, is found in 
Scripture] — , or that some cause other than the Word be supposed 
which is called “Nothing”, from which God made all things and in 
which He established all things before they were made. For otherwise 
it is not a cause. And if this is so, I do not see why it is called 663D 
“Nothing”. For I would sooner say that [it] is all things than 
nothing. For in the cause all things of which it is the cause causally 
and primordially subsist. 

A. I am forced to admit that the four elements of this world 
subsist in the primordial causes. For they are the causes not of some 
but universally of all things visible and invisible, and nothing in the 
order of all the natures is perceived by the sense or reason or 664A 
intellect that does not proceed from them and causally subsist in 
them. 

N. You understand clearly. Therefore, unless I am mistaken, 
you will not deny that all composite and corruptible bodies, which 
occupy the lowest place in all the natures, are from something, not 
from nothing. 

A. I will not deny it. For they are made from the qualities and 
quantities of the simple, invisible, and insensible bodies which are 
called elements for the reason that from their concourse the 
investigators of nature say that all bodies are composed, and into 
them are resolved, and in them are preserved. They are also 
commonly called catholic, that is, universal. For from them are 
made the proper bodies of the individuals. Again, I admit that the 
elements are not made from nothing but come from the primordial 
causes, and none of the faithful doubts but that these primordial 
causes are made at once and all together in the Word of God, when 
he hears the Prophet saying to God, “Thou madest all things in Thy 664B 
Wisdom”, and when he looks at the beginning of Holy Scripture 
where it is written, “In the Beginning God made [heaven and] 
earth.” 

N. It remains for us, then, to inquire about the primordial 
causes themselves, whether they are made out of nothing in the 
Word of God, or were always in it. And if they were always in it 

288 

PERIPHYSEON 

there was not (a time) when they were not, just as there was not (a 
time) when the Word in which they were was not. And if they were 
always in that Word, how were they made in it out of nothing? For 
it does not accord with reason that those things which always were 
began to be made out of nothing. And if one should say that that 
nothing out of which they were made always was and that they were 
always made from it, it will be asked of him where [that] nothing 
664C always was out of which they were made: whether in the Word of 
God in which all things subsist, or in itself, apart from the Word. If 
he answers, “It was always in the Word”, it will be objected to him ; 
Then it was not nothing but very much something — for all things 
which subsist in the Word of God subsist truly and naturally — and 
there will be included in the order of the primordial causes that 
which was thought nothing, and from which all things are believed 
to be made. But if he thinks that the “Nothing” is in itself other than 
the Word, he will be understood to be fabricating, like one of the 
Manichaeans, two mutually adverse principles. For many of the 
pagan philosophers have thought that formless matter is co-eternal 
with God, and that out of it He made all His works, and this matter 
they called nothing because before it received from God forms and 
species it was manifested in no thing, and was as it were nothing. 

664D For whatever entirely lacks form and species can not unreasonably 
be called nothing. But the light of truth has banished all these 
delusions, asserting that all things come from one principle, and that 
nothing is found in the nature of things visible and invisible, by 
whatever kind of generation it breaks out into its proper form, 
which is not generally agreed to subsist eternally in the only 
begotten Word of God, in Whom all things are one, and proclaiming 
that God did not receive from any external source any matter or 
cause for the creation of the universe in His wisdom, for external to 

665A Himself there is nothing ; nor find internal to Himself anything not 
coessential with Himself from which to make in His wisdom the 
things that He wished to be made. 

15 Therefore no place is provided for nothing either external or 
internal to God; and yet the belief that He made all things out of 
nothing is not vain. And therefore there is nothing else to be 
understood, when we hear that all things are created out of nothing, 
but that there was (a time) when they were not, and therefore we are 
not unreasonable in saying: “They were always; they were not 
always”, and “there was not (a time) when they were not, and there 
was (a time) when they were not”. For they were always as causes in 

BOOK III 

the Word of God potentially, beyond all places and times, beyond 
all generation <made> in place and time, beyond all form and 
species known to sense and intellect, beyond all quality and quantity 665B 
and the other accidents by means of which it is understood of the 
substance of any creature that it is, though not what it is ; and they 
were not always, because before they flowed forth through genera¬ 
tion into forms and species, places and times, and into all the 
accidents that accrue to their eternal substance which is immutably 
substantiated in the Word of God, they were not in generation, they 
were not in place or time nor in their proper forms and species to 
which accidents occur. And therefore it is not unreasonably predi¬ 
cated of them, “There was not (a time) when they were not”, 
because they subsist always in the Word of God, in Whom they do 
not have a beginning of their being — for eternity is infinite — ; and 
“there was (a time) when they were not” because in time they began 
through generation to be that which they were not, that is, to 665C 
become manifest in forms and species. 

Therefore anyone who looks carefully at the nature of things 
will find no creature susceptible to senses or intellects about which it 
cannot be truly said : “It always was and is and shall be, and it was 
not always nor is nor shall be.” For that first establishment in the 
Wisdom of God through the primordial causes immutably was and 
is and shall be ; but because that establishment is known only to 
God and surpasses every sense and intellect of the universal 
creature, and by no intellect hitherto created can it yet be known 
what it is, it begins through generation in time to receive quantities 
and qualities in which, in a kind of garments, it can show openly 665D 
that it is [though] not what it is. So it somehow begins to be, not in 
respect of its subsistence in the primordial causes, but in respect of 
receiving [manifestation] from temporal causes — now, by temporal 
causes I mean qualities and quantities and the other things which in 
time through generation attach themselves to substances as acci¬ 
dents — , and therefore it is said of them, “There was (a time) when 
they were not”. For they were not always manifesting themselves in 
accidents. For the same reason they are said now to be and they are 666A 
and truly and always shall be [in respect of their subsistence in their 
causes], while in respect of the accidents which come to them from 
an external source they are said to be [but] neither truly nor always 
are; for they will be resolved into the things from which they were 
taken, and in these they shall truly and always be, when every 
substance shall be purged of its corruptible accidents and freed from 

289 

290 

PERIPHYSEON 

all things which do not pertain to the state of its proper nature, its 
indissoluble simplicity decked solely with its natural powers and, in 
the case of those who are good men, adorned with the gifts of grace, 
glorified beyond every nature and their own by contemplations of 
eternal blessedness, and changed into God Himself, and made God 
not by nature but by grace. 

666B 16 So, after considering these reasonings, who but the excessively 

stupid or excessively contentious would not grant that all things 
which are from God are both eternal at once and made? 

A. You have explained these things to me most clearly. But 
every doubt is not yet expelled from me. For what you said about all 
things that are from God being both eternal and made for the 
reason that in the Word of God they are eternal and, as St. Augustine 
says, not made (but) substantially existing, but in time through 
generation in forms and species and accidents (they are) made I see 
without any doubt; but since it is written, “In the Beginning God 
made heaven and earth”, and, “Thou madest all things in Thy 
Wisdom”, I am forced to declare that in the Word of God all things 
666C are both eternal and made — [By all things I mean the visible and 
the invisible, the temporal and the eternal, all the primordial causes 
with all their effects by which the succession of the centuries is 
accomplished in place and time and this visible world is fulfilled.] 
But how this accords with reason I cannot clearly see. 

N. Do you then suppose that I wished to teach that all things in 
so far as they are eternal are eternal in the only begotten Word of 
God, but in so far as they are made are made apart from the Word? 
For you do not think it accords with the reasons of truth that the 
universe of created nature should be in the Word of God both 
eternal and made. 

A. I did not suppose that that was what you taught. For I do 
not think that anyone of those who practise true philosophy thinks 
that of the whole universe part subsists eternally in the Word of 
God, part is made in time outside the Word. For neither are we 
permitted to think in this way by Holy Scripture, which says in the 
psalm, “Thou madest all things in Thy Wisdom”, in Genesis, “In 
666D the Beginning God made heaven and earth”, — the Apostle says, 
“In Whom are created all things which are in heaven and which are 
on earth, whether visible or invisible, whether Thrones or Domina¬ 
tions or Principalities or Powers, all things were created from Him 
and through Him and to Him”, — in the Gospel, “All things were 

BOOK III 

291 

made through Him and without Him was made nothing” ; nor can 667A 
reason find a “nothing” outside the Word either as substance or as 
accident. For she cries : All things that are and that are not — I do 
not mean by privation but by transcendence — are comprehended 
in the Word, and in it they are and are not : what things are grasped 
by the intellect or sense are ; what transcend all sense and intellect 
are not. But that all things are in the Word of God at the same time 
both eternal and made John the Theologian, who drew from the 
breast of Wisdom the eternal and veracious waters of understanding, 
testifies when he says, “That which is made in Him was Life”, 
whether the division is made according to Augustine thus : What is 
made in place and time was Life in Him — for it is not to be believed 
or in any way supposed of this most subtle inquirer into truth that 
his reason for wanting to divide the passage in this way was to assert 667B 
that what was made in place and time was not in the Word but, as it 
were, apart from the Word, when he himself, that is, Augustine, 
most clearly teaches that both places and times together with the 
things that are made in them are eternally made in the Word of 
God, having a true understanding of the Apostle when he says of the 
Word, “In Whom are created all things that are in the heavens and 
that are in the earth, whether visible or invisible” ; and therefore if 
places and times with all the things that are contained in them are in 
the number of visible, that is, sensible things, and all visible things 
are, on the Apostle’s testimony, created in the Word, then places 
and times and all things that are in them are created in the Word — ; 
or one interprets the said sentence of the evangelist simply, as others 
do, and say: “That which was made in Him”, and thus divide as 667C 
though beginning a fresh phrase, “was Life” [for we find that the 
Greek codices make the division so], so that we understand : “What 
was made in Him in time and place through generation was life in 
eternity through its reason, that is, through its creation in the 
primordial causes of all things.” 

N. You do not doubt, then, that all the causes of all things, and 
all the effects of the causes, are in the Word eternal and made, and 
you do not think that I was teaching anything else? 

A. Concerning the eternity of all things and their creation in 
the Word I neither doubt nor think that you were teaching anything 
else. I only inquire how all things are at the same time eternal and 
made in the Word Who is eternal with the Father. For it does not, as 
I think, accord with reason that made things shall be eternal or 
eternal things made. For there will seem to be no difference between 667D 

292 

PERIPHYSEON 

the eternity of the Universe in the Word and its creation [if eternity 
is created and creation eternal]. 

N. I am surprised and very much disturbed that you should 
seek for reason where all reason fails, or understanding where all 
668A understanding is surpassed. Do you suppose that the purpose of the 
Divine Wisdom can be made manifest to the understanding either of 
men or of angels when you read that those mystical living creatures 
veiled with their wings both their faces and their feet, fearing, that is, 
to look upon what is above every created nature, the height of the 
Divine Power and [its] depth in those things which are made 
through it and in it and from it? [Yet they do not cease to fly aloft ; 
for lifted up by divine grace and by the subtlety of their nature they 
ever look, in so far as they are able, for the things which are above 
them, pursuing their search to infinity. But at the point where they 
fail they reverently shield their faces, that is to say, the thrust of their 
668B contemplation, beaten back by the divine radiance, and withdraw 
their scriptural feet, that is, their intellectual advances, from entering 
upon the incomprehensible mysteries, lest they should incautiously 
or rashly commit some act of presumption against what is ineffable 
and passes all understanding.] 

If, then, the purest intelligences whose symbols Scripture has 
placed before us in these living creatures, between whom and the 
Word there is no intermediary save the primordial causes of all 
things, fear to look upon the height of the divine brightness above 
all things and of the Power which pervades all things and of the 
Wisdom which reaches from the highest to the lowest from end to 
end, that is, from where the intellectual creature begins as far as the 
worm, since they know that the capacity of their nature is not 
adequate to contemplate these things, how should we, still weighed 
668C down by the flesh, try to explain the Divine Providence and Act, 
where only the Divine Will is to be contemplated, which activates all 
things as it wills because it is omnipotent and implants in all things 
the natural reasons which are hidden and inscrutable because its 
reason surpasses all natures, and nothing is more hidden than it, 
nothing more present, difficult as to where it is, more difficult as to 
where it is not, an ineffable light ever present to the intellectual eyes 
of all and known to no intellect as to what it is, diffused through all 
things to infinity, is made both all things in all things and nothing in 
nothing? 

[Now, as to my saying, “between whom and the Word there is 
no intermediary” the reason why I added “save the causes of all 

BOOK III 

293 

things”, was lest anyone should suppose that the celestial essences 
are immediate, that is, that they have no intermediary between 
themselves and the Cause of all things. For although they are called 
“angels” as being “eggigi”, that is, constituted next after God — for 668D 
tyybq means “next after” in Greek — , it is not to be believed that 
they were made in such a way that their causes are not created in the 
Word. For there is no creature whose cause, made in the Word, does 
not precede it, and which is not substantiated by it so that it may be, 
nor ordered by it so that it may be beautiful, nor preserved by it so 
that it may be eternal, nor manifested either to the senses or 
intellects so that it may provide matter for praise of that one Cause 
from which and in which and through which and for which it was 669A 
established.] 

Let us, then, believe and, so far as it is given us, contemplate 
with the keenness of our mind how all things visible and invisible, 
eternal and temporal, and the eternal itself and time itself, and 
places and extensions and all things which are spoken of as 
substance and accident, and, to speak generally, whatever the 
totality of the whole creature contains, are at the same time eternal 
and made in the only begotten Word of God, and that in them 
neither does their eternity precede their making nor their making 
precede their eternity. For in the dispensation of the Word their 
eternity is made and their making is eternal. For even all things 669B 
which are seen to arise through generation at times and places in the 
order of the centuries were made all together and at once eternally in 
the Word of God. For it is not to be believed that the moment of 
their beginning to be made is when they are perceived to arise in the 
world. For they were always in the Word substantially, and the 
[reason] of their rising and setting in the order of times and places 
through generation, that is, through the assumption of accidents, 
was always in the Word of God, in Whom the things that are to 
come are already made. For the Divine Wisdom circumscribes 
times, and all things that arise temporally in the nature of things 
have a prior existence in it and subsist in it eternally. For it is of all 
things the measure without measure and number without number 
and weight, that is order, without weight. And it is time and age, it is 
the past and the present and the future. And it is called by the 
Greeks CTiEKEiva, because it creates in itself and circumscribes all 669C 
times, while in its eternity it is above all times, preceding, surround¬ 
ing, enclosing all intervals. 

For even of those things we see being made each year in their 
natural course in the order of times none can give an account. For 

294 

PERIPHYSEON 

who, contemplating the force of the seeds, how according to the 
numbers of places and times they burst forth into the various species 
of animals, fruits, and crops, presumes to say how or why, or 
succeeds in giving a clear account of their occasions, and does not at 
once exclaim : All these things are to be attributed to the divine laws 
which surpass all sense and intellect, and it is not to be explored by 
669D any conjectures of the mind why it is thus or thus and how it is thus 
or thus and not otherwise that they fulfil the order of times and out 
of the invisible causes that are constituted all together in the force of 
the seeds proceed not all together but at intervals of times and places 
into the sensible forms, as though they could not be made otherwise 
if their being made otherwise seemed good to the Divine Will, which 
670A is constrained by no law? For indeed it often happens that many 
things are done contrary to the customary course of nature so that 
we may be shown that the Divine Providence can administer all 
things not in one way but in infinitely many. 

If, then, the administration of the universe in the divine laws is 
known to no intellect, to which of the rational or intellectual beings 
can it happen to perceive the eternal establishment of the same 
universe in the Word of God, in Whom none of the faithful ought to 
be unaware that all things are at once both eternal and made, even if 
he does not understand how eternal things are made and made 
things eternal? For this is known only to the Word, in Whom they 
are both made and eternal. 

A. I do not ask for the reason of the establishment of the 
universe in the Word and of its eternity, for no one can say how 
670B things that are eternal are also made. [For no rational or intellectual 
creature can know the manner of the creation of things in the Word 
since it is revealed to the Gnostic Power alone.] But I do ask for the 
reason why we are compelled to profess that eternal things are made 
in the Word of God, if it can be found. For it is not now a question 
of the multiple effects of the primordial causes in visible and 
invisible things, for none of the wise doubts that all things are made 
in these. For in that way the present question would seem to be 
soluble provided one could give sound reasons for teaching that in 
so far as all things subsist in their principles in the Word of God 
they must on that account be understood to be eternal ; but in so far 
as they proceed through generation into their effects, whether 
intelligible or sensible, in the order of times they are on that account 
670C made, so that their eternity in the Word would precede their 

BOOK III 

295 

establishment in the order of the ages, fulfilling the invisible world 
above us and the visible world about us. 

But now, since true reason does not permit us to profess such 
things — for it declares, and most truly declares, that not only the 
primordial causes but also their effects and places and times and 
essences and substances, that is, the most generic genera and the 
general forms and the most specific species in the individuals, with 
all their natural accidents, and, to speak simply, everything in the 
totality of created things which is comprehended either by sense or 
by intellect whether human or angelic, or which surpasses all sense 
and all the mind’s keenness and yet is created, is in the Word of God 
once and all together both eternal and made, and was never eternal 
without being made nor made without being eternal — , nothing is 
left but to ask, not how they are eternal and made, but why they are 
said to be both made and eternal. 

N. They are said to be made on the authority of Holy Scripture 
which declares, to use the same examples, “In the beginning God 
made heaven and earth’’ ; “Thou madest all things in Thy Wisdom” ; 
“All things were made through Him” ; “In Whom are created all 
things which are in the heavens and which are in the earth whether 
visible or invisible”, and many similar passages. But of the manner 
and reason of the establishment of all things in the Word let him 
speak who can ; myself, I confess I do not know. But I am not 
ashamed not to know when I hear the Apostle saying to God, “Who 
alone possessest immortality, and dwellest in inaccessible light”, 
especially when from afar I look to the end of our present business. 
For the purpose of our present reasoning, and indeed of reason 
itself, is to bring us to the understanding that not only are all things 
both eternal and made in the Word of God but also, by a single 
thrust of the mind, that He makes all things and is made in all 
things, as St. Maximus says : “Carrying the intellect through the 
reasons that are in the things that exist to their Causal Principle”, 
that is to say, the Word, “and binding it to Him alone as to the One 
Who gathers together all things that are from Himself and draws 
them to Him, making orderly use of the reasons through the 
individuals of the things that exist, no longer confusedly, but clearly 
believing that only God is left as true being after the diligent inquiry 
which is (directed) towards the things that are, and (that He is) the 
Being of the things that exist and their Motion and the Distinction 
of things that differ, and the indissoluble Continuity of things that 
are mingled, and the immutable Base of things that are set in 

That every 
creature is at 
the same 
time eternal 
and made 

670D 

671A 

671B 

296 

PERIPHYSEON 

position, and, in a word, the Causal Principle of all intellectual 
being whatsoever and of motion and of difference and of mingling 
and of position.” 

And therefore if only the Word of God is left as the Being of the 
things that exist and their Motion and the Distinction of things that 
differ, and the indissoluble Continuity of things that are mingled, 
that is, of things that are composite, and the immutable Base of 
things that are set in position, that is, of things that attain to 
immutable habit ; and the Cause of all intellectual being whatsoever 
and of motion and of difference and of composition and of habit, 
what else is to be understood than that He is made all things in all 
things? But how or why the Word of God is made in all things 
which are made in Him eludes the sharpness of our mind — no 
wonder, for (even) in sensible things no one can say how the 
incorporeal seminal force, breaking out into visible species and 
forms, into various colours, into the different sweetnesses of odours, 
becomes manifest to the senses and is made in things, and while it 
becomes manifest it does not cease to be hidden, and whether it be 
manifest or hidden it is never abandoned by its natural powers, 
whole in the whole of them, whole in itself, nor does it become 
greater when it seems to be multiplied, nor less when it is thought to 
contract into a small number, but immutably remains in the same 
state of its nature. [For it is not less in one grain of wheat, for 
example, than in many harvests multiplied under the same genus 
and, what is more remarkable, neither is it greater in the whole of 
that one grain than in a particle of that grain. For it is multiple in 
the one and one in the multiple.] 

But if one should say that the seminal force is revealed not 
through itself but in some matter, that is, in fluid <and so it is 
made that which is manifest, but acts upon the one which is manifest 
so that it becomes manifest not by performing its operations upon 
itself but upon some matter> , the reply must be: If it becomes 
manifest and is made in a form, is the form matter, when reason 
clearly proclaims that whatever is permanent in matter is permanent 
through its form, whereas (matter) through itself is unstable and 
without form and almost nothing? If in colours, is the colour 
matter, when it is agreed that they are understood in relation to 
matter, and even, in relation to species? If [in] the sweetnesses of 
672B odours, is odour matter, when it is said by those who concern 
themselves in such things to be a quality that affects the sense of 
smell — but quality is incorporeal? The same must be said of the 

671C 

671D 

That the 
seminal force 
is made a 
body 
672A 
although it is 
incorporeal 

BOOK III 

297 

other qualities in which the seminal force is wont to become 
manifest. But if all the aforesaid are incorporeal things adhering to 
bodies, and in themselves understood to be external to bodies, who 
but a fool would say that the incorporeal seminal force requires 
corporeal matter in order to become manifest? For if form and 
every quality and quantity be removed the seminal power can by no 
means be either made or perceived in naked matter. < What if the 
matter itself, in which it is thought to become manifest and active, is 
shown to derive its origin from incorporeal qualities? Would it not 
follow that the seminal force receives the things in which it operates 
from nowhere else but from itself, that is, in its natural powers, so 
that in a wonderful way matter, operation, and operator is made 
and makes ?> 

So the unshakable authority of Holy Scripture compels us to 
believe that the universe of the whole creature is established in the 
Word of God, and that the reason for its establishment surpasses all 
intellects and is known only to the Word in Whom < all things> are 
established. But if you wish to hear what I think about the eternity 
of the universe in the Word of God, be attentive to what follows. 

A. I am ready. 

N. Do you think that the Word of God, in Whom all things are 
made, saw all things that are made in Him? 

A. Certainly I think so. For although the Divine Operation [in] 
which all things were established is considered by the theologians 
under a triple mode, as Scripture allows — for the Father makes, in 
the Son they are made, by the Holy Spirit they are distributed — yet 
it is one and the same operation of the Most High and Holy Trinity. 
For that which the Father makes both the Son makes and the Holy 
Spirit makes, and that which is made in the Son is made in the 
Father and in the Holy Spirit. For if the Son is in the Father it is 
[necessary] that everything which is made in the Son [be] in the 
Father. For it does not accord with reason that we should understand 
that only the Son Himself is in the Father, but that the things which 
the Father makes in the Son are not in the Father. Similarly that 
which the Holy Spirit nurtures and distributes is nurtured and 
distributed by the Father and the Son. If, then, the Son makes the 
things that are made in Him, is it to be believed that He made what 
He did not see? Therefore I think that He saw the things that He 
made and that were made in Him. 

672C 

17 

Concerning 
the eternity 
of the uni¬ 
verse in the 
Word of God 

672D 

673A 

298 

PERIPHYSEON 

How God 
sees the 
things that 
He has made 

673B 

673C 

Concerning 
the Divine 
Volitions 

673D 

N. You think rightly. Tell me, then: how did He see? By 
corporeal sense or by intellect? 

A. I would not say that it was by sense or by intellect that God 
saw the things that He made. For He Who is incorporeal is without 
corporeal sense, and He Who passes all intellect cannot be called 
intellect — although He is called Intellect, as also Mind, by 
metaphor, namely, from the creature to the Creator because He is 
the Cause and Creator of the whole of intellect and mind — ; 
therefore He does not see by means of the creature whether 
corporeal [or incorporeal], for He does not need any creature as an 
instrument to see what He wishes to make. “For”, as Maximus says, 
“it cannot be” — as reason shows — “that He Who is above all 
things that are apprehends the things that are by means of the things 
that are, but we say that it is as His volitions that He knows the 
things that are, adding also the reason from the cause. For if He 
made all things by His Will — and no reason contradicts this — and 
it is right and proper to say that God ever knows His own Will, 
while every one of the things that are made He willingly made ; then 
it is as His volitions that God knows the things that are because it is 
also by His volition that He made the things that are.” 

N. Therefore, as God sees His volitions, so He also sees the 
things that He made? 

A. So it is and not otherwise. But He does not [as the foolish 
assert] see the sensibles by means of sense nor the intelligibles by 
means of intellect, but as (He sees) His volitions, so He sees the 
sensibles and the intelligibles. 

N. You understand plainly and clearly. But I beg you to say 
whether the divine volitions which God sees are one thing and the 
made things which He sees are another. 

A. I am not equipped to answer this question adequately and 
correctly. For I am hampered on all sides. For if I say, “another”, 
you will quickly reply : Then it is not as His volitions that God sees 
what He has made, for there cannot be one simple vision of things 
which are diverse and different in nature, and you will conclude: 
But the Divine Vision is simple and one and uniform. Therefore, if 
the Will of God is one thing and what He had made another, it is 
not as His volition that He sees what He has made. 

If, on the other hand, I say, “not other”, the conclusion will 
necessarily be : The Will of God is something that He has made, and 
He has made His volitions and what He has made are His volitions. 

BOOK III 

299 

For the one and the same and simple Divine Vision requires that 
everything that He sees is one and the same. But He sees as His 
volitions the things that He has made. Therefore the divine volitions 
and the things which God has made are one and the same. For the 
simple Divine Vision which sees all things as one and one as all 674A 
things unifies them. And if this be granted I fear that you may 
compel me to profess one of two things, namely, either that the Will 
of God is separate from God and attached to the creature, so that 
God is one thing and His Will another, that is to say, that God is the 
Maker while His Will is the made ; or, if true reason forbids (me) to 
say this, I shall have to profess that God and His volitions and all 
the things that He has made are one and the same, and without 
delay the conclusion, forced on by the power of reason, will be: 

Then God made Himself, if His volitions are not external to Himself 
and He does not see His volitions in one way and the things that He 
has made in another, but sees the things that He has made as His 
volitions. And if that is the case, who will have any doubt about the 674B 
eternity of the things that are made in God, when they are 
understood to be not only made and eternal, but God Himself? 

N. Most cautiously and circumspectly do you proceed along 
the road of reason, and therefore if you clearly understand without 
any doubt that what you have said is so and not otherwise, I see that 
there is no need to toil any more in urging the eternity of all things 
which are made in the Word of God. 

A. You are teasing me, as I think, in treating me lightly, that is, 
in allowing the freedom of my will to choose what it wishes and hold 
to what it wishes without asking me to show by sound reasons what, 
with all error removed, is to be believed and understood about such 
things. For if by myself I had a clear understanding of what I have 
said, perhaps I should not fear to offer a frank opinion concerning 
the Divine Volitions and concerning the things that are made, as to 
whether they are one and the same or not. But I was afraid because I 674C 
knew that I was not sufficiently equipped to enter upon this 
discussion. 

N. Go carefully, then, lest you err at any point, so that 
whatever you agree to you retain as a habit firmly established in 
your mind. 

A. Proceed. I will follow. 

N. Although, as I think, you have doubts about the Will of 
God, whether about His volitions or about the ineffable multiplicity 

300 

PERIPHYSEON 

674D 

675A 

675B 
That all 
things that 
are made in 
God are God 

of the Divine Unity — for God is a multiple unity in Himself — , as 
to whether they belong to the simple nature of the Most High 
Goodness so as not to be anything but it, or whether they do not, yet 
you do not doubt but that God was not at any time without His 
volitions. 

A. To doubt this would be very foolish. For everything that He 
has He has always and immutably, for nothing is an accident to 
Him, and therefore either He never had His volitions or, if He has 
them, there must be no doubt at all but that He has always had 
them. 

N. God, then, has always had His volitions and always beheld 
them. For what He had could not be concealed from Him. 

A. He both had and beheld. For it would be madness to 
suppose that God was without His volitions, or that He has not 
always had them and beheld them. 

N. The Divine Volitions, then, are eternal, since He Whose 
volitions they are is eternal. 

A. I grant this unreservedly. 

N. Well, then ; the things that He has willed, did He not always 
have them and always behold them ? Indeed, you clearly understand, 
I believe, that for God nothing is future since He includes within 
Himself all times and all that is in them. For of all things He is the 
Beginning and the Middle and the End, and their limit and their 
circuit and their going forth and their return. 

A. That nothing for God is future I do not doubt. 

N. Therefore all things which He has willed [to make] He 
always had in His volitions. For in Him the will does not precede 
[that] which He wills [to be made]. [For] it is coeternal with His 
Will. For He does not wait for the making of that which He wills as 
though it were future to Him, to Whom all things are present. 
Whose will is the Cause of all things, and Whose beholding is their 
effect and their perfection. For without any intervening delay is 
made that of which He beholds the making. 

But if His Will is His beholding and His beholding His Will, 
everything that He wills is made, without any interval; but if of 
everything He wills to be made He also beholds the making, and if 
what He wills and beholds is not external to Himself but within 
Himself, and there is nothing within Him which is not Himself, it 
follows that everything that He beholds and wills should be 

BOOK III 

301 

understood as coeternal with Him, if His Will and His beholding 
and His Essence are one. 

A. Now you compel us to declare that all things that are called 
eternal and made are God. For if the Divine Will and the divine 
beholding is essential [and] eternal, [and] in Him to be is not one 
thing, to will another, to behold another, but one and the same 
superessential, and reason allows that whatever He comprehends 
within His Will and His beholding is understood as nothing other 
than Himself — for a simple nature does not allow within itself that 
which is not itself — , the declaration that the One God is all things 
in all things abides without any dispute. And if this is so, no one 
who practises philosophy devoutly ought to be ignorant of the 
eternity of all things which are in God, indeed are God. But as yet I 
do not satisfactorily see how the Divine Nature, outside of which 
there is nothing and within which all things subsist, does not admit 
within itself a being that is not coessential with itself. 

N. That no nature subsists but God and the creature I should 
believe that you do not doubt — indeed, I see that you see it 
satisfactorily. For what you said of the Divine Nature, that outside 
it there is nothing, so you understand, as I think, that [while] the 
Creative Nature permits nothing outside itself because outside it 
nothing can [be], yet everything which it has created and creates it 
contains within itself, but in such a way that it itself is other, because 
it is superessential, than what it creates within itself. For that it 
should create itself does not seem to you likely to be probable. 

A. You have perfectly understood what my thought has con¬ 
ceived about God and the creature. For I firmly and unshakeably 
hold that no nature, whether created or not created, subsists or is in 
any way external to God, but that everything that subsists, whether 
created or not created, is contained within Him. And that therefore 
the fullness of the whole universe is included within these, as in two 
parts, namely, God and the creature, was what I held hitherto. But 
now again my faith seems to waver, weakened by the foregoing 
reasonings. 

N. I see that your faith stands firm and is fortified by true 
reason at least in this : my belief that outside God there is nothing. 

A. It is as you say. That I see very clearly. 

N. Bring then the keenness of your mind more diligently and 
perceptively to bear upon the things that you believe to be within 
God. 

675C 

How all 
things that 
are within 
God are 
coessential 
to Him 

675D 

676A 

302 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. I see that within God there is nothing but Himself and the 
nature created by Him. 

N. Then you see in God that which is not God? 

A. I do ; but it is created from God. 

N. How, then, does it seem to you ? Did God see all things that 
He has made before they were made? 

676B A. I should think that He saw all things that He willed to make 
before they were made. 

N. So He saw the things which He willed to make, and He did 
not see other than the things which He has made, and the things 
which He has made He saw before He made them? 

A. So I believe. 

N. Say, please, what are those things which God saw before 
they were made? For how did He see a creature which [was] not 
made? [And] if He did not see other than a creature — for 
everything that is is either God or creature — , what did He see? 
Therefore, either He saw Himself before He made everything that 
He made, or He saw a creature which was not yet created. [But how 
did He see what as yet was not? Or if [it was], and was therefore 
seen because it was, then before the creature there was that which 
was not a creature. But if only God <and what is coessential with 
Him> is allowed to exist before every creature, nothing else that 
676C God saw before He made the creature preceded the creature except 
either Himself or a nature which is eternal in Him and coeternal 
with Him.] But it has been agreed between us that God saw the 
things that were to be made. For it was not in ignorance or without 
providence that He made [that which He willed to make]. 

A. I see that I am hedged about on all sides and that there is 
left <for me> no way of escape. For if I say that God saw in 
Himself the things that were to be made I shall be forced to declare 
that He saw Himself, for there was not yet a creature for Him to see, 
nor was there, before every creature, anything else but Himself that 
He could see ; and therefore if He saw in Himself all things that were 
to be made before they were made, true reason will necessarily teach 
that He saw Himself, and He will be all the things that He made if 
He made the things which He saw in Himself, and He will be the 
676D Maker and the things that will be made. If, on the other hand, I say, 
“He saw the nature that was to be made before it was made”, you 
will say, “Then there was a creature before it was made.” For if God 

BOOK III 

303 

saw it before it was made, that was a true substance which God saw 
in it before it was made. For God does not see the things that are 
false since the Truth is immutable and everything that is in it is true 
and immutable, and if God saw the creature in Himself before it was 
made He has always seen what He saw ; for it is not an accident in 
Him to see what He sees, since it is not one thing for Him to be and 677A 
another to see ; for His is a simple nature. But if He has always seen 
what He saw, what He has seen always was, and therefore [what He 
has seen] must be eternal, and if He saw the creature which as yet 
was not, and what He saw was — for everything that God sees is 
true and eternal — there is nothing else left for us to understand but 
that the creature was in God before it was made in Him, and that 
“creature” can be understood in two ways, the one relating it to its 
eternity in the Divine Knowledge, in which all things truly and 
substantially abide, the other to its temporal establishment which 
was, as it were, subsequent in itself. And if this is so, the logical 
consequence will compel the choice of one of two alternatives [so 
that] either we say that the same creature is better than itself and 677B 
inferior: better in so far as it has eternally subsisted in God, but 
inferior in so far as it is created in itself and its creation will be 
thought to be not in God but as though external to God in itself, and 
it will contradict Scripture which says, “Thou madest all things in 
Thy Wisdom” ; or that it is not the same nature that was eternally in 
the knowledge of God, and that was established so to speak 
subsequently, as it were, in itself, and therefore it was not those 
things that were made that He saw before they were made but only 
the things that are eternal that He saw in Himself ; and anyone who 
has admitted that will be seen to be resisting the catholic profession 
of the faithful ; for Holy Wisdom declares that the things which God 
saw in Himself before they were made are not other than the things 
that He subsequently made in themselves, but that the same things 
are eternally seen and eternally made, and all this in God and 
nothing external to God. But if the nature of the Divine Goodness is 677C 
one thing and what it sees to be made and did make, and saw and 
made in itself, is another, the simplicity of the Divine Nature will be 
broken when there is understood to be in it that which it is not, 
which is altogether impossible. If on the other hand the Divine 
Nature is not other than that of which it sees the making in itself, 
but they are one and the same nature whose simplicity is inviolable 
and whose unity is indivisible, it will at once be admitted that 
God is all things everywhere, and wholly in the whole, and the 
Maker and the made and the Seer and the seen, and the place and 

304 

PERIPHYSEON 

677D 

678A 

Concerning 
the eternal 
establish¬ 
ment of all 
things in 
God 

Recapitula¬ 

tion 

678B 

the essence of all things and their substance and their accident and, 
to speak simply, everything that truly is and is not, superessential in 
essences, supersubstantial in substances, the Creator above every 
creature, created within all creation and subsisting below all crea¬ 
tions taking the beginning of being from Himself and moving 
Himself through Himself, and moved towards Himself, and in 
Himself taking His rest, multiplied in Himself through genera and 
species to infinity, not abandoning the simplicity of His nature but 
calling back the infinity of His multiplicity into Himself, for in Him 
all things are one. 

N, Now I see that you have a thoroughly clear view of the 
things of which you seemed to be in doubt, and you will no longer 
waver, as I think, in your assertion that all things are both made 
[and] eternal, and that everything that is understood truly to subsist 
in them is nothing else but the ineffable nature of the Divine 
Goodness. [For He is the substantial Good, and no one is good save 
God alone.] 

It remains, then, to treat of the eternal creation of all things in 
God, in so far as the ray of the Divine Power shall permit the 
keenness of our minds to ascend into the Divine Mysteries. 

A. It does indeed remain, and the order of our discourse now 
requires it. But first I should like you briefly to recapitulate the 
whole of what has so far been agreed between us on the present 
question. 

N. We have clearly deduced, as I think, that the Divine 
Goodness saw and always has seen those things that were to be 
made. 

A. This was concluded. 

N. And the things that He saw were not other than the things 
that He made, but the things He saw were to be made were the 
things that He made. 

A. This was granted likewise. 

N. And all the things which He has always seen He has always 
made. For in Him the sight does not precede His act, since the act is 
co-eternal with the sight — especially as [for Him] it is not one thing 
to see and another to act, but His sight is His act. For He sees by 
acting and by seeing He acts. 

A. This also was accepted. 

BOOK III 

305 

N. Concerning the simplicity of the Divine Nature we said that 
that is not to be truly and properly understood in it which is alien 
from it as not co-essential with it ; and since all things are truly and 
properly understood to be within it — for nothing subsists outside it 
— it was concluded that it alone is truly and properly in all things, 
and that nothing truly and properly is what it itself is not. 

A. It was. 

N. It follows that we ought not to understand God and the 
creature as two things distinct from one another, but as one and the 
same. For both the creature, by subsisting, is in God ; and God, by 
manifesting Himself, in a marvellous and ineffable manner creates 
Himself in the creature, the invisible making Himself visible and the 
incomprehensible comprehensible and the hidden revealed and the 
unknown known and being without form and species formed and 
specific and the superessential essential and the supernatural natural 
and the simple composite and the accident-free subject to accident 
[and accident] and the infinite finite and the uncircumscribed 
circumscribed and the supratemporal temporal and the Creator of 
all things created in all things and the Maker of all things made in all 
things, and eternal He begins to be, and immobile He moves into all 
things and becomes in all things all things. And I am not here 
speaking of the Incarnation of the Word and His taking of 
manhood on Himself, but of the ineffable descent of the Supreme 
Goodness, which is Unity and Trinity, into the things that are so as 
to make them be, indeed, so as itself to be, in all things from the 
highest to the lowest, ever eternal, ever made, by itself in itself 
eternal, by itself in itself made. And while it is eternal it does not 
cease to be made, and made it does not cease to be eternal, and out 
of itself it makes itself, for it does not require some other matter 
which is not itself in which to make itself. Otherwise it would seem 
to be impotent and imperfect in itself if it were to receive from some 
other source an aid to its manifestation and perfection. So it is from 
Himself that God takes the occasions of His theophanies, that is, of 
the divine apparitions, since all things are from Him and through 
Him and in Him and for Him. And therefore even that matter from 
which it is read that He made the world is from Him and in Him, 
and He is in it in so far as it is understood to have being. 

Nor is this remarkable, since the Scriptures show us examples 
of such things. For if the souls of Moses and Samuel, although they 
are by nature invisible and incorporeal, appeared for the purpose of 
penetrating mysteries, not in imagination but in truth to the minds 

678C 

678D 

679A 

How Moses 
and Samuel 
appeared 
visibly with¬ 
out assuming 
bodies 
679B 

306 

PERIPHYSEON 

679C 

18 

679D 

680A 

of Others, I mean of the Apostles and of Saul, visible and as it were 
corporeal, not by means of some matter that had been taken from 
without but by themselves without any intermediary, what prevents 
us, encouraged by such a miracle, from ascending to higher levels of 
the Divine Power so as to understand that it is both above all things 
and is made in all things, not, as we have said, by taking from 
elsewhere or making out of nothing the matter in which it is made 
and in which it makes itself manifest? 

We have already said enough about the seminal power, which, 
while by itself it is invisible and incomprehensible, multiplies itself 
into infinite forms and species, and though it eludes all the keenness 
of the mind when it is sought becomes subject to the bodily senses. 
Therefore there is no place for that nothing, that is the privation of 
all habit and essence, from which all things are thought by those of 
limited understanding who do not know what Holy Theology means 
by that name, to have been made. 

A. I am amazed how, although the things which have now 
been said by you are stumbling-blocks to many and are far removed 
from those who seem to philosophize, yet true reason declares them 
to be very true, and the authority of Holy Scripture when it is more 
carefully considered teaches and preaches the same. For it says, “In 
the Beginning God made heaven and earth”, that is. In God the Son 
God the Father established the universe of the whole creature visible 
and invisible. And what would the Father establish in the Beginning 
that was begotten of Him, in His Word, His Wisdom, that was not 
the Son Himself? Otherwise He would be establishing, not in Him 
but outside Him, something that He received from elsewhere or 
made out of nothing. Or how would the Word suffer to be made 
within Himself something that was not consubstantial with Himself? 
For light does not permit within itself darkness <that it has 
received from elsewhere> nor truth receive within itself anything 
but what is true. But that cannot be true which was not always 
eternal, nor that eternal which is made from the privation of all 
eternity and essence. Or what else would the Father make in His 
Wisdom but that Wisdom itself? For the Prophet says, “Thou 
madest all things in Wisdom.” Note the force of the words. Was it as 
though in some place or space that God built a kind of house in His 
Wisdom not in order that it should be made all things substantially, 
but merely that it should contain all things and that all things were 
made in Wisdom as one thing in another? Not so does reason teach, 
but as follows : “Thou madest all things in Wisdom”, that is. Thou 

BOOK III 

307 

madest Thy Wisdom all things. For even this visible sun, although 
in itself it is simple fire and receives no composition from things 
which are not consubstantial with itself, yet contains within itself 
and comprehends the nature of all sensible things, not that it 
contains within itself anything other than itself, but itself is substan¬ 
tially everything that it contains in itself. For the substance of all 
visible things is created in it. For it would not consume as its 
sustenance all bodies in which it burns if it did not first furnish the 
occasions of their subsistence. 

By the sun I here mean that incomprehensible power which is 
diffused through the whole of this visible world, which is called fire 
for that reason that it acts within in all things, of which the principal 
source is that ethereal body which is called by the name of “sun”, in 
which and through which it manifests the most evident powers of its 
operation, I mean light and heat. But it administers all the other 
bodies which are born and nourished in the world by its most 
hidden operations and is made in its totality everywhere, and from 
itself in itself it is made in all things, breaking out into all things 
visibly, consuming all things into itself invisibly. Hence it is not 
unwarrantably that Scripture says, “Gyrating in a gyre the spirit 
goes forth and returns into its own place.” For the fiery spirit 
because of the exceeding subtlety of its nature traverses all things 
and is made all things in all things, and returns into itself, since it is 
the substantial source and origin of all visible things and for that 
reason is called by the Greeks (poiiwv, that is to say, “The Returning 
One”. For, after traversing all the bodies of the world both visibly 
and invisibly it returns into itself and calls back into itself all things 
which receive the beginning of their generation from it. Hence also 
the holy theologians often represent the superessential divine and 
formless essence, as St. Dionysius says, by fire, for it images the 
divine property, if one may say so, visibly in many ways. 

But I beg you to explain what Holy Theology means by that 
name of “Nothing”. 

N. I should believe that by that name is signified the ineffable 
and incomprehensible and inaccessible brilliance of the Divine 
Goodness which is unknown to all intellects whether human or 
angelic — for it is superessential and supernatural — , which while it 
is contemplated in itself neither is nor was nor shall be, for it is 
understood to be in none of the things that exist because it surpasses 
all things, but when, by a certain ineffable descent into the things 
that are, it is beheld by the mind’s eye, it alone is found to be in all 

680B 

680C 

19 

680D 

Concerning 

“Nothing” 

through 

transcen¬ 

dence 

681A 

308 

PERIPHYSEON 

things, and it is and was and shall be. Therefore so long as it is 
understood to be incomprehensible by reason of its transcendence it 
is not unreasonably called “Nothing”, but when it begins to appear 
in its theophanies it is said to proceed, as it were, out of nothing into 
something, and that which is properly thought of as beyond all 
essence is also properly known in all essence, and therefore every 
visible and invisible creature can be called a theophany, that is, a 
divine apparition. For every order of natures from the highest to the 
lowest, that is, from the celestial essences to the last bodies of this 
681B visible world, the more secretly it is understood, the closer it is seen 
to approach the divine brilliance. 

Hence the inaccessible brilliance of the celestial powers is often 
called by theology darkness. Nor is this surprising when even the 
most high Wisdom itself, which is what they approach, is very often 
signified by the word “Darkness”. Hear the Psalmist: “As His 
darkness so also is His light”, as though he were saying openly ; so 
great is the splendour of the Divine Goodness that, not unreasonably 
for those who desire to contemplate it and cannot, it shall be turned 
into darkness. For He alone, as the Apostle says “possesseth the 
inaccessible light”. 

68 1C 

Concerning 

the 

progressions 
of the Most 
High Good 
into all 
things 

681D 

But the further the order of things descends downwards, the 
more manifestly does it reveal itself to the eyes of those who 
contemplate it, and therefore the forms and species of sensible 
things receive the name of “manifest theophanies”. Therefore the 
Divine Goodness which is called “Nothing” for the reason that, 
beyond all things that are and that are not, it is found in no essence, 
descends from the negation of all essences into the affirmation of the 
essence of the whole universe ; from itself into itself, as though from 
nothing into something, from non-essentiality into essentiality, from 
formlessness into innumerable forms and species. For its first 
progression into the primordial causes in which it is made is spoken 
of by Scripture as formless matter: matter because it is the 
beginning of the essence of things ; formless because it comes nearest 
to the formlessness of the Divine Wisdom. 

Now the Divine Wisdom is rightly called formless because it 
does not turn to any form above itself for its formation. For it is of all 
forms the undefined exemplar, and while it descends into the 
various forms of things visible and invisible it looks back to itself as 
to its formation. Therefore the Divine Goodness, regarded as above 
all things, is said not to be, and to be absolutely nothing, but in all 
things it both is and is said to be, because it is the Essence of the 

BOOK III 

309 

whole universe and its substance and its genus and its species and its 
quantity and its quality and the bond between all things and its 
position and habit and place and time and action and passion and 682A 
everything whatsoever that can be understood by whatever sort of 
intellect in every creature and about every creature. And whosoever 
shall look carefully into the words of St. Dionysius will find that this 
is their meaning ; and it does not seem inappropriate to introduce a 
few of them here, and we consider that it is necessary to repeat again 
the teaching we took from him in the earlier stages of our discourse. 

“Come”, he says, “let us praise the Good as Him Who truly 
(exists), and the Maker of the substance of all things that exist : d)v” 

— for so Dionysius himself calls God — “is by virtue of His 
superessential power the substantiating Cause and Creator of all 
that exists, of existence, of subsistence, of substance, of essence, of 
nature, the principle and the measure of ages, and the essentiality of 
times and the eternity of things that exist, the time of things that are 
made, the being of whatever is made. From that which is (derive) 
eternity and essence and cov and time and becoming and that which 682B 
is made, the essentiality in that which exists and whatever it has of 
subsistence and substance. For God is not yet cov, but He Who 
simply and Himself uncircumscribed embraces the whole in Himself. 
Therefore He is also called the King of Ages as substantiator of the 
whole of being and of what exists in Himself and about Himself ; 
and He neither was nor shall be nor has become nor becomes nor 
shall become, nor indeed is; but He Himself is the being for the 
things that exist, and (he is) not only the things that exist but the 
very being of things that exist from Him Who exists before all ages. 

For He is the age of ages, subsisting before the ages.” “... For 
the being for the existents and the ages” [is] “from Him Who 
foresees, and while every age and time (is) from Him, He Who is the 
Pre-cov (is) of all age and time and every existent whatsoever the 
Beginning and the Cause; and all things participate in Him, and 682C 
from nothing of the things that exist does He withdraw Himself. 

And He is before all things, and has constituted all things in 
Himself. And in short, whatever is in any way, both is and is 
understood and is preserved in the Pre-Existent.” 

And a little later, after an explanation of the primordial causes, 
he adds the words : “But being itself is never bereft of all things that 
exist. Being itself, indeed, is from the Pre-Existent; and from it is 

310 

PERIPHYSEON 

683A 

being; and cov (is) the beginning and measure before essence and is 
not itself being ; and being possesses it and cov is the substantiating 
beginning and middle and end both of that which exists and of age 
and of all things ; and therefore by the Oracles He Who is in truth 
Pre-cov is multiplied in every notion of the things that exist, and in 
Him is properly celebrated what was and what is and what shall be 
and what has become and what becomes and what shall become. 

682D For all these things signify to those who have a knowledge of the 
divine that it is superessentially in every notion, and the Cause of 
existent things everywhere. For neither is He this but not that ; nor 
here but not there ; but He is all things as the Cause of all things, 
embracing and holding beforehand all beginnings, all endings, all 
existent things, and He is above all things as the Super-cov which is 
superessentially before all things.” 

20 Whoever looks into the meaning of these words will find that 
they teach, indeed proclaim, nothing else but that God is the Maker 
of all things and is made in all things ; and when He is looked for 
above all things He is found in no essence — for as yet there is no 
essence — , but when He is understood in all things nothing in them 
subsists but Himself alone ; and “neither is He this”, as he says, “but 
I not that”, but He is all. Therefore, descending first from the 
superessentiality of His Nature, in which He is said not to be. He is 
created by Himself in the primordial causes and becomes the 
beginning of all essence, of all life, of all intelligence, and of all 
things which the gnostic contemplation considers in the primordial 
causes ; then, descending from the primordial causes which occupy a 

II kind of intermediate position between God and the creature, that is, 

683B between that ineffable superessentiality which surpasses all under¬ 
standing and the substantially manifest nature which is visible to 
pure minds. He is made in their effects and is openly revealed in His 
III theophanies ; then He proceeds through the manifold forms of the 
effects to the lowest order of the whole of nature, in which bodies 
are contained ; and thus going forth into all things in order He 
makes all things and is made all in all things, and returns into 
Himself, calling all things back into Himself, and while He is made 
in all things. He does not cease to be above all things and thus 
makes all things from nothing, that is. He produces from His 
Superessentiality essences, from His Supervitality lives, from His 
Superintellectuality intellects, from the negation of all things which 
are and which are not the affirmations of all things which are and 
which are not. 

BOOK III 

311 

And this is very clearly shown by the return of all things into 
the Cause from which they proceeded, when all things shall be 
converted into God as the air into light, when God shall be all in all. 
Not that even now God is not all in all, but after the sin of human 
nature and its expulsion from the abode of paradise, when, that is, it 
was thrust down from the height of the spiritual life and knowledge 
of the most clear wisdom into the deepest darkness of ignorance, no 
one unless illuminated by Divine Grace and rapt with Paul into the 
height of the Divine Mysteries can see with the sight of true 
understanding how God is all in all, for there intervenes the cloud of 
fleshly thoughts and the darkness of variegated phantasies, and the 
keenness of the mind is weakened by the irrational passions, and is 
turned back from the splendours of clear truth and is held in the 
grasp of the bodily shadows to which it has become accustomed. 
For it is not to be believed of the celestial essences which have never 
abandoned the condition of eternal bliss that they know any other 
thing in the universal creature except God Himself. For in God and 
in the primordial causes they behold all things beyond every sense 
and intellect, since they do not require all the works of nature in 
order to see the truth, but use only the ineffable grace of the eternal 
light, and it was to bring human nature back to this vision that the 
Incarnate Word of God descended, taking it upon Himself after it 
had fallen in order that He might recall it to its former state, healing 
the wounds of transgressions, sweeping away the shadows of false 
phantasies, opening the eyes of the mind, showing Himself in all 
things to those who are worthy of such a vision. 

A. These matters are difficult indeed, and far removed from 
the senses of those who ponder corporeal and visible things. 
However, for those who ascend in the spirit above visible and 
temporal things into the knowledge of the truth they become 
manifest as very clear and very true. For which of those who live a 
carnal life and are unwilling to look upon the clear light of wisdom 
hearing such things would not at once break out and exclaim: 
“They are mad who say such things. For how can the invisible, 
incorporeal, incorruptible God above all things descend from 
Himself and create Himself in all things so as to be all things in all 
things, and proceed as far as the lowest infamies and corruptions 
and the basest forms and species of this visible world so as to be 
Himself even in them, if He is all in all?” not knowing — he who 
says these things — that there can be no infamy in the universe of 
the whole creature, that no evil can harm it, that by no error can it 

That the 
683C 

Superessen¬ 
tial Goodness 
is made the 
negation and 
affirmation 
of all things 

683D 

684A 

684B 

312 

PERIPHYSEON 

be deceived or led astray — for that which affects it in part God 
does not permit to happen in the whole, for of its totality neither is 
the infamy infamous nor the evil harmful nor the error erroneous 
(true, to those who live an infamous or wicked life and who stray 
from the truth the honourable seems infamous, the good evil, the 
straight ways crooked, the righteous wicked ; but when their infamy 
and evil and error are removed, they remain to those of pious 
684C understanding all that is pure, perfect, untarnished, truly good, free 
from all error) — and not thinking of what Holy Scripture declares : 
“Every good gift and every perfect grace comes down from the 
Father of Lights”, declaring by the word “gift” the substantial 
constitutions of all things, and by “grace” the virtues with which the 
universal nature is adorned ; and this whole, namely substance and 
virtue, descends from the Father of Lights, that is, from the spring 
of all good things, God, Who flowing forth into all things that are 
and that are not, is made in all things, without Whom there can be 
nothing. But, as I think, enough has been said concerning the 
Nothing from which God has made all things. 

684D 

A recapitula¬ 
tion of the 
same things 

685A 

N. Enough surely but we must make a rapid recapitulation. By 
saying these things we are not refuting the interpretation of those 
who think that it was from the nothing by which is meant that 
privation of all possession that God made all things, and not from 
the Nothing by which is meant by the theologians the Super¬ 
essentiality and Supernaturality of the Divine Goodness. For 
according to the rules of theology the power of negation is stronger 
than that of affirmation for investigating the sublimity and incom¬ 
prehensibility of the Divine Nature ; and anyone who looks into it 
closely will not be surprised that often in the Scriptures God 
Himself is called by that name of Nothing. 

[A. Nor am I surprised, knowing on the authority of St. Dio¬ 
nysius that negations are more apt for divine knowledge than 
affirmations. 

N. You will not deny, as I think, that all things that Scripture 
avers to have been made from nothing possess a single nature 
common to all, by participation in which they subsist each in its due 
proportion ? 

A. To deny this would be ridiculous. For we believe and 
understand that God has created all together and at once the 
common nature of all things by participation in which (nature) all 
things are made. 

BOOK III 

313 

N. Do you think that that nature was made out of nothing? 

A. I not only think but firmly maintain that it was produced 
from nowhere else but from nothing. 

N. Define what that nature is. 

A. I cannot. For I do not see how a thing which is as yet 685B 
infinite and common to all and not yet distinguished by any sure 
form or species can be defined. 

N. How if someone of most high and holy authority were to 21 
persuade you that that nature was nothing else than the Word of 
God? Would you have said that it was made from nothing? — I 
mean from that nothing that means the privation of the whole of 
essence and substance and quality? 

A. Certainly not. For who would say that the Word of God 
was made from nothing seeing that it is that which makes all things 
from nothing? But who is he who was not afraid to say that the 
Word of God is the nature of all things? 

N. Listen to St. Basil in the Eighth Homily on Genesis: “For 
neither”, he says, “when the earth heard. Let it bring forth the 
growing grass and the fruit-bearing tree, did it produce grass which 685C 
it held hidden, nor did it bring out to the surface palm or oak or 
cypress which, before (coming into) sight, were hidden in its womb. 

But the Divine Word is the nature of the things that are made. Let it 
bring forth : not. Let it bring out what it holds, but. What it does not 
hold let it create ; God granting the power for the operation.” 

Notice how faithfully he has declared that the nature of all 
things that have been made is the Word of God and let no 
suggestion steal upon you of thinking that the Word of God is one 
thing and His command another. For in Him both being and 
commanding all things to be are the same thing. For by being all 
things become it since it is all things. And that you may the better 
know that the Word of God is both the nature of all things and 
consubstantial with the Father before all things and is created in all 
things that are made in it, listen to Ecclesiastes: “Who”, he asks, 685D 
“has investigated the Wisdom of God which precedes all things?” 

— and goes straight on to say : “Wisdom was created first of all 
things” — there you have it made among the creatures. Listen to the 
Gospel : “That which was made in Him was Life.” For what is read 
elsewhere in Solomon, “The Lord created me in the beginning of 686A 
His ways”, some accept as a reference to the Incarnation of the 

314 

PERIPHYSEON 

Word, others, whose interpretation seems to me the more credible, 
to His begetting by the Father.] 

22 But concerning those who think that the world was made from 
that nothing which means the privation or absence of the whole of 
essence I do not know what to say. For I do not see why they do not 
bethink them of the nature of opposites. For it is impossible that 
there should be privation where there is not possession of essence. 
For privation is the privation of possession, and therefore where 
possession does not precede privation does not follow. How, then, 
do they say that the world was made from privation ? For if this were 
true it would be agreed that the world had some possession before it 
was made. But if so, how would it come to suffer the privation of its 
possession at a time when it was not or, if it was, did not derive its 
686B being from the privation of itself? But if it was not at all before it 
was made, none of the wise doubts but that it lacked all possession. 
But if it lacked all possession, how could it be made [from] the 
privation of a possession which it never possessed? 

It is the same case with absence. For absence is the removal 
from the senses of some thing which was present or could become 
present. If, therefore, the world was made from absence, there was 
before it some nature such that from the privation of the possession 
of it or the absence of its essence there arose the occasion for the 
establishment of the world; and that nature was either God or 
creature ; and if God, they will be forced to admit that the world was 
686C made from the privation of possessing the Divine Nature or the 
absence of its essence ; but if creature, it was necessarily either 
visible or invisible ; if visible, we ought to believe that another visible 
world preceded ; if invisible, what reason compels us to admit that 
this world has been made from the absence of an invisible nature, or 
even that any world preceded it at all? But if true reason teaches 
that the universe of the whole visible and invisible nature was made 
from nothing, and that no nature but God Himself preceded it, how 
the world was made from the absence or deprivation of things that 
never were I do not understand. 

But if one should say that neither deprivation of possession nor 
the absence of some presence is meant by the name “Nothing”, but 
686D the total negation of possession and essence or of substance or of 
accident or, in a word, of all things that can be said or understood, 
the conclusion will be this : So that is the name by which it is 
necessary to call God, Who alone is what is properly meant by the 
negation of all things that are, because He is exalted above 

BOOK III 

315 

everything that is said or understood, Who is none of the things that 
are and are not, Who by not knowing is the better known. And so 687A 
agreement will be reached between us, who seemed to disagree. 

But if he should answer: Nor do I say that by “Nothing” is 
meant that negation by which God is said not to be anything of the 
things that are, but that which negates God and creature, he will of 
necessity be admitting what he was trying to deny, namely, that it is 
from the privative negation of God and creature that the world has 
been made. For the world is made from formless matter, formless 
matter from nothing at all, and therefore the world also from 
nothing at all. For he will not, as I think, dare to say that everything 
that is is either God or creature or neither God nor creature. For if 
he does, he will be counted among those who say that matter, from 
which they think God made the world, is coeternal with God. But 687B 
if everything that is is either God or creature — for no one who is 
truly wise would reckon that the world is made from the negation of 
God and the creature — there is left for the cause of the making of 
the world only that negation which by discarding the whole creature 
and exalting God above everything that is said or understood 
declares Him to be nothing of those things which are and which are 
not. 

There is also a very good argument in support of this reasoning : 

If God and the creature are two, either they derive from one 
principle and are therefore of the same nature — for from one 
principle there are not born things that are contrary by nature, for 
they draw upon the nature of their principle — ; or they are of 
themselves two principles opposed to one another — for if con- 
substantial they are not two but one, but if they are God and 
creature they are not two but one and one — or they are equal 
and not one from the other. For if they are two they must 687C 
necessarily be born of one. But if God (is) from nothing, but the 
creature from God, one will come from the other and they are not 
equal. For a one is not born of a one that is equal to itself. But if the 
creature (is) from God, God will be the Cause, but the creature the 
effect. But if an effect is nothing else but a made cause, it follows 
that God the Cause is made in His effects. For nothing proceeds 
from a cause into its effects that is foreign to its nature. For what 
breaks out into heat and light is nothing else but the fiery force 
itself. 

But if someone should say that the One begets a one equal to 
itself — for even God the Father, while being one, begets a One 

316 

PERIPHYSEON 

687D 

688A 

23 

’ AvaK8(pa- 
XaicooK; 

688B 

Concerning 

688C 

Socrates 

equal to Himself, God the Son — , let him know that he has fallen 
into gross error. For the most high Holy Trinity is not one and one 
and one but a simple and indivisible One in three inseparable 
Substances, and that One is multiple in power, not in number, and 
not any one, but universally and infinitely One, and above every one 
that can be said or understood. Therefore the Son (is) from the 
Father (as) “uno” from “uno”, not as “unum” from “uno”. But our 
present discourse is not an attack on the dogmatizers. This alone is 
what we set ourselves to investigate, in so far as our resources 
allowed us : What is meant by the name “Nothing” from which we 
believe that God made the world? 

A. Let whoever wishes to give an account of the establishment 
of the world propound to his followers whatever teaching he likes; 
for our part, let us keep to the track of our reasoning, and since it is 
more or less agreed between us that all things are from God and that 
God is in all things and that they were made from nowhere but from 
Him — since from Him and through Him and in Him all things are 
made — I beg you to give a clear and brief summary of the way in 
which the fourfold division of nature is applicable to God. 

For in disputations, and especially when they deal with obscure 
matters, an dvaK8(pa>ialcoai(;, that is, a recapitulation, is of great 
value. For it recalls to the memory all that has been said before in 
brevity and clarity, and displays to the mind’s eye in a single view all 
that has been done. 

N. Concerning God we had agreed, as I think, that of the 
whole established universe He is the Beginning and the Middle and 
the End — not that His being the Beginning is one thing. His being 
the Middle another, and His being the End another, for these three 
in Him are one — but because in theological contemplation there is 
a triple movement. For the intellect, whether human or angelic, is 
moved in one way when it considers that God is the Beginning of all 
things, in another way when it recognizes that all things are in Him and 
through Him as in a kind of medium, in another it contemplates the 
fact that the end of all things is in God and is God, for all things 
seek Him and find in Him their rest and their life. This interpretation 
is favoured by St. Augustine in the third chapter of the eighth book 
of the City of God, where he is discussing the philosopher Socrates. 
“He was unwilling”, he says, “that minds tarnished by earthly 
desires should attempt to reach up to divine things, when he saw 
that they were inquiring into the causes of things, which he believed 

BOOK III 

317 

! to be first and highest and nowhere but in the will of the One and 
I supreme God. Wherefore he thought that they could be compre- 
; hended by none but a purified mind, and therefore he urged that the 
good demeanour of a purified life should be insisted upon so that 
the mind, relieved of the burden of oppressive lusts, might raise 
itself by its natural strength to eternal things and with purity and 
understanding behold the nature of the incorporeal and immutable 
light in which the causes of all created natures live in stability.” 

A. Most surely we agreed, for reason approved it. 

N. So when we have a clear perception of the Divine Nature as 
the Beginning and Cause of all things — for He is dvapxoc; and 
dvaiiioq, that is, without beginning and without cause, for before 
Him there is nothing to stand in relation to Him as beginning or 
cause, but He Himself creates the nature of all things of which He is 
the Cause and Beginning — we not inappropriately call that Nature 
creative and not created ; for it creates and suffers itself to be created 
by none. But when we recognize the same Nature, namely the 
Divine, to be the End of all things beyond which nothing and in 
which all things eternally subsist and are universally God, we rightly 
call it neither created nor creative: not created because it is created 
by none, nor creative because here it no longer creates, for all things 
have been converted into their eternal reasons in which they shall 
and do remain eternally, and cease also to be called by the name of 
creature. For God shall be all in all, and every creature shall be 
overshadowed, that is, converted to God, as the stars when the sun 
arises. Do you then see how we are able to call one and the same 
nature, namely the Divine, not created but creative when we 
I consider it as the Beginning, but neither created nor creative when 

we regard it as the end? 

I 

A. I see what you mean well enough. Say what remains. 

N. I think there remains only the relation of Middle, which 
appears to its observers under a double mode, first when the Divine 
Nature is seen to be created and to create — for it is created by itself 
in the primordial causes, and therefore creates itself, that is, allows 
itself to appear in its theophanies, willing to emerge from the most 
hidden recesses of its nature in which it is unknown even to itself, 
that is, it knows itself in nothing because it is infinite and super¬ 
natural and superessential and beyond everything that can and 
cannot be understood ; but, descending into the principles of things 

That the 
fourfold con¬ 
sideration of 
nature is 
understood 
688D 
in God 

689A 

689B 

318 

PERIPHYSEON 

and, as it were, creating itself, it begins to know itself in some¬ 
thing — ; secondly when it is seen in the lowest effects of the 
primordial causes, in which it is correctly said of it that it is created 
only, but does not create. For it is created by descending into the 
lowest effects, beyond which it creates nothing, and is therefore said 
only to be created, and not to create. For it does not descend beyond 
the lowest effects by which it would be seen both to be created and 
to create. 

689C So it is created and creates in the primordial causes, but in their 
effects it is created and does not create, and not unreasonably, 
seeing that in these it has set the end of its descent, that is, of its 
appearing, and therefore every creature, corporeal and visible and 
subject to the senses, is wont to be called in Scripture not inap¬ 
propriately the last trace of the Divine Nature, and this every 
contemplative mind, like a Moses ascending to the peak of contem¬ 
plation, is permitted to penetrate, and as yet it can scarcely be fully 
discerned by wise minds owing to the distraction of the vapours of 
earthly phantasies and the thunderings and lightnings of mutable 
things which are suddenly born and suddenly pass away. For it is for 

689D very few, wholly detached from earthly thoughts and purged by 
virtue and knowledge, to know God in these visible creatures as the 
patriarch Abraham knew Him from the revolution of the stars, with 
the natural law for his guide, and as the other holy fathers before the 
Law was written down, and under the Law, as Moses in the Bush 
and on the summit of the Mount, then the Apostles after the Law 
were brought under Grace with Christ through visible symbols to 
the Divine Mysteries. For “His vestures white as snow” signified the 

690A visible creature, in which and through which the Word of God, Who 
subsists in all things, is understood. Listen to the Apostle when he 
says: “His invisible (attributes) have been visible from the creation 
of the world through the understanding of the things that have been 
made. Also his power and eternity are everlasting.” 

A. The fourfold division of universal nature I now most clearly 
see, and I recognize that it must be understood as both from God 
and in God. Therefore, now that we have dealt with the question of 
“Nothing” and, as I think, reached a firm conclusion, I consider 
that we should return to the discussion of the third part of universal 
nature, of which it is said that it is created only and does not create. 
For this is what we expect from the matter proposed. Indeed, 
although other questions have been introduced, this was to have 

690B been the chief topic of the third book. For it was for the sake of 

BOOK III 

319 

investigating it more thoroughly that the incidental contemplation 
of other questions was inserted. 

N. You consider rightly, and the time has come for it. But first 24 
we ought to speak about the sixfold quantity of intelligible days in 
which it is read that God made His works, if we are to carry out our 
promise fully, partly by following the interpretation of the Holy 
Fathers, partly by not concealing what comes into our minds from 
Him Who lightens our darkness and seeks to be sought and found in 
His Scriptures. For the Holy Spirit Who is the infinite founder of 
Holy Scripture established therein infinite meanings, and therefore 690C 
no commentator’s interpretation displaces another’s, provided only 
that what each says is plainly consistent with the Faith and with the 
Catholic Creed, whether he receives it from another, or finds it in 
himself, albeit enlightened by God. 

A. Proceed in what order you wish and take me along with 
you. For I shall follow you to learn in these matters the interpretation 
of others or of yourself, and shall choose what true reason, which in 
all things both seeks the truth and finds it, may instruct — not that I 
am yet qualified to distinguish true interpretations from false, but it 
would not be rash in me to dare to prefer, after consulting the truth, 
the likelier to the less likely. 

N. I would not approve anything rash or ill-considered. So the Concerning 
divine prophet Moses, in briefly writing of the establishment all 
together and the same time of the primordial causes of things visioiv 
and invisible by the words, “In the Beginning God made heaven and 690D 
earth”, and in signifying by the words “empty and void” or 
“invisible and incomposite earth” and “darkness over the abyss” 
their grandeur hidden in the Divine Will and incomprehensible 
before they flowed forth into forms and species, also indicating the 
beginning of the propagation of the pre-established causes into their 
effects by the name of the Spirit which fomented the waters or was 
borne above the waters, comes down to the interpretation of the 691A 
mystical power of the number six, saying, “And God said. Let there 
be light, and light was made.” Now in these words is found a great 
variety of interpretations by the Holy Fathers, some of whom see 
the creation of the angelic and intellectual celestial essence to be 
signified in this text of Holy Scripture, but others the creation of the 
nature of the visible light, that is, fire, as yet incomprehensible and 
invisible, which later, as though emerging from its sources, shone 
forth in the etherial bodies and, its course being hidden, as it were. 

320 

PERIPHYSEON 

for the space of three days, by traversing the abyss of the surface of 
the earth, made it, as they say, steeped in light throughout. 

Now, that by the word “light” is named the fiery nature as yet 
691B invisible and hidden ought to surprise no one who knows that Holy 
Scripture is wont to call effects by the names of their causes, and 
causes (by the names) of their effects. Now the effect of the fiery 
nature is light ; so it is not inappropriate that the fiery nature which 
was created in the beginning of things should be called by the name 
of the light which was later to proceed from it but till then was 
concealed within it, although some think that the primitive light 
began to shine at once, — but against these sufficient action has 
been taken by St. Augustine. But what follows, “And God saw the 
light that it was good, and He divided the light from the darkness 
and called the light day and the darkness night, and it was made 
evening and morning, one day”, they take to have been said with 
reference simply to the corporeal light and the intervals of time in 
691C which light and shade alternate about the earth, and they think that 
the nature of the corporeal light was established when it was said, 
“And God said. Let there be light, and light was made.” For 
because it is believed that the world was first established at the 
Spring Equinox, in which the Sun remains for an equal length of 
time above the earth as below, namely for twelve equinoctial hours, 
they think it was for that reason that it was said, “God divided the 
light from the darkness”, as though it were explicitly said: He 
divided the whole duration of the one day, which is completed in 
twenty-four hours, by an equal partition between day and night. 

But those who, following St. Augustine, more correctly think 
that the establishment of the angelic nature is signified by the 
creation of light, understand the division of the light from the 
darkness either as the distinction between formless matter and the 
formed creature, so that the name of light is taken for the perfection 
691D of form, but that of darkness for the confusion of formlessness ; or 
as a twofold contemplation of the celestial essences. For in one way 
the creature is considered in its eternal reasons in God in accordance 
with which it is established, and in another way in itself under God 
inasmuch as it is a creature ; and the first consideration is signified 
by the word “Light”, but the second by “Darkness”. For as light 
goes before darkness in rank, so the brightness of the eternal reasons 
692A in accordance with which every creature is made is preferred to the 
obscurity of the creature considered in itself ; and therefore God 
called the light day, that is, the splendour of the divine reasons, but 

BOOK III 

321 

the darkness night, that is, the obscurer form of the nature created 
in itself. 

But what follows, “And there was made evening and morning, 
one day”, they interpret as signifying the end of the created work 
and the beginning of the work to follow. For the morning, that is, 
the beginning of the work to follow is the end of the preceding and 
the end of the preceding is the beginning of the following. And 
therefore the one or first day is ended by the evening, whose 
morning, that is, beginning, had gone before in the creation of light. 

This, in brief, is what we have received from others. But we, 
who consider that the establishment of the primordial causes of 
things whether visible or invisible is to be understood in the making 
of heaven and earth, and their processions into their effects in those 
words of Holy Scripture, “Let there be light”, etc., say that by the 
creation of light is signified the procession of the primordial causes 
into their effects. 

For if Scripture, in saying, “And there was darkness over the 
abyss”, allows that the primordial causes themselves because of the 
incomprehensibility of their nature and their profundity that no 
understanding can know are overcast with a cloud of darkness, that 
is, with the density of profound ignorance, what wonder if the 
clarification of them in their effects through forms and species be 
given the name of light in these words, “And God said. Let there be 
light, and light was made”, as though one were to say, God 
commanded the primordial causes, which are in themselves invisible 
and which darken all understanding, to go forth into clear forms 
and the intelligible and sensible species of things visible and 
invisible. For not only God but the principles of all things as well 
are, according to St. Dionysius, wont to be called in the Oracles by 
the name of darkness on account of their incomprehensible infinity. 

But His procession through the principles into the creatures 
visible and invisible, I mean His theophanies, is appropriately 
signified by the name of brightness. For in them He Who passes all 
understanding suffers Himself to be in a kind of way understood. So 
“Let there be light”, says God, that is: Let the primordial causes 
proceed from the incomprehensible hiding-places of their nature 
into forms and species comprehensible and manifest to the under¬ 
standings of those who contemplate them, “and light was made”, 
that is, by the will and utterance of God the obscurity of the 
primordial causes proceeded into revealed forms and species. 

25 

692B 

Another 

theory 

692C 

692D 

322 

PERIPHYSEON 

“And God divided the light from the darkness”, that is: He 
separated the knowledge of the effects from the obscurity of their 
principal causes. For the dividing of the light from the darkness is 
the distinguishing of things which appear through forms and species 
from their principles in which they pass all understanding, and that 
was why he said earlier, “And God saw the light because it was 
693A good , that is : It pleased God that the original causes established 
before every creature beyond every intellect should be overspread 
with a light of intelligence and manifested to the intellects whether 
human or angelic; “and He called the light day and the darkness 
night”, that is: He preferred to name the manifestation through 
forms and species of things visible and invisible to the minds which 
contemplate them day, but to call the transcendence in their 
principles, incomprehensible and unknown to every created intellect, 
night. And there was made evening and morning, one day.” For 
although between the obscurity of the causes and the brightness of 
the effects a division and a difference is understood, yet it is one and 
the same day, that is, they have one meaning. For it is not 
understood that one creature is made in the causes, another 
693B established in the effects of the causes, but one and the same is 
made, in the eternal reasons as though in a darkness of the wisdom 
most secret and removed from every intellect, and subject to 
intellects in the processions of the reasons into their effects, as 
though revealed in a day of perfect knowledge. 

Now I have added these words concerning the works of the first 
intelligible day, tempered, as I think, to the capacity of intelligences, 
not in order to set my interpretation, as though it were something I 
had discovered from myself, over the interpretations of others — far 
be that (from me) ! — but out of the consideration that they do not 
much conflict with true contemplations, and that they are appro¬ 
priate to the outpourings of the primordial causes into their effects, 
which we are now discussing. 

A. Since many have given many explanations both in Greek 
and in Latin of the works of the first six days, our present discourse 
must be brief and succinct, and what has been said by you 
693C concerning the first light seems to me sufficient. For whether, as 
St. Basil thought, it signifies the creation of this corporeal light 
substantially in fire, or, as St. Augustine thought, the formation of 
the heavenly powers, or the general procession of the primordial 
causes into their effects, which ever of these opinions one chooses, 
one will not be far from the truth. 

BOOK III 

323 

N. Let us pass, then, to the consideration of the Second Day. 26 
And first it must be said that we have at the moment no intention 
concerning the allegorical sense of moral interpretations, but are 
attempting, under God’s guidance, to say a few things about only 
the creation of made things according to the historical sense. 

A. Nor do I want that. For enough has been said by the Holy 
Fathers about the allegorical sense of such things. 

N. “God said also. Let there be a firmament in the midst of the 693D 
waters and let it divide the waters from the waters. And God made 
the firmament.” Concerning the firmament all are unanimously 
agreed that nothing else is meant by that name but this visible 
heaven. But some affirm that only that outermost revolving sphere 
which encompasses the whole world about and is adorned with the 
harmonious motions of the stars is included under the one word 
“firmament”, others the whole space beyond the moon where the 694A 
bodies and the orbits of the planets are believed to be, together with 
the outermost circle of the stars ; others the whole void that revolves 
about the earth, that is, the air and the ether and the most sublime 
sphere ; for they say that the establishment of the air and the ether is 
not mentioned anywhere else. 

But as to why it is called by such a name, each has explained as 
he saw fit; some that it is because it sustains the upper waters, as 
though above it there were corporeal waters ; others, because it 
sustains the harmonious motions of the stars, as though those were 
bodies possessing weight ; others, because it contains within itself 
and holds firm the whole visible world ; nor are there lacking those 
who believe that the space of this heavier air is properly called by 
that name because it sustains as far as it can by some firm corporeity 694B 
of its nature clouds, rains, showers, snows, hail, and everything that 
is born in it from earthly vapours, and that the other regions of the 
lighter and higher parts of visible nature are named after it, as a 
whole named after a part. But as to which of these has the more 
correct understanding I leave it to the judgement of those who read 
them ; but to me, bearing in mind the meaning of the Greek name 
aiepecopa, such a word seems to have been appropriate for the 
reason that in it the place for the whole corporeal nature is situated 
and bounded. For beyond the firmament there is understood to be 
nothing sensible, or corporeal, or spatial, or temporal. For the limit 
of all visible things stands firm in it. For aiepecopa is for aiepfi dpa, 
that is, “solid things together”, for in it all solid, that is corporeal, 
things have their common boundary and stability. 694C 

324 

PERIPHYSEON 

Now, concerning the waters in the midst of which God said that 
the firmament should be made, I do not find anything satisfactory 
to say — not that I am ignorant of what many of the Fathers have 
thought of them. Thus St. Basil seems to imply in his Hexemeron 
that what is meant here are those waters called by the name of 
“abyss” and diffused around about the world, most rarefied and 
refined, above which there was at first darkness and then the Spirit 
of God was borne above them, and in which the first light, revolving 
as it were for the space of three days, shone upon this earthly mass 
when it was still without form, and which on the third day were 
condensed and gathered together in one place so that the dry land 
might appear ; and that it was in the midst of these waters that God 
694D said that the firmament should be made. But with this interpretation 
St. Augustine wholly disagrees, though without giving a satisfactory 
account of those waters between which God made the firmament. 
For in mentioning the opinions of others he did not reveal his own ; 
why, I do not know. But he prefers to the rest those who argue that 
it is the regions of this air, which are between the waters and seas 
and rivers situated below them and those which are suspended in the 
clouds above them, which are called by the name of firmament. So, 
without refuting the interpretation of any, I shall give you a briefly 
695A reasoned exposition, if you wish, of my own opinion about the 
waters. 

A. Certainly I wish it, and it is most necessary. For on this 
question no opinion has so far been given by anyone which has 
seemed satisfactory to me. 

Concerning 
the Firma¬ 
ment in the 
midst of the 
Waters 

695B 

N. I think, then, that the whole of created nature is divided 
into three parts. For everything that is created is either wholly body 
or wholly spirit or something intermediate which is neither wholly 
body nor wholly spirit, but which by a kind of relationship between 
the middle and the extremes receives into itself an equal share from 
the nature that is wholly spiritual, as from an upper extreme, and 
from the other, that is, from the nature that is wholly corporeal, 
from which it takes its proper subsistence which is connatural with 
those of the extremes. Therefore, if one looks carefully he will 
understand that this world is constituted upon this triple propor¬ 
tionality. For in so far as it is regarded in its reasons in which it is 
both eternally constituted and essentially subsists it is recognized 
not only as spiritual but also as altogether spirit — for none of those 
who practise philosophy correctly would deny that the reasons of 
corporeal nature are spiritual and indeed spirit — , but when its 

I 

! 

I 

BOOK III 

325 

lowest parts from the top down are regarded, that is, all those bodies 
composed of the universal elements, especially the earthly and the 
watery, which are susceptible both to coming into being and passing 
away, nothing is found in them but what is altogether body and 
bodily. But anyone who should observe the nature of the simple 
elements will discover, clearer than light, a certain proportionate 
mediation whereby they are neither altogether body — although it is 695C 
by their breaking up and coming together that natural bodies subsist 
— nor altogether without corporeal nature since from them all 
bodies flow forth and are resolved into them again ; and again, in 
relation to the other, upper, extreme, they are not altogether spirit 
since they are not altogether detached from the corporeal extreme, 
and not altogether not spirit since they receive the occasions of their 
existence from reasons which are altogether spiritual. Not without 
reason, then, did we say that this world possesses certain extremes 
which are totally distinct from each other, and intermediaries in 
which the concordant harmony of this universe is knit together. Let 
us then take the lower waters for the lower parts of this world — not 
inappropriately, for everything which is born into this world obtains 
its growth and nourishment from water. For when the moist quality 695D 
is removed from bodies they wither at once and decline and are 
reduced almost to nothing. For the natural philosophers affirm that 
even the celestial bodies which are the most enflamed and fiery are 
nourished by the moist nature of water, and the commentators of 
Holy Scripture do not deny this either — , whereas reason teaches 696A 
that it is the spiritual reasons of all visible things that are called by 
the name of the upper waters. For it is from them that all the 
elements whether simple or in composition flow forth as from 
certain mighty springs, and moistened by a certain intelligible virtue 
reach their disposition. Nor is Scripture silent, but declares : “And 
the waters that are above the heavens praise the Name of the Lord.” 

For although someone understands this to refer to the Heavenly 
Powers, this should not conflict with the interpretation given above, 
for the ways of interpreting the Divine Oracles are manifold. 

So God said that in the midst of these waters was made the 
firmament, that is, the nature of the simple elements which tran¬ 
scends the visible bodies by as much as it is surpassed by [their] 
reasons, and as much as it receives from the natures that are above 
it, so much it distributes to those that are below, while as much as it 
takes back from those that are below, so much it restores to those 
that are above, returning to them everything that flowed down from 696B 

326 

PERIPHYSEON 

them ; and it is this that the Lawgiver, at the prompting of the Spirit 
of prophecy, called the firmament. 

For by its firm and indivisible simplicity it supports the abyss of 
the intelligible reasons, but draws back into itself the flux of mutable 
bodies, and especially those that are composed of the dry and the 
moist qualities when with the passage of time they are dissolved, and 
within its universal solidity keeps them from perishing. And this is a 
fact of which those who, by steeping themselves in philosophical 
studies, have gained an understanding of the transfusion of natures 
into one another are not unaware. [For the causes descend into the 
elements, the elements into bodies. When bodies are dissolved they 
rebound again through the elements into their causes. Bodies 
themselves also pass into one another. In a flood air is turned into 
water and water returns again into air.] 

696C So God said, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the 
waters”, that is: Let there be the solidity of the simple elements 
between the profundity of their reasons and the mutability of the 
bodies that are composed by the coming together of the same ; “and 
let it divide the waters from the waters”, that is : let it distinguish the 
composite bodies, extended in places, mutable in times, disposed for 
coming into being and passing away, from the simple reasons, 
without variation of times and places, free from coming into being 
and passing away, fixed by an immutable law. [Now, between the 
simplicity of the causes and that of the elements there is this 
difference: that that of the causes is understood apart from the 
nature of places and times, while this cannot be without places and 
times since it is contained within them ; and that that is always free 
from all accidents, this sometimes receives accidents, sometimes 

696D avoids them : it avoids them in the universals, it receives them in the 
particulars.] 

27 But generally in all the works of the first six days it is to be 
understood that wherever Scripture relates, “God said. Let there be 
light, let there be firmament”, and so on for the remaining days, 
there is signified the [special] establishment of the primordial causes 

697A [of which the general creation was previously set forth under the 
name of heaven and earth] ; but wherever “And there was light, and 
God made the firmament, and it was made so”, the procession of 
the same primordial causes into their effects through the genera and 
species. 

“And God called the firmament heaven.” According to the 
8Tupo?ioyia of the Roman tongue, caelum is so called from the 

BOOK III 

327 

■ picture of the stars like an engraving as Pliny holds, but according to 
K the proper meaning of the Greek word oupavoq as though opoc, 

avco, that is, “the sight from above”. Rightly then is the firmament 

■ of the universal elements called ovpavoq, that is, “heaven”, since it 
K excels by the loftiness of its nature every composite and corporeal 
B creature. 

B There are those who think that there are extremely rarefied 

B waters above the firmament, that is, above the company of the stars. 
W But they are refuted both by consideration of the weights and by the 
order of the elements. Others on the other hand argue from the 
B paleness of the stars that there are vaporized and almost incorporeal 
S waters above the heavens. For they say that the stars are cold, and 
B that is why they are pale. For, as they affirm, there is no coldness 
I where the substance of waters is absent, not considering carefully 
? enough what they are saying. For even where fire is present in 
I substance, there also (is) coldness. For although crystal is of a cold 
h nature, yet no wise man would say that it lacks the fiery power, 
which penetrates into all bodies. So where the fiery force burns it is 
heat, where it does not burn it is cold ; and it does not burn unless 
there is matter in which it may burn and which it may consume. 
[And] that is why the rays of the sun when they are diffused through 
the ethereal regions do not burn. For in the most subtle and spiritual 
nature they find no matter to burn. When, however, they descend 
into the regions of the corporeal air, they find a kind of matter on 
which to work, and begin to blaze, and the more they go forth into 
denser bodies, the more they exercise their force of burning in those 
things which are or can be destroyed by the power of heat. But when 
they rise upwards into the uppermost regions of the world which are 
closest to the most rarefied and spiritual nature, not finding any 
matter for kindling, they produce no heat, and display only the 
operation of illumination, and therefore the ethereal and pure and 
spiritual heavenly bodies which are established in those regions are 
always shining, but are without heat. And hence they are believed to 
be both cold and pale. 

Therefore that planet which is called by the name of Saturn, 
since it is in the neighbourhood of the harmonious motions of the 
stars, is said to be cold and pale, whereas the body of the Sun, since 
it possesses the middle [region] of the world — for, as the 
philosophers affirm, the distance from the earth to the Sun is the 
I same as that from the Sun to the stars — is understood to occupy a 
( kind of midway position. For it receives for its subsistence a 

r,- 

•/ 

\ 

« 

V 

- - 

697B 

Why the 
Stars are 
pale and cold 

697C 

Concerning 
the Sun 

697D 

328 

PERIPHYSEON 

kind of corporeality from the natures that are below it, but a 
spiritual subtlety from those that are above it, and draws together 

698A into itself as it were contrary qualities from each part of the world, 
namely the upper and the lower, whose tension, like some balanced 
pair of scales, does not allow it to abandon its natural situation, 
permitting it neither to rise upwards because of the weight of the 
lower part, nor to sink downwards because of the lightness of the 
upper. Therefore it is seen to be of shining heat and this colour is 
intermediate between pale and ruddy since it receives into the even 
temper of its own brightness a part of the paleness of the cold stars 
above and a part of the ruddiness of the hot bodies below. But the 
planets which revolve about it change their colours in accordance 
with the qualities of the regions they are traversing, I mean Jupiter 
and Mars, Venus and Mercury, which always pursue their orbits 
around the Sun, as Plato teaches in the Timaeus; and therefore 
when they are above the sun they show a bright face, but when 
below a ruddy face. 

698B So the paleness of the stars does not compel us to understand 
that the element of water is in any way above the heaven, since that 
paleness comes from absence of heat. But since it would take a long 
time to expound everything which reason deduces from nature 
concerning these matters, let us return to our purpose. 

“And there was made evening and morning, one day.” The 
interpretation is the same as we gave above for the conclusion of the 
first day — for although the contemplation of the spiritual reasons 
of the world is other in the primordial causes than in the simple and 
universal elements, and other again in composite and particularized 
bodies, there is one and the same understanding of the universe of 
the whole world, and this explanation is to be accepted in the case of 
the remaining days wherever “And there was made evening and 
morning, one day” is introduced. Enough has been said, considering 
the brevity that is required, concerning the second day. 

698C A. Enough surely, and likely to be true, although to many, and 
indeed to almost all, unknown. 

N. It follows, then, that we should speak briefly about the third 
day. “But God said. Let the waters that are under the heaven be 
gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear, and so 
it was done.” Concerning the gathering together of the waters into 
one place the opinion which most commentators of this passage of 
Scripture adopt, and which they have taken from St. Basil the 

BOOK III 

329 

prelate of Caesarea in Cappadocia, is known to all, for it seems to 
all who think [upon it] the easiest : that which affirms that on the 
third day a very rarefied and almost vaporous quantity of waters, 
which without limit were diffused all about the as yet formless and 
invisible mass of the earth, which up to now filled the spaces of the 
air and the ether, and which glowed in the embrace of the primitive 
light, was gathered together into one place. He believes that the 698D 
firmament had been made in its midst on the second day, and thinks 
that above it the upper part of the waters was suspended, but the 
lower diffusions of the above-mentioned abyss were collected into 
one, that is, were gathered within the bounds of the ocean which 
encloses them by its shores, so that the dry land might appear and a 
place might be provided for the air and the ether. But this opinion, if 
the truth be consulted, appears shaky and inconsistent for many 699A 
reasons and to be based on altogether false fancies. For we follow 
St. Augustine in not believing or judging that it is in accordance 
with the truth that that earthly mass was created before everything 
else, or that that abyss was diffused all about it and that then the 
firmament was made in the midst of the waters, then the waters that 
remained below the heaven were collected into one place, or that 
any of these things came before any other in place or in time. For all 
these things and the nature of the rest of the visible things were 
established all together and at once [ordained and constituted] for 
their own times and places, and in no case did the generation of any 
one of them into forms and species, quantities and qualities, precede 
by temporal intervals the generation of any other, but that they 
proceeded simultaneously, each according to its genus and species 
and indivisible particulars, from their eternal reasons in which they 699B 
subsist as essences in the Word of God. For the sixfold quantity of 
the six first days and their intelligible division is understood to refer 
to the causes of established things and of their first downrush 
simultaneously into the initial constitution of this world; and that 
which was made at once and all together by the Creator is 
distinguished, in the perfection of the number six, [not by a 
temporal but by an intelligible division] by the Holy Spirit through 
the Prophet so that through the power of that number the perfection 
of the divine work might be indicated. [For this number is completed 
by its parts, nor does its whole exceed the parts nor the parts the 
whole.] For as the voice precedes the word not temporally but 
causally — for the word is made from the voice as a formed body is 
made from formless matter — so from causes as yet unknown and, 
so to speak, lacking visible shape, the establishment of all visible 

330 

PERIPHYSEON 

things, without the intervention of intervals of times or places, is 
simultaneously brought forth into the forms and numbers of places 
and times, and as He Who made the world from formless matter did 
not take the matter from which He made it from elsewhere, but 
from Himself and in Himself [both took it and made it], so He 
neither sought for places outside Himself in which to make nor 
looked for times within the intervals of which He might carry out 
His work, but in Himself He made all things, and He is the Place of 
all things and the Time of times and the Age of ages. Whose 
operations are simultaneous. For all things were made in the 
twinkling of an eye. For even those things which have received and 
699D do receive and shall receive their generation at distinct intervals 
along the paths of times are made at once and all together in Him in 
Whom both past and present and future are at once and all together 
and one. 

Having, then, rejected the aforesaid opinion, we ask of what 
kind were the waters under heaven which were gathered together 
into one place, and what is that one place. For the sensible waters 
which are commonly called by the name of sea or abyss or ocean, as 
soon as they had gushed forth from their hidden causes, made their 
700A appearance in their proper form and quantity and quality in their 
place, that is, between earth and this air which adjoins the earth, 
bound within their shores, some flowing secretly in different direc¬ 
tions in the bowels of the earth as in the veins of some great body, 
some covering openly its surface, and in the places where they had 
been dispersed when they did not have one place proper to 
themselves, to which having later become attached, they do not 
overstep the defined limits. For the four principal bodies of the 
world composed from the four simple elements, I mean earth and 
water, air and ether, with all the things that are made in them and 
from them at once and all together received their forms and places 
and individualities and times and extensions and differences and 
700B properties, their measures also and their weights and everything 
which in them is perceived or surpasses the sense and is understood 
or eludes the understanding. But if anyone offers physical reasons 
for these things, because they cannot be comprehended by the 
corporeal sense by those who only consider sensible things, he will 
[either] be treated with contempt as though he were talking nonsense 
or will be thought to be speaking allegorically because they do not 
know how to distinguish nature from [its] motions. For physics 
considers the substantial reasons of nature, but ethics her motions 
whether they be rational or irrational. 

1 

BOOK III 

331 

A. Pray expound whatever seems to you likely to be true 
concerning the question to be solved without fear of anyone, 
whatever his attitude may be, whether dazzled by the light of truth 
he does not understand what you say, or consumed with the poison 
of envy he treats you with contempt, or is disposed to quarrel with 
you out of zeal for his former opinions. 

N. After the account of the constitution of the world, that is, of 700C 
its two extreme parts which are dissimilar from each other, I mean 
of the incorporeal and simple reasons after which it was established, 
and the composite bodies which are subject to coming into being 
and passing away and to places and to times — extremities which 
for reasons already given are called by the name of waters — and of 
the mediation of the four elements which have received the name of 
firmament or heaven, the attention of the Prophet seems to descend 
to the consideration of the same lowest part of all things, namely, of 
perishable bodies, as though to a third contemplation of established 
nature. For first he gave a general description of the procession of 
the primordial causes into their effects from the unknown and 
hidden recesses of nature as though from a kind of darkness into the 700D 
light of the manifold forms, clear and manifest to the intellects or 
senses of those who contemplate them, then, considering in a second 
observation the threefold establishment of the world, namely, in its 
reasons, in the universal elements, and in the particular and 
composite bodies, he arrived at the contemplation of the soluble and 
perishable bodies themselves which occupy the lowest place of the 
whole creature. 

Since, then, all bodies which are composed from the coming 701A 
together of the four simple elements, extending from the greatest to 
the smallest, are considered in three ways — for the matter in them 
is regarded in one way, the form and species which by being 
attached to matter produces every solid and sensible body in 
another — for matter by itself without form produces no body 
because by itself it is formless, though with the addition of form it 
becomes a perfect body — , [in another the essence and substantial 
form which, like an immovable foundation, supports and contains 
the formed matter], it was necessary to distinguish logically sub¬ 
stantial form from the [formed] matter. Now, by the greatest bodies 
I meant earth, water, air, and ether, and heaven, in which there is 701B 
multiplied an innumerable quantity of smaller and medium-sized 
and minute bodies ; but all of them, that is, the greatest and 
medium-sized and the smallest, are constituted out of the four most 

332 

PERIPHYSEON 

pure and most simple elements, which are invisible in themselves, 
because they are dissolved into them. For no element by itself is 
reached by the corporeal sense. If, then, as has been demonstrated 
by the reasons given above, those four pure elements were worthy to 
be called by Scripture by the name of firmament or heaven [on 
account of] the simple power of their nature, it is not surprising that 
all bodies which are constituted from them and below them by their 
coming together should be signified by the name of the waters that 
are placed under the heaven. Not inappropriately; for they are not 
only mutable but are subject to coming into being and passing away. 
701C For even those [bodies] which are called celestial or ethereal, 
although they seem to be spiritual and imperishable, yet shall 
necessarily come to their end in dissolution and decay because they 
came into being through generation and composition. But if the 
celestial bodies await a necessary dissolution, since Truth says, 
“Heaven and earth shall pass away”, and the Psalmist, “The 
heavens are the work of Thy hands. They shall pass away”, and like 
[testimonies] in Holy Scripture, what must we think of the lowest 
bodies of the world, which are born and perish every day? 

So if in every body whether heavenly or earthly or watery is 
also observed the inconstant flux of formless matter — for it is 
defined thus : Matter is the mutability of mutable things capacious of 
701D all forms, the instability of the mutable form by which the matter 
itself is specified and formed — for it is the qualitative form which, 
when combining with matter, produces body — now, by qualitative 
form I mean that which by the quality and quantity it assumes 
becomes apparent to the corporeal senses and which, clinging to the 
702A instability of matter, is always in flux along with matter and 
undergoes coming into being and passing away, and through its 
qualities and quantities receives increases and decreases and 
succumbs to the many and various vicissitudes which come upon it 
from without from the quality of places, airs, waters, victuals, and 
similar chances — does it not seem likely and to accord with right 
reason that that mutability of matter with that qualitative form 
which, cleaving to it, endures the same storm of incessant and 
turbulent inconstancy, should be signified by the figurative name of 
the waters that lie beneath the heaven of the simple elements ; while 
the substantial form or species which immutably subsists in its genus 
and never experiences the mutability of the body which is composed 
of matter and qualitative form — for the substantial form does not 
begin with the body [although it is born in the body], without which 

i 

BOOK III 

it abides as an essence by itself in its genus, nor does it perish with 
the body, since no essence and power and operation can undergo 
either the destruction or change of destructible and changeable 
things < being consolidated > by the proper supports of its nature 
— is not inappropriately called by the word “dry”, that is, earth? 

So “let the waters which are under the earth be gathered 
together into one place and let the dry land appear” ; for unless the 
contemplating mind first assembles the fluctuating inconstancy of 
matter and the form attached to it, like turbulent waves, into one 
place in the intelligence — for matter and the form attached to it can 
be combined under a single meaning since they produce a single 
body — that substantial form which is always stable by reason of 
the natural firmness of its nature will not become apparent to the 
mind’s eye. For as the diffusion of the waters covers the earth so 
that it is not apparent to the corporeal senses, so the mutability and 
innumerable multiplicity of perishable bodies conceals the stability 
of the form which underlies them from the intellectual observation 
which contemplates the nature of things so that it is not considered 
by itself, clearly distinct from the bodies ; and as when the waters 
recede and are collected from all sides into their beds the shores 
begin to appear far and wide, bare and dry and solid, so when the 
inconstancy of perishable things is separated by the mind’s observa¬ 
tion from the imperishable natures in uninterrupted contemplation, 
soon the immutable and most beautiful firmness of the [substantial] 
forms and species will become manifest in their genera to the mind’s 
gaze. 

Now, by dry land is meant the stability of the substantial 
forms ; not inappropriately, since it is bare and free from the 
covering of all the accidents. For every form and species considered 
in the simplicity of the genus in which it subsists is altogether free 
from the encountering of accidents, while the bodies which they 
underlie are capable of receiving all accidents. 

But concerning the substantial and ever-abiding form and 
concerning that which is mutable because of its association with the 
quality and quantity of matter, enough has been said in the First 
Book, as I think, and now a brief review of them must be made so 
that no doubt may remain in the readers. The substantial form is 
that by participation in which every indivisible species is formed, 
and it is one in all and they are all in the one, and neither is it 
I multiplied in things that are multiplied nor diminished in their 

! reduction. For that form, for example, which is called “man” is no 

333 

702B 

Concerning 
the Dry Land 
and the 
Waters 

702C 

702D 

703A 

Concerning 
the Substan¬ 
tial Form 

334 

PERIPHYSEON 

greater in the infinite multiplication of human nature into its 
indivisible species than in that unique and first man who became the 
first to partake of it, nor was it less in him than in all whose bodies 
are multiplied out of him, but in all it is one and the same and in all 
703B it is equally [whole], and in none does it admit any variation or 
dissimilarity. The case is the same with all substantial forms; in 
horse, in ox, in lion, and in the other animals, in trees also and in 
crops a like rule is established. 

Concerning But that form which is joined to matter so as to constitute body 

the Material (jg) always varying and changeable and dispersed among diverse 
differences by accident. For it is not from natural causes that the 
manifold differences of visible forms proceed in one and the same 
substantial form, but they come from without. For the dissimilarity 
of men one from another in feature, size, and quality of their several 
bodies, and the variety of custom and conduct result not from 
703C human nature, which is one and the same in all in whom it exists, 
and is always most like itself and admits no variety, but from the 
things which are understood about it, namely from places and times, 
from generation, from the quantity and quality of their diets, their 
habitats, the conditions under which each is born, and, to speak 
generally, from all things which are understood about the substance 
and are not the substance itself. For that is simple and uniform and 
is susceptible to no variations or compositions. 

28 Whosoever therefore by the operation of reason can separate 
all external things whatsoever that are understood or perceived 
about the proper substance of the individual forms [that is, about 
the indivisible and most specific species of each form, for instance, 
703D of man, of horse, of ox, of fish, of bird, of crops, of trees], which are 
changeable and always in flux as though by some flood of many 
waters, from that inward substance itself about which they revolve 
while itself is firmly fixed in the unchangeable tenor of its nature, 
and gathers them together into one place, that is, includes them 
within the bounds of one and the same definition, saying, “Every¬ 
thing which is either understood or perceived about its proper 
704A substance is varying and changing and covers it over with its waves 
so that it can scarcely be distinguished what it is” ; is being 
commanded by divine admonitions to gather the waters which are 
under the heaven together into one place so that the dry land may 
appear, that is, so that the hidden substantial form about which the 
waves of the accidents are in turmoil may clearly appear before the 
gaze of the intellects which discern the nature of things. But on the 

BOOK III 

335 

subject that for all things that can be defined there is a common 
place or proper definition there has been enough discussion, as I 
think, in the First Book. 

“And God called the dry land earth and the gatherings of the 
waters He named seas.” By the duplication of words in the works of 
the three primordial days, as on the first He called the light day and 
the darkness night, on the Second God called the firmament heaven, 
on the third God called the dry land earth and the gathering 
together of the waters seas, is signified, I think, the twofold way of 
regarding the whole creature. For one and the same thing is made 
known by the investigations of contemplation in one way in its 
causes, in another way in its effects. 

“And God saw that it was good.” God’s seeing is the creation 
of the whole universe. For for Him it is not one thing to see and 
another to do, but His seeing is His Will and His Will is His 
operation. But it is right that everything that God sees is good. For 
the Divine Goodness is the cause of all good things, nay indeed, is 
itself all good things. For nothing is good in itself, but in so far as it 
is good it is good by participation in that Good which alone is 
substantial good in itself. For “no one is good save God alone”. So 
“God saw that it was good”, that is : He saw Himself (as) the Good 
in all things. For God sees nothing but Himself [because outside 
Himself there is nothing and everything that is within Him is 
Himself] and His seeing is simple, and it is formed from nothing else 
than from Himself. 

“And He said. Let the earth bring forth the flourishing and 
seed-bearing vegetation and the fruit-tree bearing fruit after its kind, 
and let the seed in it be over the earth.” In these words the Prophet 
records the creation of the power of the crops and the trees in their 
primordial causes, and this power is usually named by the Holy 
Fathers the force of the seeds, in which that species of soul which is 
called the nutritive and auctive exerts its operation, namely by 
administering the generation of the seeds and by nourishing the 
things that are generated and by bestowing upon them growth 
through the numbers of places and times. And, because everything 
that makes a visible appearance in the nature of things receives the 
original causes of its generation from nowhere else but from the 
hidden recesses of the natural and substantial form which we said 
above was signified by the word “dry land” or “earth”, it is 
therefore written : “Let the earth bring forth flourishing vegetation”, 
etc., as though it were openly said : Let the seminal force of crops 
and trees, which is causally created in the inward reasons of 

704B 

Concerning 
God’s Vision 

704C 

704D 

336 

PERIPHYSEON 

705A 

705B 

29 

Concerning 
the fourfold 
division of 
Wisdom 

705C 

705D 

substances, proceed through generation into sensible forms and 
species ; and this procession of the primordial causes into their I 

effects is set forth in the words of Scripture which follow : “And so it i 

was done, and the earth brought forth the flourishing and seed-bearing 
vegetation after its kind and the fruit-bearing tree and each thing 
that possesses seed after its species.” You see how the divine 
Scripture reveals most clearly the genera and the species in which 
there subsist causally and invisibly whatever things break forth I 
through generation in quantities and qualities into the knowledge of j 
the corporeal senses ? ; 

But if it seems to anyone that this account which we have given 
to the best of our ability of the three first days is not in accordance 
with history but with the laws of allegory, let him carefully consider 
the fourfold division of wisdom. 

And first is TipaKTiKf), practical ; second (puaiKf), natural ; third . 
GeoXoyla, which discusses God; fourth XoyiKf), rational, which 
shows by what laws each of the other three parts of wisdom should 
be discussed. One investigates the virtues by means of which the j 
vices are replaced and are entirely eradicated ; the second the I 
reasons of natures whether in their causes or their effects ; the third i 
what should piously be thought of the Cause of all things. Who is I 
God; but how to conduct a rational inquiry into virtue and nature 
and God is, as we have said, what the fourth teaches and carefully 
considers. To this (division) of the four aforesaid parts of wisdom he 
ought to apply the historical account of the establishment of things, 
and if he is not entirely ignorant of philosophy, he will attach it to 
none but the physical. And if this is so, let him look for anything 
that has been said by us by way of allegory and, as I think, he will 
not find it. For in the case of the first day we said that the 
procession, comprehensible to senses and intellects, of the primordial 
causes into their effects is signified in general by the creation of 
light. [Now, that the primordial causes of all things are substances 
established in Divine Wisdom St. Ambrose is witness when he says 
in his Hexemeron, “The man who is full of knowledge”, Moses, 
that is, “observes that the substance of things visible and invisible 
and the causes of things are contained in the Mind of God alone”.] 

In the case of the second we decided, not inappropriately as / think, 
that the triple constitution of this world, made up, that is, of its 
reasons, and of the incomposite elements, and of the composite 
bodies, is described by the word “waters”, and the firmament that 
was made in the midst of them ; but we judged that the third 

BOOK III 

337 

; consideration of this world, consisting in the separation of the 
things that are mutable in it from those which, protected by the 
support of their own nature, remain immutably in the same [state], 
that is, in the distinction which a logical observation draws between 
all the mutable accidents and the immutable solidity of the sub¬ 
stantial forms, was what the divine Scripture intended by the 
gathering together of the waters and the appearing of the earth. 

Not unreasonably ; for it is a very common practice of the Holy 
Oracles to signify by words which signify visible things the natural 
existences and reasons of invisible things, to exercise devout philo¬ 
sophers. Nor is this surprising ; for very often they are in the habit of 
denoting corporeal and sensible things by the names of the spiritual 
and invisible. But to load the present discussion with examples of 
this reciprocity of metaphor, since they are many and innumerable 
and very well known to those who are practised in Holy Scripture, 
would be a long and superfluous task. 

Nevertheless, let us use a few examples : “That which is born of 
; flesh is flesh” — here the whole man born in original sin is called by 

I the name of flesh — “and that which is born of the spirit is spirit” — 

the whole man reborn by regeneration in Christ is expressed by the 
: word “spirit”. And if anyone shall say. Not the whole man is born 

of flesh but only the flesh of man, I shall reply : Then not the whole 
man is born of the spirit but only the soul, and if so it follows that 
the grace of baptism is of no benefit to bodies. But if the whole man, 
namely, soul and body, is reborn in Christ and is made spirit, the 
whole man necessarily is born in Adam of the flesh and is flesh, and 
so it is concluded both that flesh is called spirit and spirit flesh. The 
Word of God is called flesh, and flesh the Word, and (there are) 
similar cases in which there is understood both auveKSoxf] and 
psxacpopd. 

So we did not use allegory when we said that Holy Scripture 
meant by the name of light the visible and intelligible forms of 
things, but by the expression “darkness” the substantial causes 
which surpass all sense and intellect and are eternally substantiated 
in the Divine Mind ; and by the symbolic names of the waters and 
the firmament in their midst the triple establishment of this visible 
world, that is, in its causes, which St. Ambrose calls the substances 
of visible things precreated in the Divine Mind, and in the general 
elements which the Greeks call the universal axoixsia because they 
fit and chime with one another [for axoixeicoaic; is SiaxuTTCoaic;, that 
is, conformation ; for by their coming together all visible bodies are 

706A 

706B 

706C 

’ AvaK8(pa- 
Xamoiq 

338 

PERIPHYSEON 

706D made, and therefore the Athenians call letters aioixeiot because by 
their coming together the articulated word is perfected]. Not 
unreasonably; for although they are considered severally in their 
purity and distinct from one another they appear to be contraries 
[for cold is the contradiction of heat, moisture of dryness], but when 
they mingle with one another they bring about by a kind of 
marvellous and inexplicable harmony the compositions of all visible 
707A things [for actually it is not the substances of the elements that are in 
discord but their qualities], and these, namely the compositions, 
because they can be dissolved and reduced to those things by whose 
coming together they were brought about, are most appropriately 
typified by the Prophet in the phrase, “the waters that are under the 
heaven”. But since there are two ways of regarding these visible 
beings which are subject to the corporeal senses — for in one way we 
consider in them their sustaining and immutable substances in 
which they have their proper being, in another the accidents which 
are susceptible to increase and decrease and continuously undergo 
the incessant change of their restless motion — , it was necessary by 
intellectual discrimination to draw a distinction between the mutable 
and the immutable, that is, between the accidents and the substances, 
and to typify the mutable as waters which are, as it were, never 
resting and always in flux, the immutable as the solid and dry land 
which subsists by virtue of the stability of its nature. Therefore in all 
707B these instances we are not treating of allegory but only of the bare 
physical consideration, adapting the names of sensible things to 
signify invisible things in accordance with a very well-established 
usage of Divine Scripture. 

But that we should not once again seem to be holding in 
contempt the most venerable interpretations of the Holy Father 
Basil, I will briefly report what his opinion was in so far as it is given 
me to understand it. In his fourth Homily on Genesis he says : “Let 
the waters be gathered together in one gathering. Lest the water 
should flow in and submerge the regions that receive it and, 
continuously rising, flood one region after another and whelm the 
whole of the adjoining continent, it is commanded to gather itself 
into one gathering ; and this is why, when the sea is often swollen by 
the winds and raises its waves to their highest pitch, just as it reaches 
707C the shore, its force is broken and it falls back in spray. Wilt thou not 
fear Me, said the Lord, Who have set the sand as a boundary to the 
sea? — for it is by the weakest of all things, namely sand, that the 
violent invasions” of the sea “are restrained. What otherwise would 

BOOK III 

339 

prevent the Red Sea from overrunning the whole of Egypt which is 
at a lower level, and from joining the sea which borders on Egypt if 
it were not restrained by the Creator’s decree? For since Egypt is at 
a lower level than the Red Sea some who wished to make an 
artificial link between the Egyptian Sea and the Indian, in which the 
Red Sea is situated, were prevented from their efforts by this, both 
Sesostris the Egyptian who made a start with it, and later Darius the 
Mede when he attempted to complete it. 

“I have said this in order that we may understand the power of 
the decree. Let the waters be gathered together in one gathering, 
that is : Let no (gathering) go back upon itself, but let it remain 
gathered together in the first gathering. Then He who said, “Let the 707D 
waters be gathered together in one gathering”, has shown you that 
there were many waters separated in many ways. For the peaks of 
the mountains with their deep well-watered gullies had their gather¬ 
ing of water, and moreover many plains and level spaces (in no way 
smaller than the greatest oceans) and many hollows and valleys of 708A 
one shape or another, all of them then receptacles filled with water, 

— all (their waters) were brought together by the divine command 
into one gathering of water collected from everywhere.” 

By these and similar words of this author it is clearly shown 30 
that the masses of water everywhere diffused in hollow places and in 
the lowlands of the earth were gathered together in one gathering by 
the divine decree for this reason, that they should not by the piling 
up of their inundations cover the whole surface of the earth, but that 
the dry land adorned with plants and trees and rich in the different 
kinds of animals and girt with the most wide shores of ocean and the 
different seas and protected from the force of the flood tide by the 708B 
sandy barriers made strong by the power of the divine ordinance 
should appear for the purpose of human habitation. For by the 
might of the divine decree the most forceful fury of the waves is 
bridled and repulsed from overflowing the lowlands of the earth and 
the places that are at a lower level than themselves. But as I said, I 
wished to add this to prevent anyone from saying : Why have we 
dared to ignore totally a famous commentator of Holy Scripture? 

A. It was a wise precaution. For on no account ought we to 31 
neglect or reject the interpretations of the Holy Fathers, especially 
as we are not unaware that very often they put their arguments in 
simple terms to suit the understanding of their hearers when it is not 
capable of grasping the profundities of the natural reasons upon 
which the spiritual meaning is based ; and therefore I think I should 

340 

PERIPHYSEON 

not be speaking rashly when I say that the divine Basil was 
illuminated by grace from on high when he adopted a simpler 
708C explanation of the operations of the six first intelligible days than 
that by which he himself understood them, for he was accommodat¬ 
ing his discourse to the simplicity of his audience. For he spoke as a 
preacher before his congregation, and for the sake of those whose 
understanding could not penetrate beyond conceiving events as 
disposed in space and time, he expounded, what in a profounder 
sense he knew to have been performed by God as a single and 
instantaneous act, as though it were spread over a succession of 
temporal intervals ; as Moses, the greatest of the prophets, is himself 
understood to have done. For he could not narrate instantaneously 
what God did instantaneously. Neither can we when, groping in the 
darkness of our ignorance, we attempt to behold the light of truth, 
express in words instantaneously everything which in our minds we 
708D perceive instantaneously. For every science which in the mind of the 
wise man is formed as a whole can be communicated to the ears of 
his hearers only by being divided into parts and ordered in words 
and syllables and sentences which follow one another in temporal 
succession. Therefore we ought not to believe that the simplicity of 
the language which the father used in his exposition reflects a 
709A simplicity in his understanding. For who will be so bold as to rebuke 
one of the luminaries of theology when he does not know how much 
of the light he retained within himself and how much he wished to 
mete out to the less proficient? Nor would I find it easy to believe 
that this great teacher, so full of the power of wisdom, would have 
understood or considered that the enormous mass of the earth 
remained shrouded on all sides by the infinite floods of the abyss for 
any interval of time after its first creation and then, after the space 
of two temporal days had passed, was at the beginning of the third 
day stripped, as it were, of the abyss which was covering it, being 
collected together into a gathering. For the most blessed Basil would 
have clearly seen, as I think, that all these things, and everything else 
which the divine Scripture relates concerning the operations of the 
709B six primordial days are distinguished by the reasons in accordance 
with which they were established and accomplished simultaneously, 
without any temporal interval, by the divine decree, and brought 
forth into their species. 

[Should we understand any differently his teaching in the Ninth 
Homily of his Hexemeron? “Understand”, he says, “the Word of 
God running through creation, setting forth at that moment and 

BOOK III 

341 

operating until now and reaching to the end, when the world will be 
consummated, and as a ball when it is propelled by someone, if it is 
received by a downward slope, and by suitable conformation and 
convenience of the ground, rolls downhill and does not come to rest 
until the levelness of the plains receives it, so the nature of existing 
things, moved by one decree, runs through the creation that consists 
in generation and decay, preserving the sequences of kinds by means 
of likeness until it reaches the limit of its descent. For it makes horse 
the successor of horse, lion of lion, eagle of eagle, and sends forth 
each of the animals protected by continuity of succession until the 
end of the universe.” [Consider the force of the simile. The Word of 
God, he says, ever in act and in motion, runs through all things from 
the beginning of creation to the end of the universe. For by one 
decree He makes together and at once one nature of things and 
moves it into genera and species like a ball which rolls down a slope 
and does not stop until it comes, as it were, to rest at the end of the 
universe. So the Word of God is one ; by one decree it ordains the 
coming into being of the one nature of existing things which it both 
established and simultaneously led forth into its proper forms. For 
as it was by one decree, albeit repeated six times by the Theologian, 
that He created simultaneously the nature of all things, so that 
nature simultaneously begins to flow into all creatures, and no 
creature is prior to any other by any spatial or temporal number or 
interval.] ] 

N. Justly and rightly do you call him a great man, and we must 
not think of him as anything else. So, when the mutability of the 
accidents is beautifully distinguished from the stability of substance, 
the multiple power of the latter when it breaks out visibly into the 
diverse species is typified by the crops and trees. For it is in 
accordance with nature that every species is contained within its 
genus, and every genus within substance. Moreover, every substance 
disseminates its power through the genera into their proper forms 
and species. And the whole of this is administered, in accordance 
with the divine decree, by the life which operates in the seeds. [And] 
so it is not unreasonable that the natural philosophers should call 
plants and trees animals fixed in place. For they are animate bodies 
which increase through the intervals of places and times but remain 
fixed in the places in which they grow. 

And be it noted that as the gathering together of the waters 
cannot stand by itself unless it is sustained by the mass of the earth, 
whether it flows within through hidden channels or without through 

709C 

709D 

710A 

That acci¬ 
dents cannot 
remain static 

342 

PERIPHYSEON 

710B 

without 

substance 

710C 32 

710D 

711A 

exposed floods, or remains stagnant in ponds and lakes, so the flood 
of accidents cannot be held except when it is sustained by substance, 
whether they remain concealed in the recesses of the subject as in the 
case of qualities and quantities in their causal relations or break 
forth so as to become manifest in some matter as in the case of 
corporeal masses which are decked in various colours, or remain 
stable like the forms and shapes which when attached to the 
mutability of matter produce visible bodies appropriate to their 
particular conditions, and gather together so as not to be suddenly 
dissolved and, abandoning the form which contains them, fall away 
and flow back into their mutability. But let us not linger more over 
such matters, but turn to the fourth consideration of the constitution 
of the world. 

A. So the order of our discussion requires. For if anyone 
wishes to investigate every single problem that such matters suggest 
for inquiry and solution, his time will run out before he can reach 
the end of all the things that would need to be discussed and 
thoroughly examined. 

N. After the account, then, of the formation of the two inferior 
parts of the visible world, namely earth and water, and the 
consideration of their instantaneous formation without any temporal 
interval by the divine decree in their genera and species, and of their 
restriction to fixed places and within fixed boundaries, had been set 
forth, the divine Cosmographer at once turns the attention of his 
mind to the constitution of the superior parts, I mean air and fire, of 
which he says : “And God said. Let there be luminaries in the 
firmament of heaven and let them divide the day and the night and 
let them be for signs and times and days and years and let them 
shine in the firmament of heaven and illuminate the earth, and it 
was done.” You have heard the general establishment of all the 
luminaries of the firmament of heaven in the primordial causes 
before every day and time and place ; hear the procession of the 
same into their effects, multiplied into their proper forms, dispersed 
at spatial intervals, revolving in their temporal courses, linked 
together by their stable motion and mobile stability. “And God 
made two great luminaries, the greater luminary to preside over the 
day and the lesser luminary to preside over the night, and the stars”, 
and the other things which Scripture records about the operations of 
the fourth day. About the firmament we gave what seemed to us a 
likely account when we were speaking of the second day. For the 
firmament which was created in the midst of the waters was not 

BOOK III 

Other, as I think, than that in which the series of celestial luminaries 
was created on the fourth day. For if it were another. Scripture 
would not perhaps have refrained from mentioning it but would 
have said : Let there be luminaries and a firmament of heaven, as it 
said “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters”. Since, 
however, it did not say. Let there be a firmament, but “Let there be 
luminaries in the firmament”, it is plain to see that the firmament 71 IB 
which on the second day was created in the midst of the waters and 
that in which the stellar luminaries were subsequently, not in time 
but in the disposition of the prophetic vision established, is one and 
the same. 

Since, then, according to the philosophers, there are three very 
great bodies in the world, of which one, the lowest and middle part 
of the whole world, like the centre of a circle or sphere, is called by 
the divine authority “dry land” or “earth”, specified by its separation 
from the waters which cover it and adorned with the most fair 
variety of plants and trees, whether one shall understand the words 
“earth” and “waters” in their simpler sense as signifying this visible 
mass which is situated in the world surrounded by the girdle of 
ocean, or in their profounder meaning which distinguishes substance 
from accidents, and the terms “plants” and “trees” as these sensible 71 1C 
adornments in which in summer time the surface of the earth is clad, 
which by the force of their seeds burst forth on to the earth to which 
they are attached by their roots, nourished and fattened by moisture, 
or see them for the intelligible forms which proceed from the inner 
and natural recesses of substance as plants and trees grow out of the 
earth — for in every sensible body we have one way of regarding, 
with the corporeal senses the mass of its quantity which forms the 
base of its qualities, another of understanding with the keen mind its 
invisible substance and the proper species which subsist in it — in 
accordance with which the numbers of all visible [and invisible] 
things are multiplied, their universality brought together, their 
individuality preserved — the Prophet turns his attention to the 
consideration of the other two very great bodies of the world. 71 ID 

“Let there be luminaries”, he says, “in the firmament of 
heaven.” You remember, as I think, what we took this expression 
“firmament established in the midst of the waters” to mean when we 
were discussing it ? 

A. I remember it clearly, unless my powers of recollection fail 
me. For we agreed that nothing was more likely than that this 
expression signified the universality of the four simple elements, 712A 

343 

344 

PERIPHYSEON 

That compo¬ 
site bodies 
712B 
are formed 
from the 
qualities of 
simple bodies 

712C 

712D 

which in themselves are most pure and incomprehensible to every 
bodily sense and are universally diffused throughout all things; but 
when by their invisible motion they join together in the right 
proportions make all the sensible bodies, both celestial and aerial 
and watery and earthly, both the very great and the very small and 
those of intermediate size and, to speak in general terms, the whole 
sphere of heaven, and all things that are contained in it and within it 
from the highest to the lowest are made from their concourse, and 
whatever comes into being in the succession of the ages by the 
changes of corruptible things proceeds from them and is resolved 
into them. Now these are called by the Greeks irup, df|p, uScop, yp, 
that is. Fire, Air, Water, Earth, after the names of the very great 
bodies which are composed from them. 

And here it must be noted that sensible bodies are not formed 
from the coming together of the substances of the elements, for 
these are indestructible and indissoluble, but from their qualities 
when these are mixed in due proportion. Now, it is very well known 
that the qualities of the elements are four: heat, moisture, cold, 
dryness ; and it is from these that natural philosophy declares that 
all material bodies, with the addition of forms, are composed. And 
the philosophers say that two of these, heat and cold, are active, and 
two, moisture and dryness, passive. For when by a certain natural 
coming together heat mingles with moisture and cold with dryness 
there takes place the procreation of all things that are born on land 
or in the sea, as also the Poet meant when he said, “The Ether the 
almighty father descended into the lap of his consort in widespread 
fertilizing showers” ; for he gave the name of “father” to the fiery 
quality which is heat, and “fertilizing showers” to the watery 
quality, which is coldness, and “the lap of the consort” to the 
fertilizing property of moisture which is the quality proper to air, 
and by calling dryness, which is the quality proper to earth, by the 
name of his one wife he signified the earth with the grosser part of 
the air which is contiguous to it. From this it follows that the two 
active qualities, heat I mean and coldness, which are contrary to one 
another, when they are joined with the two passive qualities, that is, 
moisture and dryness, which are opposite to one another, bring 
about the birth and growth of all things that are born in land and on 
water. And if anyone finds it strange that coldness, although it is the 
property of water, descends from the higher parts of this air into the 
lap of the dryness of earth, let him understand that the waters that 
are suspended in the clouds are colder than those of the seas and the 

BOOK III 

345 

running rivers. But if anyone should dispute this and ask, Why then 
do many philosophers, as St. Augustine testifies, assert that fire and 
air are active but water and earth passive, if water, being cold, when 
mingled with the dryness of earth, is the active and not the passive 713A 
element in the seeds, he can be given the sufficient answer that water 
is cold and moist, but it derives the moisture from the air while the 
coldness it derives from itself ; and it is the quality which it takes 
from its neighbouring element that is subject to the action of the 
hot, whereas that quality which is its own is always in act in the 
seeds. [For which of those who are well versed in the reasons of 
nature does not know that neither pure heat alone, without any 
admixture of coldness, nor pure coldness alone, without some 
mingling of heat, effects the generation of any body; or that no 
body can be brought to birth by natural passion either from 
moisture alone or from dryness alone unless each is tempered with 
the other?] But it is clearly not necessary to delay longer over these 
matters, which are the province of mundane philosophy. Therefore 
having made these few introductory remarks concerning the four 713B 
qualities of the four universal elements which, since they occupy a 
position intermediate between the primordial causes and composite 
bodies, were given the name of firmament, I see that we must now 
hasten on to the explanation of the luminaries that are constituted in 
it. 

N. You see correctly. If, then, the four most simple and most 
universal elements of the world are called by the name of firmament, 
what do you think? Are those four, in their diffusion everywhere 
throughout all bodies, whether etherial or aerial or watery or 
earthly, so connected with one another that it is impossible to find 
any sensible body in which the confluence of all of them is absent, or 
do some flow together from some but not all from all ? 

A. This question is very easily answered, for it has been raised 713C 
by the natural philosophers and has been reasonably solved. For 
they say that within the circuit of the sensible world there can be no 
body extended in the dimensions of length, breadth, (and) height in 
which the nature of the four elements cannot be understood even if 
it is not visibly manifest. For as everything in them which is 
perceptible to the bodily sense receives the matter for its constitution 
from no other source than the mutual concourse of the qualities of 
the four elements, so a rational investigation finds that everything in 
them, in so far as they are bodies, is nothing else but the coming 
together in a single form of the same simple and indivisible 

PERIPHYSEON 

346 

713D 

714A 

That the 
714B 
diversity of 
bodies de¬ 
pends on the 
diversity of 
their partici¬ 
pation in 
qualities 

That the 
simple ele¬ 
ments are 
distributed 
in equal 
measure in 
the sensible 
world 

714C 

elements. Now, I inserted the words, “in so far as they are bodies”, 
lest anyone should suppose that we were here touching upon or 
treating of the substances of things or their genera or species or that 
vital principle which is said to animate and nourish all bodies in 
which vital motion is recognized. For these things are, and are 
understood to be, outside the whole sphere of corporeal nature, and 
are the things without which there can be no corporeal nature either 
of those things which are incomprehensible to the corporeal senses, 
such as those four elements we are now discussing, or those which 
are comprehensible, as are the concourses of the various qualities 
which effect the visible constitution of material things. 

Thus, although some of the qualities are more evident in certain 
bodies than others, yet there is one and the same assemblage of the 
universal elements, measurable together as a single form, in all. For 
the Divine Mind held an impartial balance between two diametrically 
opposed extremes when he weighed the body of the whole world — I 
mean between heaviness and lightness, between which all the visible 
bodies of moderate weight are suspended. Therefore all bodies, to 
the extent that they participate in heaviness, are receptive of the 
earthly qualities, namely solidity and stability, but to the extent that 
they draw upon lightness, participate in the celestial qualities, I 
mean emptiness and mutability; while the intermediate bodies 
which hold the balance between the two extremes possess these 
qualities in equal proportion. Now, in all of the four universal 
elements there is one and the same motion and stability and 
receptivity and possessiveness. 

N. Well answered. For all the physicists agree in this. Therefore 
the four very pure elements which are called by the divine authority 
by the name of “firmament” are everywhere throughout the whole 
sensible world in equal measure and concourse. 

A. It has already been granted, and proved by reason. To this 
too the meaning of the Greek names is witness. For HUp, fire, is so 
called, as I think, because it penetrates all things through their 
pores, that is, their hidden channels. For there is no body from 
which fire cannot be struck when drawn forth from some kind of 
collision. For even the friction of the waves emits sparks, nor would 
they run at all if they were without heat. What shall I say of colours, 
which without doubt proceed from the nature of light? Do we not 
see that they cover the surfaces of all bodies? Air, that is, breath, is 
(so) called because it breathes through all things. For there is no 
sensible nature which the very subtle air cannot penetrate ; which we 

BOOK III 

can prove from smells and sounds. For you will not find a body 
which does not give back some smell to those that smell it or some 
sound to those that strike it. 'YScop, that is, water, is (so) called as it 
were eiSoq opcopevov, that is “seen form”. For there is no corporeal 
thing from whose surface when polished by some friction some 
image cannot be reflected. Earth is called dxOoq from its weight. For 714D 
there is not a body which does not seek its natural place by the 
measure of its weight, whether it verges towards the centre of the 
world or towards the extremes. Nor is this interpretation contra¬ 
dicted by that other name [for earth] which is yfj, for literally this 
[means “valley”]. For the valley of every creature is the place to 
which it is confined by its proper definition. So when you look at 715A 
any body, if you perceive in it the light of colour, understand the 
presence of fire ; if sound, whether natural or artificial, the presence 
of air ; if some image reflected whether naturally or artificially from 
a flat surface, the presence of the watery element — for when it is 
not reflected from it, the fault lies with effort, not with its nature — ; 
where (you see) any tendency towards stability, whether erect or 
prone, the presence of the earthly element ; and there are many other 
proofs in nature by which the inseparable concourse of the four 
elements in all composite bodies always and everywhere is recognized 
without any doubt. 

N. What you have said seems to me to be reasonable and 
likely. Therefore that which is written. But “God said. Let there be 
luminaries in the firmament of heaven”, we ought to understand in 
such a way as though it were openly said. Let there be stellar bodies, 
clear and bright, in the four elements that are diffused everywhere, 715B 
(and let them be) composed from their qualities. For the subject 
bodies in them, occupying their allotted places, mean one thing, the 
brightness that shines from them everywhere throughout all the 
zones of the world means another. For the white object is one thing, 
the whiteness another nor are the bright and brightness the same ; the 
one is the subject, the other accident. Therefore, by the divine decree 
by which it was commanded, “Let there be luminaries in the 
firmament of heaven”, the vehicles of light, as St. Basil calls them, 
by which it might be carried about the circuit of the world at given 
intervals of time, were made. 

And see how providentially Scripture speaks. It did not say. Let 
there be a greater luminary and a lesser luminary, but, “Let there be 
luminaries.” For it had a general expression for the establishment of 
all the celestial bodies that shine down upon the earth, of which 

347 

PERIPHYSEON 

715C while some are set at no great distance from the earth, like the moon 
which, according to Pythagoras, is 126,000 stades above the mass of 
the earth, and is therefore said to be in the earth’s vicinity and often 
by entering its shadow (and) being bereft of the light of the sun, 
suffers a loss of brilliance (and that interval which separates the 
moon from the earth the philosophers call a tone, that is, interval 
with proportionate quantity; for those who are learned in the 
harmony of sounds speak of tones in two ways : for they call tones 
both the ’’diastemata”, that is, the intervals of sound, and the 
“analogiae”, that is, their proportional relations) — others (are set) 
in the midst of the universe, such as the sun and all the planets that 
revolve about him ; others at the outermost parts of the universe, as 
are the choirs of the fixed stars. 

33 A. Concerning the orbits and intervals between the celestial 

and very brilliant bodies the opinions of the natural philosophers 
are many and varied and have never been surely reconciled as far as 
I can see; and therefore if you have any view about such things 
which is likely and conformable to reason, do not delay in explaining 
it to me. 

N. You are leading us on a long journey when you know that 
we should rather hurry on to what remains to be said of the 
operations of the six days, and when the time has come to put an 
end to this long book — furthermore, you are inquiring into matters 
716A concerning which there exists hardly any opinion based on reason or 
fully enunciated by any of the philosophers — not, as I think, 
because they did not understand (it) — in that case it would not be 
right to call them physicists [or philosophers] — but because none 
of those whom we have read up to now seems to give, clearly and 
without uncertainty, a satisfactory account of the reasons of these 
matters. But I shall not refuse to reveal to you something which is 
likely from what they have written [(though) sparingly] and 
demonstrated by sound arguments (and) practical experiment con¬ 
cerning the distance between the earth and the moon. 

For it has been calculated from (observation of) the moon’s 
eclipse without any error <as they say> that the moon is distant 
126,000 stades from the earth. For the earth’s shadow, which they 
call night, nature herself extends far enough to reach the moon. For 
7I6B her orb would not suffer the loss of its light if it did not pass within 
the area of the shadow which thus deprives her of the sun’s radiance, 
and so it is deduced without any ambiguity that the distance of the 
moon from the earth is equal to what reason teaches us is the 

BOOK III 

349 

length of the shadow of night. Now the shadow of the night extends 
as far as the circle of the moon ; therefore plain reason teaches that 
the night is projected 126,000 stades upward. But a more careful 
investigation is required to place beyond doubt the grounds on 
which it is argued that the moon is distant 126,000 stades from the 
earth. 

A. Just so ; for as yet no satisfactory reason has shed any light 
on this question for me. 

N. Observe carefully, then, [the findings of the philosophers] 
which seem likely to me to be true concerning these matters. [For] 
from readings taken from the gnomon, that is, sundial, they both 
inquired after this distance with subtlety and discovered it with 716C 
certainty; of whom the most learned in every geometrical and 
astronomical calculation is said to have been Eratosthenes. Now, 
scaphia are circular vessels of bronze which indicate the passage of 
hours from the height of a rod that is set up in the midst of their 
base. This rod is called a gnomon, and from it as centre lines are 
drawn to the rims of the vessels, and these lines divide the whole 
circle of the sundial into twenty-four segments, that is to say, into 
the twenty-four intervals of hourly duration through which the 
circumference of the whole celestial sphere revolves about the earth 
until it returns to the position of the natural horizon which it held 
on the previous day. Therefore the aforesaid Eratosthenes by careful 
observation of the movement of the rod’s shadow through the 
segments of the sundial came to a clear understanding that the 
movement of the shadow through the hourly intervals about the rod 716D 
of the sundial was proportionate [to the circuit of the night through 
the same hourly intervals about the earth’s circumference], so that 
whatever is observed in the vessels of the sundial [which represents 
the sky] by analogous contemplation may be understood of the 
motion of the heavenly bodies. Thus, at the Vernal Equinox the 
length of the rod’s shadow is equal to half the length of the gnomon 
on Meroe, which is an island in the Nile, and at Syene, a city of 
Egypt. But the diameter of the whole circle of the sundial is also 717A 
equal to half (the length oO the rod, and therefore both the shadow 
[of the rod at the Equinox] is (equal in length to) the diameter of the 
sundial', and, because every diameter is doubled by [the very] sphere 
or circle of which it is the diameter, the shadow of the rod must describe 
a circle that is double (its own length). For it is doubled by the very 
circle or sphere of which it constitutes the centre. For of the number 
ten also the number five is, as it were, a kind of diameter of a circle. 

350 

PERIPHYSEON 

So, having clearly understood the principle of the sundial, Era¬ 
tosthenes, a man of cunning ingenuity, calculated by subtle investi¬ 
gation the circumference of the whole earth. And first he recognized 
that the circumference of the equinoctial circle, which divides the 
whole of the globe of the earth and the whole sphere of heaven into 
717B two equal parts, is made up of 360 sections, of which he satisfied 
himself beyond doubt that a twelfth part, that is every 30 sections, 
takes two hours to rise or to set [or to vacate the region through 
which it moves]. Thus, what the shadow indicates to the sense on the 
sundial reason shows to be the effect of the unceasing motion of the 
celestial bodies ; for the shadow of the rod would not pass through 
the intervals of the sundial //the ethereal body with its stars did not 
revolve about the earth. So that which the earth’s mass accomplishes 
in the midst of the universe the rod accomplishes in the midst of the 
sundial, and as the rod’s shadow is carried about itself around the 
circuit of the scaphium, so night, which is earth’s shadow, is borne 
about the earth itself around through the aerial spaces which 
separate the moon from the earth. Now, it is the same sun which 
casts the shadow from the body of the earth and from the body of 
717C the rod ; as at midday at the time of the equinox in those parts of the 
habitable globe which are close to the equator, I mean on Meroe 
and at Syene, it throws from the gnomon a shadow of such length as 
to attain to its diameter, that is, to half (its length), or a little further, 
so it subtends everywhere from the whole earth’s mass a shadow of 
such length as to reach the orbit of the moon or a little beyond, a 
fact which is proved by the eclipse of the moon herself. For if the 
earth’s shadow did not sometimes extend beyond the lunar orbit, 
the moon herself would not perhaps suffer the loss of the sun’s light. 
For the centre of the moon’s orbit is the earth, so the philosophers 
say, although it is sometimes thought to increase its distance from 
the earth in the sign Taurus, where the zenith of its that is, its 
717D altitude, is thought to be [and therefore it should not be thought 
that eclipses are caused by irregularities in its orbit around the earth, 
but by the length of the shadow]. 

Therefore, Eratosthenes, after investigating the altitude of the 
earth’s shadow by comparing the gnomon to its shadow and finding 
that it does not exceed the earth’s diameter — for the depth of the 
night is equal to the girth of the earth when this is measured on the 
equator — first sought out the earth’s circumference so that from it 
he could calculate its diameter — for once you know the circum- 
718A ference of a circle or a sphere it is easy to calculate accurately the 

BOOK III 

351 

line which divides it into equal parts — , then having learnt from 
King Ptolemy’s geometricians the size of the portion of the earth’s 
surface between Meroe and Syene, he deduced, from the fact that at 
the time of the equinox the shadow at noon was similar (at both 
places), that a single segment measured 700 stades. Multiplying this 
by 360, that is, by the length of the equator, he calculated without 
any mistake that the circumference of the whole earth is 252,000 
stades. For 700 stades multiplied by 360 gives 252,000 stades; and 
j by dividing this number into two equal parts he found the half of it, 
that is, 126,000 stades in the diameter of the earth and in the 
distance from the earth to the moon. 

And note the prevalence in all these calculations of the perfect 
numbers, namely 6 and 7 and 8, which by nature constitute the chief 
symphonic proportion of music which is called the diapason. For 
this has eight notes, seven intervals, and six tones. For the number 
six multiplied by itself, that is six times six, makes, 36, which if you 
multiply it by 7 thousand gives you the circumference of the whole 
earth. For 36 times 7 thousand or 7 (thousand) times 36 makes 
252,000 stades, the number which comprises the girth of the whole 
earth. But if you multiply 6 by the length of its diameter, which is 3, 
you will get the sum of the number 18, and if that is multiplied by 7 
thousand it gives the earth’s diameter. For 18 times 7 thousand or 7 
(thousand) times 18 makes a hundred (and) twenty six thousand, the 
number [of stades] which gives both the diameter of the earth and 
the interval between the moon and the earth. 

Moreover it is not unreasonably declared by the philosophers 
that the interval between the moon and the earth and the girth of the 
whole earth [are contained] in the proportion of a tone. For 18 times 
14,000 stades makes 252,000, namely, the circumference of the 
earth, while 7,000 stades multiplied by 18 gives the earth’s diameter 
and its distance from the moon. But the ratio of 10 + 8 to 10 + 6, 
which is twice 8, gives one tone, for the greater number contains the 
lesser plus the eighth of it, which is 2. For according to the theory of 
harmony 10-1-8 stands in the same ratio to 10 -f 6 as 9 to 8, namely 
the epogdoos. For every greater number which contains a lesser 
[plus] the eighth part of the lesser is called in arithmetic an 
epogdoos, in music a tone. 

So within these ratios are contained the circumference of the 
globe, its diameter, and the distance from the earth to the moon and 
the depth of the night. But if you ask why both Pliny Secundus and 
Ptolemy in his geographical (work), as Martianus writes, assign no 

The circum¬ 
ference of 
the earth 

718B 

718C 

718D 

719A 

352 

PERIPHYSEON 

more than 500 stades to each degree, a number which if multiplied 
by 360 will not be able to contain the circumference of the earth as 
calculated by Eratosthenes, I do not find it easy to answer your 
question. For should I admit that Eratosthenes gave a greater 
measurement of the size of the earth, but Pliny and Ptolemy a 
smaller, it will not seem probable that there should be so serious a 
disagreement among the highest authorities [in natural philosophy] 
that some should maintain that the girth of the earth is contained 
7I9B within 252 thousand stades, others within 180 — for 360 times 500 
stades gives 180,000 stades — figures which differ from one another 
by 72,000 stades ; especially as those wise and most careful inquirers 
into nature are in agreement as to the number of degrees in the 
equinoctial or zodiacal circle ; for all say unanimously 360. 

Should I say that he, I mean Eratosthenes, used a shorter stade 
for his measure and thus allowed a greater number of stades for 
each degree, while they (used) a longer (stade), and therefore 
(allowed) a smaller number, how shall we reasonably account for 
this? For both sides confirm that a stade measures 125 paces. 
Therefore my own view is that the cause of this disagreement resides 
in the difference in the length of the pace. For it could happen that 
719C two surveyors, one of taller, the other of shorter stature, would pace 
out a stade by longer or shorter paces respectively, so that the one 
would calculate the measure of a single degree by a greater number 
of stades, the other by a less. For who would not believe that 
Hercules, who is traditionally said to have been the first to have 
paced out the stade on Mount Olympus, gave it a measure based on 
paces and feet which were incomparably greater than those of others 
who measured the stade after him ? For the length of the stade which 
he was the first to have measured would depend on the length of his 
paces and steps and feet, and the size of his feet would depend on the 
height of his whole stature. 

Why then should it be strange if one and the same interval 
consisting of one and the same degree should at the same time 
receive a measure of 500 stades and of 700 stades, and that while in 
719D each case the stade is measured by the same number of paces and 
steps and feet, the paces and steps and feet are not themselves of the 
same length, but are longer in some, shorter in others, so that when 
the stades are measured by the longer 500 will complete the space of 
one degree, when by the shorter, one and the same pace of one 
degree will contain 700? 

BOOK III 

Now, on the Greek reckoning the stade has 6 acres, 100 cubits, 
125 paces, 240 steps, 400 ells, 600 feet. But when the girth of the 
earth’s mass and the depth of the night, which has the same 
measurement as the earth’s diameter, have been found by reasonable 
argument, the circumference of the moon’s orbit can be quickly 
discovered by those who seek it ; for the depth of the night 
multiplied by 3 gives the diameter of the lunar orbit. For 3 times 
126,000 stades makes 378,000. Therefore the diameter of the lunar 
orbit is 378,000 stades. Now, if you multiply (by two) the diameter 
you will get the circumference of the whole circle as 756,000 stades. 

Now, concerning the measurement of the moon’s body there is 
a wide variety of opinion. Thus, many say that the globe of the 
moon is equal in size to that of the earth, and this they seek to prove 
from the eclipse of the Sun, because they think that the moon can 
obscure the Sun’s rays from the whole earth. But those who are 
positioned near the equator, as Martianus writes, give a more likely 
account and a rational proof of it from the eclipse of the Sun. For 
they say that at the moment of the solar eclipse the moon’s shadow 
covers an eighteenth part of the earth, and because every body is 
greater than the triple cone-shaped shadow that it casts, they 
calculate that the body of the moon contains within its amplitude a 
sixth part of the earth, and therefore, since the eighteenth part of the 
earth is 14,000 stades, it follows that that eighteenth part multiplied 
by 3 gives the amplitude of the lunar globe. Now 14 multiplied by 3 
makes 42; therefore 42,000 stades comprise the amplitude of the 
moon. For that amount of thousands of stades gives a sixth part of 
the earth. For 6 times 42,000 or 42 times 6,000 amounts to 252,000 
stades. 

And you will remark how the amplitudes of the moon and of 
the earth are contained within the reciprocal values of the numbers 6 
and 7. For 6 times 7 or 7 times 6 encompasses 42, that is, the globe 
of the moon ; and again 6 times 42 (encompasses) 252, that is, the extent 
of the earth, and reason has shown that all these numbers, counted 
in thousands of stades, clearly reveal the sum of the most perfect 
constitution of the natural bodies of the world. For the conformation 
of the number thousand as a solid cube is the symbol of all 
perfection. Therefore the stability of nature is signified by the 
number 6, its mobility by the number 7, and the constant ratio 
between the two by the thousand. For the mobile stability and stable 
mobility of all things is most perfectly established by eternal ratios. 

353 

720A 

The circum¬ 
ference of 
the circle of 
the Moon 

720B 

720C 

720D 

354 

PERIPHYSEON 

Nor is it without reason that the philosophers measured all 
these things in stades. For the number 5 is dvaKaiaaTiKoc;, that is, 
returning upon itself. For whenever you multiply 5 by itself it must 
return upon itself. Therefore the first cubic motion of 5, 5 times 5 
72IA times 5, completes the stade as 125 paces, and therefore it is not 
unreasonable to gather both the mobility and stability of mundane 
bodies from that number, which is at the same time cubic, rotatory, 
and returning upon itself. 

In what we have said about the distances of the lower parts of 
the world we have been following the reasonings of the great 
philosophers without unhesitatingly affirming that things are as 
they say, but setting forth those which seem most likely to be so and 
more in accordance with known factors in an endeavour to satisfy 
your inquiries. 

A. What you set forth about them does satisfy me. Let him 
who thinks it not sufficiently reasoned or expounded seek from 
others other interpretations. For the proportional principle on 
which the world is constituted has been discussed by various 
authorities in many different ways. But now that we have examined 
what is reasonably seen to be truth concerning the sizes and 
721B distances of the lower bodies, I mean of the moon and the earth, I 
should like to hear a brief account of the ethereal regions. For no 
one doubts that these are the sole or principal subjects for contem¬ 
plation in the divine operation on the fourth intelligible day. 

N. We linger too long over the Fourth Day. 

A. It will not seem too long, I think, to those who are less 
instructed and who are anxious to learn and who are studying 
natural science, should they perchance read our discussion — 
especially as it is not reasonable to give a rational account of the 
lower parts of the world while completely ignoring the higher. 

N. Concerning the globe of the Sun (which holds) the balance 
between the heaviest and the lightest nature we have already agreed 
that it is eternally carried in a circular motion around the lower 
721C regions of the world along the celestial equator. 

A. We have indeed, and gave sound reasons for it, and the 
disposition of nature does not allow it to be otherwise. 

N. Concerning its size neither the masters of profane letters 
nor the commentators of the divine Scriptures allow a certain 
answer to be given. For both Pliny Secundus in his Natural History 

BOOK III 

355 

and St. Basil in his Hexemeron absolutely forbid the size of the Sun 
to be given. For it has no shadow from which its size can be found 
by argument — for we should not have been able to find out the size 
either of the earth or of the moon if they spread no shadows which 
could be actually measured — and thereby the Sun’s body, since it 
permits no shadow to extend to infinity but limits (them) to fixed 
dimensions proportionate to the bodies of which they are the 
shadows, shows very plainly that its (own) size is infinite. 7210 

A. I do not question this either, and I do not think that anyone 
should question it. For a conjecture based on ocular observation 
does not serve where reason does not have a basis for argument. But 
I would ask you to expound what the philosophers think about its 
distance from the earth. 

N. The first of all philosophers, as they say, Pythagoras gave as 722A 
the interval between the earth and the moon 126,000 stades ; and 
this was later surely demonstrated from the earth’s shadow and the 
lunar eclipse by Eratosthenes, as we have said. The same Pythagoras 
is said to have taught that the distance from the Sun to the moon is 
equal to twice this interval, but as to why he thought that, opinion is 
divided among many. 

However, since he attempted to affirm by sure proofs that the 34 
structure of the whole world both rotates and is measured in 
accordance with musical proportions, which the divine scripture 
does not deny either, for it says, “[And] who will put to sleep the 
concert of heaven ?’’, we can speculate that he said it for no other 
reason than to demonstrate in the intervals between the stars the 722B 
rational proportions of the diastemata of music. Thus, finding that 
the solar orbit is at the centre of the whole space that extends from 
the earth to the highest sphere by which all the sensibles are 
circumscribed, he not unreasonably thought that from earth to Sun 
was one diapason and from the Sun to the uttermost bound of the 
world was another. 

Now, the modulation of the diapason is in the proportion of 2 
to 1. As therefore in the diatonic scale, for example in the harmony 
of sounds, the double diapason is attuned to the product of twice 
(the proportion of) 2 to 1, [the first < diapason > ] from the 
principal of principals to the pear), that is, the middle, the second 
from the peorj to the vf|Tr| U7r8pPo>.alcov, that is, the highest note of 
the tetrachord, so also the whole space from the earth to the Sun is 
attuned to the proportion of the diapason — for the Sun occupies the 

356 

PERIPHYSEON 

central position — , and from the Sun to the twelve constellations, that 

722C is, to the outermost revolution of the stars, is joined by another 
diapason, and therefore following calculations of what they call 
harmony he thought that the distance from the earth to the sphere 
constitutes a double diapason, and thus it was concluded that three 
times the diameter of the earth is equal to the interval between the 
earth and the sun, as it is to the diameter of the lunar orbit. Thus the 
diameter of the lunar orbit measures the same as the interval 
between the earth and the Sun. For in both cases it is 378,000 stades. 
Therefore by multiplying this number by 2 you will get 756,000 
stades for the interval between the earth and the outermost sphere, 
and you will remark the harmony of nature. For as many thousands 
of stades as are in the length of the lunar orbit so many are there in 

722D the depth of the space between the earth and the Signs. For in both 
there are 756,000 stades. 

But if you wish to know the diameter of the solar orbit, you 
will, by multiplying the diameter of the earth, 126,000 stades, by 7, 
get 882,000 stades as the diameter of the circle of the Sun, and if you 
double this number, the circumference of the same circle will 
amount in thousands of stades to 1,764,000 stades. [But if you 

723A require] the diameter of the whole sphere of heaven you will find it 
by this calculation : Double the circumference of the lunar circle, i.e. 
756,000 stades, and add the diameter of the earth, 126,000 stades, 
and you will get the diameter of the sphere to be, in thousands of 
stades, 1,638 [thousands], and by multiplying this number by 2 the 
circumference of the whole universe is reckoned to be contained, [in 
thousands of stades, 3,276,000 stades, so that the whole world is 
contained in the perfection of the number six]. 

35 So much for the philosophical arguments that investigate the 
cosmic distances. But if these seem to anyone superfluous since they 
are not ratified or transmitted by the testimonies of Holy Scripture, 
let him not rebuke us. For neither can he prove that these things are 
not so, just as we cannot confirm that they are. 

723B And although nothing definite is found in the divine Scriptures 
concerning such measurements of the sizes and distances of the 
bodies of the world [“For who”, asks Ecclesiastes, “has measured 
the height of heaven and the breadth of the earth and the depth of 
the abyss?” which I think we should understand in an allegorical 
rather than an historical sense, for I would not say that the 
constitution of this world lies outside the understanding of the 
rational nature when it was for (that nature’s) sake that it was 

BOOK III 

357 

created], yet the Divine Authority not only does not prohibit the 
investigation of the reasons of things visible and invisible, but even 
encourages it. For, says the Apostle, “from the creation of the world 
His invisible things are seen, being understood from the things that 
have been made”. Therefore it is no small step but a great and 
indeed profitable one from the knowledge of the sensibles to the 
understanding of the intelligibles. For as through sense we arrive at 
understanding, so through the creature we return to God. For we 
ought not like irrational animals look only on the surface of visible 
things but also give a rational account of the things which we 
perceive by the corporeal sense. The eagle sees more clearly the form 
of the Sun ; the wise man sees more clearly its position and motion 
through places and times. 

[Suppose man had not sinned or been degraded to the likeness 
of the beasts; would he then be ignorant of the boundaries of this 
world (that is) his possession which he would most righteously 
govern according to the laws of nature? For he who even after his 
fall did not entirely lose the dignity of his nature should have been 
another angel to praise God in His sensible creatures. For there 
remains in him an impulse of the reason to seek the knowledge of 
things and to be unwilling to fall into error, although he does so in 
many things, yet not in all.] 

And if Christ at the time of His Transfiguration wore two 
vestures white as snow, namely the letter of the Divine Oracles and 
the sensible appearance of visible things, why we should be encou¬ 
raged diligently to touch the one in order to be worthy to find Him 
Whose vesture it is, and forbidden to inquire about the other, 
namely the visible creature, how and by what reasons it is woven, I 
do not clearly see. For even Abraham knew God not through the 
letters of Scripture, which had not yet been composed, but by the 
revolutions of the stars. Was he simply regarding the appearances 
only of the stars as other animals do, without being able to 
understand their reasons? I should not have the temerity to say this 
of the great and wise theologian. 

And if any should blame us for using philosophical arguments, 
let him consider God’s people when they were fleeing from Egypt 
and [following] the divine counsel took spoils with them and were 
not reprehended for using those spoils — especially as those who are 
skilled in natural science are reprehended not because their reasoning 
about the visible creature is at fault, but because they have not 

723C 

723D 

Concerning 
the Lord’s 
Vestures 

724A 

358 

PERIPHYSEON 

724B sufficiently penetrated beyond it to its Author [for they ought to have 
discovered the Creator from the creature, which only Plato did]. 

But if anyone finds it impossible to accept the measurements we 
have given for the bodies of the world and their distances from one 
another because those [bodies] are thought by many to be of a larger 
size than can be contained within the above-mentioned numbers of 
stades, let him read attentively the measurements of Noah’s Ark — 
its length was 300 cubits, its breadth was 50 cubits, its height 30 
cubits — and see how in so small a space of cubits could be 
contained seven pairs of each of the clean animals and two pairs of 
each of the unclean with their provender, and in addition Noah with 
his sons and their wives — especially //, as St. Augustine says, that 
724C cubit by which both the Ark of Noah and the Ark of the Testament 
and the Tabernacle [and the other mystical objects of the Old 
Testament] are measured did not exceed iVi palms [and the palm 
was the measure from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the little 
finger]. So the power of God and the basic principles of nature are 
more capacious than what human thought contrives. 

And lest we should seem to be taking refuge in the miracles of 
the divine power from our inability to support our statements on 
reasons (drawn) from nature, I suppose you think of the earth as 
poised at the centre of the sphere of the world not otherwise than 
you see the centre at the base of some circle or globe. For the earth 
holds both the lowest and the middle place amongst creatures. 

A. Not otherwise, but in the same way. 

N. Nor the degrees of the celestial equator drawn to the earth 
724D otherwise than as lines drawn from the circumference to the centre. 

A. The principle (is) the same (in both cases). 

N. And although they are not of the same size on the earth as 
on the celestial equator, yet the direction [of the notional lines] is the 
same, and (the number of) the degrees is the same from end to end ? 

A. Absolutely. 

N. You do not deny that what is understood by the degrees 
must equally apply to the stades? 

A. On the contrary, I affirm it. 

N. Then the nearer the degrees or the stades approach the 
centre of the earth the narrower they become, while on the other 

BOOK III 359 

hand the further they move away from the earth the greater do the 
intervals (between them) become. 

A. The figure of the circle does not permit otherwise. ”725A 

N. What, then, do you think of those who measure the earth in 
degrees and stades and other intervals, those whom the Greeks call 
geometricians? Do you think they measured the earth foot by foot 
or pace by pace or by the cubit or [sijmilar [measures]? 

A. I should not believe that that could be easily done because 
of such great irregularities of mountains and valleys. [For] even the 
flatness of the plains is not so even that it can be measured by taking 
strides of equal length. [For it is because of the irregularity of its 
parts as well as the heaviness of its weight that the earth occupies the 
lowest place in nature ; for the order of the elements depends on the 
similarity of their parts ; the more like they are in their parts the 
higher they are in their stations.] 

N. Then perhaps by the bodily eye? 

A. Not even that. For sense is prone to error, and nothing 
should be entrusted to its judgement. For although the exterior 725B 
sense does not conflict with reason except that it is affected from 
without, the judgement of the interior (sense), on the other hand, is 
very often deceived concerning the things which it receives through 
the body, thinking that the oar in the water is broken, (or that the 
single) moon or lamp or some other (source of light) is two because 
a deviation of the sense, that is, a splitting of the rays that are 
scattered from the pupil of the eye, (makes them see) double. 

N. How used they to measure, then ? 

A. [First], they say, by the geometrical rod which the Greeks Concerning 

call a spoke; this, by giving the cube of five paces, that is, by thegeometn- 

^ csl rod 

multiplying five by five by five, measured one stade. Now, once they 
had found one stade it was easy to find many stades on the plains of 
Egypt, which is said to be the motherland of such measurements. 

N. How did they manage elsewhere than in Egypt, where 
measurement would be difficult because of the unevenness of the 725C 
ground ? 

A. Not, they say, by foot-rules or measuring-rods but by 
logical argument alone, that is, by means of sundials, infallibly 
calculating the interval of each degree from the similarity of the 
shadows. For one degree, that is, one day’s journey of the Sun along 

360 

PERIPHYSEON 

the zodiacal circle, takes up as much space on the earth as the 
similarity of shadows on the sundial takes. 

N. So they deduced the width of the degrees and stades by 
measuring them where they reach the earth? 

A. No, that is not what they thought either, but first they 
measured by how many thousands of stades the highest mountains 
rise above the surface of the earth, for instance Olympus, whose 
peak they reckon to be 10 stades high, Pindus, Rhodope, Acro- 
ceraunia. Atlas; then they conceived as it were a line drawn by the 
725D reason beginning from the summits of the mountains, that extend 
into the regions of the air, and carried it round like the most perfect 
of circles, everywhere equidistant from the earth, until they had 
brought it back to the point from which it began, and thus from 
regarding the mountains obtained a clear knowledge of the circum¬ 
ference of the earth as level everywhere. 

N. That the geometrical measurements were first discovered by 
such reasoning I would not deny, and it was from these that they 
came to see that those stades which are close to the earth are, as it 
726A were, narrow, but that as they are removed further and further away 
from the earth’s surface towards the mountain tops they are no 
longer confined and no longer inadequate for encompassing the 
earth’s mass. But as they are the same whether close to the earth 
or removed further from it by the aforesaid distance they suffice 
<for measuring the earth> if the false imaginings of irrational 
thought are excluded. Hence also Pliny’s view that the amplitude of 
the earth can be measured by a rational line (drawn) by geographical 
theory through the peaks of the highest mountains. For there is no 
other way of obtaining the circular dimension of the earth. 

A. Enough has been said about these matters. 

N. Let us return, then, to Scripture. 

A. It is high time. 

N. “Let there be”, he says, “luminaries in the firmament of 
heaven and let them divide the day from the night”, as though it 
were said in plain language. Let the luminaries which were made in 
726B the firmament of heaven divide day and night between them, as the 
Psalmist makes clear when he says, “Who made great luminaries, 
the Sun to rule over the day, the moon and the stars to rule over the 
night” — not that day and night do not always exist about the 
circuit of the earth, but the Sun wherever it is present always has the 

BOOK III 

361 

power of giving light, but where it is absent the brightness of the 
moon and stars makes the darkness of the shadows thin and 
lightgiving lest it should be wholly impenetrable to the eyes of the 
animals. 

“And let them be for signs and seasons and days and years.” 

Here we understand “signs” not in the sense of constellations but as 
certain presages of good or bad weather to come which are wont to 
derive their value as tests from the colours of the heavenly lumi¬ 
naries, while by “seasons” he means the courses of the constellations 
in general, and their returns at certain fixed intervals of time to (take 
up) the same journey again at the same place, recalled by the Divine 726C 
Providence in the natural revolution of days and years. 

“And let them shine in the firmament of heaven” ; for no star 
suffers the eclipse of its light but all shine continuously in the 
ethereal regions without any overshadowing, except the globe of the 
moon which, when it descends into the region of the shadow, is 
abandoned by the Sun’s rays and seems to be obscured. Therefore 
he says, “And let them shine in the firmament of heaven and let 
them shed light on the earth, and it was made so”, that is to say, (Let 
them shine) in their original causes from which they have proceeded 
into their proper species and quantities and intervals and motions 
and brightnesses. So now there follows the procession of the causes 
into the species. 

“And God made two great luminaries, a greater luminary to 
preside over the day”, that is, the Sun whose presence produces the 
day, “and a lesser luminary” — he means the moon whose size and 726D 
light are incomparably less than those of the Sun — “to preside over 
the night”. For from the 8^^ to the 22’^^ day the moon shines all night 
at the time of the full moon at the equinox and for part of the night 
at other times. But since, when it is in the Sun’s embrace or near him 
on one side or the other, it is prevented from penetrating with its 
light the darkness, it gains help from the stars whose brightness 
attenuates the thickness of the shadows, he therefore said, “and a 
lesser luminary to preside over the night, and the stars; and he 
placed them”, the stars, that is, “in the firmament of heaven”, as 727A 
though he had said. He fixed them in the firmament of heaven. For 
we understand this to refer to the choirs of the constellations, which 
although they revolve with the world yet ever remain fixed in the 
same (relative) positions; and if the world is at rest and only the 
choirs of the constellations revolve, as some of the philosophers 

362 

PERIPHYSEON 

contend, yet the order and range of the stars and their stable relative 
position remain unchanged. “That they might shed light on the 
earth.” It is a beautiful description that Scripture gives of nature. 
For although men think that the heavenly luminaries shine beneath 
the earth, yet the reason of nature surely teaches that no nature can 
be lower than the earth ; for it occupies the central and lowest place 
727B in the whole constitution of the world, and hence it is understood 
that there is no corporeal creature below it. Therefore all regions 
and bodies of the world which encompass the earth on every side, 
whether in motion or at rest, are naturally created above it, and that 
is why he said, “That they might shed light on the earth”. For 
wherever they should shine, whether below the horizon in the lower 
hemisphere, as men customarily think, or above the horizon in the 
upper hemisphere, which is called “upper” because in it the stars are 
visible to men, in the natural order of things they shine over the 
earth. 

“And might preside over day and night.” This was explained 
above. 

“And might divide the light from the darkness”, that is, that 
they might separate night and day so that when the Sun appears it 
should be day, but when the moon and stars, night. And it is to be 
noted that that division of light and dark is not in the luminaries 
727C themselves but is for those who inhabit the earth. For (the lumi¬ 
naries) are always shining and for them it is always day and they 
suffer no night; for their abodes are incessantly illumined by their 
own light and that of the Sun, and no less by day than by night do 
they shed the grace of their brightness upon the world. Therefore it 
is for the inhabitants of the earth whom day and night alternately 
visit that the heavenly luminaries divide the light from the dark. For 
by their incessant revolution about the circle of the earth in one 
place they bestow light, in another take it away. For just as day is 
nothing else but the presence of light, so night is nothing else but its 
absence, and therefore a very bright night does not lose the name of 
night either since it does not altogether banish darkness. 

But now, as much has been said of the Fourth Day as the need 
727D for brevity allows, and something must be said of the Fifth 
Intelligible Light. 

A. This is what the logical order of things requires. 

36 N. “God also said. Let the waters produce the creeping thing 
of living soul and the thing that flies above the earth under the 

BOOK III 

363 

firmament of heaven.” Throughout the four days of the creation of 
natures that have already been discussed we read of no mention of 
the soul either simply and absolutely or with the qualification 
“living”, and it is not inappropriate to ask why. Indeed, concerning 
this contemplation of nature there is a wide variety of opinion. For 
there are those who say that the elements of this world, I mean the 
heaven with its stars, and the ether with its planets, the air with its 
clouds and breaths of wind and lightnings and other disturbances, 
the water also and its flowing motion, likewise the earth with all its 
plants and trees, are not only without soul but also without any kind 
of life at all, and that, so they say, is the reason why nothing is 
introduced in the operations of the first Four Days to represent soul 
or life. But Plato, the greatest of philosophers, and his sectaries not 
only affirm a general life of the world, but also declare that there is 
no form attached to bodies nor any body that is deprived of life; 
and that life, whether general or special, they confidently dare to call 
soul ; and the great commentators of the divine Scripture support 
their opinion, affirming that plants and trees and all things that grow 
out of the earth are alive. Nor does the nature of things permit it 
to be otherwise. For if there is no matter which without form 
produces body, and no form subsists without its proper substance, 
and no substance can be without the vital motion which contains it 
and causes its subsistence — for everything which is naturally 
moved receives the source of its motion from some life — , it 
necessarily follows that every creature is either Life-through-itself or 
participates in life and is somehow alive, whether the vital motion is 
clearly apparent in it or is not apparent but the sensible species itself 
shows that it is hiddenly governed [through] life. [Hear what 
St. Augustine says in his book On True Religion : “If’, he says, “we 
wish to know who has instituted the body, let us look for him who is 
most endowed with form. For every form derives from him. And 
who is this but the One God, the One Truth, the One Salvation of 
all, and the first and highest Essence from which comes everything 
that is in so far as it is ? For in so far as it is, whatever is is good, and 
therefore death is not of God. For God did not create death, nor 
does He rejoice in the destruction of the living since, as Highest 
Essence, He made to be everything that is, and that is why He is also 
called Essence. But death compels everything that dies not to be. 
For if the things that die were to die absolutely, they would 
undoubtedly come to nothing. But they die only to the extent that 
they participate less in being.” This can be said more briefly as 

728A 

That no body 
can be with¬ 
out life 

728B 

728C 

364 

PERIPHYSEON 

follows : They die the more the less they are. Now, the body is less 
7280 than any life since in so far as it remains in its form it is through life 
that it does so, whether that by which each individual animal (is 
governed) or that by which the whole nature of the world is 
governed.] 

For as there is no body which is not contained within its proper 
species, so there is no species which is not controlled by the power of 
some life. Therefore, if all bodies which are naturally constituted are 
governed by some species of life, and every species seeks its own 
genus while every genus takes its origin from universal substance, it 
must be that every species of life which contains the numerousness 
729A of the various bodies returns to an universal life, by participation in 
which it is a species. 

Now, this universal life is called by the natural philosophers the 
Universal Soul which through its species controls the totality which 
is contained within the orbit of the heavenly sphere, while those who 
contemplate the Divine Sophia call it the common life, which, while 
it participates in that one Life which is substantial in itself and is the 
fountain and creator of all life, by its division into things visible and 
invisible distributes lives in accordance with the Divine Ordinance, 
as this Sun which is known to the senses pours forth its rays on all 
around. But the way in which life reaches all things is not the same 
as that in which the rays of the Sun do ; for these do not penetrate all 
things, since there are many bodies into the interiors of which they 
do not enter. But no creature, whether sensible or intelligible, can be 
729B without life. For even the bodies which appear to our senses as dead 
are not entirely abandoned by life. For just as their composition and 
formation were accomplished by the administration of their proper 
life, so also is their dissolution and unforming and return into the 
things from which they originated subject to the obedience of the 
same. Seeds which are committed to the earth will not put on life 
again unless they first die ; and their death is the separation of matter 
and form ; and that life which quickens the seminal force and through 
the seminal force does not abandon them until they are resolved into 
dissolution, but ever cleaves to them, is indeed that life which 
dissolves them ; and at once, without any delay, begins to quicken 
them, that is, to call them back again to the same form. For where 
would that life be at the time of the body’s dissolution but in the 
body that is undergoing dissolution ? For as it formed no part of the 
729C composition, so it is not dissolved with the dissolution, nor reborn 
with that which is reborn, nor does it flourish more in the whole 

BOOK III 

365 

when it is joined together than when it is divided into parts, nor 
greater, that is, mightier, in the whole than in the part, nor less, that 
is, weaker, in the part than in the whole. For [it exerts] the same 
control over all things. 

Again, that dissolution which is called the death of the body is a 
dissolution for our senses [and for matter], not for our very nature, 
which is indivisible in itself and is always everywhere the same nor is 
ever separated from itself by intervals of place and time. For man 
does not cease to be [man]. 

Now, man is body and soul ; but if he is always man, then he is 
always soul and body, and although the parts of man may be 
separated from one another — for soul abandons the control of the 
body which it had assumed after its generation, and the body, 
deserted by it, is dissolved and its parts return each to its proper 
place among the elements — yet by the reason of nature neither do 
the parts cease to be always inseparably related to the whole nor the 
whole to the parts. For the reason of their relation can never cease 
to be. Thus, what to the corporeal sense seems to be separated, must 
on a higher view of things always subsist as it was inseparably. For 
indeed the human body, whether alive or dead, is the body of a man. 
Similarly the human soul, whether it is controlling its body as 
gathered together in an unity or ceases to control it — as it appears 
to the senses — as dissolved into its parts, yet does not cease to be 
the soul of a man, and therefore, in this deeper insight into things, 
we are given to understand that it continues to govern a body 
distributed among the elements no less than one which is bound 
together in the structural unity of its members, as right reason 
undeniably teaches. For if the soul is a spirit which in itself is free of 
all corporeal grossness, and the elements also into which the body is 
resolved are, in so far as they subsist simply in themselves, closely 
akin to the spiritual nature, why should it surprise us if the 
incorporeal soul should control the parts of its body preserved in 
natures akin to itself? For it can attain to the things that are more 
like itself more easily than to those that are unlike. Now, the things 
that are unlike itself are the gross and corruptible bodies, while the 
things that are like it are those which are most subtle and by no 
means susceptible to corruption. For it is not to be believed that 
when the corporeal parts which composed the solid body are 
dissolved into those elements in which they are preserved, they do 
not shed their grossness and do not pass into the lightest and most 
spiritual qualities of the elements themselves — not that they cease 

That if man 
is always 
man he is 
always soul 
729D 
and body 

730A 

That the soul 
is more able 
to control 
what is like it 
than what is 
unlike it 

730B 

366 

PERIPHYSEON 

Concerning 
sight and 
hearing 

730D 

altogether to be bodies, but they become as spiritual bodies as are 
the elements themselves. And this you can very readily prove from 
the example of the body when it is still alive. For some of its parts 
are heavy and thick with grossness, like bones, flesh, the sinews also 
730C and the veins ; also the humours which irrigate the whole bulk and 
nourish it and build it up — for all these are taken into the 
constitution of the body from the watery and earthly qualities — ; 
but some are most light and are hampered by no weight of gravity or 
grossness, and whithersoever they are directed by the soul are 
immediately there without a moment’s delay, like vision and 
hearing, which none of those who are sound philosophers would 
deny to be parts of the body deriving from fire and air. For, as 
St. Augustine says, there is a luminous quality in the eyes, an aerial, 
mobile, sonorous quality in the ears. 

For sight is a kind of light which first rises out of the fire in the 
heart and then ascends to the highest part of the head (namely to 
that part which is called by the Greeks pfjviy^ but by the Latins 
“membranula”, by which the brain is surrounded and protected), 
having passed through certain channels to the eyebrows and the 
pupils of the eyes, whence in a very swift rush it leaps forth like the 
rays of the Sun and reaches with such speed the places and bodies 
that are near or stand very far off before the eyelids and the brows. 

Again, hearing is a certain very subtle ringing which first issues 
731A forth from the breathing of the lungs and rises upwards to the same 
part of the head through its own hidden paths and, poured into the 
spirals of the ears, bursts forth and, mingling with the parts of the 
air which are close to it or further away, hastens to receive without 
any delay whatever resounds in it. 

These parts of the body, then, which are most subtle and akin 
to spiritual natures, although they take their origin from the inner 
recesses of the thick bulk, extend so far beyond it that they are 
thought to lie far outside it. For sight reaches out to grasp the 
coloured forms of visible things, and hearing to reproduce in itself 
the accents of voices or other sounds which erupt from the impact 
with the air and which we call the forms and colours of voices. For 
the other three senses are seen to be contained within the limits of 
the body, although the sense of smell is considered to extend beyond 
them, not unreasonably as I think. 

73IB Now, all this is accomplished by the soul, which in itself is 
simple and is without corporeal quantity or spatial extension, in the 
body which it controls by its presence, and while it is itself contained 

BOOK III 

367 

in no locality it brings to life and controls the localized parts of its 
body wherever they may be. For it is not in a local sense that it is 
contained in the mass of the fleshly members, nor in a local sense 
that it is projected outside them with the projected senses. But in a 
potential sense it is present to receive the phantasies which are 
everywhere formed in the instruments of its senses ; and by this 
reasoning we come to know how great is its natural power and 
placelessness. For at one and the same moment of time it perceives 
the phantasies, that is, the images, of the stars in the light from the 
eyes which is radiated through the ether, and of voices by the sense 73 IC 
of hearing which is diffused through the air, and of odours by the 
sense of smell whether within or without the body, and of flavours 
by the sense of taste, and of all things which can be felt by the sense 
of touch ; having perceived these phantasies, first formed with 
marvellous rapidity without any temporal interval from the corporeal 
numbers in the sensible, it receives them through the numbers that 
meet, introduces them through the numbers that advance, commends 
them to the memory through the recordable numbers, orders them 
through the rational numbers, and, according to the rules of the 
divine numbers which are above it, acknowledges or rejects them 
through the intellectual numbers. Contemplating their exemplars it 
forms judgements both about the numbers which are constituted 
within itself and about the corporeal and sensible numbers both of 
which are outside it. 

For reason has discovered eight orders of numbers, of which 
the first and highest is above the understanding among the eternal 
causes, and is that by which the rational soul discerns all things, as 
the Apostle says : “Spiritual man judges all things ; but he himself is 
judged by no man.” Two others are entirely without and beneath 
the soul, of which one, the most remote, is in the bodies from which 
are formed the corporeal senses in which the phantasies come into 
being, while the other is formed in the corporeal senses themselves, 
and this is the first order of phantasies to be constituted in the 
instruments of the senses, I mean in the eyes and ears and other seats 
of the senses. But within the soul itself five numbers are reckoned to 
be naturally established : the number that meet, which are the first 
to encounter the phantasies and receive them ; after these the 
numbers that advance, which are like guides to the city of the 
memory, to which the phantasies, when they have arrived there, are 
introduced by the recordable numbers; then the rational numbers 
distribute them about the city as the intellectual numbers have 

Concerning 
731D 
the eight 
orders of 
numbers dis¬ 
tinguished 
by reason 

732A 

368 

PERIPHYSEON 

732B 

37 

Concerning 

Universal 

Life 

732C 

Concerning 
the Intellec¬ 
tual and the 
Rational Life 

732D 

That angels 
are made in 
the Image of 
God 

ordained. For the phantasies which come as a crowd through sight 
especially have a place in the memory. In like manner those that 
enter by way of hearing and the other senses are received into their 
places of residence in the same city. But whoever wishes for further 
knowledge of all these things should read the great Augustine in the 
sixth book of his “De musica”, and in the books of his Confessions 
and the great Gregory of Nyssa in his “Discourse on the Image”. 

Why, then, should we be surprised if the rational soul after the 
dissolution of its body into its parts diffused among the elements 
should continue its activity by a natural control concealed and 
removed from every bodily sense, seeing that even when the body is 
still alive and gathered into an unity, in so far as is perceptible to the 
senses, it exerts the power of its authority over it not only in the 
mass of its members but also in the senses that extend far beyond it ? 

But let us return to the consideration of Universal Life, of 
which the demonstration of the power over bodies prompted us to 
introduce these remarks about the rational life, though not about 
every life that controls the body — now, this I say bearing in mind 
the souls of the irrational animals, concerning which there is a 
[wide] variety of opinion. For some say that they survive the death 
of the body, others that they die with the body and do not remain 
after it, a question about which we shall have a little to say later. So 
of Universal Life the first and main division is by that differentiation 
which separates the rational life from the irrational ; and the 
rational life is distributed between angels and men, but whereas in 
angels it is called intellectual as though for a special meaning, in men 
it is called rational — although in actual fact the truth is that in both 
angels and men it is both intellectual and rational; and therefore 
intellectual and rational life is predicated of both as a common 
form. The statement that life itself is called intellect in angels, soul in 
men, is retained so as to distinguish between them. For I can think 
of no other reason why the angelic life should not be called rational 
soul or the rational soul of man intellect, especially as angels possess 
heavenly bodies of their own in which they often manifest them¬ 
selves ; and thus, if it is recognized that they have bodies, why their 
life should not be called soul I do not know, unless it be merely, as 
we said above, in order to draw a verbal distinction — for that 
angels also are made in the Image of God we do not doubt; and 
where there are reason and intellect I should not believe that the 
Image of God is absent, although Scripture clearly says only of man 
that he is made in the Image of God. I say nothing of Plato lest I 

BOOK III 

369 

should be thought to be one of his sectaries, but he defines the 
angels as rational immortal animals. And thus we are left with these 
terms by which this human nature is differentiated from the angelic 
substance, [namely] rational soul and image of God. 

Now, the irrational life is divided into that which participates in 
sense and that which is without sense ; and the one is distributed 
among all animals which possess the power of perceiving, the other 
among [matters] which lack all sense, the kind of life which is held 
to rule plants and trees, and below which reason finds no kind of life 
at all. 

Thus by four differentiations created life is brought together 
into four species : the intellectual in angels, [the rational in men, the 
sensitive in beasts, the insensitive] in plants and in the other bodies, 
in which only the form shows a trace of life, as are the four elements 
of the world whether as simple in themselves or as composite : earth, 
I mean, water and air and ether. And this is why man is not 
inappropriately called the workshop of all creatures since in him the 
universal creature is contained. [For] he has intellect like an angel, 
reason like a man, sense like an [irrational] animal, life like a plant, 
and subsists in body and soul : [there is no creature that he is 
without]. [For] outside these you (will) find no creature. 

But perhaps someone will say that all these are also contained 
in the angel. To him I reply that sense, which is distributed among 
animals, cannot subsist except in a body constituted of the four 
elements. For there will be no sight where there is not fire nor 
hearing if air is absent. If moisture be removed neither smell nor 
taste will remain. The absence of earth removes all touch. But the 
bodies of angels are simple and spiritual and lack every exterior 
sense. For they do not receive the knowledge of sensible things 
through the phantasies of bodies, but perceive every corporeal 
creature spiritually in its spiritual causes, as we shall when we are 
changed into a nature that shall be equal to theirs. Therefore the 
angels lack corporeal sense because they are above it ; and thus are 
removed from all irrational life, whether sensitive or deprived of all 
sense. They are not weighed down by composite and corruptible 
bodies. So you will find many things in man which the angelic 
nature totally rejects, whereas there is nothing in the angel nor in 
any other creature which is not naturally present in man. 

And lest you should say. If then every species of life is in man 
he contains not one but many lives which differ from one another. 

733A 

Concerning 
the irrational 
life 

733B 

That angels 
do not pos¬ 
sess sense 

733C 

733D 

370 

PERIPHYSEON 

734A 

734B 

38 

Concerning 
the nutritive 
and germinal 
life 
734C 

for he has the irrational and the rational, and at the same time the 
sensitive and the germinal, consider more carefully the powers of the 
human soul; for while it is of one and the same subsistence and 
power and operation in all human bodies at once [and] generally 
and in individual human bodies specifically, [yet] it can perform all 
the vital motions and administrations of its body whether they are 
within or without. For beyond the corporeal senses it both reasons 
and understands like the angelic life, whithin the corporeal senses it 
exercises its power of perception in the likeness of irrationals 
without abandoning its rationality; it provides nourishment and 
increase to its body as the life that lacks sense and penetrates the 
plants and trees. It is everywhere wholly in itself and, wholly in all 
things, it preserves its senses whole. Thus the force of the germinal 
life is revealed in the bones and the nails and hair, for these parts of 
our body, being impervious to the air, participate in no sense ; in the 
five-fold instrument of the senses it communicates with the irrational 
life which is proper to the animals that lack reason. In all these its 
nature does not permit it to be without [its own] reason in itself 
although it is often moved irrationally. Everything else that it can do 
apart from these powers, namely the powers of bestowing life and 
nourishment and perception through the senses, whether it does or 
suffers, right reason knows that it does or suffers outside the body. 

Now that we have obtained this knowledge concerning the 
divisions and differentiations of Universal Life, let us return to the 
solution, to the best of our ability, of the question that was raised 
earlier, for it was that which prompted us to insert these remarks 
about the general soul or life. 

For the question was. Why in the works of the Four Primordial 
Days no mention is made of any life or soul, and then on the Fifth 
Day Scripture suddenly breaks out and says, “Let the waters 
produce the creeping thing of living soul” ; and he does not say. The 
“creeping thing of soul” simply, but adds “living” as though the 
soul were not a living thing. And the subject is, as I think, that 
species which we placed last among the divisions of the general life, 
and rightly so, because a subtle investigation of natures reveals that 
it is without any intellect or reason. And it is ignored by Scripture as 
though it were no life at all, whether soul or living soul, so that we 
may understand that it is the last and most imperfect participation 
in the life that is created as essence ; and therefore the Divine 
Authority ordained that it should rather be reckoned among bodily 
rather than living numbers. It is right therefore that nothing 

BOOK III 

371 

representing this vital motion was included among the operations of 
the Four Days in which the species of heavenly and terrestrial 
essences are brought forth [into the open] from the primordial 
causes and receive the perfection of their formation. For even on the 
Third Day there is no mention of it, on which the germination of the 
plants and trees from the earth is ordained, although in these its 
power of control is clear [to the corporeal senses] — not because this 
species of life does not have in nature a place for its share of 734D 
existence — for the natural force that gives nourishment and 
increase to all things which cling to the earth by their roots and rise 
from out of the earth in the infinite number of shoots and plants, 
and brings them forth into their proper species in the likeness of 
each genus and in the natural sequence of flower, fruit, and seed 
disposed throughout individual places and times, is not to be lightly 
estimated — but because it can achieve nothing outside the body 
and reveals in itself no power of perfect life existing independently 735A 
of bodies, it is numbered by the Divine Authority, as we said before, 
among the individuals of the corporeal nature rather than among 
the species of the general life; and because in itself it, that is, the 
germinal life, can be contemplated by the intellect apart from its 
association with the higher life, I mean the sensitive and rational, 
while the rational and sensitive are not permitted by nature to 
animate any body without it. Holy Scripture kept it apart. 

For the soul which lacks all sense seems as though it also lacks 
all vital motion, and therefore is called simply “soul”, but not 
“living soul”. Nor is this surprising. For if in infants when they are 
conceived in the womb or when they are issuing from the womb the 
soul is reckoned to be such as is altogether without reason and 
intellect because although it is both rational and intellectual it 735B 
cannot show the signs of reason and intellect in its bodily parts, 
which are as yet of recent birth and imperfect, how much more 
appropriate is it that the soul which is by nature deprived [of the 
powers] of intellect and reason should not have the right to be 
designated in Scripture by the name of living soul? 

A. 1 accept this interpretation and perceive that it accords with 
the nature of things and with the Prophet’s discourse. But since 
there are many who contend that the corporeal bulks of plants and 
trees have no vital motion whatsoever, saying that they are animated 
by the moisture on which they flourish and by no other life, I should 
like to have the view of this matter which you have stated above 
corroborated by some weighty authority who should explicitly 

372 

PERIPHYSEON 

pronounce that plants and trees are controlled by some species of 
life, whatever it may be. 

735C N. You are not, as I think, unaware that the opinion of all the 
philosophers who discourse about the world is, in respect of this 
part of nature, unanimous. For they say that all bodies that are 
contained within the sensible world are contained by a vital motion, 
whether they are in motion or at rest. 

A. To all who practise philosophy or read the philosophers this 
is very well known. For both Plato in the “Timaeus” and Pliny 
Secundus in his “Natural History” provide us with very clear 
teaching [on these matters]. 

N. If, then, you desire the testimonies of the Holy Fathers, 
hear the noble Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, in his 
Seventh Homily on Genesis : “Let the waters bring forth”, he says, 
“creeping things of living souls. Now is the animate... animal first 
created. For although plants and trees are said to live because they 
735D participate in the nutritive and auctive power, yet they are not also 
animals or animate.” Again, Gregory of Nyssa, who is also called 
Nazianzen, brother germane of the aforesaid Basil, in his Discourse 
“On the Image” [in chapter viii, says, “Reason teaches that the 
power of life and soul is observed in three different ways. For one 
is” that which merely bestows increase and nourishment, and is 
736A called “auctive and nutritive because it supplies whatever is required 
for the increase of that which it nourishes ; it is also called plant life 
and is observed in plants. For it must be understood that even in 
plants there is a kind of vital power which has no part of sense. But 
as well as this species of life there is a second which has both this” 
that the above-mentioned possesses, and in addition “the function 
of control through the sense, and this” species “is found in the 
nature of the irrationals. For it not only bestows nourishment and 
increase but also possesses the functions of sensible action and 
perception. But the perfect life in the body is formed in the rational 
nature, by which I mean the human; and is nutritive and sensitive 
and participates in reason and is controlled by the mind.” 

The same (Gregory) in the same discourse] in chapter xv says, 
736B “Reason finds three different kinds in the vital power: the first is 
nutritive without sense ; the second is on the one hand nutritive and 
sensitive [and] but on the other hand has no part in the operation of 
reason ; there is also the third which is rational and perfect and 
penetrates to every power.” 

BOOK III 

373 

Augustine in his book “De uera religione” says, “Let us not 
make a religion of the cult of that life by which the trees are said to 
live since there is in it no sense, and it is of the same kind as that by 
which the numerousness of our bodies is activated, by which also 
the hair and the bones live, which are removeable without the sense 
(perceiving it). But better than this is the sentient life, and yet we 
ought not to worship the life of beasts; nor should we make a 
religion even of that perfect and wise rational soul whether as 
controller of the parts (of the body) or of the whole.” And these 
testimonies of the aforesaid Fathers are sufficient, as I think, to 
corroborate what we have said. 

A. They are indeed sufficient, and we must pass on to other 
matters. 

N. See how beautifully the range of nature develops as ordered 
by the Divine Oracles. Thus, on the Fifth Day it brings forth for the 
first time the creation of the animals that are endowed with the five 
senses. 

But concerning the soul of all the irrational animals I am not a 
little puzzled why very many of the Holy Fathers assert that it 
perishes with their bodies and cannot survive them. Thus Basil in his 
ninth homily on Genesis says, “Let earth bring forth living soul. 
Why” [he says] “does earth bring forth soul ? So that you may learn 
the difference between the soul of the beast and the soul of man.” 
[And] “You will learn a little later how the soul of man was made; 
but now hear of the soul of the irrationals. Since, according to what 
is written, the soul of every animal is its blood, and blood solidified 
usually turns into flesh, and flesh when decayed returns to earth, it 
follows that the soul of beasts is an earthly thing. So, let the earth 
bring forth living soul. Notice the progress of soul into blood, of 
blood into flesh, of flesh into the earth ; and then returning take the 
same way back from earth into flesh, from flesh into blood, from 
blood into soul, and you will find that the soul of beasts is earth. Do 
not think that it is an older substance than its body or that it remains 
after the dissolution of the flesh.” 

Gregory of Nyssa too in his Discourse “On the Image”, the 
sixteenth chapter, says, “Now, if some things in creation have the 
nutritive function, or again others are controlled by the sensitive 
power, neither the former participate in sense nor the latter parti¬ 
cipate in intellect.” “But if it possesses perfection in the intellectual 
and rational soul, everything which is not so may indeed be a 

736C 

39 

Concerning 
the soul of 
the irrational 
beings 

736D 

737A 

374 

PERIPHYSEON 

737B 

The soul of 
irrational 
beings does 
not die 

737C 

737D 

738A 

homonym of soul, but not truly soul, only a vital function which 
makes use of the name of soul.” 

But if it is as they claim, why is the main division of universal 
soul into rational and intellectual soul on the one hand, and soul 
which lacks reason and intellect on the other? Why are two 
mutually contrary species included under the one genus of life? For 
rational and irrational are not opposed to one another but (are 
made to) express a difference of species within the one genus. 

But living and dying are opposed to one another absolutely. 
For the one signifies a possession, the other a privation. But 
possession and privation are mutually contradictory. If, then, after 
the dissolution of the body one species survives while the other 
perishes, how will their genus preserve its integrity? For as, when a 
genus perishes, every one of its species must perish, so when the 
species perish reason requires that their genus must perish. For the 
genus is preserved in its species and the species in their genus. But if 
of the forms or species which are constituted under one genus some 
can and do die while others cannot and do not, what are we to say of 
their genus ? Will it both perish in some and not perish in others ? — 
for that cannot remain a whole which suffers destruction in some of 
its parts, and therefore it will not be a genus but the collapse of a 
genus. For if of all things consisting of body and soul there is one 
genus which is called animal since in it all animals subsist as 
substances — for in it both man and lion and ox and horse are one 
and substantially one — how can it be that all the species of that 
genus should perish and only that remain which is allotted to man ? 
And therefore, if only one species should survive while the others 
pass away, the genus also will perish, for it surely will not stand in 
one species. [For] [I do not see] how one species can make any 
genus. For since the genus [is] the substantial unity of many forms 
or species [how will the genus stand when the substantial unity of 
the many forms or species does not remain? Now, that the many 
species are one in the genus] is the teaching of St. Dionysius in his 
chapter on the Perfect and the One where he says, “For there is no 
many that does not participate in the One, but (what is) many in the 
parts (is) one in the whole ; and (what is) many (in) the accidents (is) 
one in the subject ; and (what is) many in number or powers (is) one 
(in) the species; and (what is) many (in) the species (is) one in the 
genus.” 

Therefore if all species are one in their genus, how should that 
one in part perish and in part remain? And if that one is a 

BOOK III 

375 

substantial one, how could it perish when in every creature there 
remain indestructibly and without increase or decrease these three: 
Substance, Power, Operation? And if the bodies of all animals, 
when they are dissolved, are not reduced to nothing but, as the 
natural reason clearly allows, return to the elemental qualities by the 
concourse of which they were materially made, how can their souls 
perish entirely, seeing that they are certainly of a superior nature — 
for none of the wise deny that any soul is superior to every body — , 738B 
when it is [not] consistent with reason that what is inferior should 
remain and be preserved while what is superior is destroyed and 
perishes, or that what is composite should be kept in its separated 
parts while what is simple and without any composition and 
incapable of being dissolved should be destroyed? But who of those 
who study wisdom does not know that every body is composite 
while every soul is simple? 

And, what is stranger than all this, why do those who assert 
that irrational souls perish after the dissolution of the body — not 
unreasonably, as they claim, since they derive from the earth and to 
the earth return again — exalt with high praises the power of the 
irrational soul over the senses and prefer it to that of the rational 
soul in the senses of the body? For what man has as sharp a vision 
as the eagle and the gazelle? Who is endowed with a sense of smell 738C 
like a dog’s, and, not to prolong too far this discourse on the power 
of the irrational soul over the senses of individual animals, what 
must we say of the length of memory of the irrationals ? Ulysses’ dog 
recognized his master over twenty years. A camel who has suffered 
injury at the hands of his masters waits for many years for a suitable 
occasion for revenge, mindful all the time of the injury. The griffin, 
they say, is so chaste that when once he has lost his conjugal [mate], 
mindful of his first spouse, he preserves his chastity inviolate, and 
the same thing is related of the turtle dove by those who study 
natural history. Basil describes the piety of storks towards their 
parents. For when the father grows old and through excessive old 738D 
age begins to lose his clothing of feathers, the sons stand around him 
and shelter him with their plumage and prepare abundance of food 
and also supply strong help in flight, raising him on either side in a 
tranquil flight which they support in every way. 

Therefore I cannot see how all these natural powers could be 
present in the irrational soul if it were earth, as the above-mentioned 
Fathers say, risen from earth and returning to earth again, or if it 739A 
were not truly substantial soul. [And if the soul is earth, and earth a 

376 

PERIPHYSEON 

body, how is the body called soul when their natures are so widely 
different? And if the body is a soul it will necessarily have the life 
which enlivens that (soul) — for there is no body which lacks life 
and form ; otherwise it would not be a body — , and that would 
mean that it was the soul of soul or life of life.] But let no one think 
that we say such things with the intent of overthrowing the opinions 
of the Holy Fathers, but rather of seeking with all our might a more 
reasonable way of accepting them, by deciding whether irrational 
souls perish when the bodies are dissolved and return to earth or 
739B whether, while abandoning the control of their bodies, they are 
preserved in their genera, and of holding firmly to that which 
everywhere is sought and found and concluded by sound arguments, 
namely, that every life or soul which controls a body derives its 
existence as soul or life by participation in one primordial life or 
soul — a participation which natural reason does not allow to be 
wholly abandoned, whether it appears in the control of the body or 
not. Therefore we say these things without prejudice to the opinion 
of any, but to urge those who read to look more deeply, and 
confidently follow, in consulting the truth, what seems to them the 
more likely explanation of these matters. But I would believe that 
these holy and philosophical men, and skilled in the accurate 
investigation of nature, taught publicly in this way for the sake of 
men who were uninstructed and entirely given up to the flesh like 
739C brutes and irrational animals so that they should not be so 
dominated by the flesh and subservient to its lusts but that, alarmed 
at such vileness in the irrational creature, they should mend their 
ways and raise themselves to the dignity of the rational creature in 
which they were created ; and Gregory himself openly admits this in 
the sixteenth chapter of the “On the Image”. For after saying that 
the irrational soul is not truly soul, he adds a little later, “Let the 
lovers of the flesh learn not to bind their intelligence to the things 
that are visible to the sense, but to devote themselves to the 
observations of souls, because true soul is seen in men whereas the 
sense is held in common with the irrational (animals).” 

A. Let each select what he prefers, and let him abide by what 
he has selected, but as for us, let us pass on to what remains to be 
considered. 

739D 40 N. “Let the waters bring forth the creeping thing of living soul 

and that which flies over the earth under the firmament of heaven.” 
Here too understand “of living soul” to mean “the flying thing of 
living soul”. For more of living soul is found in the senses of flying 

BOOK III 

377 

things than in those of the fishes. For according to Basil the sense of 
hearing is slow in fishes : they see with more blurred vision because 
of the water, and there is in them neither much memory, nor 
phantasy nor associative knowledge, while all these things abound 740A 
in birds no less than in men, nay, more so. 

Now, it is rightly asked why the flying things [are said to be] 
brought forth from water. For it would seem more credible that as 
the animals which inhabit the earth are said to be created out of the 
earth, so also the fishes, which alone are the inhabitants of water, 
should be created from water, but the flying things, which plane 
through the air, should similarly be created from air. But this 
question can be reasonably met if [the nature] of waters [is 
considered, of which] there are two kinds : One is found in seas and 
rivers and is of a grosser quality; the other in vapours and clouds 
and of a lighter quality. And the grosser kind is supported by the 
solidity of the earth, while the lighter is suspended in the serenity of 
the air until it assumes a grossness and heaviness which the thinness 
(of the air) cannot sustain. Thus it follows, by a natural deduction, 740B 
that the creeping things of living soul, that is, the genera and species 
of all fishes, are created from the grosser kind of waters, while the 
flying things, similarly in their genera and species, are created from 
the lighter, and since the region of the air which lies between the 
moon and the earth is divided into two parts, of which the upper is 
serene and subject to none of the disturbances which arise in the air 
from the earthly and watery vapours, while the lower is moist and of 
a more solid quality, and accommodated to the motions of the 
winds, the accumulations of clouds, and the other things which 
result from the proximity of the earth and of the waters, it is not 
unreasonable to believe that whatever is born of that part of the air 
which is of a moist and watery quality is created out of air. For the 
flying things could not traverse this part of the air which adjoins the 
lands and waters if they did not partake of the aerial nature at all; 740C 
but as it is, since there is discovered in them both the lightness of 
feathers and the hollowness of bones and the faculty of flight we are 
given most explicitly to understand that they are created not only 
from water but also from air, something which is also easily seen 
from the nature of the amphibians which live both in the water and 
in the air, or in the water and on earth. For there are some flying 
things which spend part of their time in the air and part in the water, 
and while they live in the water adopt the form of fishes, but in the 
air that of birds, and this they do by changing their shape every six 
months. For for six months they swim about in the water and for six 

378 

PERIPHYSEON 

740D 

741A 

741B 

742A 

months fly about in the air and descend to the earth like other flying 
things [and this species of birds always goes about in flocks whether 
in the air or in the water and is called “luligo”] ; from this we are 
given to understand that [the flying things] participate in the 
substance of both elements, that is, of air and of water. But there are 
amphibians, that is, things that live a double life, on earth and on 
the water : seals and crocodiles and many similar animals. 

There is also another argument to prove that flying things are 
made from moist air. For they breathe in and out, and therefore 
dwell both on land and in the air, but in water they are suffocated, 
and therefore always swim on the surface, save for those amphibians 
which deliberately plunge beneath the waves. 

But fishes, because they are created almost entirely out of 
thickened water, not being able to breathe in and out like the 
animals of earth and air, on contact with earth and air very quickly 
perish. However, they are not entirely deprived of respiration. For if 
they were absolutely deprived of it they would not sleep. But, as 
Pliny says, fish do sleep. Therefore they possess lungs which breathe 
in and out. But that breath they derive not from the thicker air but 
from that most subtle kind which penetrates all corporeal things. 

Since, then, fishes and flying things clearly show more than 
other animals that their qualities are created from the moist nature 
almost entirely — for they are moist and cold — , for that reason 
Divine Scripture records that they are produced from the waters. 

And observe carefully : he did not say. Let the water bring 
down, but. Let the waters bring forth, that you may understand 
that, as we have said, there are two kinds of waters, a grosser kind in 
the sea and rivers, a lighter in the air, and therefore he brought this 
distinction into his narrative in the words “Let the waters bring 
forth”. Then he adds “the creeping thing of living soul and the thing 
that flies over the earth”, as though to say openly, [Let] one kind of 
water, the grosser, [produce] the fishes, the other, which is the 
lighter, the flying things, which one can also see from their very 
bodies. For we see that fishes are encumbered by the heaviness of 
grosser bodies, while the flying things are raised up into the height 
by the lightness of their feathers. 

But in saying, “above the earth under the firmament of 
heaven”, he clearly signifies that the bodies of the flying things are 
not at all encumbered by the heaviness of earth, but are raised into 
the air from whose moist quality they are created. 

BOOK III 

379 

“Under the firmament of heaven.” Since to the fineness and 
spirituality of the simple elements which, as we have explained, the 
Divine Oracles signify under the name of firmament or heaven, no 
other kind of animals shows a nature more similar than do the birds, 
it is appropriate that the flying things should be ordered to be made 
under the firmament of heaven, that is, in the vicinity of the quality 
of the most pure and all but incorporeal elements. Therefore the 
flying thing is created under the firmament of heaven, that is, close 
to, but below, the very light thinness of spiritual bodies. So much for 
the creation of the fishes and flying things in their primordial causes. 

Their procession into their genera and species follows. 

“And God created great Kf|Tr| and every living soul” and so 
forth. KfjTO(; [that is, monster] is of the neuter gender with the 742B 
Greeks, and of the singular number, but in the plural, as in the case 
of the other neuter nouns with them, it ends in the letter a : Kfjxoc;, 
Kr|T8a. Then there is contraction of the two syllables into one, that is 
of E and a into q, Kpiea, Kf|Tq, and of the two accents, namely an 
acute and a grave, that is, into one, a circumflex. For Kpiea is 
accented acutely on the second syllable, but is grave on the last, 
while KfjTq carries the circumflex. But we must, as I think, put an 
end to this book and not prolong it further, if you agree. 

A. Indeed I agree. And it would have required an end long 
since, if the prolixity of the reasoning had not held us back. 

PERIPHYSEON 

BOOK IV 

N. In the First Book of this our Philosophy of Nature it was 
our object to prove that the uncreated creative Cause of all things 
which exist and all things which do not exist, the sole principle, 
origin, and universal Source of all. Which Itself proceeds from 
nothing while from It proceed all things, the Trinity which in three 
Substances is co-essential, and Which, Itself dvapxoi; (that is, 
without beginning) is the Beginning and the End, the one Good, the 
one God, opoouaioc; and UTiepouaioq (that is, co-essential and 
superessential), is in fact an UTrepouoioiric; or superessential Nature 
That was our principal theme. 

For as St. Epiphanius, the Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, says 
in his Ancoratus, or Discourse on Faith : 

“The three Holies have a common holiness, and the three 
Agents a common activity : the three Designers design in unity and 
the Three Workers are three who work as One, and the Three Which 
subsist have a subsistence common to all Three, each existing for the 
sake of the others. This is called the Holy Trinity, in which there are 
Three who exist, one accord, one Deity of the same Essence, of the 
same power, of the same subsistence, and holding all similar things 
in common likewise: for the Deity of the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit operates an equality of Grace. But how They are What 
They are we must leave to Them to teach us. For no one has known 
the Father save the Son, and no one has known the Son save the 
Father, and him to whomsoever the Son has revealed Himself: and this 
revelation is brought about through the Holy Spirit. Therefore these 
three Existents — Existents from Himself, through Himself or in 

I 

Recapitula- 
741C 
tion of 
the natures 

742C 

PERIPHYSEON 

743A 

743B 

743C 

Himself — are suitably known by each one in proportion as Owe;, 
Hup, Hveupa, that is Light, Fire and Spirit, reveal Themselves.” 

Such, as I say, was the teaching of Epiphanius to supply an 
orthodox answer to the question : What ought we to believe about 
the Three in the Holy Trinity, and what about the One? and to 
instruct those who seek after faith. And it seems to me that he was 
employing the allegory of Light, Fire and Heat, substituting Spirit 
for the last. It need not worry us that he puts Light before Fire : for 
the Father is Light and Fire and Heat, and the Son is Light and Fire 
and Heat, and the Holy Spirit Light and Fire and Heat. For the 
Father illumines, the Son illumines, and the Holy Spirit illumines 
(That is to say, all wisdom and knowledge are the gifts of all Three) : 
the Father burns, the Son burns, and the Holy Spirit burns (for 
together They burn away our transgressions and transmute us, a 
burnt offering, by the action of GecooK; or deification, into the Unity 
which is Theirs) : the Father warms, the Son warms, and the Holy 
Spirit warms (for with one and the same heat of Love They cherish 
us and nourish us, and so lead us forth from the kind of formlessness 
of our imperfection, which was the result of the transgression of the 
First Man, to the perfection of man when the era of Christ shall be 
fulfilled. Now, the perfection of man is Christ, in Whom all is 
consummated : and the fulfilment of His era is the consummation of 
the salvation of the Catholic Church, which is established among 
angels and among men). 

In the Second Book we considered the nature which creates and 
is created, and decided that it subsists in the principles of things, or 
their Primordial Causes. For this nature on the one hand is created 
by that single Universal Cause and supreme Goodness Whose 
property it is by Its unspeakable Power to lead all things forth from 
non-existence into existence : and on the other hand does not cease 
to create the things which come after it, by means of their 
participation in it. 

The Third Book treats of the Nature which is created but does 
not create, that is to say, of the ultimate effects of the Primordial 
Causes. These hold the lowest estate of nature, for the devolution of 
the Universe ceases with them, having no further place whither to 
descend, for it is now established in the realm of corporeal objects. 
But in this book we also gave considerable attention to the 
Primordial Causes and to God, to His image which is reflected in 
Mind, Reason and Sense, and we enquired what kind of nothing 
that was from which God created all things, and how it could be 

BOOK IV 

383 

that the Only Begotten Word of God both makes all things and is 
made in all. We also briefly discussed the works of the First 
Intelligible week, up to the Sixth Day. 

Now we come to the Fourth Book which starts with the works 
of the Sixth Prophetic Meditation of the creation of the Universe, 
goes on to consider the Return of all things into that Nature which 
neither creates nor is created, and so brings our work to its 
conclusion. The difficulty of this part of our theme, the conflict and 
clash of different interpretations, I find so formidable that in 
comparison to it the first three books seem like a smooth sea upon 
which, because of the calmness of the waves, readers could sail 
without fear of shipwreck, steering a safe course. Now, however, we 
enter upon a voyage where the course has to be picked from the 
mass of tortuous digressions, where we have to climb the steeps of 
obscure doctrines, encounter the region of the Syrtes, that is to say, 
the dangers of the currents of unfamiliar teaching, ever in immediate 
danger of shipwreck in the obscurity of the subtlest intellects, which 
like concealed rocks may suddenly split our vessel : and the length of 
this course is such that we must endure it even into a fifth book. 
Nevertheless, with the mercy of God as our captain and steersman 
and our sails filled with the propitious wind of his spirit, we shall 
pick through all these dangers the true and safe course, and reach 
the harbour which we seek, free and unhurt after a smooth voyage. 

A. Let us spread sails, then, and set out to sea. For Reason, not 
inexperienced in these waters, fearing neither the threats of the 
waves nor windings nor the Syrtes nor rocks, shall speed our course : 
indeed she finds it sweeter to exercise her skill in the hidden straits of 
the Ocean of Divinity than idly to bask in the smooth and open 
waters, where she cannot display her power. For “in the sweat of her 
brow is she to get her bread” — so is she commanded by the word of 
God, and to till the field of Holy Scripture, prolific as it is of thorns 
and thistles, that is to give herself to the narrow density of divine 
understandings, and to follow with the unflagging steps of investi¬ 
gation the study of wisdom, undaunted by the seeming impassability 
of the path, “until she find the place of the Lord, the tabernacle of 
the God of Jacob,” that is to say, until the grace of God leading and 
helping and aiding and moving her by patient and assiduous study 
of the Holy Scriptures, she may return and reach again that which in 
the Fall of the First Man she had lost, the contemplation of Truth; 
and reaching it she may love it, and loving it she may abide in it, and 
abiding in it she may there find her rest. 

2 

743D 

744A 

744B 

384 

PERIPHYSEON 

3 N. God also said : “Let the earth bring forth the living soul in 
its genus, cattle and reptiles and the beasts of the field according to 
their species,” etc. “Let the earth bring forth the living soul” : that is 
to say : Let the earth bring forth the living animal. This figure of 
speech, very common in the Scriptural writings, is called auvexSoxf) 
or conceptio : for the concept of the whole is implied in the naming 
of the part, or that of the part in the naming of the whole. So the 
word soul by itself frequently in the Scriptures signifies the whole 
animal. Thus in the Acts of the Apostles it is said : “We were in the 
ship two hundred and seventy souls” ; the souls, of course, were not 
there without the bodies. And in Genesis : “All the souls of the 
House of Jacob which entered into Egypt were seventy.” In the 
Gospel the word flesh signifies the whole man : “And the Word was 
made flesh” means that the Word was made a complete man, 
consisting of flesh, soul and mind. And where it is said in another 

744D place: “The spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak,” by the 
flesh is meant the whole of His humanity, and by the spirit the Holy 
Spirit which was indeed in the stress of His Passion a ready helper 
for Him in His task of redeeming the human race — it is that Spirit 
which when He was nailed to the cross He commended to His 
Father, saying, “Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit” : 

745A which is as much as to say : Into Thy hands I commend the Spirit 
Which proceedeth from Thee and from Me, for He is incapable of 
suffering : I alone shall suffer in the flesh, for I alone put on flesh, 
and was made flesh. I do not mean that even He, in His Godhead, is 
capable of suffering, but that with the humanity which He alone put 
on He was subjected to the capacity for suffering, its actual passion 
and its death : these things He suffered together with the Manhood 
which He had taken into the unity of His Substance. Since then it is 
rightly said that He partook of the suffering of His Manhood, it is 
equally true to say that He suffered. For the Substance of the Word 
and of the Man is one, and is not divided in the Passion. And if you 
require a more certain support from authority, hear what the same 
Epiphanius says in his Discourse on Faith : 

“He died for us once, consenting to bear suffering for our 
sufferings : He once tasted death, even the death of the Cross : 

745B willingly for us the Word encountered Death, that it might destroy 
death : the Word was made flesh, and while It did not suffer in Its 
Godhead, in Its incapacity for suffering It partook of the suffering 
of Its Manhood. It remains incapable of passion, and yet the 
Passion is attributed to It : Death is attributed to It, and yet It 

BOOK IV 

385 

remains in immortality : for He himself has said, I am the Life : and 
Life never dies, but accepting death on our behalf. He came to bring 
us life. For life came to us not through man, nor hope through the 
flesh. For, Cursed be he. He says, who places his hope in man, and. 
Whoso putteth his trust in man is like the tamarisk of the field. 
What conclusion, then, shall we draw from this ? Does it not appear 
from what we have said that Christ is man? That He is so must be 
clear to everyone, for we unreservedly confess that the Word Our 
Lord was made man : this is not a matter of opinion but of truth. 
But the Man was not one who had achieved Godhead : for not in 
man did our hope of salvation lie; not one of all the men since 
Adam could have achieved it. But God the Word was made man 
that our hope should not depend upon man but upon the true and 
living God made Man. For it is written that every high priest chosen 
from amongst men is constituted for the service of men. Therefore 
the Lord when He came took flesh of our humanity, and God the 
Word was made Man for us, so that in His Godhead we might 
obtain salvation, while in His Manhood He might bear the sufferings 
of us men, by His Passion resolving our passion and by His Death 
slaying death itself. But suffering is attributed to the Deity, and yet 
the Deity does not suffer : suffering is attributed to the Deity 
because so the Word, Which is holy and cannot suffer, willed when 
It came. We may think in this connection of a man who puts on a 
garment which has been soiled by stains of blood : although the 
blood is upon the garment it does not touch the body of him who 
wears it, although it be said of the wearer that he is soiled by the 
blood — In just such a way Christ is said to have suffered in the 
flesh, that is to say, in the Man whom our Lord became : and such a 
change in Himself wrought the Holy God the Word when He came 
down from heaven — as the Blessed Peter writes : Mortified in the 
flesh, but living in the Spirit : and again : Therefore Christ suffering 
for us in the flesh, we ourselves are fortified by this knowledge ; thus 
as the blood upon the garment is attributed to the wearer, so the 
passion of the flesh is attributed in His case to the Godhead, 
although the Godhead suffers nothing: so that the world’s hope 
reposes not in men but in the Man whom the Lord became : but 
when He took upon Himself again His Godhead, the Passion was 
attributed thereto, so that the world might owe its salvation to the 
impassible Godhead. As the Passion was endured in the flesh, so the 
attribution of passion was endured in the Godhead, who neither 
suffered nor endured, that the Scripture might be fulfilled which 
says : If they had known they would never have crucified the Lord of 

745C 

745D 

746A 

386 

PERIPHYSEON 

Glory. So He is crucified, the Lord is crucified : and we adore Him 
746B buried, rising on the third day, and ascending to the 

heavens.” But that you may know that it was concerning none other 
than the Spirit that were spoken the words, “Father into Thy hands 
I commend my Spirit,” refer once again to the same treatise of 
Epiphanius : 

“When you hear it said that He ascended to the right hand of 
the Father and obtained from the Father the promise of the Spirit, 
or the words : ‘To await the promise of the Father which you heard 
from Me,’ or: ‘The Spirit sent Him into the wilderness,’ or the 
words which He Himself spake : ‘Give no thought of what ye shall 
say, for it is the Spirit of My Father Which speaketh in you,’ or : 
‘But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils,’ or : ‘But whosoever 
blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him,’ 
etc., or : ‘Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit,’ or : ‘But the 
Boy grew and was strengthend by the Spirit,’ ‘But Jesus, full of the 
746C Holy Spirit, returned from Jordan,’ or: ‘Jesus returned in the 
power of the Spirit’, or : ‘That which is born of the Spirit is spirit,’ 
or : ‘And I shall ask My Father, and He shall send you another 
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth’ or: ‘Because Satan has filled your 
heart,’ said Peter to Ananias, ‘you lie to the Holy Spirit,’ and later 
on : ‘You did not lie to them, but to God,’ — from all these it 
follows that from God proceeds God, that is, the Holy Spirit.” 

So much from Epiphanius. 

A. Although this digression seems to have taken us some way 
from our subject, it is valuable for those who wish to understand the 
Holy Scriptures. For from it we have learnt that the Godhead of the 
Word is incapable of suffering, and yet shares in the suffering of Its 
humanity. And this agrees with what our Lord has said in His 
Gospel : “The Spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak” ; and 
again : “Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit — where He 
746D is speaking of no other spirit than the Holy Spirit. But we must 
return to our subject. 

4 N. “Let the earth bring forth the living soul” : that is to say. Let 
the earth bring forth the living animal. Note the beauty of this 
figure, mentioned already, of the part for the whole, whereby the 
747^ whole animal is indicated by its better part, the soul. And since of 
the whole animal the lower part, the body, is derived from the earth, 
this same phrase is a command to the whole animal, body and soul, 
to be produced from the earth. For although the soul has nothing 

BOOK IV 

earthly about it since it is not a body, yet since it combines with the 
body to produce the unity of the animal, the Scriptures can say that 
it too is formed from the earth. But if an enquiry is desired into the 
higher meaning of this passage, it can be interpreted in another way : 
We are wont to use the word “earth” to signify the constant mass of 
the totality of substantial nature, including both the visibles and the 
invisibles — everything in fact which we speculated to have come 
into being on the Third Day. Hence, when the Apostle says: 
“Mortify your members which are above the earth,” he means us to 
mortify the members of our wickedness which are ours not because 
God created them, but as a result of our disobedience : so that above 
the earth, that is, in addition to the mass of nature which was 
created by God, we have built up, as it were, the body of universal 
sin : it is this that we must mortify lest we be any longer defiled by it. 
And in the place of the members of wickedness which we have 
destroyed, we should establish the members of righteousness, that is 
to say, the Virtues, so that in the same way as we, by our various 
vices, constructed upon the nature which God had created an 
abominable temple fit only for the habitation of the devil, so we 
should now build anew from the bricks of our virtues, which by the 
Grace of God have been supplied to us, a house acceptable to its 
Creator, that is, to the Creator of nature itself, from which all taint 
of evil should be cleansed and done away. This interpretation 
accords with the words of the Psalmist : “Sinners and evil-doers 
shall perish from the earth so as not to be.” For here by another 
figure the effect signifies the cause, and by sinners and evil-doers are 
meant sins and evils, which shall perish from the earth of nature 
when it is freed from all evil, so as no longer to exist. For as long as 
our nature is held subject to sin and evil, so long will they appear to 
be, although in fact they are not : but when our nature is purged of 
them and returns to her former purity, all things which have no 
subsistence of themselves, that is to say, sin and evil, shall revert to 
utter nothingness, so as no longer to exist. 

In another place the Psalmist in the name of a righteous liver 
bestows his blessing upon all the righteous : “They shall be like a 
tree that is planted by the water-side,” that is to say, like the Word 
Which was made Flesh for our sakes at the end of all the ages. For 
the Apostle says that upon us “the ends of the ages have come 
down,” using the plural for the singular End of all, namely Christ : 
for He is “the ends of the ages” because He is the consummation of 
all things. The Psalmist continues : “Not thus shall it be with the 

747B 

747C 

747D 

PERIPHYSEON 

748A 

748B 

748C 

wicked, not thus : but they shall be as the dust which the wind 
bloweth from the face of the earth,” calling the dispensation of the 
righteous judgment a wind because it is by that, with a winnowing 
fan in His hand, that He dispels the dust of all evil from the surface 
of the earth, that is to say, from the loveliness of the substance of 
nature. In another psalm the writer says of this earth : “His Spirit 
shall go forth and shall return again unto his own country”. Whose 
Spirit : Surely His Who, when nailed to the cross for us, drooped His 
head and gave up His Spirit. And whither is it to go forth? He 
descended into hell. For what purpose? To lead out our human 
nature which had been held in bondage there : for “He led captivity 
captive”. But since death was not able to hold captive Him in 
Whom she found no sin. He returns again to His own country : He 
reverts to His own nature, the nature which He had created, 
redeemed, and made His own : he puts on the body of immortality, 
the first state of man’s nature, and in addition the glory of His own 
Resurrection. And that you may know that He Who promised that 
His Spirit should go forth alone, shall Himself return not alone, but 
bringing the whole of human nature with Him, hear His very words : 
“If a grain of wheat fall not into the earth and die, it remains alone : 
but if it shall have died it beareth much fruit”. “Thou sendest forth 
Thy Spirit,” He says, “and shalt renew the face of the earth,” that is 
to say. Thou shalt restore the integrity of nature : and the Spirit may 
be taken to refer to the soul of Christ which, at the drooping of His 
head (signifying the condescension of the Deity to participation in 
the Passion), was given over for the world’s salvation, and it went 
out and returned to that nature which it had redeemed by its 
mission, and it was sent forth to restore the beauty of the nature 
which was destroyed in the first man ; or the Spirit may be taken to 
refer to the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Christ, Who bowing His head, 
which is Christ, was given over in the passing death of the flesh for 
the universal creature, of which He is the Firstborn whose Spirit He 
is. He shall go forth and return again “unto His own country,” that 
is to say, into that Nature which He had abandoned because of the 
sin of the First Man; for that was “His own” until it transgressed 
and was abandoned by Him ; but He returns to it again for the sake 
of Him Whose Spirit He is and who endured the Passion on its 
behalf: and at the time of the Resurrection He shall return again in 
yet fuller measure, and He shall be sent to restore by His power to 
its former glory the countenance of the universal nature. Therefore, 
seeing that on this earth that is common to us all, every animal was 
causally and primordially created as soul and body (for all things 

BOOK IV 

389 

were created in an honourable state), why should we be surprised 
that the Divine Precept ordained that there should be brought forth 
“the living soul”, that is, the living animal, which is simply the 
evolution into the tangible state of genus and species of those 
properties which it already contained latently in their reasons and 
causes? And see how the Sacred Text declares to us the natural 748D 
sequence of events : “Let the earth bring forth the living soul in its 
genus."' Genus is mentioned first because all species are contained in 
it and achieve their unity in it, just as genus achieves its multiplicity 
by division into the general forms and differentiated species, a 
process which is also revealed in the words : “Cattle and reptiles and 
beasts of the field after their species". 

From this we may see that that art which concerns itself with 
the division of genera into species and the resolution of species into 749A 
genera, which is called 5ia?i8KTiKij did not arise from human 
contrivances, but was first implanted in nature by the originator of 
all the arts that are properly so called, and was later discovered 
therein by the sages who make use of it in their subtle investigations 
of reality. 

A. From what you have said (and I find no fault in it) one 
could if one wished interpret in another way the text, “Let the 
waters bring forth of living souls both creeping things and things 
that fly above the earth”. For not only can this mean simply that 
fishes and birds were created from the moist and cold element of 
water which we can touch and see, but it is also capable of a higher 
significance relative to the deeply hidden recesses of nature in which 
these were created in their Primordial Causes before they evolved 
into their genera and species. For if we can take “earth” to mean the 
mass and fertility of nature, what is to prevent us from taking 
“water” to mean her concealed depths? In which case, for all 
animals, whether we are taught that they come from land or sea, we 
should recognise one and the same ultimate source, in spite of the 
fact that we speculate on them as separated : for some were created 
on the fifth Prophetic day, and others on the sixth. And I believe there 
is a reason for this : for it seems likely that the Earth was commanded 
to bring forth the land animals on the sixth day, the day of the 
creation of Man also, because their nature appears to exhibit a 
closer resemblance to that of Man. For excepting reason and 
intellect there is nothing in the nature of the human animal which 
the naturalist may not also observe in these others. 

5 

The differ¬ 
ence that 
is found 
between the 
things pro¬ 
duced by 
water and 
those by 
earth 
749B 

749C 

390 

PERIPHYSEON 

The visible 
749D 
earth and 
water gene¬ 
rate nothing 
of themselves 

750A 

750B 

N. Far from anything preventing us, reason herself, in my 
opinion, if we could but listen to her more carefully, insists that we 
should understand the relation which exists between the Sacred 
Texts and reality. For there are many ways, indeed an infinite 
number, of interpreting the Scriptures, just as in one and the same 
feather of a peacock and even in a single small portion of the 
feather, we see a marvellously beautiful variety of innumerable 
colours. And this variety of interpretation is not contrary to nature, 
for this tangible earth and water are bodies composed of the 
qualities of the four elements : and they bring forth nothing of 
themselves and in spite of all appearance no natural species is born 
of them. No : it is by the operation of that Life Force which is called 
the nutritive, in accordance with the laws and principles which were 
implanted in those elements, that the potency of the seeds which 
they contain bursts forth from the secret recesses of creation, as far 
as it is permitted by the Divine Providence, through the genera and 
the forms into the different species of grasses, twigs, and animals : so 
that the coming into being of all things which appear to be born of 
earth and water originates from the same source whence the 
elements themselves have issued forth into their natural species and 
qualities and quantities. For there is a most general nature in which 
all things participate, which is created by the One Universal 
Principle. And from this nature corporeal creatures are derived, and 
can be likened to streams which, issuing from one all-providing 
source, pursue their different courses through subterranean channels 
until they break out above ground in the different forms of the 
individual objects of nature. For the potency which I have men¬ 
tioned, coming forth from the hidden places of nature through the 
various seeds, first declares itself in those seeds, and then mixed with 
various fluids pullulates into the distinct species of the sensibles. 

A. Your account is logical and likely, for it accords with the 
observations of the naturalists. But since man, who was created on 
the Sixth Day, is thus set among the number of the animals, and 
comprehended under one genus with them, I should like to hear 
from you whether or not his creation is also included within the 
Divine Precept which commanded the earth “to bring forth the 
living soul”. 

N. This would be a hard question to answer if the Scriptures 
merely said “Let the earth bring forth the living soul”. But the 
addition of the words, “in its genus”, makes it quite clear that this 
precept applies to all the animals. For there is no species which is 

BOOK IV 

not wholly included in its genus. It is true that the species of animal 
which is established in man is superior by virtue of reason and 
intelligence to the nature of the animals, and is only placed in that 
genus by the foresight of the Prophet’s contemplation in order that 
he might describe his creation more spaciously and in greater detail 
at the conclusion of all the things which God created. Thus he 
records this greatest and most precious species of animal twice in his 
vision of the events of the Sixth Day : first, under his genus, which is 
animal, he is commanded to be brought forth from the earth; and 
then somewhat later he is separated a little from the rest of the 
animals, and mention is made of his creation as image and likeness 
of God. 

A. A single form, then, is first brought forth out of the earth 
together with the other animals : and a little later is said to be made 
in the image of God. Not unreasonably, I am troubled about this. 
For if the whole of that genus which is called animal with all its 
species was made in the “image and likeness of God” I should 
perhaps find nothing surprising in your doctrine that man was first 
brought forth from the earth with the rest of the animals and then a 
little later was made in the image and likeness of God : but since in 
fact the Sacred Narrative relates that only man, and no other animal 
but man, was created in the image of God, I find it somewhat 
strange that man was brought forth from the earth with cattle, 
beasts of the field and reptiles; and yet he alone is formed in the 
image of God, and so removed far beyond all comparison with the 
rest of the animal kingdom : for it is written : “Let Us make man in 
Our image and likeness”. And I find it stranger still that he was 
brought forth together with those over whom he is preferred and 
ordained to be master. For the Scriptures go on to say : “And let 
him have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the 
air and over the cattle and over the universal creature and over every 
creeping thing that moves upon the earth”. 

N. Yes, you have good and reasonable cause for finding this 
strange : for these matters demand a most cautious and searching 
investigation. First let us establish beyond the shadow of any doubt 
that man was in fact established within the universal genus of the 
animals. The best proof of it is that this genus falls into three 
groups : cattle, reptiles, and beasts of the field. For there is, I think, 
a reason for this division. On the other Days, the Third for instance 
and the Fifth, in which mention is made of genera and species, there 
is no analysis of the genus into its species : either simply the genus 

391 

The difference 
between the 
creation of 
man and of 
animals 

750C 

750D 

75IA 

392 

751B 

751C 

“Cattle” 
signify the 
rational 
motions of 
the soul 

751D 

752A 

Allegorical 

quadrupeds 

PERIPHYSEON 

alone with its species undiscriminated is given, as on the Third Day, 
on which the earth was commanded to put forth the genera and 
species of grass and twigs ; or only the genus and one of its species, 
as on the Fifth, when the genus of fish is called “reptile”, and the 
genus of birds “volatile”, without in either case discrimination into 
species. For where it is said “And God created the great sea 
monsters” it is rather a question of substituting species for genus 
than of analysing the genus into its species. For how could a genus 
be analysed into one species, seeing that no analysis discovers less 
than two components? But on the Sixth Day not only do we have a 
description of the genus but also of its division into three species. 
For it is written : “God said. Let the earth bring forth the living soul 
in its genus, cattle and creeping things and the beasts of the earth 
after their species” : or as the Septuagint has it : “God said : let the 
earth bring forth the living soul according to its genus, four-footed 
things, reptiles and beasts according to their genus; and so it was 
done.” 

I believe, therefore, that this threefold division implies a 
threefold motion in the form of life which adheres to the bodies of 
the land animals and effects the union of soul to body (for the 
animal is the meeting-place of soul and body in sensation). But this 
threefold motion becomes intelligible in man only, the only rational 
animal. For subject to his reason he has certain motions which may 
be symbolised by the word “cattle” or “four-footed things”. For 
instance, by his skilled zeal to understand the sensibles he moves his 
five-fold sense in disciplined order towards cognition of them, and 
to this motion it is reasonable to give the name of “cattle”, for it is 
of no small assistance to the rational soul in acquiring true and 
accurate knowledge of all the sensibles, dispelling all falsehood. For 
there is, as it were, a kind of four-footed motion of the senses subject 
to reason. For everything in sensible nature of which we obtain 
knowledge through the sense is composed of four elements, or 
rather is constituted out of such a composition. For consider the 
corporeal species and you will see that of whatever material each is 
composed it exhibits the qualities of the four elements. Whatever 
you hear or smell you may be sure is a product of the air of the four 
elements, and in like manner whatever you taste or touch arises 
from the combination of earth and water. So the term “quadruped” 
is not inappropriate to the bodily sense, seeing that every sensible 
has its origin in the four elements and nowhere else. 

BOOK IV 

393 

But there are certain motions arising from the lower nature 
which might correctly be termed irrationals, which are resistent to 
reason. These, such as rage and covetousness and all the inordinate 
appetites of the corporeal senses, are wrongly attributed to sensible 
creatures. And since these motions which infect human nature 
belong properly to the brute creation, they are not improperly called 
beasts, especially as they are in continual revolt against the discipline 
of reason, and can rarely, if ever, be tamed thereby, but are ever 
seeking to attack savagely and devour the rational motions. 

Moreover in the rational animal there are certain other motions, 
though not manifesting themselves, by which the body joined to that 
nature is administered. These motions are situated in the auctive 
and nutritive part of the soul. And since they perform their 
functions by their natural facility and as it were hiddenly — for they 
in no way agitate or disturb the disposition of the soul but, provided 
that the integrity of nature is preserved intact, pervade by a silent 
progress the harmony of the body — they are therefore not 
improperly given the name of reptiles. Now in all animals except 
man two only of these aforesaid three types of motion are found : 
that which resides in the sense and strictly speaking lacks the control 
of reason, and is therefore called bestial ; and that which is 
attributed to the nutritive Life Force, and resembles the reptile. Man 
participates in these together with all other animals, and conversely 
all the other animals participate in them in common with him. Do 
you now see how it is that man is in all animals and all animals in 
him, and that yet he transcends them all? And if anyone look more 
closely into the admirable and well-nigh ineffable constitution of 
nature herself, he will clearly see that the same man is a species of 
the genus animal and also transcends every animal species, and thus 
admits an affirmation and a negation : for it may rightly be 
predicated of him : “Man is an animal” ; and : “Man is not an 
animal”. For when consideration is given to his body and his 
nutritive Life Force, to his senses and to his memory of sensibles, 
and to all his irrational appetites, such as rage and covetousness, he 
is altogether an animal ; for all these he shares in common with all 
the other animals. But in his higher nature, which consists in reason 
and mind and the interior sense, with all their rational motions, 
which are called virtues, and with the memory of the eternal and 
divine things, he is altogether other than animal. For all these 
attributes he shares with the celestial essences, which by the 
excellence of their substance transcend in a manner beyond our 
comprehension everything which is contained in the animal nature. 

Beasts that 
resist reason 
752B 

Human 

reptiles 

752C 

Man is Animal 
and is not 
animal 
752D 

753A 

394 

PERIPHYSEON 

753B 

753C 

The double 
creation 
of man 

753D 

Therefore, as we have said, it may be claimed with equal justification 
of man that he is, and is not, an animal. And we may obtain 
corroboration of this from Holy Scripture. “Man in his animal 
nature,” says the Apostle, “does not perceive the things of God”. 
And again : “Man in his spiritual nature Judgeth all things, but is 
himself judged by none.” See how clearly, how unambiguously, he 
divides man into, as it were, two men : of whom one is animal, since 
his nature resembles that of the animals, which admits nothing 
spiritual within itself ; and the other spiritual, since it has communion 
with the eternal, spiritual, and divine substances, and is free of all 
animality. And that part of him by which he is animal is appropriately 
termed the Outer Man, while that by which he transcends all other 
animals as well as the animal part of himself may be called the Inner 
Man. For in those who live according to the Spirit, in the words of 
the same Apostle, “the outer man wastes, but the inner man is 
renewed from day to day.” For he who lives perfectly not only 
altogether despises his body and the Life Force which administers it 
and all the corporeal senses together with the objects which they 
perceive, and all the irrational motions which he perceives in 
himself, together with the memory of all transient things ; but also, 
in so far as he is able, does away with them and destroys them, lest 
they should in any way prevail within him, and strives that he may 
become dead to them and they to him. But that part of him by which 
he partakes of the celestial essence he “renews from day to day”, 
that is, he ascends from virtue to virtue by the movement and co¬ 
operation and leadership and perfecting power of the Grace of God. 
And that nature through which man is in communion with the 
animals is called the flesh : and that by which he participates in the 
celestial essence is called Mind or Spirit or Intellect. Hear what the 
Apostle says : “By my mind I serve the Law of God, but by flesh the 
law of sin.” And this has the support of innumerable other texts of 
Holy Scripture. So what is there so remarkable in the fact that man 
is understood to have a two-fold creation, seeing that he himself is in 
a manner of speaking a two-fold creature? That in him which 
resembles the animals was created with the animals, and that which 
resembles the spiritual creatures was created in itself and absolutely 
with the spiritual creatures. Let not your mind therefore be troubled 
that I said that man was produced out of the Earth in one and the 
same genus as the rest of the animals, and yet is made “in the image 
and likeness of God” beyond all animal nature. 

A. My mind would not perhaps be so troubled if it could 
realise more clearly how the creation of man can be such that he is 

BOOK IV 

395 

of one and the same genus as the rest of the animals, and yet in his 
better part transcends all animal nature. 

N. I cannot understand why you wish me to repeat myself. For 
we have said already that man, in so far as he is an animal, is found 
among the animals in one genus but that in so far as he is not an 
animal, he was created outside every genus of all the animals. 

A. Alas, a still greater and far harder problem, I think, arises. 754A 

N. Be good enough to tell me what it is. 

A. Your opinion, I think, is that two souls co-exist in the same 
man, of which one administers the body, giving it life and nourish¬ 
ment and increase, and perceives the sensibles by means of the 
corporeal senses and stores the phantasies of them in its memory, 
and performs all the other functions which it is well known are 
performed by the souls of the other animals ; while the other, which 
subsists in the reason and the mind, “is made in the image and 
likeness of God.” But this seems altogether absurd. 

N. Neither reason nor divine authority would permit me to 
hold that in the one man there are two souls. Indeed, they would 
forbid it, and it is not right that any true philosopher should 
maintain such an opinion. Rather I declare that man consists of one 
and the same rational soul conjoined to the body in a mysterious 754B 
manner, and that it is by a certain wonderful and intelligible division human 
that man himself is divided into two parts, in one of which he is 
created in the image and the likeness of the Creator, and participates 
in no animality but is utterly removed therefrom ; while in the other 
he communicates with the animal nature and was produced out of 
the earth, that is to say, out of the common nature of all things, and 
is included in the universal genus of the animals. 

A. What, then, shall we say ? Can the human soul be described 
as a certain single nature free from all composition or are we asked 
to believe that its unity is composed of a number of parts? 

N. To one thing I hold most firmly, that the soul is simple and 
lacks all composition of parts : and one thing I utterly reject, that it 
receives into its nature any kind of composition whatsoever of parts 
which differ from one another. For it is whole in itself and its 
wholeness pervades the whole of its nature. For it is wholly Life, 
wholly Mind, wholly Reason, wholly Sense, wholly Memory, and it 754C 
is as a whole that it gives life, nourishment, consistency and increase 
to the body. As a whole it perceives the sensible species through the 

396 

PERIPHYSEON 

whole of its senses ; as a whole it operates beyond the bounds of the 
bodily senses and treats, separates, combines and forms judgements 
upon the nature and order of the Universe ; as a whole it extends 
beyond and above every creature, including even itself in so far as it 
is itself reckoned among the numbers of the creatures, and, purged 
from all vices and all phantasies, revolves about its Creator in an 
eternal and intelligible motion. And since it is thus by nature simple, 
its division into the intelligible and substantial differentiations as it 
were of a whole into its parts is in accord with the plurality of its 
754D motions. This is the reason for the many names under which it goes. 
For when it is occupied with the Divine Essence it is called Mind 
and Spirit and Intellect; when it is occupied with the natures and 
causes of creation it is called Discursive Reason ; when it receives the 
species of the sensibles through the corporeal senses, it is called 
Sense ; when after the manner of the irrational animals it performs 
those hidden operations within the body which give it nourishment 
and increase, its proper name is Vital Motion. But in all these cases 
it is everywhere whole. 

A. Therefore the whole soul is on the one hand produced from 
the earth in the genus of the animals, and on the other hand is made 
755A in the image of God. For this and nothing else is what must follow 
from the foregoing arguments. 

N. Just so. And no true and orthodox philosopher should 
doubt it, lest he appear impiously to rend in twain this most simple 
and indivisible nature. 

A. I still do not see how one and the same man can, as this 
discussion seeks to demonstrate, be, and yet not be, an animal; 
possess, and yet not possess, animality ; be, and yet not be, flesh ; be, 
and yet not be, spirit. How can such contradictory and mutually 
opposed predicates be understood of one absolutely simple nature? 

N. From what has already been said it should be as clear as day 
to anyone who looks into the matter more carefully that everything 
which seems to you to be contrary to the simplicity of human nature 
755B contrary to but is entirely suitable. For among 

the wise it is maintained that in man is contained the universal 
creature. For, like the angel, he enjoys the use of Mind and 
Discursive Reason ; and like the animal, the use of physical sense 
and the capacity to administer his body : and therefore his nature is 
understood to include that of every creature. For the whole of 
creation is divided into five parts : the creature may be either a 

BOOK IV 

397 

body; or a living being; or a sensible being; or a rational being; or 
an intellectual being. And all these five parts are in every way found 
in man. For he possesses in his body the basis of his subsistence; 
then a seminal life to administer that body; sense to preside over 
that life ; then reason to govern the natural parts that are inferior to 
itself ; and finally Spirit, which holds the highest place of all. 

And so all human nature, in what it shares with the other 
animals, is truly animal nature. What it shares with them is body ; 755C 
the life which controls the body ; and the sense together with the 
memory which draws from it the phantasies of sensible objects. But 
insofar as it participates in the divine and celestial essence, human 
nature is not animal nature ; for it participates in the celestial 
essence by reason and intellect and memory of eternal things. Here 
it is entirely free from all taint of animality. For in this part of itself 
it is made in the image of God : and it is with this part only, in men 
who are apt for it, that God holds converse. “For it is to that part of 
man that He speaks,” writes St. Augustine in the eleventh book of 
the City of God, “because it is better than the other parts of which 
man is composed, and God himself alone is better than that part. 

For since man is made in the Image of God, he straightway is nearer 
to God (who is superior to him) in that part of himself by which he 
transcends the natures which are below him, those natures which he 
shares in common with the beasts.” And be it noted that even in this 
life, even before the time when all that is animal in man becomes 755D 
spiritual and all that is composite is made one in an ineffable 
simplicity, the whole man can be both an animal and a spiritual 
creature; but while it is only by the freedom of his will that he is 
animal, he is spiritual by the combined operation of freewill and of 
Grace, for without the latter the innate power of the will is quite 
insufficient to convert man into spirit. Therefore man becomes 756A 
animal, and is so described, when he abandons those operations 
which accord with Reason and Intellect and are concerned with the 
knowledge of the Creator and of creation, for those irrational 
activities which among the brute beasts are concerned with the 
appetites of the body — and falls through his wilful appetite, so as 
to gorge his sensibilities with the deadly allure of the temporal and 
corruptible things which tend towards non-being. But he becomes 
spiritual when, turning wholly towards the better and kindled by the 
fire of Divine Love, he despises the world and the flesh in all their 
forms and, abandoning all the activities of animal nature, is wholly 
transformed into the likeness of the celestial essences, so that in the 

398 

PERIPHYSEON 

quality of a life adorned with all the virtues there is anticipated in 
him the state to which He is destined by his immutable substance. 
Thus there are two ways of recognising the animal man : in one, he 
756B lives entirely according to nature ; in the other, he falls through the 
irrational motion of his freewill tending to evil. The spiritual man 
also lives according to nature ; but also in accordance with good will 
helped by divine Grace, purified by act and knowledge and decked 
with the adornments of the virtues, he is recalled to the former 
dignity of the Divine Image. 

A. This I freely accept. But there is still something I am not 
quite clear about. In the genus all species are one. But how can 
mutually contradictory species be one in their genus? For the 
definition of man seems to be in contradiction to those of the other 
animals. For man is a rational animal ; the others are irrational 
756C animals. Do you not see how completely opposed to one another are 
the terms rational and irrational? 

N. If you consider the natures of things more carefully you will 
find that this proposition, which concerns difference, is that we have 
in the one genus not two contraries but two differentiae. Let us take 
an example : 

Every creature is either visible or invisible. This distinction is 
one of difference, not of contradiction. For visibility and invisibility 
are two properties which are separate from one another but not 
mutually repugnant. Likewise every creature is either corporeal or 
incorporeal. Again, in the Divine Nature there are distinguished the 
different states of the Divine Persons. For whereas the Father is 
unbegotten, the Son is begotten and the Spirit is neither begotten 
nor unbegotten ; and there are innumerable examples of the same 
kind. But to give you a clearer understanding I would ask you to 
observe that contradiction is always held to be within the same 
756D species or part, whereas difference distinguishes one part from 
another : thus, if speaking of man one were to say of that species of 
nature which according to its substance is called man, that man is a 
rational animal and that man is an irrational animal, this would be 
the statement of a pair of contradictories, of which one will be true 
and the other false. For contradictory statements of one and the 
same subject cannot both at the same time be true or both at the 
757A false, whether they be of a universal or of a particular 

application. 

BOOK IV 

399 

So when you say : Man is a rational animal, horse is an 
irrational animal, no contradiction arises since the difference of 
substance between the rational and the irrational animal is made 
clear. For in allowing reason to man and denying it to horse you 
indicate the difference between man and horse. For it is precisely 
this that is man’s difference from the other animals, that he 
possesses reason, just as it is their difference from him that they do 
not. But no distinction must be made herein between the possession 
and the lack ; for the possession in man’s case is the presence of 
reason, while in the case of the horse the possession is the absence of 
reason. For the horse is not deprived of that which it never could 
have possessed. Where there was no antecedent possession there will 
be no consequent deprivation. Death could never occur to any 
animal or to any being which participates in Life if there had not 
been an antecedent possession of life. And in like manner it would 
be wrong to call any animal stupid save that in which we see that the 
possession of reason was a possibility ; nor insensitive save that in 
which the possession of sense could naturally inhere. 

A. Why, then, did you say that in one and the same subject two 
mutually contradictory predicates could not be both at the same 
time false or true, but that if the one were true the other must be 
false, so in the case where of one and the same animal it is said that 
it is a horse and not a horse? For now you appear to assert the 
simultaneous truth of contradictory predicates in man : that man is 
an animal, and that man is not an animal, and you declare that he 
possesses this character naturally until his whole animal nature 
becomes spiritual. And why is this so in the case of man only and 
not in that of the other animals, in whom it is absolutely true that 
they are animal and absolutely untrue that they are not animal? 

N. Do you believe that any other animal than man was made 
in the image of God? 

A. Certainly not. 

N. Do you deny that two mutually adverse predicates can be 
made of God, and can be true and in no way false, although they are 
not of the same power, as for instance when it is said that God is 
Truth and that God is not truth? 

A. I would not dare to do so, seeing that He Himself has said 
of Himself “I am the Way and the Truth and the Life,” while 
St. Dionysius the Areopagite says in the Symbolic Theology that 
God “is neither the truth nor the life for he writes that He “is 

757B 

757C 

400 

PERIPHYSEON 

757D 

758A 

In human 
nature the 
image is in 
the animal 
and the 
animal is 
in the image 

758B 

neither power nor light nor life,” and a little later “neither is He 
science nor truth.” 

N. Perhaps Dionysius is contradicting Christ Who predicated 
of Himself that He was Himself the Truth ? 

A. Impossible. 

N. Either statement is true, then : God is Truth, and God is not 
truth ? 

A. Not only true, but the profoundest truth. The one statement 
is made by affirmation and by metaphor from the fact that He is the 
Creator and Primordial Cause of Truth, and because it is by 
participation in Him that whatsoever things are true are all true ; 
while the other is made by negation, and relates to that tran¬ 
scendence which is More-than-Truth. And so it is true that God is 
truth, since He is the cause of all truths, and it is also true that God 
is not truth, transcending as He does everything which can be 
spoken or can be thought or can exist. Nor have I forgotten that you 
added the words, “although both statements are not of the same 
power” ; for affirmation is less capable than negation of signifying 
the ineffable Essence of God, seeing that by the former one among 
the created attributes is transferred to the Creator, whereas by the 
latter the Creator is conceived in Himself beyond every creature. 

N. You did well to recall this comment which I added. Why 
should we then be surprised if man, who alone among the animals is 
made in the image of God, can truly and simultaneously have it said 
of him that man is an animal, and that man is not an animal ? For by 
this we at once understand that it belongs to the species of this 
animal to be specially fashioned after the image of God, concerning 
Whom predicates may be truly and simultaneously made which in 
the case of other animate creatures are mutually exclusive. And if 
affirmations and negations of the Divine Essence coincide for the 
reason that It transcends all things that were created by It and of 
which It is the Cause, who would not infer that affirmations and 
negations harmoniously coincide also in the image and likeness of It 
which is man, seeing that this animal transcends the others among 
which it is fashioned in the same genus, and is the cause for which 
they were fashioned? For what true philosopher is unaware that this 
visible world with all its parts, from the highest to the lowest, was 
created for the sake of man in order that he might preside over it 
and be the lord of all visible nature? This is the teaching of 
St. Gregory, who in his Treatise on the Image writes as follows : 

BOOK IV 

401 

“Every creature except man was established some how by the 
Divine power at the same time as the Mandate was given. But before 
the establishment of man there was a council, and he was prefigured 
by the Creator through the word of Scripture as to what he should 
be, and with what quality it were fit to endow him, and after what 
primal exemplar he should be modelled and of what material he 
should be made, and what function he should perform, and over 
what he should be lord. All these things were first considered by the 
Word so that before he came forth into being a more venerable rank 
in the world of becoming was allowed him as one destined to hold 
sway over all the things that are. For, to quote the Holy Word, God 
said : Let us make man in our image and likeness, and let him have 
dominion over the fishes of the sea and over the beasts of the earth 
and over the birds of the air, and over cattle and over the whole 
earth.” 

And this was given him whether he sinned or not, although he 
would not have ruled in the same way if he had not sinned as he 
rules now that he has sinned. 

And to make matters clearer : do you suppose that man is an 
animal in that part which is made in the Image of God ? Or that the 
Image of God subsists in that part in which he was brought forth 
among the beasts of the field? Or that either the one or the other, 
that is, either the image or the animal, is not truly to be found in 
man ? 

A. To the last question I would say at once that I make no such 
supposition ; for that reasoning is sound which discovers both these 
aspects in man. But to the former questions, that is, as to whether 
the Image is in the animal and the animal in the Image I should 
reply with an unqualified negative were I not perplexed by something 
which you said before as to man being everywhere a whole in 
himself. For from this it appears to me to follow that the whole 
image must subsist in the whole animal and the whole animal in the 
whole Image throughout the whole man. 

N. I am surprised that this should trouble you, seeing that it is 
precisely herein that the image and likeness of God in human nature 
can be recognised. For just as God is both beyond all things and in 
all things, for He Who only truly is, is the essence of all things, and 
while He is whole in all things He does not cease to be whole beyond 
all things, whole in the world, whole around the world, whole in the 
sensible creature, whole in the intelligible creature, whole creating 

758C 

758D 

759A 

759B 

PERIPHYSEON 

the Universe, whole created in the Universe, whole in the whole of 
the Universe and whole in its parts, since He is both the Whole and 
the Part, just as He is neither the whole nor the part ; in the same 
way human nature is in its own world, in its own universe and in its 
visible and invisible parts whole in itself, and whole in its whole, and 
whole in its parts, and its parts are whole in themselves and whole in 
the whole. For even the lowest and least valuable part, the body, is 
according to its own principles whole in the whole man, for the 
body, in so far as it is truly body, subsists in its own principles which 
were made at the beginning of creation ; and since human nature is 
so in itself, it goes beyond its whole. For it could not otherwise 
cleave to its Creator if it did not go beyond all the things that are 
759C beneath it and beyond itself. For, says Augustine, between our mind 
by which we know the Father and the Truth through which we 
know Him, no creature is interposed. And in a fine passage of the 
Symbolic Theology the Areopagite, Dionysius, I mean, teaches the 
same thing : 

“O friend Timothy, do you, strengthened by your sojourn 
among the mystical speculations, abandon not only the senses but 
also intellectual activities, abandon the sensibles and the invisibles, 
all non-being and all being, and emptying yourself of all knowledge 
restore yourself as far as possible to the Unity of Him who is beyond 
all essence and all knowledge; for there by the immeasurable and 
absolute ecstasy of the mind you will ascend from yourself and all 
things, abandoning all things and liberated from all things, to the 
Superessential Ray of the divine Darkness.” 

And in the Gospel Our Lord says ; “Where I am there is My 
759D servant also.” But He is above all things : above all things therefore 
is the man who cleaves to Him, and above himself in so far as he is 
in all things. 

And although human nature while sojourning in this mortal life 
cannot by itself truly cleave to God, yet by the Grace of Him to 
Whom it cleaves it is both possible and in accordance with its nature 
to do so ; therefore we not improperly say that human nature cleaves 
to Its Creator. For experiment is generally regarded as a test of 
760A possibility, and that which is bound to happen some day is regarded 
as though it were already achieved. 

But why did I say “in its own world, in its own universe”, when 
I could more plainly have said “in the whole world, both visible and 
invisible?” For humanity is wholly in the wholeness of the whole 

BOOK IV 

created nature, seeing that in it every creature is fashioned, and in it 
all are linked together, and into it shall all return, and through it 
must all be saved. Hear what his Creator says : “Preach the gospel 
unto every creature;” that is, to man. There is mind to be found, 
there reason, there sense, there the seminal life, there the body — not 
this corruptible body which is the result of sin, but that which man 
had before the Fall : not this composite and dissoluble body, but 
that simple and indivisible body; not this animal and earthly body, 
but that which is spiritual and heavenly ; not this body begotten by 
both sexes from seeds through carnal intercourse, but that which 
was brought forth before the Fall out of the simplicity of nature and 
which is to be in the Resurrection : not this body which is known to 
the corporeal senses, but that which is still hidden in the secret place 
of nature : not that which was laid upon us in recompense for sin, 
but that which was already inherent in us in our uncorrupted nature 
and into which this corruptible and mortal body will be restored. “It 
is sown,” says the Apostle, meaning that it is born from the seed, “in 
corruption, it will rise in virtue.” In what sort of virtue? Surely, in 
the virtue of that very body which was established according to 
nature in the beginning. “It is sown in derision, it will rise in glory; 
it is sown an animal body, it will rise a spiritual body.“ For 
everything that is created in man according to nature must of 
necessity remain eternally intact and uncorrupted. For it is not in 
accordance with the Divine Justice that anything should perish of 
that which He has made, especially as it is not nature herself who 
has sinned, but the perverse will which moves irrationally against 
rational nature. 

Now of this there is an excellent proof : if the hatred of death is 
an innate quality in man, must he not also hold naturally in 
abhorrence the cause of death, which is sin? And this is something 
common to all animals, to avoid and fear death and the causes of 
death. Therefore just as no philosopher wishes to enter into error, so 
human nature did not wish to sin, and therefore her Creator, being 
Just, did not wish to punish her, but rather was it His will to impose 
upon her that in which might be purged that fault caused by the 
perversity of the will and the persuasiveness of the serpent, that it 
might not cleave to her forever. For the reasonable and intellectual 
nature, although not wishing to be deceived, was not incapable of 
suffering deceit, especially as she had not yet attained the perfection 
of her form which she was to receive as the reward of her obedience 
and by which she was to be transformed in theosis or deification. We 

760B 

760C 

760D 

PERIPHYSEON 

ought not therefore to judge human nature as she is manifested to 
the bodily senses and as in punishment for her Fall she undergoes 
the penalty of being born a temporal and corruptible object into this 
world by sexual intercourse after the likeness of the irrational 
761A animals and whose end is death ; but as she was established before 
the Fall in the Image of God, a condition in which she eludes in a 
mysterious way through the ineffable dignity of her nature every 
bodily sense and all mortal thought. Deceived and fallen, blinded by 
the murkiness of her depraved will, she has given up to oblivion 
herself and her Creator. 

And this is the most wretched feature of her death, and the 
deepest profundity of her submersion in the fog of ignorance, that 
she has drifted so far from herself and her Creator and approached 
in likeness so near and so shamefully the irrational and mortal 
animals. And from this state none could again redeem her or call her 
or bring her back or restore her to the former condition from which 
she fell save the Wisdom of God Which created her and received her 
761B into the Unity of substance with Him, that thus he might save her 
and free her from all her woe. Let it then not trouble you that it is 
said of human nature that it is everywhere a whole in itself, that the 
Image is whole in the animal, and that the animal is whole in the 
Image. 

6 N. For everything which her Creator primordially created in 

her remains whole and intact, though remaining hidden until now, 
awaiting the revelation of the Sons of God. 

A. Perhaps I should not be in difficulty if you could clearly 
convince me of something which I cannot see for myself; for I 
wonder whether man would have been an animal if he had not 
sinned — or, to put the question in another way, was man an animal 
before he sinned ? If he was not, why have we toiled so long to seek, 
and, I think, to find, man’s state in the universal genus of the 
761C animals ? For if he was not created in that genus, either before the 
Fall he was not an animal at all, or, if he was, he was fashioned in a 
different genus of animals. But neither does Holy Scripture make 
mention of such a thing nor does the most careful enquiry into 
nature reveal any trace of it. For all animals subsist in a single 
genus, from which they proceed by divisions. On the other hand, if 
from the text, “Let the earth bring forth living soul,” we are to 
assume that man’s state before the Fall was among the other 
animals, why does the Psalmist bring it against man after the Fall as 

BOOK IV 

405 

a great disgrace : “Man when he was held in honour, fell short of 
intelligence, and became comparable to the irrational cattle, and 
was made like unto them ?” Here the Prophet seems to make it quite 
plain that before the Fall man held the honour of a spiritual 
substance transcending the nature of all animals : but that slipping 
back therefrom and failing to realise the dignity of his nature he fell 761D 
into the disgrace of a likeness to the beasts of the field. But if he was 
an animal before the Fall, why after the Fall is it held against him 
that he has acquired the likeness of the animals with whom he was in 
his nature created together in a single genus ? 

N. You would have reason to raise this question if the Prophet 
had simply said “He became comparable to the cattle, and was 
made like unto them;” but he adds the epithet “irrational” and 
thereby makes it sufficiently clear that this is the chief charge against 
man, that while he was a spiritual and rational animal in his original 762A 
state of the image and likeness of God he foolishly and irrationally 
acted against the command of his Creator and brought upon himself 
the likeness of the foolish beasts, dishonouring the natural dignity of 
his nature by a brutish activity which was improper to himself. It is 
not for being an animal that he is praised, but for being the image of 
God : neither is it for being an animal that he is blamed, but that he 
willed to distort the image which he could not destroy. For in the 
other animals irrational action is not shameful, for it is according to 
their nature, and they could not be animals without it. But in the 
rational animal it is a reprehensible distortion of nature to fall by 
the forbidden concupiscence of a perverse will into the activity of 
irrational animals, although to them it is natural, and to desire to 
remain therein, abandoning the more exalted beauty of the Divine 
Image. 

A. Rightly indeed is the rational animal blamed for acting in 
the way of the irrational animals ; and rightly to be reprehended is 
the man of honourable form who of his own free will clothes himself 
in the form of a beast and hurls himself from that which is the better 
down to that which is much inferior. 

But there still remains the question why God created man, 
whom He wished to make in His image and likeness, in the genus of 
the animals. For since man had been chosen to be the principal 
participant in the Supernal Figure and to be the peer of the celestial 
essences in whom there is permitted to be no consubstantiality with 
the terrestial animals, it would seem a greater honour for him to be 762C 
constituted free from all animality. For the celestial essences are not 

406 

PERIPHYSEON 

The angel 
is not 
animal 

762D 

763A 

763B 

weighed down by earthly bodies, nor do they use corporeal senses 
for knowledge of sensible things. For they do not receive phantasies 
from without, but know inwardly within themselves the “reasons” 
of the things which they perceive. For that matter neither does the 
soul see outside itself the things which it perceives, but it does have 
to rely upon inward phantasies of them, which the angels do not 
require. I grant you that Plato defines the angel as a rational and 
immortal animal ; but if our speculations about the nature of things 
are to be firmly grounded we ought not rashly to include among 
them anything which cannot be supported by the authority of Holy 
Scripture and the Holy Fathers. Again, Saint Augustine not only 
does not deny the possibility that the highest angels have spiritual 
bodies in which they frequently manifest themselves but actually 
asserts that this is so : but we are by no means bound by this to 
believe that the celestial substances are animals, especially as it is 
not the harmony and inseparable linking of celestial and incor¬ 
ruptible bodies with angelic spirits which produce an animal but the 
joining of earthly and corruptible bodies to rational or irrational 
souls through the medium of sense. Of course, if the exterior sense 
were present to the body and the intellect of the angel, nothing 
would prevent us from saying, as Plato was pleased to do, that the 
angel, being in that case a composite of body and soul with sense 
mediating between the two and intellect bringing life to the whole, 
was an animal : but in that case, why are angels not counted in the 
genus of the animals? 

For as to man, he would have been an animal even if he had not 
sinned : for it was not sin but nature which made an animal of him. 
Moreover there is no tradition which gives us the authority to say 
that the angels who sinned were animals, which would logically 
follow from such an argument. For that future bliss which is 
promised to the saints is taught to be nothing else but equality with 
the angelic nature, perfect and lacking in nothing. But who that was 
truly wise would believe that man’s destined transformation was as 
it were from an inferior to a superior animal, from an earthly to a 
heavenly animal, from a temporal to an eternal animal, from a 
mortal to an immortal animal, from an unhappy to a blessed 
animal ? Would he not rather believe that all the things which in this 
life are understood or perceived to be attributes common to devout 
men and to the other animals are by a certain ineffable mutation 
changed into that celestial and incommunicable essence which has 
nothing of animality about it ; and that this too would have been the 

BOOK IV 

407 

condition of man, had he not sinned? Why then is man created in 
the genus of the animals which are produced out of the earth, a 
genus in which he is not destined always to remain? For when this 
world, of which man is an animal part, shall have perished, all that 
is animal in man shall perish with it and in it. For it is not 
reasonable that when the whole shall perish the parts shall escape 
destruction. Moreover, if the whole world with all its parts is to be 
destroyed I fail to see how man, in so far as he is a part of the world, 
could survive the world, — or in what place or in what way. Hence 
my insistence in begging you to resolve this knotty problem. 

N. What you demand is a very advanced physical explanation 
of man’s creation, which will require us to prolong our discussion 
considerably. When you ask why God should have created man, 
whom He proposed to make in His own Image, in the genus of 
animals, it should be enough for me to reply briefly that He wished 
so to fashion him that there might be one among the animals in 
which His Image was expressly manifested. But if one goes on to ask 
why He wished to do so, he is enquiring into the causes of the Divine 
Will, an enquiry which is over-presumptuous and arrogant. “For 
who hath known the sense of the Lord?’’ But if I should say that, 
you would relapse into an ungrateful silence and consider me 
incapable of producing a clear and full exposition. While, therefore, 
I will not tell you why He willed, for that is beyond all understanding, 
I shall relate, to the extent that He Himself has told us, what He 
willed to do. He has created in man all creatures visible and 
invisible, for the whole spread of creation is understood to inhere in 
man. For although after his transgression and the failure of supernal 
Light it is not clear yet how great was the first creation of man, 
nevertheless there is nothing naturally present in the celestial 
essences which does not subsist essentially in man. For there is 
innate in him Intellect and Reason, as well as the principle of 
possession of the celestial and angelic body, which after the 
Resurrection shall appear more clearly than light both in the just 
and the unjust : for it will be common to all human nature to rise 
again in eternal and incorruptible spiritual bodies. “It is sown,’’ he 
says, “an animal body ; it is raised a spiritual body.” All this sensible 
world is fashioned in man. No part of it is found, either corporeal or 
incorporeal, which does not subsist created in man, which does not 
perceive through him, which does not live through him, which is not 
incorporated in him. Do not think here of man’s physical stature, 
but rather of his natural potency, particularly bearing in mind that 

763C 

763D 

In man every 
creature was 
created 

764A 

408 

PERIPHYSEON 

764B 

Why God 
wished to 
create every 
creature in 
man 

764C 

in the human body itself the pupil of the eye, albeit the least of all 
the members in physical size, yet exerts the greatest power. If then 
God did not create man in the genus of the animals, or at any rate, if 
He did not place the whole nature of all animals in man, how would 
the whole of creation, both visible and invisible, subsist in him? 
Reason, then, permits us to say that God willed to place man in the 
genus of the animals for this purpose : that He wished to create 
every creature in him. And if you ask me why He wished to create 
every creature in him, I reply : because He wished to make him in 
His image and likeness, so that, just as the Primal Archetype 
transcends all by the excellence of His Essence, so His image should 
transcend all created things in dignity and grace. But as to why it 
should be man whom He wished to create in His Image before all 
creatures visible and invisible, I confess that I am entirely ignorant. 

A. I consider that you have given a sufficient and reasonable 
reply to my question why God wished to create man in the genus of 
the animals. But I have a further question to ask : In what way are 
all things created in man, and how do they subsist in him ? Are they 
in him simply as essence, or simply as accidents, or do they play in 
him all the roles which we observe in universal creation, that is, 
essence, species, difference, property, and everything which is 
understood to relate to them? 

N. I am in some difficulty as to how to give a rational answer 
to that question. For if I reply, simply as essence, you will rightly 
object that in that case only those things exist which subsist as 
essences, and other things which are understood to relate to essence 
or substance are not to be reckoned in the number of the universe of 
764D things — in fact are altogether without being; and if this is so, you 
will ask me, whence are those things which are understood to relate 
to the essence of existents? If I say that these things were made by 
God, you will ask : “Why then are they not included in the sum of 
the things which were created in man ?“ And if I say that they were 
not made by God, you will reply that in that case they are not ; for if 
they were, they would not be from any other than the Universal 
765A Cause which is God. And if I grant that those things which are 
understood to relate to essences are not among the number of 
existents because they are not from God, you will at once ask : 
“How then do we have understanding of them? For nothing which 
is not from God can by any means be understood, because it does 
not exist in any way.” If I say that not only the essences, but all 
things which are understood naturally to relate to them are from 

BOOK IV 

409 

God and to be numbered among the parts of the whole, I shall 
undoubtedly be compelled to choose one of the two following 
alternatives : either that the whole universe of things was not created 
in man in its entirety, since only the essences were made in him : or 
that the entire universe of things, that is, the essences and everything 
which is perceived to relate to them and to inhere in them is 
established in man ; but if I say that it is not a part of the universe of 
things, that is substances, that is constituted in man, but the whole 
of it, you will follow with the hardest question of all : Was irrationality 
then made in him, and bestiality, quadrupedality, volatility and all 
the differences of the divers animals and of the other things, 
together with all species and properties and accidents and all the 
other innumerable attributes which seem to be so far removed from 
human nature that if they were indeed found in man, he would 
rightly be considered not a man but the foulest of monsters? 

A. You have piled up the difficulty of the question, and 
deliberately raised up against yourself what would have been raised 
by another ; and thus you are in a position either to clear it up or to 
pass it over as being over-abstruse and go on to another ; but that 
would seem a most unsuitable proceeding. 

N. Let us then make some attempt to examine it so as not to 
leave it for the time being wholly untouched. 

A. You will not be able to satisfy me otherwise. 

N. Is it your opinion that everything which is known by the 
intellect or the reason or imagined by the sense can somehow be 
created and produced in the knower and perceiver? 

A. It seems to me that it can. For it is indeed my opinion that 
the species of sensible things and the quantities and qualities which I 
reach by my corporeal sense are in a certain way created in me ; for 
when I imprint the phantasies of them in my memory, and when I 
deal with them within myself by division and comparison and, as it 
were, collect them into a kind of unity, I notice a certain knowledge 
of the things which are external to me being built up within me ; and 
in the same way when I seek earnestly after certain concepts 
resembling the intelligible species, concepts of intelligibles which I 
contemplate with the mind alone, as for example the concept of the 
liberal arts, I feel them born and becoming within me; but the 
relation between this knowledge and the things themselves which 
are its object I do not fully grasp. 

765B 

765C 

The 

knowledge of 
things is 
better than 
765D 
the thing 
itself 

410 

PERIPHYSEON 

766A 

766B 

766C 

N. How does it seem to you? Are the knowledges of things, 
made in the soul, of the same nature as the things themselves, or are 
they something different? 

A. They are different. For how will the corporeal species of, 
for example, a certain animal or grass or tree be of one nature with 
the knowledge of it which is produced in an incorporeal nature? 
And in the same way how can the intelligible species of any 
discipline and the knowledge of it be of the one nature? 

N. If then they are of a different genus or nature and not the 
same, tell me, I pray, which of the two is the more excellent ? Are the 
things of a more exalted nature than the concepts of them, or are the 
concepts more exalted than the things? 

A. I should have said that the visible species are of a better 
nature than the concepts of them, were it not for Saint Augustine 
who in the Ninth Book On the Trinity, chapter Eleven, gives the 
following opinion : 

“When we learn of bodies through the sense of the body, a 
certain replica of the bodies is created in our mind : this is a 
phantasy in our memory. For it is certainly not the bodies themselves 
that are in our mind when we reflect on them, but replicas of them. 
Nevertheless the phantasy of a body in the mind is better than the 
species of that body, in as much as it is in a better nature, namely, in 
a vital substance, for such the mind is. Furthermore I would not 
dare to say that even intelligible things are better than the concept of 
them which is in the soul.” 

For it is a doctrine according to reason that that which 
understands is better than that which is understood. Thus, if the 
knowledge of all things subsists in the Divine Wisdom, I should not 
be rash in asserting that this Wisdom is incomparably superior to 
the things of which it is the knowledge. And if so, I believe that the 
same relationship proceeds from the Divine Providence throughout 
all creation, so that not only every nature which has the knowledge 
of that which follows it is better and superior, but also the 
knowledge itself, through the dignity of the nature in which it 
resides, greatly excels the object of which it is the knowledge. And 
therefore I should find it rather easy to say that the knowledge of the 
intelligible is antecedent to the intelligibles themselves. 

N. You would perhaps be right in saying so if that which is 
formed is more excellent than that which forms. 

A. Why do you make this qualification ? 

BOOK IV 

411 

N. Because the knowledge of the arts which is in the soul seems 
to be formed by the arts themselves. But if you could establish 
beyond doubt that the knowledge was not formed from the arts, but 
the arts from the knowledge, your argument would perhaps be 
running on the right lines. 

A. Did we not prove a moment ago that everything which 
understands is more excellent than that which is understood? 

N. We did. 

A. Tell me then whether it is the skill of the mind which 
understands an art or an art which understands the skill. 

N. I have no doubt that the art is understood by the mind. But 
if I were to say that the same art was known by the skill itself in the 
same manner as it is known by the mind which is endowed with that 
skill, I should be afraid of seeming to assert that the mind and its 
skill are two things furnished with the knowledge of the art, instead 
of being one and the same essence, in which the knowledge of the art 
is naturally present. If however the mind and its skill are not two 
different but, as true reason teaches, one and the same, I am 
compelled to admit that everything which is understood by the mind 
is also understood by its skill, and it must follow that the mind and 
its skill, or rather, the skilled mind, is of a more excellent nature 
than the art which it understands, if the things which understand are 
prior to the things which are understood. If, however, I were to say 
that the art itself was the skill of the skilled mind, the consequence 
would be either that the skilled mind and the skilled art were two 
entities with mutual understanding of each other and mutually 
understood, and thus enjoying an equal dignity of nature; or else 
the mind and its skill, and the art which it understands and by which 
it is understood, must be considered to be of one and the same 
essence. But it is not yet clear which of these alternatives should be 
adopted. 

A. Perhaps it will be if, under guidance of God, we enter upon 
the right path of reasoning. 

N. Let us then look into the matter more carefully. But first I 
should like you to tell me whether the nature of the mind which 
possesses the skill of the art is simple or not. 

A. I think that it is simple. For being an incorporeal and 
intellectual substance it must therefore be without all compositeness. 

766D 

767A 

The mind, its 
skill and art 
are of the 
same 
substance 

412 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. You think rightly. Do you suppose then that something 
which does not naturally reside in its essence may adhere to it as an 
accident ? 

A. I think indeed it may. For I see that many things are 
767B contingent to it. For example, it is not time ; yet it moves in time. 
Skill in the arts is an accident to it : for at one time it is recognised as 
skilled, at another as unskilled ; at one time disciplined, at another 
undisciplined ; now wise, now foolish ; sometimes, indulging in 
irrational cogitations, it is seen to be in error, while at other times it 
goes upon the path of right reason ; and so on. 

N. So skill in the arts, or the art itself, do not naturally reside in 
it, but come to it from outside as the result of accidents. 

A. I should not go so far as to say that ; for it is not likely that 
God should have created in His own image and likeness a mind in 
which skill and the art were not naturally inborn, for this would not 
be so much mind as a kind of brutish and irrational life. Nor do I 
think that it would be right to say that man’s creation in the Image 
of God was rather by accident than by substance, especially when 
767C we see that intelligence and reason are present in the mind sub¬ 
stantially. 

N. Then [skill and the art] are not accidents to the mind, but 
are naturally present to it? 

A. I think it would not be rash to say so. For although through 
the accident of its transgression of the divine command whereby it 
became forgetful both of itself and its Creator the mind is born 
unskilled and unwise, yet when it is reformed by the rules of 
doctrine it may discover again in itself its God and itself and its skill 
and the art and all those things which subsist in it according to its 
nature, if it be irradiated by the Grace of its Redeemer. 

N. It remains then to consider in what way skill and the art 
reside in the mind, whether as those natural qualities which are 
known as potencies, like the species of wisdom and science which it 
perceives in the reflection of the Divine Ray ; or as substantial and 
767D constituent parts of itself, so that mind, skill and the art would form 
a kind of trinity in one essence. 

A. Your last suggestion is the one which I would accept. For 
the three seem to me to form a kind of substantial and connatural 
trinity. 

BOOK IV 

413 

N. Then mind intellectually comprehends both its skill and the 
art, and is intellectually comprehended both by the one and by the 
other (though not as to what it is, but as to the fact that it is). For 
otherwise the trinity will not be coessential and coequal. 

A. I could not deny this, for reason compels me to admit it. 

N. Consider then whether they are formed by one another or 
by some nature superior to them. 

A. If the Catholic Faith did not teach that this trinity is 
established and formed and intellectually comprehended by a higher 
nature, and if Truth did not assent to this teaching, I should have 
some justification for replying that they are perhaps formed by one 
another, or at least that they are their own primal Form. But under 
the circumstances, of course, I do not doubt that the trinity of the 
mind is formed by a superior Nature, seeing that all things that are 
formed take from It the origin of their Forms, and it is by being 
turned towards It that are formed all things which are turned 
towards It or can be turned towards It. 

N. Any hesitation on this point would be extremely stupid. So 
only the Mind of God possesses in Itself the true knowledge of the 
human mind, of its skill and of the art, for by It and for It was this 
trinity formed. 

A. Nothing could be truer than that. 

N. Do you think that the human mind is one thing, and the 
concept of it in the Mind of Him Who forms and knows it another ? 

A. That cannot be. For I understand the substance of the 
whole man to be nothing else but the concept of him in the Mind of 
his Artificer, Who knew all things in Himself before they were 
made ; and that very knowledge is the true and only substance of the 
things known, since it is in that knowledge that they are most 
perfectly created and eternally and immutably subsist. 

N. We may then define man as follows : Man is a certain 
intellectual concept formed eternally in the Mind of God. 

A. That is an extremely true and very well tested definition of 
man ; and not only of man, but of everything else which is formed in 
the Divine Wisdom. And I am not afraid of those who define him 
not as he is intellectually comprehended to be, but according to 
those things which are seen by the intellect to relate to him, saying 
that man is a rational mortal animal capable of sense and learning ; 
and what is more amazing, they call this definition a substantial one. 

768A 

768B 

Definition 
of man 

768C 

414 

PERIPHYSEON 

768D 

Let the 
concept in 
man of every 
769A 
animal be its 
substantial 
name 

The 

substance of 
intelligible 
and sensible 
things in man 
is made 
according to 
the likeness 
of God 

769B 

although it is not substantial at all but describes what relates to the 
substance from the attributes acquired by the substance from 
outside itself through generation. But the concept of man in the 
Mind of God is none of these ; for there it is simple, and cannot be 
called by this or that name, for it stands above all definition and all 
groupings of parts, for it can only be predicated of it that it is, not 
what it is. For that is what a truly substantial definition does : it 
asserts only that it is, but does not say what it is. 

N. Does it seem to you that there is a kind of concept in man of 
all the sensible and intelligible things the human mind can under¬ 
stand? 

A. That clearly seems to be true ; and indeed the essence of 
man is understood principally to consist in this : that it has been 
given him to possess the concept of all things which were either 
created his equals or which he was instructed to govern. For how 
could man be given the dominion of things of which he had not the 
concept? For his dominion over them would go astray if he did not 
know the things which he was to rule. Holy Scripture gives us a clear 
indication of this when it says : 

“Therefore, having formed out of the earth every beast of the 
field and every bird of the heavens, the Lord God brought them 
unto Adam to see what he would call them : and whatsoever Adam 
called every living soul that is its name.” 

It says “to see,” that is, to understand what he would call them. 
For if he did not understand, how would he be able to call them 
rightly? But what he called anything that is its name, that is, it is the 
very notion of the living soul. 

N. What is so remarkable then, in the notion of nature, created 
in the human mind and possessed by it, being the substance of the 
very things of which it is the notion, just as in the Divine Mind the 
notion of the whole created Universe is the incommunicable sub¬ 
stance of that whole? And just as we may call the notion of all 
intelligibles and sensibles in the whole of things the substance of 
those intelligibles and sensibles, so we may also say that the notion 
of the differences and properties and natural accidents are the 
differences and the properties and accidents themselves. 

A. There is no objection to that. 

N. Therefore, not only is irrationality created in the mind, but 
also every species, difference and property of irrationality, and all 

BOOK IV 

415 

things which are naturally learnt concerning it, since the knowledge 
of all these and similar things is established in it. By similar things 
I mean those which nature contains besides the animals, such as the 
elements of the world, the genera and species of grasses and trees, 
quantities and qualities, and all the innumerable multitude of 
differentiations. True knowledge of all these is implanted in human 
nature although it is concealed from her that she has it until she is 
restored to her pristine and integral condition, in which with all 
clarity she will understand the magnitude and the beauty of the 769C 
image that is fashioned within her, and will no longer be in 
ignorance of anything which is established within for she will be 
encompassed by the divine Light and turned towards God in Whom 
she will enjoy the perspicuous vision of all things. 

What else does the great Boethius mean when he says : “Wisdom 
is the comprehension of the truth of the things which are and whose 
lot it is to be endowed with immutable substance. And by the things 
which are we mean those which are neither enlarged by extension 
nor diminished by retraction nor changed by any variations, but 
ever preserve themselves in their proper strength by the exercise of 
their own resources. Such are qualities, quantities, forms, magni¬ 
tudes, smallnesses, equalities, conditions, acts, dispositions, places, 
times, and whatever is found in any manner united to corporeal 
objects. They themselves are by nature incorporeal and flourish by 
reason of their immutable substance, but through participation in 
body their circumstance is altered and through contact with the 769D 
variable object they pass into changeable inconstancy and where 
else do you suppose these things subsist but in the notions of them substance is 
contained in the soul of the wise? For where they are compre- his concept of 
hended, there they are; and they are nothing other than the 
understanding of themselves. 

A. The solution of this present problem demands a complex 
exposition, and an unceasing flow, as though from an inexhaustible 770A 
source, of countless and various cognate problems pours forth from 
all sides of it in the process, so that it would not be unfairly 
compared to that fictional Hydra of Hercules whose heads grew 
again as often as they were cut off in such proportion that for one 
that was severed a hundred sprang up. Moreover this figment is a 
symbol of human nature, for that too is a hydra, that is to say, a 
kind of multiple source of inexhaustible depth into which none save 
Hercules, that is, virtue, may penetrate. “For no one knoweth what 
things are in man, save the spirit of man which is in him.” If then 

416 

PERIPHYSEON 

that inner notion which is contained in the human mind constitutes 
the substance of those things of which it is the notion, it follows that 
the notion by which man knows himself may be considered his very 
substance. 

N. It certainly follows. For we have already said that the 
770B human mind, and its knowledge by which it knows itself, and the 
discipline by which through learning itself it obtains that knowledge 
of itself, subsist as one and the same essence. 

A. What then are we to say about our definition of man ? Did 
we not just now arrive at the conclusion that man is a certain 
intellectual concept formed eternally in the Divine Mind? But if that 
is so, and if we were not overhasty in arriving at this definition, how 
can man’s substance be the notion by which he knows himself? 

N. Surely we were not overhasty. For that definition which 
declares that a certain concept formed eternally in the Divine Mind 
is the substance of man is true. But neither is our present teaching 
unreasonable, namely that the knowledge by which the human mind 
knows itself is in man his substance. For every creature is considered 
under one aspect as it exists in the Word of God in which all things 
770C are made, and under another as it exists in itself. This is what 
St. Augustine means when he says in his Hexaemeron : 

In one way the things which are made through It are 
subordinate to It, in another the things which It is are in It. For the 
understanding of all things in the Wisdom of God is the substance 
of all things, nay, it is all things. But the knowledge by which the 
intelligible and sensible creature has intelligence of itself as it is in 
itself stands, as it were, for a kind a secondary substance in it, by 
which it has only the notion that it knows and is and wills, but has 
no notion what it is. The primary substance, constituted in the 
Wisdom of God, is eternal and immutable, while the secondary is 
temporal and variable; the one precedes, the other follows; the 
primary is primordial and causal, the secondary derivative and 
caused ; the primary contains all things as a whole, the secondary 
comprehends through knowledge as particulars as many things as 
770D are allotted it by its superior, and are subjected to it ; the secondary 
emanates from the primary and will return to it again.” 

I am not now referring to that superessential substance which 
by being itself is God and the sole cause of all things, but of that 
which is created as a primordial cause in the Wisdom of God, and of 

BOOK IV 

417 

which the effect is this substance which we have made secondary, 
and is so disposed by the natural order of things. 

A. We should understand, then, that man has two substances, 
one that is a genus among the Primordial Causes, and another 771A 
which is a species among the effects of those Causes. 

N. No, I should not say that there were two substances, but 
one which may be conceived under two aspects. Under one aspect 
the human substance is perceived as created among the intelligible 
Causes, under the other as generated among their effects ; under the 
former free from all mutability, under the latter subject to change; 
under the former simple, involved in no accidents, it eludes all 
reason and intelligence ; under the latter it receives a kind of 
composition of quantities and qualities and whatever else can be 
understood in relation to it, whereby it becomes apprehensible to 
the mind. So it is that what is one and the same thing can be thought 
of as twofold because there are two ways of looking at it, yet 
everywhere it preserves its incomprehensibility, in the effects as in 
the causes, and whether it is endowed with accidents or abides in its 
naked simplicity : under neither set of circumstances is it subject to 
created sense or intellect nor even the knowledge of itself as to what 
it is. 

A. How can it be, then, that the human mind, as you have been 
asserting now for some time, possesses a notion by which it knows 
itself and a discipline by which it learns of itself ; and yet, as you now 
maintain, is not discernible either to itself or to any other creature? 

The substance 
of man under¬ 
stood simply 

The human 
mind cannot 
771B 
be 

understood 

N. Both assertions have the full support of reason. For the 
human mind does know itself, and again does not know itself. For it 
knows that it is, but does not know what it is. And as we have taught 
in the earlier books it is this which reveals most clearly the Image of 
God to be in man. For just as God is comprehensible in the sense 
that it can be deduced from His creation that he is, and incompre¬ 
hensible because it cannot be comprehended by any intellect 
whether human or angelic nor even by Himself what He is, seeing 771C 
that He is not a thing but is superessential : so to the human mind it 
is given to know one thing only, that it is — but as to what it is no 
sort of notion is permitted it ; and, a fact which is stranger still and, 
to those who study God and man, more fair to contemplate, the 
human mind is more honoured in its ignorance than in its know- ignorance is 
ledge ; for the ignorance in it of what it is is more praiseworthy than 
the knowledge that it is, just as the negation of God accords better knowledge 
with the praise of His Nature than the affirmation and it shows 

418 

PERIPHYSEON 

771D 

772A 

772B 

greater wisdom not to know than to know that Nature of Which 
ignorance is the true wisdom and Which is known all the better for 
not being known. Therefore the Divine Likeness in the human mind 
is most clearly discerned when it is only known that it is, and not 
known what it is ; and, if I may so put it, what it is is denied in it, and 
only that it is is affirmed. Nor is this unreasonable. For if it were 
known to be something, then at once it would be limited by some 
definition, and thereby would cease to be a complete expression of 
the Image of its Creator, Who is absolutely unlimited and contained 
within no definition, because He is infinite, beyond all that may be 
said or comprehended, superessential. 

A. How then is every creature made in the knowledge of man, 
which does not even know of itself what it is, and this is thought to 
be its great glory, the mark of a superior nature and indication that 
it is circumscribed by no finite substance? 

N. I assure you that there is a very strong argument which 
points to the fact that every creature is created as substance in man. 
For we are taught by Gregory the Theologian (who touches on this 
matter in his controversy with those who deny that the Word of 
God is superessential and maintain that it is contained within some 
substance and therefore does not transcend all things but is to be 
counted among their number, seeking thereby to show a distinction 
between the Substance of the Father and the Substance of the Son), 
that of the substance of all things we cannot have a definition of 
what it is. So the human replica of the Divine Essence is not bound 
by any fixed limit any more than the Divine Essence in Whose 
Image it is made. And it is the same with the attributes by which it is 
surrounded: its time and place; its differences and properties; its 
quantities and qualities; its relations, conditions, positions; its acts 
and its passions : of these too it can only be understood that they 
exist but by no means what they are. From this it follows that there 
is no creature that can be held to possess any other substance but 
that reason by which it subsists in the Primordial Causes within the 
Word of God, and thus there can be no definition of what it is, 
seeing that it transcends every substantial definition. There can only 
be circumstantial definition, which relates to its accidents whereby it 
proceeds through generation into its proper species, either intelligible 
or sensible. 

A. Both Holy Scripture and our own reason declare that the 
human and the angelic nature are either the same or very similar; 
for both man and angel are held to be, and in fact are, intelligible 

8 

BOOK IV 

and rational creatures. And if there is this close correspondence 
between them it is reasonable to enquire why we are taught that 
every creature is made in man but not in angel. 

N. There is a good reason for this, I think. For we observe in 
man not a few things which neither reason understands nor 
authority transmits to subsist in angel. For instance there is this 
animal body which, according to Floly Scripture, was attached to 
the human soul even before the Transgression ; there is the fivefold 
bodily exterior sense ; there are the phantasies of sensible objects, 
which through that sense enter into the soul ; there are the perplexity 
and difficulty which delay the reason’s enquiries into the nature of 
the Universe ; the painful industry which it requires to discriminate 
between vice and virtue; and very many other things of that sort. 
For that all these things are lacking to the angelic nature while 
present in nature no truly wise man would deny. Nevertheless, 
Augustine in the Eighth Book of the City of God, Chapter Seven 
(5/c), would appear to have taught that the angels have sense, for 
in that chapter he praises the contemplative power of the great 
philosophers because “they saw that all forms of mutable things, 
whereby they are what they are (of what nature soever they be) have 
their origin from none but Him that truly is and is unchangeable. 
Consequently neither the body of this universe, the figures, qualities, 
ordered motion, and elements disposed from heaven down to earth, 
and whatever bodies are in them, nor any life — whether that which 
nourishes and conserves, as in the case of trees, or that which has 
this but also perceives, as in the case of the animals, or that which 
has all this but also understands, as in the case of man, or that which 
has no need of the support of nourishment, but conserves, perceives 
and understands, as in the case of the angels — can have being but 
from Him who has only simple being.” 

But I should say that he was here referring to the interior sense. 
For who does not know that the celestial being is untouched by very 
many of the parts and motions of nature which are naturally innate 
in the human being? And of those things which are not innate in it 
either as substance or happen to it as accident, it is not reasonable to 
hold that the celestial substance possesses the knowledge. For 
although the Angels are held to administer this world and every 
corporeal creature, yet we must by no means suppose they do so 
through the instrument of the corporeal senses or by movements 
through space or time or by visible manifestations. Nor would it be 
right to say that it was through some defect in their power that they 

419 

772C 

The angels do 
not sense 

772D 

773A 

773B 

420 

PERIPHYSEON 

do not have those accidents which are ours through the shortcomings 
of a nature which is still subject to variations of space and time. For 
when they transform their spiritual and invisible bodies into visible 
apparitions in order to reveal themselves in space and time to the 
mortal senses, they accept this accident not for their own sakes, but 
for the sake of those men of whom they are in charge and to whom 
they declare the mysteries of God. For with them vision is not 
exercised through sense nor conditioned by space, nor their know¬ 
ledge of how they shall act in administering nature conditioned by 
773C time, for they eternally transcend all time, and all space in the 
contemplation of Truth, in which the causes of their administration 
are present all at once to their sight. And do not suppose that I am 
speaking of all celestial essences, — I speak only of the higher orders 
who stand ever before the face of God and in whom there is no 
ignorance save that of the Divine Dark which excels every intellect. 
In fact, the lowest order, the angelic properly so called, through 
which the higher orders carry out the mandates of divine Providence 
either in the human mind by means of apparitions or in the other 
parts of this world, is not yet free from all ignorance, for, as 
St. Dionysius the Areopagite in his book on the Celestial Hierarchy 
773D most ingeniously shows, “It is instructed by the higher orders and 
initiated into knowledge of divine mysteries beyond its ken.” 

And so not unreasonably are we told to believe and understand 
that every visible and invisible creature is created in man alone. For 
no substance has been created which is not understood to subsist in 
him, no species or difference or property or natural accident is 
found in nature which either is not naturally in him or of which he 
774A cannot have knowledge ; and the knowledge of the things which are 
contained within him excels the things of which it is the knowledge 
by so much as the nature in which it is constituted excels. For every 
rational nature is rightly preferred to the irrational and sensible 
nature because it is closer to God. Wherefore it is also rightly 
understood that the things of which the knowledge is innate in 
human nature have their substance in the knowledge of themselves. 
For where they have the better knowledge of themselves, there they 
must be considered to enjoy the truer existence. Furthermore, if the 
things themselves subsist more truly in the notions of them than in 
themselves, and the notions of them are naturally present to man, 
therefore in man are they universally created, as will no doubt be 
proved in due course by the Return of all things into man. For why 
774B should they all return to him if they did not in some sense partake of 

BOOK IV 

421 

his nature, and did not in some manner proceed from him? But 
about the Return we have promised to speak in its proper place. 

A. Although these matters seem extremely difficult since they 
pass beyond the limit of simple doctrine, yet if we consider them 
with the speculative reason, they are sufficiently consistent with the 
capacity of the understanding of the human condition, and are most 
useful in establishing what now may be properly admitted, that man 
was not brought forth in the genus of the animals : rather every 
genus of animals was brought forth from the earth, that is to say, 
from the solid part of nature, in him — and not only every genus of 
animals was made in man, but the whole created Universe ; so that 
truly of man may we understand these words of the Truth : “Preach 
the Gospel unto every creature.” Also the Apostle says : “The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth together until now.” But if there be 774C 
any to whom these things seem too abstruse or altogether incredible, 
let him, if unversed in all the natural arts which are called liberal, 
either keep silent or learn not to argue rashly about what he cannot 
understand : or if he is learned he will plainly see that (to offer him 
an example from one of these arts) geometrical figures do not 
naturally subsist in themselves but in the “reasons” of the art to 
which they belong. For the triangle which is seen by the corporeal 
sense in a material object is a kind of sensible image of something 
which is present in the mind ; and of this triangle whose substance is 
in the instructed mind he will have understanding, and with sound 
judgment estimate which is the better, the triangular figure or the 774D 
triangle which it is the figure. And if I am not mistaken, he will 
find that the figure is a true figure, certainly, but a false triangle, 
whereas the triangle which subsists in the art is the cause of the 
figure and is the true triangle. And I am not speaking of the 
imaginary triangle which proceeds from the mind through the 
memory into the sense, and through the sense into sensible figures, 
nor of that which returns again from the sensible figure through the 
corporeal sense and is implanted in the memory, but of that very 
triangle which endures immutably in the art itself, where line and 
angle exist together, and where there is not one place for the 
angle, another for the middle, another for the extremity, another 775A 
for the point, another for the spaces of the sides from the 
point, another for the spaces of the angles from the point, another 
for the point from which the lines originate and in which the 
angles are enclosed by the meetings of the lines ; but all these things 
are one in one and the same notion of the geometer’s mind, and the 
whole is understood in the particulars and the particulars in the 

422 

PERIPHYSEON 

whole, unified in the intellect itself, for the intellect is the substantial 
cause of all things which it understands, and that from which the 
figures of the geometrical bodies proceed into their species. And 
what we have said of the triangle must also be understood of all 
other figures, whether angular or curved or oblique, and whether 
plane or solid. For all these subsist in their notions which are 
comprehended under one and the same “reason” in the skilled mind 
instructed in the art. If, then, the geometrical bodies, whether they 
are formed in the phantasies of the memory or in some sensible 
775B matter subsist in the rational notions of themselves which lack all 
phantasy or matter, beyond anything which is perceived by the 
bodily sense or imagined by the memory, why should it be so 
strange that the natural bodies also, composed of the qualities of the 
universal elements, have their substance in that nature in which 
there is knowledge of them, especially as all the perceptions of 
bodies are incorporeal? For the species in which they are contained 
are incorporeal, nor would any wise man doubt that quantities and 
qualities are likewise of an intelligible nature and proceed from the 
intelligible reasons of vital substance. 

9 

How every 
creature was 
created in 
775C 
man, even if 
we read that 
he was made 
after the 
creation of all 

775D 

N. Whoever looks intently into the nature of things will soon 
find that this is the way in which they are constituted. 

A. After this discussion it will not be inappropriate to enquire 
in what way every creature is created in man, seeing that we are 
taught that man himself was created last of all. For if the whole of 
created nature, both visible and invisible, was created before him, as 
is handed down to us by the Divine History, and we read of nothing 
being created after him, how can it be explained that we can perceive 
that every creature is created in man ? For if anyone should say that 
created nature was created twice, first after its species in itself and 
then as a genus in man, I should find difficulty in bringing such a 
view into accord with reason, for if that were the case, man would 
possess no substance of his own, but would be a kind of amalgam of 
many things, in fact of the whole creation which had already been 
established before, one manifold conglomeration of divers forms. 
And worse still, if every creature whether visible or invisible is in 
itself most perfectly created (and since the Creator is perfect and 
more-than-perfect, it cannot be believed that He has created anything 
that is imperfect), how should it receive as it were a second 
perfection of its nature in man, whose creation was the last of the 
Divine Operations? And if it did, then it would not be out of 
nothing that God created man in His own Image, but out of those 

BOOK IV 

423 

things which were created before him. But if anyone shall say that 
the human body was not made out of nothing, but out of a kind of 
earth, namely clay, what would he say about the better creation of 
man which undoubtedly was established in soul and spiritual body 
in his first creation? For the former (that is, the soul) was made by 
the Divine Breath, nay rather, it is the Divine Breath, formed, as we 
believe, not out of something, but out of nothing. 

N. I see that this question is involved in a great deal of 
obscurity and requires versatile skill for its solution, but rather than 
burke it altogether we shall make some attempt at examining it 
insofar as we are inwardly enlightened by the Divine Ray. But first 
tell me, I pray, if the intelligibles or sensibles are prior to the mind 
which understands them or the sense that perceives them? 

A. I think I should be right in saying that where there is one 
thing that understands and another that is understood, and where 
that which understands is of a better nature than that which is 
understood, the understanding mind or the perceiving sense is prior 
to the thing which is understood or perceived. But where the things 
themselves understand themselves, as far as that may be, I should 
not say that they are prior to themselves, for where the things itself 
and its knowledge of itself are one, I do not see what kind of 
precedence there can be. 

Although I know that I am, my knowledge of myself is not 
prior to myself because I and the knowledge by which I know myself 
are not two different things : if I did not know that I was I would not 
be ignorant that I did not know that I was: therefore whether I 
know or do not know that I am I shall not be without knowledge: 
for there will remain the knowledge of my ignorance. And if 
everything which is able to know that it does not know itself cannot 
be ignorant of the fact that it is (for if it did not have any existence at 
all it would not know that it did not know itself) it follows that 
absolutely everything has existence which knows that it is or knows 
that it does not know that it is. But if anyone is so far sunk in 776C 
ignorance that he neither knows that he is nor perceives that he does 
not know that he is, I should say that either such a one is not a man 
at all, or that he is altogether dead. 

In the foregoing arguments we have sufficiently established the 
fact that these two things inhere at once and inseparably and 
eternally in the human soul : knowledge and ignorance. For it 
possesses the knowledge that it is a rational and intelligible creature ; 
and the ignorance of what intelligence and reason are. 

424 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. Then you did not exist before you knew or did not know 
that you existed? 

A. No. For at one and the same time I received my being, and 
the knowledge that I was, and the understanding that I did not 
know what I was. 

N. Tell me, when does man receive the knowledge of himself: 
in that creation in which all men generally were made in their 
Primordial Causes before the beginning of time ; or in that generative 
process by which in the course of time known only to God and 
776D predetermined by Him man issued forth into this life? 

A. In both, I think. In the one it receives the knowledge in a 
general manner and secretly in the causes, in the other it receives it 
in a special manner and openly in the effects. For in that primordial 
and general state of all human nature no one knows himself as a 
species nor begins to have a particular knowledge of himself, for 
there is one general and common knowledge of all, known only to 
God. For there all men are one, and that one is made in the Image of 
777A God, in Whom all are created. For as all the forms or species which 
are contained in the one genus do not as yet become subject through 
differences or properties to the intellect or the sense, but subsist as a 
kind of unity which is still undivided until each shall receive in its 
individual species its property and difference in an intelligible and 
sensible form : so in the case of the individual in the common unity 
of human nature, he does not behold either himself or others of like 
substance with himself until he has proceeded into this world in the 
time appointed for him in accordance with the reasons which are 
eternally established. 

N. Why then does not everyone know himself as soon as he has 
arrived through generation into this world? 

A. I could safely say that here we have an indication of the 
penalty which our nature must pay for its transgression. For if man 
777B had not sinned he certainly would not have fallen into such a depth 
of ignorance of himself, any more than he would have suffered the 
shame of sharing with the irrational animals the propagation of his 
species by means of the two-fold sex, as the wisest of the Greeks 
maintain with the most convincing arguments. For He Who alone 
was born without sin into the world, to wit, the Redeemer of the 
World, never anywhere suffered from such ignorance, but as soon as 
he was conceived and born had understanding of, and could speak 
and teach concerning Himself and all things. This was so not only 

BOOK IV 

425 

because He was the Wisdom of the Father from Whom nothing is 
hid, but because in order that he might purify the corruption of 
humanity He put on an humanity which was incorrupt — not that 
the humanity which He put on is other than the humanity which He 
restored, but He Who alone is incorrupt remained in it as a means of 
healing the wound of our perverted nature, hidden in its inmost 
reasons. For human nature perished entirely in all men except in 777c 
Him in Whom alone it remained incorruptible. And indeed He 
himself is the greatest example of Grace, not because He was freed 
of any part of the guilt of human nature, but because He alone of all 
men through no previous merit was joined by unity of substance 
with the Word of God, in Whom all the elect and all who receive the 
fulness of His Grace become the sons of God and participants in the 
Divine Substance. 

N. There was then in human nature the potency of possessing 
the fullest knowledge of itself had it not sinned. 

A. Nothing is more likely. For most mighty and most wretched 
was that fall in which our nature lost the knowledge and the wisdom 
which had been planted in her, and lapsed into a profound 
ignorance of herself and her Creator, even though we understand 
that the desire for the bliss which she had lost remained with her 777D 
even after the Fall, which would certainly not have been the case if 
she had lost all knowledge of herself and her God. 

N. So the fullest knowledge both of herself and her Creator 
was implanted in her as part of her nature before the Fall, in so far 
as the knowledge of a creature can comprehend itself and its cause? 778A 

A. Such is my opinion. For how would she be an image if in 
some respect she differed from that of which she is the image? — 
except of course in the relation to the subject, about which we spoke 
in the earlier books when we were discussing the prototype or 
principal Exemplar and its image. We said there that God Himself 
was the Principal Exemplar, subsisting through, by and in Himself, 
neither created nor formed nor changed by any thing; whereas His 
image, which is man, is created by Him, and does not subsist 
through, by or in itself, but, at the hands of Him Whose image it is, 
it has received being in accordance with its nature, and being God in 
accordance with His Grace. But all other things which are predicated 
of God may be predicated of His image also : but of God essentially, 
of the image by participation. For it is by participation in the 778B 
Supreme Good and the Supreme Goodness whose image it is, that 

PERIPHYSEON 

426 

the image is both goodness and good ; by participation in that 
Eternal and Eternity by which it is formed, that it is both eternal and 
eternity; by participation again in that omnipotence by which it is 
created and turning to which it is specified that it is itself an 
omnipotence. For if human nature had not sinned but had adhered 
unchangeably to Him Who had created her, she would certainly 
have been omnipotent. For whatever in nature she wished to happen 
would necessarily happen, since she would wish for nothing else to 
happen save that which she understood that her Creator wished to 
happen ; moreover, if she had fully adhered to her Creator and not 
abandoned Him so as not to lose her likeness to Him, she would 
fully comprehend His omnipotent and unchanging will and all the 
other things which may reasonably be predicated or contemplated 
or understood in God and in His image. 

N. If then the perfect knowledge both of herself and her 
Creator was present in human nature before the Fall, it would not 
be remarkable if in reason we found that she then possessed the 
fullest knowledge of natures similar to her own, like the celestial 
essences, and those inferior to herself such as this world with its 
causes, which are subject to the intellect, and that this science still 
abides in her, generally in potency only, but in the highest men in 
act. 

A. To those who understand these matters clearly there would 
be nothing remarkable in that, for it is true and probable. 

778D 

779A 

The difference 
between 
divine and 
human 
knowledge 

N. And it is to the great and true glory of the human race that 
it is so, and especially to Him Who willed to make it so. Wherefore 
in like manner we should accept the following account of His 
intellect and His knowledge. Just as the Creative Wisdom, which is 
the Word of God, beholds all things which are made in It before 
they are made, and that very beholding of all things which are 
beheld before they are made is their true and eternal and immutable 
essence, so the created wisdom, which is human nature, knows all 
things which are made in it before they are made, and that very 
knowledge of the things which are known before they are made is 
their true and indestructible essence. Accordingly, the knowledge in 
the Creative Wisdom is itself rightly held to be the primary and 
causal essence of the whole of creation, while the knowledge in the 
created nature is the secondary essence and subsists as the effect of 
the higher knowledge. And what we have said about the primary 
and causal essence which is constituted in the knowledge of the 
Creative Wisdom and about the secondary which is its effect and 

BOOK IV 

427 

which is reasonably stated to subsist in the human soul, may 
without hesitation be applied to all the attributes which are observed 
to be attached to the essence of all creation. For the accurate 
examination of nature shows us that whatever circumstance attaches 
to the substances in the human intelligence proceeds through the 
created wisdom from the knowledge of the Creative Wisdom. Now, 
attached to the essences there are the sensible species, quantities, 
qualities, places, times and like attributes without which the essence 
cannot be understood. 

We can then sum up everything that we have been trying to 
teach briefly as follows : 

Just as the understanding of all things which the Father made 
in His only begotten Word is their essence and is the substance of all 
those attributes which are understood to be attached by nature to 
the essence; so the knowledge of all things which the Word of the 
Father has created in the human soul is their essence and the subject 
of all those attributes which are discerned to be attached by nature 
to that essence : and just as the Divine Understanding is prior to all 
things and is all things ; so the intellectual knowledge of the soul is 
prior to all the things which she knows and is all the things which 
she fore-knows. Therefore all things subsist as causes in the Divine 
Understanding, but as effects in human knowledge. 

As we have often said before, this does not mean that the 
essence of all things in the Word is something other than the essence 
of all things in man, but one and the same essence is contemplated 
by the mind under two different aspects, as subsisting in the eternal 
Causes, and as understood in its effects : for There it surpasses all 
understanding, while here it is understood only through the consi¬ 
deration of the attributes which are attached to it : in neither case, 
however, is it permitted to the created intellect to know what it is. 
For if it could be known it would not entirely reproduce the image 
of its Creator in itself, for from those things of which He is the 
Principle, the Cause and the Maker it can only be known that He is, 
but what He is escapes all sense and all intellect. 

A. There was, then, no creature, either visible or invisible 
before the creation of man — neither in place nor in time nor in 
rank nor in birth nor in eternity nor, in a word, in any order of 
precedence. For in knowledge and rank, though not in place or 

779B 

779C 

The creation 
of no 
creature 
preceded 
779D 
man ; the 
creation of 
man preceded 
in dignity and 
knowledge 

428 

PERIPHYSEON 

780A 

The creation 
of angel and 
man was 
simultaneous 

time, man’s creation is prior to those things which were created with 
it or in it or below it, but simultaneous with the creation of those 
who are his equals in the hierarchy of nature, that is to say, the 
celestial essences. For human nature also participates in the celestial 
and intelligible essence, and it is to human as well as angelic essence 
and nature that the scriptural text refers : “He created the heavens in 
His intellect,” which may be interpreted: He created the intelligible 
Heavens. For this reason it is not easy to understand how all things 
visible and invisible are established in man if man was created as 
substance together with the angelic essences. For it does not seem in 
accordance with reason that on the one hand the beginning of his 
creation should be simultaneous with that of the celestial powers 
and on the other that they should be created in him. 

N. If you look more closely into the mutual relation and unity 
which exist between intelligible and rational natures, you will at 
once find that not only is the angelic nature established in the 
human but also the human is established in the angelic. For it is 
created in everything of which the pure intellect has the most perfect 
780B knowledge and becomes one with it. So closely indeed were the 
human and angelic natures associated, and so it would be now if the 
first man had not sinned, that the two would have become one. Even 
as it is this is beginning to happen in the case of the highest men, 
from whom are the firstborn among the celestial natures. Moreover 
the angel is made in man, through the understanding of angel which 
is in man, and man is in the angel through the understanding of man 
which is established in the angel. For, as I have said, he who has a 
pure understanding is created in that which he understands. So the 
intelligible and rational nature of the angel is created in the 
intelligible and rational nature of man just as the nature of man is 
created in the nature of angel, through the mutual knowledge by 
which angel understands man and man angel. 

There is nothing strange in this. For when we enter upon a 
discussion together the same thing happens : each of us is created in 
780C the other: for when I understand what you understand I am made 
your understanding, and in a certain way that cannot be described I 
am created in you. In the same way when you clearly understand 
what I clearly understand you are made my understanding, and of 
two understandings is made one, formed from that which we both 
clearly and without doubt understand. For example, to take an 
illustration from numerology, you understand that the number six is 
equal to its parts : and I understand the same thing, and understand 

BOOK IV 

that you understand it just as you understand that I understand. 

Each of our understandings, formed by the number six, has become 
one, and thus I am created in you and you are created in me. For we 
ourselves are not other than our understandings ; for our true and 
ultimate essence is understanding specified by the contemplation of 
truth. Moreover we are taught by the Apostle (when he forbids our 
understanding to cherish visible forms, saying, “Be not fashioned 
after this world”) that the understanding can conform not only to 780D 
natures which are co-essential with itself, but also to natures which 
are inferior to it when it understands and senses them in love. 
Consequently, by reason of this mutual understanding, it is not 
untrue to say that the angel is created in man and man in the angel, 
and by no law of creation or method of precedence can it be rightly 
believed or understood that angel is prior to man, although, 
according to many, the prophetic narrative speaks first of the 
creation of the angelic nature and subsequently of the human. For, 
as St. Augustine points out in the Eleventh Book of the City of God, 
it is not to be believed that Divine Scripture, in the relation of the 
operations of the six Primordial and Intelligible Days, was entirely 
silent about the creation of the celestial powers, but either on the 
very first page of Genesis, where it is written “In the beginning God 
made heaven and earth,” he indicated their creation by the name 
heaven, or a little later, where it is said “And God said. Let there be 
light, and there was light.” The aforesaid Father asserts that the 
creation of the angelic nature is implied in both places, but 
especially in the second. For in the former text the name heaven 
refers rather to the establishment of the whole invisible creation in 
unformed matter than to the specific formation of the angelic 
nature. But the words “Let there be light, and there was light” he 781B 
has no hesitation in ascribing to the formation of the celestial 
essences — although he mentions the interpretation of others who 
refer this divine precept to the creation in the upper parts of the 
world of a primal light subject to the sense and occupying space. 
However this interpretation he refutes by very acute arguments in 
his Hexcemeron. 

The words “And God divided the light from the darkness, and 
God called the light day, and the darkness He called night” he 
interprets in a double sense: either light means the formation in its 
proper species of the angelic creature, and darkness the formlessness 
of that creature while yet imperfect, a formlessness which is prior to 
the form in origin though not in time; or the division of the light 

429 

430 

PERIPHYSEON 

from the darkness signifies the segregation and differentiation of 
781C that part of the angelic nature which had immutably adhered to its 
Creator, deserving through its obedience the foretaste of bliss, from 
that part which did not abide in truth but in punishment for its pride 
fell into the darkness of ignorance of its future fall and lasting 
misery. But whoever wishes to learn more of this twofold inter¬ 
pretation of the most holy master, let him zealously read his own 
words in the Hexaemeron and in the aforesaid volume of the City of 
God, which I think it would be redundant to quote in this little 
discussion of ours as it is lengthy and available to all. 

A. Right. For there is no cause to introduce the opinions of the 
Holy Fathers, especially those that are widely known, except where 
the gravest necessity requires that reason be supported for the sake 
781D of those who, being untrained in it, are more amenable to authority 
than reason. 

10 But I should like to learn from you why the establishment of 
the angelic nature is related on what is called the First Intelligible 
Day, that is in the first movement of the Prophetic Meditation, and 
then a description of the four days of the sensible Universe is 
interposed before the formation of man is introduced in the sixth 
movement of the Meditation ; or, to put it more clearly, why is man 
not introduced at the very beginning of the contemplative Act of the 
782A whole creation, instead of at the conclusion of all, when that 
operation has already been six times repeated? For not only the 
angelic essence, but also the essence of sensible things, seems to 
precede in dignity, not to say time, the creation of man. 

N. It is in this very fact that the exaltation of human nature 
over all existent things is most clearly shown : for by this it is made 
abundantly clear that in all those events which are related before the 
creation of man, he himself was already created, in fact that all 
things were created in him. For perhaps the chief reason why the 
creation of the angels is not more explicitly stated than by the word 
“light”, why it is not said : “Let there be angel,” or : “Let Us make 
782B angel” in the same way as it is written, “Let Us make man” is that 
we may understand that the creation of the substance of man, no 
less than that of angel, is to be inferred in the creation of light. But if 
man participates in the creation of the celestial essence which is 
signified by the creation of light, what true natural philosopher 
would not conclude that all things that are related after the creation 
of light are created in man, not only in his knowledge of them but in 
their very being — especially when he is in no doubt whatever that 

BOOK IV 

this sensible world was created for the sake of man, that he might 
rule it as a king rules his kingdom and as a husband his household, 
and that he might use it to the glory of his Creator, subordinated to 
no part of it, in no way dependent on it, but raised above it ruling it 
alone ? For if man had not sinned he would not be ruled among the 
parts of the Universe, but would himself rule the whole of it as his 
subject : and he would not employ for that purpose these corporeal 
senses of the mortal body, but would govern eternally and faultlessly 
the whole and the parts of it in accordance with the laws of God, 
without any physical act in space or time, but solely by the rational 
apprehension of its natural and innate causes by the easy use of right 
will. But if he were to abandon his Creator and fall down into the 
world from the lofty station of his nature, he would then lose his 
rank and be ignobly counted among its parts, and be himself 
corrected by the Divine Justice and pay the penalty for his sin. 

So the reason why man is introduced at the conclusion of the 
narrative of the equipping of this visible world is that we might 
understand that all the things of which the creation is narrated 
before that of man are universally comprehended within him. For 
every greater number includes within itself the lesser. For if the 
creation of man was clearly stated at the beginning of the narration 
of the creation of the visible and invisible Universe, all the rest of 
nature, of which the creation would be narrated in order subse¬ 
quently, would reasonably appear as subsisting outside his nature. 
But as it is, since the creation of man is introduced at the conclusion 
of all the divine operations, it is shown that the divine creations all 
subsist and are comprehended in him. And indeed, in the case of the 
celestial essences, that is, the angels, we said that they subsisted in 
him in two ways. In one way because, were he not hindered by the 
earthly habitation of this mortal body which is the result of sin, he 
would be co-essential with them, that is to say, co-intellectual and 
co-rational : in another because their mutual recognition is so 
closely knit that united by reciprocal intellection and formed by the 
simple contemplation of truth, the angel is born in man as man, and 
man is born in the angel as angel. What shall I say of the operations 
of the second movement of the Prophetic Meditation? Do we not 
recognise that that Firmament, which is the solidity of the simple 
elements set between the upper waters of the Primordial Causes and 
the lower waters of the unstable motions of corporeal and corruptible 
nature, which flow in space and time through the processes of birth 
and decay, — do we not recognise that it is established in the essence 

431 

782C 

782D 

All things 
that are 
783A 

narrated in 
the works of 
the First Six 
Days were 
created in 
man 

The creation 
of the 

firmament in 

783B 

man 

432 

The creation 
of earth, 
water, grasses 
and fruits in 
man 

783C 

The triple 
mode of 
sensing 

783D 

The creation 
of the sun in 
man 

784A 

The creation 
of the moon 
in man 

PERIPHYSEON 

of man? For what shrewd student of human nature does not 
observe therein the universal elements of the world? 

What should be said of the operations of the Third Day? Do 
we not recognise in man the stability of substance which is signified 
by the phrase “Dry Land,” and the instability of the transient 
accidents which is signified by the inundations of the “waters,” and 
the distinction of the one from the other by their natural differences ? 
And do wo not reckon among the parts of human nature that vital 
principle which gives nourishment and increase and life to the 
grasses and twigs? 

And as on the First Day the principal part of man, that most 
sublime light, that is to say. Intellect and Reason, was established 
together with angelic nature in the creation of Light; so on the 
Fourth Day of the Prophetic Meditation, there was introduced 
according to a rational order the creation of that secondary light 
which is called exterior sense, created for the apprehension of the 
shapes and species and qualities and quantities of visible things. For 
although the exterior sense, which is the intermediary between the 
soul and exterior objects, belongs properly and naturally to the soul, 
yet it is reckoned with the body because it exerts its power through 
bodily instruments. So the Prophetic Meditation did well to establish, 
in the fourth place of creation of things, the creation of that sense 
which is attached to a body formed out of the four elements of the 
world. Now the modes of this sense are three, of which the first 
without danger of error announces to the mind the species of the 
sensibles: and this it does so admirably that with the greatest ease 
and without labour the mind is able to form unclouded judgments 
upon these species in all clarity. This mode is therefore not 
improperly called the larger luminary for it does not deceive the 
mind, but with all the brightness of the sun uncovers every sensible 
species and lays them bare before the reason. 

The second mode, which is likened to the lesser luminary, is one 
through which the mind is often deceived, as though wandering 
uncertainly through some nocturnal tasks : consequently it cannot 
easily form true judgements upon objects which it receives through 
sense. Examples of what I mean are the oar which appears to be 
broken when it is dipped in the water, the reversed face in the 
mirror, towers which appear to those sailing to move, the counterfeit 
of voices which the Greeks call and a thousand other illusions 
of this sort, which are found naturally in all the senses of the body. 
And the rational soul must employ the most anxious care and 

BOOK IV 

433 

utmost industry to distinguish these from true appearances when 
forming its judgments. For these have no existence in nature, but are 
formed in the senses and frequently deceive the mind and put it into 
the error of taking false things for true. 

The third mode is that which admits to the mind, in multiplicity 784B 
and accumulation, numbers of sensible forms. It takes from the 
sphere of sensible nature, decorated with the various orders of of the stars in 
innumerable species, the choirs, as it were, of the countless stars, man 
and is so bewildered by the confusions of so many mingled 
phantasies that scarcely if ever can it form a judgment about them 
which will be free from error; but attempts by means of certain 
logical processes to make statements which will to some extent 
resemble the truth, and to be certain about things which are 
themselves uncertain. And it disputes about the minutest principles 
of visible nature without ever employing the same method twice: 
sometimes offering opinions which, like bright stars, show a 
degree of clarity and proximity to the truth ; sometimes opinions 
that are more obscure and further from the truth, like dimmer stars ; 
sometimes very obscure and very far from the truth, like those stars 
which are scarcely to be seen. Therefore the third power of the 
senses is described under the metaphor of the stars of different 784C 
brilliancies. 

Thus the three modes of sensation are established in the three 
orders of celestial luminaries. For as the sun is in the world, so is the 
most sure and infallible mode of sense in man : as is the moon, so is 
the ambiguous phantasy which is, as it were, a doubtful light to the 
sentient mind: as are the stars so are the imperceptibly small 
numbers of the phantasies which are produced by the innumerable 
and imperceptible species of bodily objects. And do not let it 
surprise you that human perceptions — I refer to the bodily senses 
— are signified by the greater things of the world, namely the 
celestial bodies: for the soundest reason teaches us in no uncertain 
way that man is one, and in his unity a greater One than the whole 
visible world, not by the bulk of his parts but by the dignity of the 
harmony of his rational nature. For as the holy Father Augustine 784D 
teaches us that “the soul of a worm is better than the body of the sun 
that illuminates the whole world” — for the lowest form of life, 
however humble, is to be preferred by reason of the dignity of its 
essence to the first and most valuable of bodies — what then is 
surprising in the fact that all the bodies of the whole world are of 
lower degree than the sensation of man? First because the natural 

434 

PERIPHYSEON 

785A 

Of sense 
and sensible 

785B 

785C 

Another 
triple division 
of the senses 
which 
likewise are 
made in man 

cause is of a higher order than those things of whose creation it is by 
nature the cause — and indeed no wise man doubts that the 
sensibles were created for the sense, and not the sense for the 
sensibles. Next, because it is reasonable that the nature which makes 
a judgment is of a higher order than that upon which the Judgment 
is made — and it is perfectly plain to every careful observer of 
nature that the senses form Judgment upon the sensibles and not the 
sensibles upon the senses. A further consideration is that sense is 
only found in living substance, in which the vital activity is most 
manifest, while the sensibles, in so far as they are bodies, need not 
always manifest the vital activity, for they exist in the lowest place of 
creation. For there are some sensibles in which the vital activity 
scarcely ever or never appears. Finally no sensible is a vital principle 
even though it may appear to be moved by a vital principle ; whereas 
sense, as nature herself teaches us, is not only alive but is itself, in its 
essence. Life. And if the quantity and magnitude of the bodily mass 
of the sensibles is a matter for praise, still more so is that quantity 
and magnitude of power which subsists in the senses. See what 
power there is in the sense of the eyes which can gaze into the 
infinity of the light-filled space and can mould within itself the 
divers and innumerable species of bodies, colours, shapes, and all 
other things of which the phantasies enter the memory by means of 
this sense : And what will you say of the power of hearing, which can 
absorb and discriminate between so many voices which are heard at 
the same time and conflict with one another? And anyone who in 
this way considers the other senses will contemplate for himself their 
marvellous and indescribable virtues. 

From the foregoing we may see how the intelligible principles 
of created nature, in so far as our mind can grasp them, are created 
in the human Intellect ; and that similarly the sensible species of the 
same Universe, with the quantities and the qualities, in so far as our 
sense may apprehend them, discover the causes of their creation in 
the human sense, and therein subsist. 

But since sensation is not confined to man, but is present by 
nature in the other animals, it undergoes a further distribution. In 
the Fifth Movement of the Prophetic Meditation it is attributed to 
the creeping things of the sea and the birds of the air. Rightly so, 
since the sense which was conferred upon nature on the Fifth Day is 
itself fivefold. 

And on the Sixth Day it is applied to the land animals. The 
reason for this is, I think, that they have a closer kinship with man. 

BOOK IV 

435 

who was created on the Sixth Day, than the animals which were 
produced from the nature of the waters. 

Thus man himself, whose creation is detail by detail mystically 785D 
foreshadowed in the contemplations of the Divine Act referred to 
before, seeing that all the foregoing were created in him and with 
him, not in chronological order but the order in which causes flow 
forth into their effects, is at last manifestly formed as the climax of 
the whole Universe, by the sixth repetition of the Prophetic Medi¬ 
tation, so that in that number not only the perfection of human 
nature but the creation in it of all which was revealed prior to it 
might be symbolised. For the Scripture says: “And God said. Let 
Us make man in Our image and likeness, and let him rule over the 786A 
fishes of the sea and the birds of the air and the beasts and all 
creation, and over every creeping thing which moves on the earth. 

And God created man in His image, in the image of God created He 
him.” 

Here it should be first noted that in the creation of all things 
which from the beginning of creation are described in the foregoing 
Five Intellectual Days, the Unity and ineffable Trinity of the divine 
superessential nature, or, as St. Dionysius the Areopagite calls it, 
the “Fecundity of the Highest Good”, is not openly expressed — 
although in the text “In the beginning God created Heaven and 
Earth” it is not unreasonable to see a reference to the Persons of the 
Father and the Son : the Father in the word “God”, the Word in the 786B 
word “Beginning”. And a little later the Holy Spirit is introduced in 
the text “And the Spirit of God brooded over the waters.” So in the 
creation of the Primordial Causes the Holy Trinity is given Its 
proper place. Moreover, in the procession of the Causes into their 
forms and species Holy Scripture makes a similar reference to the 
Trinity ; for instance : “God said. Let there be light”. By the name of 
God is intended the Father, and by the sensible word implied by the 
phrase “He said” His only begotten and super-intelligible Word, in 
Which and through Which He made all things that are. But in the 
text “God saw the light because it is good” the Holy Spirit is 
intended, as also on the other days wherever it is added “And God 
saw it, because it was good.” But on the Sixth Day, when man is 
created, both the Unity and the Trinity of the Divine Nature are 
stated most explicitly : the Unity in the words “And He said,” where 
“God” is understood or, as in the Septuagint, openly expressed, 786C 
“And God said;” while in the plural verb “Let Us make” are 
expressed the Three Substances of the One Essence, or as the Latins 

PERIPHYSEON 

more usually have it, the Three Persons of the One Substance. 
Rightly so: for where the Image is created, there the Primal 
Exemplar of which it is the Image is most explicitly revealed. 

11 Now although man is a unity, he is in a manner of speaking 
composed out of a number of parts, for it is agreed that he is made 
up of body, that is, matter possessing a sensible form, and soul, 
which in turn is composed of sense, reason, intellect, and vital 
motion. It may therefore be asked whether it is throughout all his 
parts that man is created in the image of God, or only in respect of 
those which occupy the loftier or most lofty place in his nature. And 
786D I shall be grateful to hear what is your opinion in this matter. 

A. This is a question on which almost all the scriptural 
commentators have something to say. And in the first place they 
unanimously allow that it is not in respect of his body that man is 
created in the image of God: for God is incorporeal; there is no 
corporality in His Substance nor does it befall Him as an accident. 
But as to whether it is in the soul as a whole, that is, throughout all 
the parts which are discerned in it, or only in the higher parts that 
man is created in the image of God, has been a matter of most 
vigorous debate among spiritual authors, and the conclusion has 
787A been reached that nowhere but in the most exalted part, that is to 
say, the intelligible, is the Divine Image expressed. For this part is 
seen to be threefold, consisting clearly of Intellect, Reason and the 
Interior Sense ; which have been the subject of many exchanges 
between us in the earlier books. For many philosophers deny that 
the image of God is to be found in that Vital Principle by which the 
body is administered and by which the human soul seems to have a 
common nature with the nutritive and auctive life-principle which is 
the special attribute of grasses and trees; or in that five-fold and 
exterior sense in which man shares a common nature with the 
irrational animals ; although these are regarded as parts of the soul. 
But a more careful examination of the human soul reveals that its 
nature is of the simplest, and that it is wholly a whole in itself and by 
787B no means is it unlike itself in any part, or inferior or superior to itself 
in any of those qualities which are found in its essence. For, as has 
already been said, it is as a whole that it administers the body and 
gives it nourishment and increase; as a whole that it perceives 
through the senses; as a whole that it receives the phantasies of the 
sensibles ; as a whole it is in the numbers of the occursors which first 
take up the phantasies of the sensibles ; as a whole in the progressors 
which conduct them into the mind; as a whole in the recorders 

BOOK IV 

437 

which commend them to the memory; as a whole in the whole 
memory; as a whole above the whole memory, whether of the 
sensibles or the intelligibles. It is not therefore a diversity of parts — 
if we have to assert that it has parts — which is distinguished in the 
soul, but a variety of functions and movements. For its movements 
are its parts, which produce divers cognitive faculties in the soul. 
For she herself is everywhere in herself whole and individual : but 
her movements, which are also called soul-numbers, because they 
are found in the soul, are designated by different names. For when 
she is occupied in a contemplative activity about her Creator, 
transcending herself and transcending the understanding of all 
creation, she is called intellect or mind or spirit : when by what may 
be called the secondary activity of her nature she investigates the 
causes of nature, she is called reason : when having found them she 
distinguishes them and defines them, she is called interior sense: 
when she receives through the organs of her body the phantasies of 
the sensibles, she is called exterior sense (not because the exterior 
sense is itself the essence of soul, but because it is through it that she 
perceives the forms and species of the sensibles ; for there is a vast 
difference between the nature of the simple mind and the multi¬ 
tudinous variety of the bodily instruments): when she administers 
the body by giving it nourishment and increase, she gets the name 
of Vital Motion: and yet she, is of the most simple, the most 
indivisible and the most impartible essence and is not diminished in 
her minor offices nor magnified in her greater offices nor is she most 
in her greatest offices, but in all she is the equal of herself, as the 
great Gregory of Nyssa affirms in his Treatise On the Image. 

787C 

A repetition 
of the 
motions of 
the soul so 
that they may 
be seen more 
clearly 

787D 

788A 

From this we may understand that the whole human soul is 
made in the image of God, since it is wholly an intellect which 
intellects, wholly a reason which reasons, wholly a sense in the 
interior sense and in perception, wholly life and life-giving. 

Now there are two principal aspects under which we recognise 
the creation of the human soul in the image of God : first, in that, as 
God is present throughout all the things that are and can be 
comprehended by none of them, so the soul penetrates the whole 
frame of her body but cannot be included within it. Secondly, in that 
as of God only being can be predicated, but in no way can it be said 
of Him what He is, so the human soul is only understood to be, but 
what she is neither herself nor any other creature understands. Thus 
the aforesaid Gregory in the Eleventh Chapter of the above- 
mentioned Treatise on the Image, drawing a distinction between the 788B 

438 

PERIPHYSEON 

bodily senses and the nature of the mind, in treating of the mind 
says that it is incomprehensible. 

“What then in its very nature is the mind,” he asks, “which 
divides itself up with the powers of the senses, and through each of 
them receives befittingly the knowledge of the things that are? For 
no wise man, I fancy, doubts but that it is something other than 
sense. For if it were itself what sense is, it would certainly have an 
affinity in sense operation with one of the senses: for it is simple, 
and no variety may be admitted into the simple. But now if the 
senses are compared with one another, it is seen that touch is one 
thing and smell another and that the others are similarly related to 
one another without mingling, seeing that each has its apt and 
proper function. The mind itself, then, must be something of a 
788C nature altogether different from sense, if we are to keep its 
intelligible simplicity free from all variety. “Who,” asks the Apostle, 
“has known the mind of God?” But I would rather say: “Who has 
understood his own mind?” Would those who place the Nature of 
God among the things which they hold within their comprehension 
say if they understood themselves, if they knew the nature of their 
own mind? Is it perhaps a thoroughly partible nature, and tho¬ 
roughly composite? How should an intelligible be in composition? 
Or what would be the mode of putting together the different 
genera? But if it is simple and incomposite, how is it divided into the 
manifold divisions of sense? How is variety found in the simple, or 
unity in variety? But to know the solution of these things of which 
there is question I have recourse to the very words of God Himself. 
788D For He says: “Let Us make man in Our image and likeness.” So 
long as the image does not lack any of those things which are 
discerned in the Primal Exemplar, it is a proper image: but if in 
anything it departs from conformity to the primal Exemplar, there it 
is no longer an image. Is it not therefore necessary because 
incomprehensibility of essence is among the things which are 
predicated of the Divine Nature, that he to whom the Image has 
789A been apportioned shall imitate wholly the Primal Exemplar? For if 
the nature of the Image were to comprehend the Primal Exemplar, 
it will itself be beyond comprehension. If contrariety is found 
in those things that are predicated (of the Divine Nature), which 
must happen in this case, the fault is attributed to the image. But 
since the very nature of our mind, which is made in the image of its 
Creator, escapes knowledge, it possesses an exact likeness to that 

BOOK IV 

439 

which is placed above it by the fact that in itself it is unknowable, 
showing the characteristic of an incomprehensible nature.” 

Again, in the Thirteenth Chapter he writes : 

“Since God is Himself the most beautiful and best of all things, 
that towards which all things which have a desire towards the Good 
aspire, we therefore say that the mind also is so created in the image 
of the Fairest — in so far as it participates in the likeness of the Primal 
Exemplar — as much as it is permitted to reside in the Good. But if 
in some manner it transgresses beyond this limit, it is denuded of the 
beauty of that in which it had been residing. Indeed we say that the 
mind is adorned with the beauty of the Primal Exemplar in the same 
way as a mirror is adorned by the reflection of that which appears in 
it. By the same analogy again we hold that the mind possesses a 
nature administered by itself, and that this is adorned by a beauty 
which is derived from it, as though it were a reflection of a 
reflection, and that the substantial material, that is the material 
substance, associated with this nature is held and embraced by it.” 

Now the reason why he says this is that nature is properly 
observed only in association with matter, because matter “floats” 
about until it discovers the form by which it is established. 

“Therefore (he continues) if one thing is held by another, the 
presence of the True Good is brought down through all things 
co-rationally and forms by means of that which is placed beneath it 
that which is consequent to it : that is, it forms matter by means of 
mind. But when the dispersion of this most excellent connaturality is 
brought about, and in a contrary manner that which is above 
becomes that which is below, then occurs the deformation of that 
matter which has been described by nature, that is, by the natural 
order. For matter by itself is a deformed thing, when the order of 
nature has been changed and the natural beauty of the deformed is 
destroyed — that beauty in which it was formed through the mind — 
and so the distribution of the baseness of matter is extended through 
nature into the mind, so that you will no more see the image of God 
in the character of what has been formed. For the mind, placing the 
form of good things, like a mirror, behind itself, throws away the 
manifestations of the greatest Good, but at the same time absorbs 
into itself the deformity of matter, and in this way evil is generated, 
produced by the elimination of good. For every consequent event is 
good which properly possesses the First Good : but every thing 

789C 

The forming 
of matter by 
mind 

789D 

The 

generation of 
evil 

440 

PERIPHYSEON 

790A which is extraneous to relation and likeness to the First Good is 
altogether lacking in good. If therefore in accordance with the 
reasoning given the One which truly is is reasonably held to be good 
and the mind is created in the image of the Good, and is the 
possessor of well-being; but the nature of the body, which is 
contained in the mind, is as it were the image of an image — from 
this it is demonstrated that our material principle is constituted 
indeed and stabilized when it is administered by the nature of the 
mind ; but it is dissolved again and decays when it is separated from 
the mind which contains and stabilizes it, and is banished from 
connaturality with the Good. And this occurs through no other 
means than the conversion of its nature to its opposite, when desire 
is felt, not for the Good but for that which has need of a forming 
790B principle. For it is necessary that all matter be conformed through 
its lack of proper form to something dishonourable and a likeness 
of deformity.” 

A little later St. Gregory writes : 

“And from this the conclusion is drawn that in the composite 
man the mind is indeed administered by God, but our material life is 
administered by mind, provided that it remains in its own nature, 
that is to say, in the image of mind : but if it abandons its nature, it is 
also alienated from that operation which occurs through the mind.” 

The three 
things by 
which the 
constitution 
790C 
of the whole 
man is made 

Now anyone who closely follows the words of this theologian 
will find references everywhere in the text of the Treatise on the 
Image to a threefold division in the constitution of man, out of 
which the order of his nature is woven, as though it were produced 
by the composition of the three : that is, the mind ; the vital motion, 
which he sometimes calls the fluid, and sometimes the material, life 
principle ; and the informed matter. So that the whole man is said to 
consist of Mind, the material Life Principle, and Matter itself. And 
indeed the mind, in which all the virtue of the soul subsists, is made 
in the image of God, and is the mirror of the Supreme Good, since 
in it the incomprehensible form of the Divine Essence is in an 
ineffable and incomprehensible way displayed. But the material life 
principle, whose specific activity centres about matter, and which 
for that reason is called material, seeing that it is involved in the 
mutable matter of the body, is a kind of image of the mind, and, as 
St. Gregory says, a reflection of a reflection : so that the mind is a 
representation of the Divine Nature, but the vital motion, which is 
also called the material life principle, is with matter itself the form of 
mind, as it were a second image, through which the mind displays 

BOOK IV 

441 

the form even of matter. And thus, in a way the whole man can be 
suitably described as fashioned after the Image of God, although 
really and primarily it is only in the mind that the Image can be seen 
to subsist. It is like this : the mind receives the cause of its formation, 
without any intervening creature, from God, while the vital motion 
receives it from the mind, and finally matter receives the cause of its 
formation from the mind through the vital motion. Thus matter 
follows vital motion, and vital motion follows mind, and finally 
mind follows God : when therefore it turns towards Him it preserves 
the beauty and integrity of its nature : but when it turns away from 
Him it wastes and disfigures not only itself but also that which is 
subject to it, that is, the material life principle and matter itself as 
well. 

But in connection with this vital motion, a question of some 
importance arises. For it is necessary to enquire whether or not it 
pertains to the nature of man. If it does not, why is it called the image 
of an image, that is, the image of the mind? And how could mind 
through it produce a form for matter? But if such a vital principle is 
entirely part of the substance of man, how can we say that man is a 
product of soul and body only, and how is it that the vital principle 
is found in nothing wherein the matter has been dissolved? For it 
does not have its home in matter, which has already been abandoned 
by all vital motion when it is deprived of the presence of substantial 
life which is the soul. Nor is it seen to subsist in the soul which is 
unaffected by matter after it has ceased to control the body. For this 
reason I think that no better explanation can be given of the vital 
motion than that it is a kind of link or junction between body and 
soul, through which they are attached to one another, and by means 
of which the body is formed by the soul and is given life by it and is 
administered by it in waking and sleeping, that is, whether the soul 
gives attention to the activities of the body, or withdraws from the 
senses, and rests within itself as though forgetful of its body. But 
even then it does not cease in a secret and ineffable silence to 
administer the body, bestowing upon all its parts food for the 
nourishment and preservation thereof. But when body and soul are 
separated from one another, there is an end of that vital motion. For 
it cannot live when it has nothing to move, that is to say, unless that 
is preserved through which it has movement, since it is nothing else 
than the movement of mind governing body. But on death there is 
an end of movement and of being moved, so that movement therein 
perishes entirely. For the coming to rest of the moved or the mover 

790D 

791A 

Vital motion 

791B 

791C 

442 

PERIPHYSEON 

is the end of all movement. Therefore when the soul rests from 
moving her body, all vital motion, that is, the whole material life 
principle, ceases to be. Therefore the same Blessed Gregory writes in 
his Fourteenth Chapter: 

“This material and fluid life of bodies, which goes forward by a 
791D continuous motion, possesses the virtue of being in this: that its 
motion has no rest. For just as a river is seen to fill a valley through 
which it flows by the impetus of its flood, without the same water 
being conveyed twice over the same place, but some flows down¬ 
stream and some flows from above ; so what is material in this life, 
moved as it is over a certain place, is changed by a continual 
succession of flux and alteration so that it can never cease to move ; 
and so its inability to stop results in unceasing motion, which is 
792A different but involves the same appearances. But if ever the motion 
shall cease, it will procure an absolute cessation of being, that is to 
say, it will utterly cease to be.” 

But if you wish to see how the mind is enclosed in no part of the 
body while by its presence it administers the whole body, and is 
everywhere a whole throughout all the parts it administers, hear 
what St. Gregory has to say in the Fifteenth Chapter of the same 
treatise : 

The natural 
order 
disturbed 

792B 

792C 

“It was the purpose of our treatise to show that the mind is not 
retained in any given part of the body, but that it is in contact with 
all parts equally, and consequently operates the motion in accord¬ 
ance with the part of the nature which is subject to it. But there are 
times when the mind follows the inclinations of nature, as if it were 
the servant. For often the bodily nature commands it, and imposes 
upon the mind the emotion of one who grieves and the desire of one 
who rejoices, so that it takes the initiative ; exciting in the mind the 
hunger for food or the desire for some delightful thing. And the 
mind receiving these stimulants enters into a conference with the 
body for the purpose of gaining opportunities of satisfying them. 
This, however, is not the case with all, but only with those who find 
themselves more in the condition of captives, who force the reason 
to serve the desires of the bodily nature, and employ the mind 
servilely to flatter the lust which operates through the bodily senses. 
But in the more perfect it is not so. For the mind rules by reason, 
and is not passive, but chooses that which is useful: the mind 
marches before and nature follows after. Now reason discovers 
three varieties in the vital force: the first is that which gives 
nourishment without sense ; the second is that which gives nourish- 

BOOK IV 

443 

ment and sense, but is without the operation of reason; and the 
third is perfect and reasonable, which penetrates every power so that 
it may take up its abode in them, although it has more sway over the 
intellectual. But let no one suppose from this that there are three 
souls mixed together in a corporate man, or that each of these can 
be marked off from the others by its proper limits, so that we come 
to believe that the human soul is an amalgamation of many souls. 
The true and perfect soul is by nature a unity, intellectual and 
immaterial, and is bound to the material nature through the senses. 
Now all matter is in a state of flux and mutability. If then it partake 
of the life-giving power, it is moved to increase: but if it fall away 
from the life-giving act, its motion will be towards corruption and it 
will perish. Therefore neither can there be operation of the sense 
without the material essence, nor of the intellect without the sense.” 

And in the Sixteenth Chapter he speaks again about sense: 

“The mind is not contained in any particular part of the things 
that are in us, but is extended equally in and through all parts. It 
neither contains the body as something outside it nor is contained as 
something within it. This can properly be said of utensils or jars or 
other such objects where one is placed within the other. But the 
intellect is associated with the body by a contact which is ineffable 
and unintelligible : being neither within the body, for the incorporeal 
cannot be contained within the corporeal ; nor held from without, 
for that which is incorporeal cannot be encompassed, but mind 
draws near to nature after a super-rational and unintelligible mode 
and is fitted to it and is considered in relation to it, neither placed 
within it nor enfolded by it : but how this can be is not to be 
explained or comprehended save that it is through the proper 
disposition of that permeable nature that the mind also becomes 
effective. But if that nature suffers some flaw, the movement of the 
intelligence is proportionally disordered.” 

By this he means to say: If the instrument of the body is 
damaged or is in any way deficient, and the integrity of its natural 
constitution has by some accident been spoilt, the movement of the 
intelligence, that is, the movement of the mind, wavers in that part 
where the damage has occurred to the instrument, that is to say, 
where it is unable to actualise its administrative potency — not 
because the mind is at fault, but because that part, being damaged, 
cannot receive the power of the mind. 

But since it is necessary to make a diligent examination of 
human nature, and to distinguish beyond question what in it is 

792D 

The soul is 
contained 
neither within 
793A 

the body nor 
without the 
body 

793B 

444 

PERIPHYSEON 

created in the image and likeness, that is, in the like image of God, 
and what in it is far removed from the likeness of the Divine Image, 
I thought fit to bring in the words of the most holy and most wise 
793C master Gregory. In the Seventeenth Chapter of his Treatise on the 
Image, then, he writes : 

“Let us consider again the word of God : Let Us make man in 
Our image and likeness. What notions, unworthy of man’s excel¬ 
lence, derived from external things, have been conceived by those 
who seek to magnify man by comparing him with this world, as if it 
existed in him. For they call him |iiKp6Koapo(;, that is, a little world, 
consisting of the same elements as those from which the Universe is 
created. But those who praise man with this title have forgotten that 
the properties for which they honour him are common to the mouse 
and the flea. For in these too, the composition is of the same four 
elements, as in every single living creature there is a portion, 
whether greater or less, of these, without which no sensible can have 
793D any consistency of nature at all. What are we to think of man made 
after the stamp and likeness of the world when the heaven has 
passed away and the earth has been changed and all things 
contained in it have passed away with the disappearance of the 
world which contained them? But according to the Church’s 
794A reasoning, the greatness of man lies not in his likeness to the created 
world but in the fact that he is created according to the image of the 
Creator of Nature. What then, you will rightly ask, is the “reason’’ 
of this Image? How can the corporeal be assimilated to the 
incorporeal? How the temporal to the eternal, that which is mutable 
and fluid to the immutable, that which is passive and corruptible to 
the impassive and incorruptible, that which dwells with evil and ever 
turns towards it to that which is pure from all evil? For between that 
Mind, the Divine, which is the Primal Exemplar, and that which is 
created after its image, a vast space intervenes. For if the image 
possessed a likeness to the Primal Exemplar then it could rightly be 
given the same name: but if the imitation is far removed from the 
archetype it is no longer its image but something different. So how 
794B can man, this mortal and passive and quickly withering object, be 
the image of the Nature which is immortal, pure, and ever-existent ? 
Only that Truth Which truly is fully knows the true “reason” of this 
image ; but after a search for the truth of this by calm speculations 
and opinions, in so far as it can be grasped, we say in reply to these 
questions the following: 

“Neither does the Word of God lie when it says that man is 
made after the image of God : nor is the misery even to unhappiness 

BOOK IV 

445 

of human nature assimilated to the bliss of the life that knows no 
passion. For we must choose between two alternatives : if someone 
compares to God that which is ours, either the divine is passive or 
the human impassive, if the principle of likeness is to be equal in 
each. But if the Divine is not passive, nor our own nature free from 
passion then what other principle remains on which we may affirm 
the truth of the Word of God which declares that man was made in 
the image of God? Must we reject the Holy Scripture? Let us then 
open up a way which shall lead from what is written to what we wish 
to solve. After He said “Let Us make man in Our own image and let 
Us make him after this sort,” the text goes on to say that “God 
made man, after the image of God made he him, male and female 
made He them.” It is then stated in the text before us, that these 
words are uttered for the refutation of heretical impiety, so that by 
learning that the only-begotten God created man in His own image, 
we may not separate the divinity of the Father from that of the Son, 
seeing that the holy Scripture also calls both God, Him Who created 
man and Him in Whose image he was created. But we must not go 
on about this. Now we must turn to the question how an unhappy 
thing can be called by Holy Scripture a similitude of what is divine 
and blessed. For this purpose the text must be examined carefully. 
For we find that that which was made in the image of God is one 
thing and that which is shown to be now in unhappiness another. 
“God made man,” it is written, “in the image of God made He 
him.” The creation of that which was made in the image is 
completed, and then follows according to the structure of the text an 
epanalepsis or repetition, “Male and female created He them.” For I 
think that all will agree that this is something outside the Principal 
Image. For, according to the Apostle, in Christ Jesus there is neither 
male nor female. And yet the text says that man is divided into these 
two categories. Does it not then appear that there is a two-fold 
fashioning of our nature, one by which we are assimilated to God, 
the other by which we are divided by this differentiation? For 
something of this sort is implied in the construction of the words; 
for first it is said that “God created man, in the image of God 
created He him ;” and then are added the words, “Male and female 
created He them,” — something which is alien from the properties 
of God. Now it is my opinion that a right and excellent doctrine may 
be drawn from this scriptural text. This doctrine is as follows: 

794C 

794D 

795A 

795B 

“Humanity is the middle term between two extremes widely 
separated from each other, namely, the incorporeal nature of God, 

446 

PERIPHYSEON 

and the irrational nature of the beasts. Let us consider each of these 
extremes in relation to man : the divine portion, which is a rational 
and intelligible nature, and which does not admit the distinction 
between male and female, and the corporeal constitution of the 
irrational nature and its falling by division into two kinds, the male 
and the female. Each of these is wholly present in all who participate 
795C in human life. But from the order in which the generation of man is 
related we learn that the intelligible nature comes first, and that the 
association and kinship with the irrational nature is something 
which was super-added to man. For it is first written that God made 
man in the image of God, showing by these words that, as the 
Apostle says, in one who is so created there is neither male nor 
female. Then the material properties of human nature are added : 
“Male and female created He them.” What are we to learn from 
this? And let no man accuse me of dragging out the matter in 
question. God in His Nature is every good thing that can be known. 
But the highest existing intelligible and comprehensible Good 
795D creates human life for no other reason than that well-being should 
be its property. And therefore, moved to create our nature. He 
would only be employing an imperfect power of goodness if while 
granting some of what He contains to man he withheld full 
participation through envy. But the perfection of His goodness is 
796A apparent in this, that not only does He bring man from non¬ 
existence into generation, but ordains that he shall not lack goodness. 
But seeing that the catalogue of individual goods is long, and not 
easy to enumerate. Scripture indicates them all comprehensively by 
saying that man was made in the image of God. For by this is meant 
that he made human nature a participant in every good. For if God 
is the plenitude of good things, and man is an image of God, the 
image must resemble the Primal Exemplar in this respect also, that it 
is the plenitude of all good. Is there then not in us every form of 
good, every virtue, every wisdom and every thing whatever that is 
best? In this respect also it is the image, in that it is free from all 
796B necessity, and is subjected to no natural or material authority but 
possesses in itself a will which is capable of obtaining its desires. For 
virtue is a voluntary thing, free from all domination. For that which 
is constrained under duress cannot be a virtue. Therefore if in all 
things the image exhibits the stamp of the beauty of the Primal 
Exemplar, except for a difference in a particular, it will not yet be an 
entire likeness, although in all parts it shows that it is not far 
removed from being so. What kind of difference do we see between 
God and the man who is like unto God ? This, that the one Nature is 

BOOK IV 

447 

uncreated, while the other obtains its being through creation; and 
this difference of character leads to others that follow as a result. 

For it is agreed that a nature which is uncreated cannot undergo 
change, but always remains the same, while the creature does not 
subsist without change. For the very transition from not-being into 
being is a kind of change, the God-willed transmutation into 796C 
existence of that which does not exist. And just as the Gospel calls 
the impression on the coin the image of Caesar, from which we learn 
that the shape of that which is moulded is in the likeness of Caesar, 
but the subject itself is something different from Caesar — so also in 
the present instance of the imagings which are taken from the 
Divine Nature, considering their existence in human nature in those 
in whom there is a likeness to God, we discern a difference of subject 
between that which is observed in the uncreated and that which is 
observed in the created nature. Seeing therefore that the one 
remains ever the same while the other, being a created product, 
takes its origin from a mutation, and itself naturally possesses a 
changeableness akin to that mutation, for this reason He Who in the 
words of the Prophet knows all things before their generation, 796D 
following or rather foreknowing by his prognostic power, into what 
the motion of the human will would by its own virtue and power 
resolve itself (for He saw that which was to be) built upon the image 
the superstructure of the distinction between male and female. And 
in this there is no longer a likeness to the divine Primal Exemplar, 797A 
but, as has been said, a property of the less rational nature. But the 
reason for this superstructure will only be known to those who 
regard the truth in its purity and are ministers of the Word. But we, 
in so far as we are able, in giving our opinion from certain 
conjectures and from what follows from them, shall not dogmatically 
set forth what comes into our mind, but propose certain theories 
which may be suitable to the ears of the faithful as though for 
practice in disputation. 

“What, then, is our opinion in this matter? The text “God 
created man” is not limited to a single individual but applies to all 
humanity. For the name of Adam is not here given to the creature as 
later on in the story, but the name given to the man who was created 
is of universal application. Are we not to gather from the universal 
application of the term nature that in God’s prescience and power 
the whole of humanity was understood to be in question in that first 
creation ? For we should regard none of the creatures made by God 797B 
as infinite with Him, but the Wisdom of the Creator is the defining 

448 

PERIPHYSEON 

797C 

797D 

There would 
798A 
be no 
marriages if 
man had not 
sinned, nor 
multiplication 
of (human) 
nature 
through male 
and female, 
for there 
would be 
neither male 
nor female 

limit and measure of each one of them. Therefore as an individual 
man is limited by a certain quantity of body, and his substance is 
measured by the extent of the surface by which his body is perfected, 
so, I think, the whole plenitude of humanity was included by the 
God of all men through His prognostic virtue, as it were in a single 
body: and this is the teaching of that text which says that ‘God 
created man, in the image of God created He him.’ For the image is 
not in a part of man’s nature, nor grace in any one of those 
considered to have grace, but such power attaches to the whole 
genus equally. It is an indication of this that mind is allotted to all 
men alike, so that all possess the power of understanding and taking 
counsel : and it is the same with regard to all the other things by 
which is revealed the Divine Nature in that which is created after It. 
And the man who was revealed in the first constitution of the world, 
and the man who is to come after the consummation of all things, 
both equally bear within them the Divine Image. And the reason 
why the totality is described as one man is that in the power of God 
there is no past and no present, but what He beholds is contained in 
the ever-present comprehensive operation of His Universality. 
Therefore all human nature, which has endured from the beginning 
until now, is an image of Him Who truly exists : but that differentia¬ 
tion of the genus into male and female was a later addition to the 
constitution of the human form.” 

And let it not surprise you that we so often have recourse to the 
opinions of the same author; for our purpose is not to improve 
upon his treatise but to clarify our problem. In the Eighteenth 
Chapter of the same discourse he writes : 

‘‘The glory of the Resurrection promises us precisely this : the 
restitution of the fallen to their pristine state. For the Grace to 
which we are to look forward is the Return to our first way of life, 
leading back to Paradise once again him who was expelled therefrom. 
Therefore the life of those who have been restored to that which is 
properly held to be the life of the angels, was itself before the Fall an 
angelic life : and therefore the Return itself to our former way of life 
is likened to the angels. But just as it is written that there is no giving 
in marriage among them and yet that their armies consist of infinite 
myriads — for so Daniel has related it in his visions — perhaps if no 
perversion and falling away from the angelic nature had been 
wrought in us through the same man by sin, we should not now be 
compelled to multiply ourselves by matrimony. For in the angelic 
nature there is a different mode of propagation, and one which 

BOOK IV 

449 

cannot be described or understood by human reason : but yet it is 
so, and the same mode would operate in those who were created a 
little lower than the angels, to give increase to man according to the 
measure appointed by the plan of the Creator. 

“But should one have difficulty and make enquiry into the 798B 
mode of propagation of souls if man did not enter into the 
intercourse of marriage, we shall indicate the mode of the angelic 
substance which in that one essence exists in infinite myriads and are 
numbered as many. For to one enquiring how man could survive 
without matrimony, we will suitably reply, in the same way as the 
angels manage without matrimony : for that man was like unto them 
before the Fall is shown by his Return once more to that nature. 

“Well then, now that these questions have been well decided by 
us, a return must be made to our former question, namely how after 
the establishment of the image itself God imposed upon its formation 
the superstructure of the differentiation into male and female? I 
offer as useful in this connection a theory which I put forward 
previously. For He Who brought all things into being and formed 798C 
man entirely in His Will after the Divine Image, did not establish 
intervals in which future things would gradually be added, through 
his knowledge of the number of souls which was required to bring 
humanity to its fulness, but intellected through His prognostic act 
the whole of human nature at once in its fulness, and gave it a place 
of high honour and a tranquility co-equal with that of the angels. 

But since He foresaw by His contemplative power that man would 
not rightly walk in the way of a good will and would therefore fall 
from the angelic way of life. He formed in our nature a plan of 
propagation suitable to those who have been snared into sin, so that 
the number of human souls should not be diminished when human 
nature had fallen from the power of propagating itself in the angelic 
mode, and implanted in man the irrational method of propagation 
of the beasts of the field in place of the glorious fecundity of the 798D 
angels. Moreover, the great David, bewailing the misery of man, 
seems to me to lament human nature in these words, ‘Man when he 
was held in honour did not understand his honour,’ referring to his 
equality of status with the angels. ‘And so,’ he said ‘he was now 
compared with the beasts of the field’ who are without reason. For 
in very truth man has become like caUle^ now that on account of his 
inclination towards the material nature he has accepted the animal 799A 
mode of generation.’’ 

450 

PERIPHYSEON 

After the 
resurrection 
there will be 
799B 
neither male 
nor female 

799C 

Enquiry into 
the body 
made in the 
first creation 

799D 

800A 

N. The whole drift of the words which you have taken from 
this great theologian is towards an understanding that man is 
created in the Image of God in his mind only and in its innate 
powers — now the innate powers of the mind are wisdom, know¬ 
ledge, the faculty of reason, and those others which by adorning the 
mind show it to be in the likeness of the Creator — and that all men 
were at once and together created in that one man about whom it is 
written, “Let us make man in Our image and likeness,” and “in 
whom all men sinned for at the time he was all of mankind that 
existed ; and that in him all men have been driven forth from the 
bliss of Paradise.i^nd if man were not in a state of sin, he would not 
be suffering the division of his simplicity into the sexes. And this 
distinction has absolutely no connection with the divine image and 
likeness, and would never have existed had man not sinned, nor will 
it exist after the restoration of our nature to its pristine condition, 
which will be manifested after the general resurrection of all men. If 
then man had not sinned, no one would be born through the 
intercourse of the sexes nor from seed, but just as the angelic essence 
while remaining one is at once and together without temporal 
interval multiplied into infinite myriads, so too human nature, had 
it been willing to obey the mandate, and had it obeyed it, would 
have at once and together broken forth into the number foreknown 
to its Creator alone. But God, Who neither deceives nor is deceived, 
foresaw that man would abandon the rank and dignity of his 
creation, and therefore superimposed upon human nature an alter¬ 
native mode of propagation, by which this world might be extended 
in space and time to allow for man to pay for his general offence a 
general penalty, by being born like the rest of the animals from a 
corruptible seed.' But while we are collecting these and many similar 
passages from fhe teachings of this master, many questions emerge 
on all sides, of which the first and most important strikes one most 
forcibly : if all men, not only those who have been and those who are 
but also those who shall be, were at once and together created in 
that divine word which says, “Let Us make man;” and if those 
corruptible bodies which are born from a corruptible and mortal 
and material seed are external to the human nature which is made in 
the image of God, and are superimposed upon it because of our sin 
and would therefore have no existence if man had not dishonoured 
the beauty of the Divine Image in which he is created: it is not 
irrelevant to enquire how the first creation of man is in the image of 
God, for the second is not in the image but is something super¬ 
imposed upon that image for the reason already stated. Did the first 

BOOK IV 

451 

creation take place only in the soul apart from the body, or in soul 
and body together ? If in the soul alone, how can it be called man, 
seeing that it is agreed that man is composed of two natures, the 
invisible nature in the soul and the visible nature in the body? I 
should not think that it was only a part of man that was then 
created, or that we should synecdochically understand the words, 

“Let us make man,” chiefly because the Prophetic Books give us the 
fullest and most perfect account of the creation of all natures. If on 
the other hand the first creation is rightly referred to soul and body, 
that is, to the whole integral man, then it must at once be asked what 
kind of body that was which man possessed at his first creation. For 
true reason cannot accept that this body was something super¬ 
imposed upon us because of sin, for it was established in the first 800B 
natural conformation of man. 

A. This question is not a superfluous one, and the posing of it 
and its solution will not be without value. As you are the poser, you 
have made yourself responsible for the answer. For I do not think 
you would have asked it unless you had some answer in readiness. 

N. That body which was created at the establishment of man in 
the beginning I should say was spiritual and immortal, and either 
like or identical with that which we shall possess after the Resur¬ 
rection. For I would not easily admit that it could have been a 
corruptible and material body at a time when the cause of corruption 
and materiality, that is, sin, had not yet appeared. And a still greater 
objection is that it is quite apparent to the reason that if that very 
body which was made at the first creation of man before the Fall is 
after the Fall suddenly changed and made corruptible, then that 800C 
corruptible body was not a superstructure but is simply the spiritual 
and incorruptible body transformed into an earthly body: and 
therefore the authority of the great master, Gregory the Theologian, 
would seem to waver, a thing not to be believed. For the unhesi¬ 
tatingly asserts that the whole which in the first creation of man is 
created in the image of God remains in its psycho-somatic structure 
eternally incorruptible. Passing over the lucid arguments by which 
he affirms beyond doubt that neither were souls created before 
bodies nor bodies before souls, but that the whole man was made at 
once and together in the Divine Counsel in which it is said, “Let Us 
make man,” and that at the same time by a kind of second begetting 800D 
imposed upon the first, he is born into this world, as happens now, 
at a given moment of time, as a result of the sin of the perverse will 
of human nature, and that that spiritual and natural body which is 

452 

PERIPHYSEON 

in eternal association with mind and forms one composite entity 
with it is distinguished from that which was added as a penalty for 
801A our transgression, we come to his most brilliant explanation of this 
matter in the Twenty-Seventh Chapter of the Treatise to which we 
have already had recourse so often : 

“For the fluidity and mutability of our nature is not all- 
pervasive. If it were so it would be altogether unknowable for we 
should have by nature no stability: but a more careful analysis 
shows that there is something of us which endures, while another 
part is subject to change. For the body undergoes change by 
increase and diminution, like garments, which are changed with the 
changing of one’s age. But throughout all these changes there is a 
form which abides and is itself unchangeable, never giving up those 
marks which were inscribed at one time on it from its very nature: 
and this with its marks is apparent in all bodily changes. But change, 
which results from some passion and which is an accident super¬ 
imposed upon our form, is removed through the Word of God. For 
801B that deformity through formlessness, like some strange face, takes 
its own form ; but when that formlessness is removed by the Word 
— as in the case of Naaman the Syrian and the ten lepers as told in 
the Gospel — the face obscured by the disease shines forth in health 
again along with its marks. Therefore in the conformity of the soul 
to God, it is not that which displays the flux of mutability and the 
capacity of transformation which is the innate quality of the soul, 
but that which is permanent, and likewise unchanging in our 
composition, that is placed in our soul. And the mutable qualities of 
our composition are an additional form to the differentiations of 
our species. But this composition is nothing else than a mixture of 
the elements : and the elements, from which the human body also is 
composed, are constitutive principles of the universe. It necessarily 
follows therefore that, since the species is permanent in our soul, 
like the device of a signet ring, those impressions of the signet which 
801C are to be repeated according to the form are not unknown to the 
soul, but in the time when the impression is to be made anew she will 
again receive to herself whatever will fit the character of her form. 
And the form which will be impressed upon her will be in accord 
with the characters impressed upon her in the beginning.” 

You see how nicely he distinguishes the property of the first 
creation from those which were added to it? For whatsoever in 
human bodies is seen to be immutable is proper to the first creation : 
but whatever in them is perceived to be mutable and variable, this 

BOOK IV 

has been added later, and subsists outside the body’s true nature. 

Now in all human bodies generally there is one and the same 
common form, and that abides ever unchangeable in all. For the 
innumerable differences which are accidental to the one form do not 801D 
arise from the “reason” of the first creation but from the qualities of 
the corruptible seeds. Therefore the spiritual form is itself the 
spiritual body which was made in the first creation of man. But that 
which is derived from matter, that is, from the qualities and 
quantities of the four elements of the sensible world together with 
that qualitative form about which we had something to say in the 
earlier books, since they undergo increase and diminution, un¬ 
doubtedly pertain to the composition of the superadded and, one 802A 
might say, superfluous body. And the material and external body is 
like a garment and is not improperly regarded as the outward 
expression of the internal and natural body : for it is moved through 
times and ages, suffering increase and loss of itself, while the interior 
body remains ever immutably in its proper state. 

But seeing that the exterior body also is created by God, and is 13 
added by Him to the other, the greatness of the Divine Goodness 
and His infinite Providence towards all things which are was not 
willing that it should entirely perish and be reduced to nothing, 
because it comes from that Providence and holds the lowest rank 
among creatures ; now everything which is born into this world by 
generation in space and time must have an end whether the interval 
between its birth into this life and the end of the same life be a very 
short while, a day, an hour or a moment ; or a very long period of 802B 
centuries, or a moderate period of seasons or years, this being 
demanded by the nature of created things. For everything which 
comes into being in the world and is composed of the stuff of the 
world must of necessity be dissolved and perish with the world. It 
was then necessary for the exterior and material body to be resolved 
into those elements from which it was put together: but it was not 
necessary that it should perish, because it came from God. The 
interior body, of course, endures forever and abides without change 
in those principles according to which it was constituted with and in 
and through and for the sake of the soul. But since the species of 
that other body, the material and dissoluble, abides in the soul, not 
only during life but even after dissolution and return into the 
elements of the world (for the dispute between Abraham and the 
rich man shows that the idea of the body abides with the soul after 802C 
death): therefore the soul cannot forget or cease to know her parts 

453 

454 

PERIPHYSEON 

wherever among the elements they may be scattered. For although 
they are something which has been added to human nature as the 
result of sin, they cannot be devoid of all connection with it, seeing 
that they were added and created by the same Creator as created the 
nature, and therefore in the restoration of man to the unity of his 
nature they are to be recalled, so that at the time of the Resurrection 
the soul will receive the whole of that which had been subject to her. 
This is the meaning of the master’s saying: “It necessarily follows 
that since the species is permanent in our soul, like the device of a 
signet ring, those impressions of the signet which are to be repeated 
according to the form are not unknown to the soul.’’ By this he 
802D means that while the species, that is, the idea inscribed on the signet, 
or exterior body, which he calls the signet of the inner, abides in the 
soul even after the dissolution of the signet, she is not without 
knowledge, because of that idea which always abides, of the parts of 
the signet which are scattered among the elements, and which on the 
day of the Resurrection are to be reformed in the signet, that is, in 
the body conformed to the soul, which is the interior body. For the 
exterior and material body is the signet of the interior, on which the 
803A form of the soul is expressed, and therefore is rightly called its form. 

But do not think that I am teaching that there are two natural 
bodies in the one man. For there is only one body by whose fitting 
together with the soul so as to form with her one nature and one 
substance man is made. For that material body which is added to it 
is not so much to be regarded as a true body as a kind of mutable 
and corruptible garment of the true and natural body. For that is 
not true which does not eternally abide and, in the words of 
St. Augustine, “that which begins to be what it formerly was not, 
and ceases to be what it is, is already not.” Hence it comes about 
that this mortal, corruptible, earthly and animal body is never 
simple but has a certain accretion added to it, and thereby is 
distinguished from the simple body itself, which was created in man 
803B in the beginning, and which will be. 

14 A. What then shall we reply to the most holy and godly 
theologian St. Augustine, whose teaching seems to go against these 
arguments? For in almost all his books he shows no hesitation in 
declaring that the body of the first man before the Fall was of the 
animal form, was earthly and was mortal, although it could not 
have come to a mortal end if man had not sinned, for it died through 
sin as the Apostle says: “The body indeed is dead through sin.” 
Thus in the first book on the Baptism of Young Children, when 

BOOK IV 

455 

arguing against those who say that Adam was so created that even 
had he not deserved to die because of his sin, he would nevertheless 
have died, not as a punishment for a fault but through the necessity 
of nature, he writes : 

“What response have they to the Scriptural Authority that God 
said in reproach and condemnation to the First Man even after his 
sin, ‘Dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return ?’ For he was not 803C 
dust in respect of his soul, but, as is clear, in respect of his body, and 
it was through the death of that same body that he was about to 
return unto dust. For although he was dust in respect of the body, 
and the body in which he was created was an animal body, yet, if he 
had not sinned, he would have been changed into a spiritual body 
and without danger of death into that incorruption which is 
promised to the faithful and to the saints. And the yearning for this 
within ourselves is not only apparent to ourselves but also is 
indicated by the words of the Apostle when he says : ‘For in this we 
complain, desiring to put on our habitation which is from heaven, 
which if we put on we shall not be naked.’ For as we are in this 
habitation we are weighed down and mourn, in which we do not 
wish to be despoiled, but to be garmented afresh, in order that 
mortality may be swallowed up in life. If, then, Adam had not 803D 
sinned, he would not have to be despoiled of his body, but would be 
clothed anew with immortality and incorruption, in order that his 
mortality might be swallowed up in life, that is, that he might 
exchange his animal nature for a spiritual. For there was no fear for 
him that he should remain too long in his animal body and be 
burdened with age and after a period of old age gradually arrive at 
the point of death. For if God provided the Israelites with garments 
and sandals, which after so many years were never worn out, what 804A 
would be strange if his power could grant obedient man that 
possessing this animal and mortal body, he should possess it in such 
a manner that he might become aged without enfeeblement, and be 
destined at a time willed by God to pass without the mediation of 
death from mortality to immortality? For just as this flesh which we 
now possess is not invulnerable by the fact that it is not necessary 
for it to be wounded, so that flesh was not immortal by the fact that 
it was not necessary for it to die. I believe that this Grace was 
conferred upon those who were translated hence without under¬ 
going death, even while they were still in the animal and mortal 
body. For neither were Enoch nor Elijah for all their years tarnished 
by old age, and yet, as I think, they were not while upon earth 

456 

PERIPHYSEON 

Enoch and 
Elijah 
804B 

804C 

804D 

805A 

already changed into that spiritual kind of body which is promised 
in the Resurrection and which was first manifested in Our Lord, 
save perhaps that they do not lack that food which refreshes by its 
own consumption. But from the time when they were translated 
they so live as to enjoy a society similar to that of those forty days 
when Elijah lived without food save for a cup of water and a cake of 
bread. Or if there is a need even of such resources as these, perhaps 
they feed in Paradise as Adam did before he was compelled to 
depart thence as a penalty for his sin. For he had, I think, 
refreshment from hunger from the fruits of trees and a bulwark 
against old age in the Tree of Life.” 

But what purpose would be served by piling up the mighty 
proofs of this mighty and admirable man when it is perfectly clear to 
all who read his books, but especially Genesis Understood Literally 
and the City of God, that concerning the body of the First Man 
before the Fall his teaching is none other than that it was animal and 
mortal. For if it had not been animal, how would it have been 
bidden to ward off hunger by eating of the fruits of Paradise, and 
old age by eating of the Tree of Life? For, as St. Augustine himself 
often declares, the first human creatures are held to have eaten of 
the fruits of Paradise before the Fall, and to have done so in a 
corporeal sense. 

N. Let him reply who will and can: but for you and me 
perhaps it is enough to read the opinions of the Holy Fathers 
concerning the condition of man before the Fall, and to enquire 
cautiously and diligently into the findings of each one of them. But 
it is- not our business to bring one into conflict with another, or to 
Justify one against another, knowing as we do that after the Holy 
Apostles none of the Greeks has higher authority in expounding the 
Holy Scripture than Gregory the Theologian, and none of the 
Romans than Aurelius Augustinus. And what if in what appears to 
be a controversy between great men we wish to find an agreement by 
saying that that body which Gregory says was added as a super¬ 
structure to human nature by the Divine Prescience on account of 
the future sin is the same as that which Augustine calls animal, and 
if Gregory does not refrain from saying that there were two 
creations of man, the one a substantial creation in the image of God, 
the other widely different from that image, and divided because of 
sin into male and female and Augustine said that there was one 
division into male and female and was silent about the other which 
is in the image of God and lacks all sex? What relevance has this. 

BOOK IV 

when we consider that it is not a true estimate of St. Augustine to 
say that he was silent concerning the creation of man in the image of 
God but expounded that which according to Gregory was established 
on account of sin in the image of the beasts of the field — especially 
as anyone who glances through his books will have no difficulty in 
discovering that in the First Man male and female were created in 
the image of God, and the animal bodies themselves with which they 
were endowed before the Fall were not the result of punishment for 
sin, but of the necessity of nature, that is to say, for the fulfilment by 
procreation of the predestined number of holy men, which from 805B 
human nature are to be made one in the angelic society of bliss, until 
the Celestial City might be filled with holy angels and with holy 
men ? 

But I do not cease to be amazed why he calls that body animal 
which he exalts with loud praises as spiritual and blessed. For that it 
was blessed before the Fall he himself testifies in the Tenth Chapter 
of the Fourteenth Book of the City of God: 

“But it is a fair question whether the First Man or the first 
human creatures (for there were two in marriage) had in the animal 
body before the Fall those affections before they sinned from which 
we in the spiritual body shall be free when our sin is purged and 
done away, namely, concupiscence and joy, fear and grief. If they 
had them, how could they have been blessed in Paradise, that 
memorable abode of bliss ? Who can finally and absolutely be called 805C 
blessed that either fears or sorrows? But how could those human 
creatures either fear or grieve in that copious affluence of such great 
goods, where they were out of the danger of death or any evil 
sickness of the body, having all things that a good will desired and 
lacking all things that might be offensive to the physical or mental 
contentment of man? Their love for God was immutable, there 
existed between them the faithful and sincere association of loving 
consorts, and from that love they derived great joy, having power to 
enjoy in full what they loved. They were in a peaceable avoidance of 
sin, and so long as that continued it kept out all external annoyance 
which might distress them. Did they desire, do you think, to taste of 
the forbidden tree, and yet fear to die, and thereby experience 
distress even then and even in that place through the passions of lust 805D 
and fear? God forbid we should think this to have been where there 
was no sin at all, for sin could not be absent where there was a lust 
for that which was forbidden by God, and abstinence through fear 
of the punishment instead of the love of righteousness. God forbid, I 

457 

458 

PERIPHYSEON 

say, that before any sin was there should yet have been such a sin 
that that should be proved true in relation to the Tree which God 
said in relation to the woman: “Whoever looks upon a woman to 

806A lust after her has already committed adultery in his heart.” 

“How happy then were the first human creatures, being 
troubled with no perturbations of the mind nor hurt by any 
discomforts of the body ! Even so happy should all mankind have 
been if those had not committed sin which they transferred to their 
posterity ; and if none of their seed had committed an act worthy of 
condemnation. And this bliss remaining until by the utterance of the 
benediction ‘Increase and multiply,’ the number of the predestined 
Saints were fulfilled, then should another and better bliss have been 
given us, namely, that which has been given to the most blessed 
angels, wherein there would be an eternal security from sin and 
death; and so should the Saints have lived then without tasting of 
labour, sorrow or death, as they shall do now in the Resurrection of 
the Dead when the bodily incorruption is restored to them, after 
they have endured them all.” 

806B Again in the Twenty Fifth (sic) Chapter of the same book he 
writes : 

“Therefore man lived in Paradise as he desired so long as he 
only desired what God commanded. He lived enjoying God, the 
good Source of his own well-being. He lived without need, and he 
had life eternal in his power. He had meat for hunger, drink for 
thirst, the Tree of Life to ward off old age. His senses were free from 
all bodily corruption and from all discomforts arising from the 
body. He feared neither disease within nor violence without. The 
acme of health was in his flesh, and fulness of peace in his mind ; and 
as Paradise was neither fiery nor frosty, so was the good will of its 
inhabitant offended neither with desire nor fear. There was no 
sorrow at all, no empty delight. But their Joy was perpetuated by 

806C God’s mercy, when they loved Him with a pure heart and a good 
conscience and an unfeigned faith. Their wedlock love was faithful 
and honest, in harmony they watched over mind and body, and kept 
the Precept without trouble. They were neither weary of leisure nor 
unwillingly sleepy. And can we not suppose that in all this material 
ease and human happiness they might beget their children without 
the disease of lust, and move those members by the same agreement 
of the will as they performed their other functions and without the 
deceitful goad of passion, the man being laid in his wife’s lap in 
peace of mind and body without corruption of integrity?” 

BOOK IV 

You see how he celebrates and praises the happiness of each sex 
in Paradise before the Fall; how holy and immaculate was their 
married state ; what a blameless love and inseparable association 
existed between the pair; how lovely was the way in which those 806D 
holy beings propagated their kind, and increased them to the 
number foreordained; finally you see that after the happiness of 
Paradise they were to be translated to the bliss of the angels. It is not 
surprising if one should express astonishment that it can be believed 
that animal bodies have dwelt in such a height of bliss. 

j A. Was it not settled between us when we were discussing the 

I creation of human nature that man had been placed in the genus of 
' the animals, in fact, that all the animals were according to their 807A 
substance created in him, not only because the knowledge of all 
things existed in him, but also because the visible and invisible 
Universe was established in him? 

N. That was certainly our conclusion. 

A. Why then should it be considered strange or incredible if 
human bodies are said to have been animal bodies before they 
sinned in Paradise, seeing that they were established in the genus of 
animals? For we are compelled by reason to choose between two 
alternatives : Either, if we wish to say that his body was not animal, 
we must deny that man was created wholly in the genus of the 
animals ; or, if we cannot dispute or deny the fact that he was a kind 
of animal created in the genus of the animals we cannot deny that 
the body which he had before the Fall and that which would have 
been in bliss if it had not sinned, was an animal body. 

N. You reason acutely. Now, do you hold that God made all 807B 
things at once? 

A. That is certainly my belief and conviction. For all things 
whose birth into the world is marked by intervals of time were 
created at one and the same time both before the world and with the 
world, although the administration of the Divine providence does 
not fill the Universe with them all at once, but in temporal 
succession. For the Lord says: “My Father works until now, and I 
work.” 

N. You understand rightly. Do you think that God made man 
in the genus of the animals because He foresaw that he would come 
to live as an animal and that he would fall from the beauty and 
dignity of the Divine Image into a life of irrational animal passion ? 

460 

PERIPHYSEON 

A. It seems likely. For He Who made all things at the same 
time made the future. 

The two 
creations of 
807C 
man were 
simultaneous 

What 
followed 
from sin 

N. Since then this foreknowledge is most sure and cannot be 
deceived, at the same time as He created man He created the 
consequences of his sin even before he had sinned, and we may 
without impropriety judge that of the things which were created 
together in man, some, like those in which we see the image of God 
that is to say. Mind and Reason and Interior Sense, or, in other 
words. Essence, Potency and Act, were creations of the goodness of 
God, others are there on account of the transgression which was 
foreknown and was most certain to befall. For there are many 
things of which God has foreknowledge but of which He is not the 
Cause, because they do not substantially exist : wisely He creates 
and ordains all things in such a way that they may not disturb the 
fairness of the Universe, and He alone has the power to make good 
out of the evil of the irrational will. 

807D Now all these things, the animal, earthly and corruptible body ; 
the sex that is divided into male and female ; propagation by a mode 
similar to that of the beasts; the need of food and drink and 
clothing; the increase and decrease of the body; the alteration of 
sleeping and waking, and the inevitable necessity of both ; and all 
similar limitations from which human nature would have been 
808A entirely free if it had not sinned — as it is destined one day to be free 
again — are the consequences of sin and were added to man’s nature 
at the time of his creation as something external to his nature on 
account of sin before sin was committed, by Him whose fore¬ 
knowledge is not deceived. In saying this I am following Gregory of 
Nyssa and his commentator Maximus, without contradicting other 
Holy Fathers of the spiritual doctrine who seem to have thought 
differently, being of the opinion that these things refer to the first 
and substantial creation of man. And if you ask why God should 
create in man before he sinned the characteristics which were made 
because of sin, remember that in God nothing is before and nothing 
after, because for him there is nothing past, nor future, nor the 
passage from past to future, for “to Him all things are at once 
present.’’ Why should He not then simultaneously create those 
things which He saw were to be created and willed to be created? 
For when we say “before and after sin’’ we are demonstrating the 
808B multiplicity of our thought processes which is due to the fact that we 
are still subject to temporal conditions : but to God the fore¬ 
knowledge of sin and the consequence of sin itself are contem- 

BOOK IV 

poraneous. For it is in man, not to God, that the sin was a future 
event, and that the consequence of sin anticipates the sin itself, 
seeing that even the sin itself anticipates itself in the same man. 
Because the evil will, which is latent sin, was antecedent to the 
tasting of the forbidden fruit, which is open sin. This is relevant to 
the interpretation of the text “Jacob I loved but Esau I held in 
hatred.” For at the time neither the good nor the evil deeds of either 
had been committed, and their consequences, that is, the love and 
the hatred in the temporal order, were already effected in the eyes of 
Him to Whom the Universe is contemporaneous and one. 

This also is the teaching of that same master Augustine in the 
Thirteenth Chapter of the book from which I was quoting 
before : for concerning the first human beings he says : 808C 

“But evil begins within them secretly at first, to draw them into 
open disobedience afterwards. For there would have been no evil 
work had there not been an evil will before it, and what could begin 
this evil will but pride, that is the ‘beginning of all evil?’ ” 

The meaning of this is that man was never without sin, for he 
was never without the mutability of the will. For that too, the 
irrational mutability of the free will, which is the cause of evil, must 
be accounted a kind of evil : for who would dare to say that the 
cause of evil is not itself evil, when the free will to which it was given 
to choose the good made itself the slave and follower of evil? It is 
this which St. Augustine seems to have wished to imply. For he does 
not say “Man lived in Paradise,” or “He hadWvtd in Paradise ;” not 
“He lived in the enjoyment of God,” or “He had lived in the 
enjoyment of God not “He lived without need,” or “He had lived 808D 
without need.” For if he had used these verbs in the preterite, he 
might well be thought to mean that for a space of time man was in 
actual possession of perfect and sinless bliss in Paradise. But he 
says : “Man began to live in Paradise, began to live in the enjoyment 809A 
of God, began to live without need,” and this class of past tense is 
called by accurate observers of the different significances of the 
tenses the inceptive : because it signifies the inception and indication 
of some action which by no means necessarily reaches perfection. 

Now as to the fact that the first human creatures were in 15 
Paradise for no temporal space. Augustine teaches in the Ninth 
Book of the Hexemeron as follows : “Why was there no sexual 
intercourse between them until they had left Paradise? We may 
reply at once, because as soon as the woman was created, and before 

461 

462 

PERIPHYSEON 

they came together, that transgression was committed on account of 
which they were destined for death and departed from the place of 
that blessedness. For Scripture makes no mention of a time elapsing 
between their creation and the birth of Cain.” 

809B But that Adam was in Paradise for a period of time before the 

woman was moulded from his side let him declare who can. 
Therefore that praise of the life of man in Paradise must refer rather 
to the life that would have been his if he had remained obedient than 
to that which he only began to spend and in which he did not 
continue. For if he had continued in it even for a brief interval he 
must necessarily have achieved some degree of perfection, and in 
that case perhaps this master would not have said “He began to 
live,” but “He lived” or “He had lived :” although if he had used the 
preterite and pluperfect in this way, or if he used them elsewhere, I 
should rather think that he was using the preterite for the future 
than that he meant that man had continued for a space of time in the 
blessedness of Paradise before the Fall, for the following reason, 

809C that he was expressing the predestined and fore-determined blessed¬ 
ness which was to be man’s if he had not sinned, as though it had 
already occurred, when in fact, that is, in the effects of the 
completed predestination, it was still among those things which 
were destined to be created at some future time. 

Now I say this because often when he is writing about Paradise 
he does use the preterite and pluperfect, as any careful reader of his 
books can discover for himself : for instance in the Eleventh Book of 
the Hexemeron : 

“In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread until thou art 
changed into the earth from which thou art made, for dust thou art 
and unto dust shalt thou return. Who does not know,” he asks, 
“that these are the labours of man upon earth? Nor is it to be 
doubted that if that bliss which had existed in Paradise were 
retained they would not have been.” 

809D “Had existed,” he says, not “began to exist,” nor is this 
surprising since very often the Divine Authority speaks of the future 
as though it had already happened. For who would have expected to 
find the Devil in the bliss of Paradise, who fell as soon as he was 
created, as the Lord says in the Gospel : “He was a murderer from 
the beginning, and did not abide in truth.” Augustine, about whom 
we have just been speaking, has something to say about this 
sentence of Our Lord also in the Eleventh Book of his Hexemeron : 

BOOK IV 

463 

“That the Devil was never in a state of truth, that he never lived 
a blessed life with the angels, but that he fell at the very beginning of 
his creation — this must not be accepted in the sense that he was 
created an evil creature by the good God, but rather that he was 
depraved by his own will : for otherwise it would not have been said 
that he fell in the beginning. For [on this supposition] he did not fall 
but was so created : but from the moment of his creation he turned 
his face away from the light of truth, being swollen with pride and 
infatuated with the love of his own power. Therefore he did not taste 
the sweetness of the angelic life, not because after trying it he 
rejected it, but because through his unwillingness to accept it he 
abandoned and lost it. Therefore he could not have had fore¬ 
knowledge of his own fall for foreknowledge is the fruit of piety. But 
he was straightway impious, and was therefore mentally blind, and 
he did not fall away from a state which he had actually accepted, but 
from one which he would have accepted if he had been willing to 
subordinate himself to God. But since this was precisely what he 
would not do, he fell from that state which it was intended he should 
accept, and did not escape from the power of Him under Whom he 
would not serve, and was so weighed down by the punishment that 
he cannot joy in the light of righteousness, nor escape from his 
sentence.” 

Likewise he is thus addressed in the character of the Prince of 
Tyre in the Book of Ezechiel the Prophet : “Thou art the signet of 
similitude and the crown of glory, thou wast in the delights of the 
Paradise of God, thou wast adorned with every precious stone,” 
etc., events which so to speak refer to a time prior to the Devil’s fall. 
And in fact there had been created by the divine dispensation that 
which was to have been in the Devil had he not fallen. But if when 
such things are said of the Devil the passage of time has a mystical 
meaning and Scripture is rightly understood only in this way, what 
is there to prevent us from giving the same interpretation to man’s 
having been in Paradise before the Fall, that is to say, that that 
would have happened to him if he had not sinned : especially as no 
authority divine or human, has recorded how much time he spent in 
the bliss of Paradise before the Fall ? Why should nothing be said of 
this, if we are to understand that he was there? On the other hand 
there are not lacking proofs that the time of his existence before the 
Fall was either very short or none at all. For there is no record of his 
having carried out before the Fall any of the commands which were 
given him, for instance, “Increase and multiply and replenish the 
earth,” that is. Paradise. Would he not have been continuously 

810A 

As the devil 
was never in 
the delights 
of Paradise 
so never was 
man 

810B 

810C 

464 

PERIPHYSEON 

begetting a happy progeny if he had dwelt for any length of time in 
Paradise before his transgression, feeding upon the Tree of Life, lest 
his body should suffer corruption? Why did not the virtue of that 
divine and spiritual medicine prevail to keep him from sinning and 
810D falling into corruption? For if the food of the Tree of Life furnished 
his body with health and incorruptibility for one or two or a number 
of days, and not indefinitely, it did not then have such virtue as it is 
recorded and believed to have had. Or why should that be called the 
Tree of Life which only had the power of reducing the process of 
corruption, and not of altogether eliminating it and of endowing 
those who eat of it with the gift of eternal life? For if the nature of 
81 lA that tree is the antidote of every disease, so that it gives life to all 
those who feed on its fruit, why can it not conquer death in those 
who take of it, still more in those who eat of it? Sin, you will say, 
was too strong for its virtue, rendering it inoperative. Then the evil 
of sin was stronger than the goodness of life. 

Let us therefore consider the truth of the Tree of Life in the 
words of Our Lord. Speaking of the Devil He says: “He was a 
man-slayer from the beginning.” Do you think that the Fall 
happened to any other man than him alone whom God created in 
His image?” 

A. No. 

N. From what beginning was the Devil a man-slayer? Was it 
from the beginning of his own creation or from the beginning of the 
81 IB creation of man, or perhaps both, if both were created together and 
neither had his creation before the other ? If the creation of the Devil 
was prior to that of man how was the devil a man-slayer from the 
beginning? But if the creation of man was prior to that of the Devil, 
how can the Devil be called a man-slayer from the beginning of the 
creation of man? If, to take the remaining possibility, it was from 
the beginning of the creation of both that the Devil was a man- 
slayer and the man slain, what time is allowed for man’s life in 
Paradise before he was slain by the Devil ? This argument is clearly 
supported by the parable in the Gospel : “A certain man was 
descending from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves.” For 
it is not said that a certain man was in Jerusalem and fell among 
thieves. For if human nature had remained in Jerusalem, that is. 
Paradise, it certainly would not have met with thieves, that is with 
the Devil and his satellites. Therefore he was already beginning to 
81 1C descend from Paradise under the impulse of his irrational will and 
was beginning to hasten to Jericho, that is, into the weakness and 

BOOK IV 

instability of temporal nature, and was already wounded by his fall, 
and despoiled of all those natural goods in which he had been 
created. From which we are given to understand that man fell 
himself before he was tempted by the Devil — and not only this but 
also that it was not in Paradise, but in his descent therefrom and in 
his freely willed abandonment of the joy of Paradise, called here 
Jerusalem, that is to say, the Vision of Peace and in his fall into 
Jericho, that is, the present world that he was wounded by the Devil 
and despoiled of his bliss. For it is not to be believed that the same 
man could both have been abiding in the contemplation of eternal 
Peace and also have fallen at the persuasion of a woman corrupted 
by the poison of a serpent; or that that serpent, I mean the Devil, 81 ID 
who had already fallen from Paradise, that is, from the ranks of the 
angelic nature, could have prevailed over a man who was not yet in 
a state of sin and was not already himself falling from the sublimity 
of the Divine Image. And the same doctrine, that man was created 
equal to the angels but did not abide in that rank, but soon began to 
deviate from the path of goodness, seems to be taught in the 
Eighteenth Chapter of St. Gregory’s Treatise on the Image, which we 
have already quoted before, and which we must now quote again : 812A 

“He Who brought all things into being and formed man 
entirely in His Will after the Divine Image, did not establish 
intervals in which future things would gradually be added, through 
his knowledge of the number of perfect souls which was required to 
bring humanity to its perfect fulness, but intellected through His 
prognostic Act the whole of human nature at once in its fulness, and 
gave it a place of high honour and a tranquility co-equal with that of 
the angels.” 

Here you are to understand that the said master puts the past 
for the future tense. For he says that it was by God’s prognostic Act 
that He established human nature in a place of high honour and a 
tranquility co-equal with that of the angels; and how can that be 
understood save in the sense that although man had now been 
established in the Causes he was not yet proceeding into the effects 
of his blessedness. And St. Gregory gives the reason for his not 812B 
having proceeded : 

“But since He foresaw by His contemplative power that man 
would not rightly walk in the way of a good will and would 
therefore fall away from the angelic way of life, he formed in our 
nature a place of propagation suitable to those who have been 
snared into sin, so that the number of human souls should not be 

465 

466 

PERIPHYSEON 

8I2C 

Man’s first 
creation 
according to 
812D 
the Spirit 

813A 

diminished when human nature had fallen from the power of 
propagating itself in the angelic mode, and implanted in man the 
irrational mode of propagation of the beasts of the field in the place 
of the glorious fecundity of the angels.” 

If then these words of the holy Theologian are true — and it is 
safe to assume that they are — we can understand nothing else but 
that human nature abode in the Paradise in which it was naturally 
created for no temporal interval and without sensible effects, but 
that it quickly deviated from the way of truth and received as a 
punishment for the activity of its perverse will the division into the 
two sexes whereby it might propagate its kind after the manner of 
the beasts of the field. 

And therefore if human nature had remained in that blessed 
state in which it was created it would not have needed sexual 
intercourse for its propagation, but would have multiplied as the 
angels multiply, without the use of sex. The venerable master 
Maximus, the commentator of our Theologian, in his Treatise on 
Baptism agrees with this : 

“Those who put a mystical interpretation on Holy Writ and 
glorify it with more exalted speculations in so far as they are 
relevant, declare that man was made in the image of God in his 
principles, being born altogether of the Spirit through his will, and 
by accepting the likeness which was due to his observance of the 
Divine Mandate which was to be given him : so that the same man 
might be on the one hand an image of God according to nature, and 
on the other a Son of God, and God, through the Spirit according to 
Grace. For it was not otherwise possible for man to be shown as the 
Son of God and God by the deification of grace, unless he had 
already been born of the Spirit through his will, through the self- 
moving and free power that he naturally possesses. But the First 
Man, abandoning this God-making and Godly and immaterial 
birth, and by giving greater glory to that which is revealed and is 
pleasurable to the senses than to intelligible and mystical goods, was 
deservedly condemned to the disordered and material and corruptible 
birth of bodies, for God worthily judged that by willingly preferring the 
worse things to the better man exchanged his free, passionless, 
spontaneous and chaste birth for a birth that was painful and servile 
and confined to the image of the irrational brutes and the beasts of 
the field ; and that in exchange for the divine and ineffable honour 
of his association with God, he was taking the dishonourable 
intercourse of the irrational beasts. But wishing to liberate man 

BOOK IV 

467 

from this condition, and to lead him back to his divine blessedness, 
the Word Who is the Creator of human nature truly becomes a Man 
and the issue of men, and is born from man according to the body, 
but without sin.” 

But that you may know that it is not an invention of our own 
but something which we have learnt from the aforesaid author 
Maximus, that man did not taste of the Tree of Life, but from the 
start took his first and deadly nourishment from the forbidden tree, 
and did not raise his intelligible eye to the Divine Light, hear what 
he says in the Twenty-Eighth Chapter of his Commentary on the 
words of Gregory : 

“Not willing to lift the eye of his soul to this Divine Light, our 
first father Adam like a blind man in the darkness of ignorance 
which was his punishment willingly clutching with both hands at his 
material degradation, gave himself up entirely to the senses, through 
which he imbibed the corrupt poison of that bitterest of beasts.” 

Now by the corrupt sense by which Adam was deceived he 
means the woman : for among the Greeks aioGriaiq, sense, is of the 
feminine gender; and by the bitterest of beasts he means the Devil, 
who instilled the poison of his wickedness into the human mind 
through the medium of the corporeal sense. Then he goes on to say a 
little later : 

“And when sense, knowing full well that death was in the 
forbidden tree, yet offered him the fruit of it, he made it his first 
repast, and thus accommodated his life to its food, rendering it 
mortal and fluid throughout the corruptible body.” 

Then he adds : “So if he had trusted in God rather than in his 
fellow-slave, the sense, and had fed on the Tree of Life, perhaps he 
would not have laid aside the gift of immortality, which would have 
been preserved by his participation in Life, since all life is preserved 
by its own appropriate and suitable food. But the food of that 
blessed life is the bread that came down from heaven, and gives life 
to the world, as the Word Itself truly says of Itself in the Gospels.” 

But the First Man was unwilling to feed on this fare, and was 
therefore deservedly rejected from the Divine Life, and received 
from its parent death another life, through which he endows himself 
with an irrational form and obscures the transcendent beauty of the 
Divine, and by feeding upon the fruit betrays the whole of nature to 
death. But it is not our present purpose to argue against those who, 
admitting that man lived in bliss for a temporal period before the 

813B 

813C 

813D 

468 

PERIPHYSEON 

Fall, yet dare not say how long a period that was: for we are 
prepared to say only those things which seem to us to be probable; 
to refute the opinion of others who think otherwise, or to treat it 
with contempt, or to pronounce it false, is none of our present 
business. And now I think we ought to turn to the consideration of 
that Paradise itself. 

A. Let us by all means do so. For this is the right method of 
discourse, not to give the impression of deviating to the right or the 
left, that is to say, neither to depart from the doctrine which the 
Catholic Church has accepted as being of the highest and the holiest 
authority, nor spurn those who, we know, have a simple under¬ 
standing, since they are contained within the sincerity of the Catholic 
Faith. “For let each one of us,” as the Apostle says, “be rich in his 
own perception.” For to approve our own perception or that of 
those whom we consider to be the best while rejecting the perception 
of others is either extremely dangerous or most insolent or at least 
productive of controversy. Let us therefore in this business proceed 
8146 with caution, humility and moderation in the footsteps of the Holy 
Fathers. 

16 N. St. Augustine writes in the Eighth Book of his Hexemeron : 

“I am not unaware that concerning Paradise much has been 
written by many, but their opinions fall more or less into three 
categories : of which one is of those who hold that Paradise is only 
to be understood in a corporeal sense ; the second of those who say 
it is only spiritual ; the third of those who believe that it is both, that 
is to say, both corporeal and spiritual. And to be brief I confess that 
it is the third opinion that I hold myself.” 

And in the Eleventh Chapter of the Fourteenth Book of the 
City of God he writes : 

Wherefore in a Paradise both corporeal and spiritual man 
made God his rule to live by. For the Paradise was not corporeal for 
the body without being spiritual for the Mind : nor was it spiritual to 
814C be enjoyed by man’s inner senses without being corporeal to be 
enjoyed with his outer senses: no, it was both for both. But after 
that proud and therefore envious angel fell from the spiritual 
Paradise turning through that pride from God to himself, desiring 
to creep into man’s sense by his malevolent subtlety because, falling 
himself, he envied man’s constancy, he chose to become a serpent, 
one of the creatures that then lived harmlessly and in subjection with 
these two human beings, the male and the female, in the corporeal 

The 
814A 
Beginning of 
the discussion 
on Paradise 

BOOK IV 

Paradise, a creature slippery and pliable, wreathed in knots, well 
fitted for his work, through whom he would speak.” 

You see how he asserts that there were two Paradises, the one 
spiritual in which man lived a happy psychic life, the other corporeal 814D 
in which he lived a happy corporeal life. But in the book which he 
wrote on the True Religion he seems to say that there was only one 
Paradise, the spiritual : 

“This is the first sin of the rational soul, the desire to do that 
which the highest and innermost Truth forbids. Thus man is driven 
out of Paradise into this world, that is, out of eternity into time, out 
of plenty into want, out of stability into instability: not however 
from a substantial good into a substantial evil, for no substance is 8I5A 
an evil, but from an eternal good into a temporal good, from a 
spiritual good to a fleshly good, from an intelligible good to a 
sensible good, from the highest good to the lowest good.” 

Notice the expression, “from an intelligible good to a sensible 
good.” Does this not clearly imply that Paradise is intelligible and 
not sensible? For if he had intended to say that it was sensible he 
would have said: “From a sensible good (namely the corporeal 
Paradise) to an inferior sensible good” — unless we are to believe 
that this passage refers only to the spiritual Paradise from which the 
sinning soul was expelled, and that he has refrained from mentioning 
the expulsion of its body from the corporeal Paradise. For he does 
not say : “This is the first sin of man,” but “This is the first sin of the 815B 
rational soul.” But I would rather suppose that by the name of the 
better part of man he is referring to the whole. For it is not to be 
believed that if there ever were, or still are, two Paradises man 
would have suffered for his transgression by being expelled from the 
spiritual but not from the corporeal unless we are to believe that in 
this place he has only expounded the expulsion of man from the 
spiritual Paradise, and that he has refrained from mentioning his 
expulsion from the sensible. 

St. Ambrose also in the introduction to his book On Paradise 
seems to postulate in the same way two Paradises, particularly in the 
following passage: 

“In this Paradise, therefore, God placed the man whom He 
created. Moreover, you are to understand that it was not that man 
who is according to the Image of God that He placed in Paradise, 
but man who is according to the body. For that which is incorporeal 
cannot be in a place.” 

470 

815C 

815D 

816A 

816B 

The four 
rivers of 
Paradise 

PERIPHYSEON 

But a little later when he comes to give his explanation of 
Paradise he most clearly shows that not only is Paradise to be 
understood in a spiritual sense, but that it is nothing else than the 
man himself. Here I think he is wholly indebted to Origen, although 
he does not specifically refer to him, for he says : 

“There was one before our time who has remarked that man’s 
transgression was committed through pleasure and through sense; 
for he took the form of a serpent to represent pleasure, and the form 
of the woman to represent sense, and saw a representation of man in 
the mind and the intellect. Now the Greeks call sense aia0r|ai(; and 
the mind, which he asserted to have been brought into transgression 
by the deception of the sense, they call vouc;. It is appropriate then 
that in Greek voOc; has a masculine form and aia0r|ai(; a feminine. 
Hence some call Adam the ‘earthly vou(;’.” 

And somewhat later he writes : 

“Paradise is therefore a fertile ground, that is, a fecund soul, 
planted in Eden, that is, in pleasure, or it is the ploughed land in 
which the delight of the mind doth grow. Moreover Adam is, as it 
were, vovq, and Eve aia0riai(; or sense. And see what supports the 
soul possesses to use against the weakness of nature or the exposure 
of creation to dangers. There was a fount to irrigate Paradise. What 
is this fount ? Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Fount of Eternal Life, and 
His Father too. For it is written : Seeing that you have in you the 
fount of life ; and again, from her belly shall flow the living waters. 
It is called the Fount, and it is called the River, and it irrigates the 
fruitful Tree of Paradise that it may bear the fruit of life eternal. 
This fount, then, as you have read, is in Paradise. For it is written 
that the fount proceeds out of Eden. That is to say, the fount is in 
your soul. Hence Solomon also says ‘Drink the water from your 
vessels and from the founts of your wells.’ This is the fount which 
proceeds from that well-tilled and pleasureful soul ; and this fount, 
which irrigates Paradise, is the power of the soul which bursts forth 
from the highest fount. And this fount, it is written, is divided into 
four springs. The name of the first is Phison’’ — and so on. 

The same Saint Ambrose goes on to discuss most lucidly the 
four rivers of Paradise, comparing them severally to the several 
virtues of the soul: Phison, which the Greeks call Ganges, to 
Prudence : Geon, which is the Nile, to Temperance ; Tygris, which is 
so called because of the swiftness of its current, to Fortitude; 
Euphrates to Justice. See in what a spiritual way he interprets 
Paradise. 

BOOK IV 

A. Yes, I see it. But perhaps someone might say that he is here 
rather employing allegory than intending to deny the existence of a 
material Paradise. For if he did not believe in the existence of a 
corporeal and local Paradise, he would not perhaps in the course of 
the above-mentioned work after the exposition of the spiritual 
Paradise, which is either the soul herself or some spiritual environ¬ 
ment of the soul, have gone on to expound the text “And God took 
the man whom He had made, and placed hirn in Paradise, to till it 
and watch over it.” “Note,” he says “that the man is already 
existing when he is seized. For he existed in the land of his creation. 816C 
Then the power of God seized him, breathing into him the processes 
and increases of virtue. Finally he placed him in Paradise, as though 
caught up by the breath of the divine service. Notice here that man 
was created outside Paradise and woman inside Paradise, and from 
this learn that it is not by the nobility of place or class but by virtue 
that a man acquires Grace for himself. For although man was 
created outside Paradise, that is, in a lower place, he is found to be 
the better of the two, while she who was created in a better place, 
that is, in Paradise is found to be inferior. For the woman was first 
deceived, and then herself deceived the man.” 

Is it not clear from these words that he wished to postulate a 
local Paradise, and therefore a corporeal and sensible one? 

N. It is not our intention to dispute with those who hold such 816D 
opinions. For whether there be two Paradises, the one corporeal and 
the other spiritual, we neither deny or affirm. We are merely 
comparing the opinions of the Holy Fathers: it is not ours to say 
which should be followed rather than another. Let each abound in 
his sense, and let him choose which he will follow, avoiding all 
controversy. But in what sense the master of highest authority and 817A 
of the acutest and most exalted genius has put forward these 
suggestions in his commentaries on Holy Scripture it is not clear to 
us — unless perhaps, as we have very often found in his expositions, 
he has followed the Greek theologians, and particularly Gregory. 

For the Greeks maintain that there are two creations of man, one in 
the Image of God, in which there is neither male nor female but only 
universal and indivisible humanity most like the angelic nature, of 
which we are unmistakeably taught by authority and right reason 
that it lacks all sexual distinction ; the other and second, which was 
added as a result of the foreknowledge of the Fall of the rational 
nature, and in which sex is established. Rightly then is it described as 
having occurred outside Paradise, and in a lower place out of the 8I7B 

471 

472 

PERIPHYSEON 

earth of its creation, seeing that it was added on account of sin. 
Therefore the male sex which was added to the nature created in the 
Image of God was made outside Paradise. But because even that sex 
is added as though taken from elsewhere to a previously existing 
nature, namely, the divine Image, it is established in Paradise 
together with the first creation : where also, as in a higher place, the 
second sex, called by the name of woman, and drawn from the side 
of the first, is added to it as an assistant in the procreation of 
offspring in the shameful manner of the irrational animals. 

And since the creation of the male sex is prior to that of the 
female not in terms of time but in terms of honour (for woman was 
made from man in the first creation, but not man from woman), he 
therefore says that the creation of man was outside Paradise, and 
that of woman inside, so that you may understand by this that man 
was made a better creature than woman even outside Paradise, that 
817C is, outside the rank of the Primordial Causes, and that woman was 
created, as it were, within Paradise, that is to say, within the union 
of the sex which was added to the simplicity of the Divine Image. Or 
you may put it this way : since in every man it may be said that there 
are two men, for the Apostle says : “The outer man is corrupted but 
the inner man is renewed,” the inner man is properly formed in 
Paradise after the Image of God, while the outer and corruptible 
man is formed from the clay of the earth outside and below 
Paradise : and by the fact that man is seized and placed within 
Paradise is meant that if God had operated His saving power in him, 
and if man had observed the Divine Precept, he also could have 
attained to the rank of the First Man who was created in the image 
817D of God. But since he refused to obey the Divine Precept, he 
abandoned not only his Creator, but also the dignity of the Image. 
And therefore he was cloven into two sexes, the male and the 
female, a cleavage which derived its origin not from nature but from 
sin. And therefore although the woman was made from the man in 
818A Paradise, she was not for that reason better than man, for she took 
the occasion of her creation not from the Divine Image which was 
created within Paradise, but from the penalty of her future trans¬ 
gression. For she also was causally created in the outer man, who 
deservedly because of his sin was created outside Paradise from the 
clay of the earth ; and she was subsequently in honour though not in 
time taken from the side of man in Paradise. 

But whether it was this or something else which our master 
wished to convey, it is not our intention to quarrel with those who 

BOOK IV 

473 

believe that there were two Paradises, as I said before, the one 
spiritual, the other corporeal, answering to the double nature of 
man — especially as we find that constantly in the scriptural 
accounts many references to the truth of nature are to be taken both 
as historical facts and as spiritual signs. Thus Abraham had two 
sons, one from his handmaid, and one from the free woman : these 
were historical events. But they also have the allegorical significance 
of the Two Laws, that of the Old Testament and that of the New. 
The Rock from which the waters flowed followed the Chosen People 
in the wilderness: but the Apostle says: “Now the Rock was 
Christ.” And what of the constitution of these two very beings, the 
male and the female in Paradise, which is under discussion at the 
moment? Do they not signify, as the Apostle bears witness, Christ 
and His Church? What then would be so strange in the fact that the 
corporeal Paradise was created as a symbol of the spiritual ? And we 
know that Origen, that supreme commentator of Scripture, declares 
that Paradise is nowhere and nothing else than that which is 
established as he says, in the Third Heaven, into which St. Paul was 
rapt. But if it is in the Third Heaven, then it is certainly spiritual. 
For the spiritual nature of the Third Heaven into which St. Paul was 
rapt is not doubted by the best authors in either tongue : for they all 
agree in calling it intellectual. 

But Epiphanius the Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus reproves 
Origen in this, and uncompromisingly maintains that Paradise is on 
earth : 

“It is a certain sensible place in the eastern parts of the earth 
with sensible trees and rivers, and the other objects which are 
believed concerning Paradise in a simple corporeal sense by those 
who cleave to the corporeal senses.” 

For the same Epiphanius “has”, he says, “no doubt” that those 
tunics of skin which God stitched together for man after his 
transgression were, as an historical fact, made from the fleece of the 
sheep which, as he says, were in Paradise: and he reproves Origen 
who by a very fine and truthful allegory interprets those skins as 
signifying the mortal bodies which were added to the first human 
beings as a punishment for their sin. Almost all authors, Greek and 
Latin, follow Origen in his theory of the tunics of skin. 

It would not be irrelevant, I think, to insert here the opinion of 
the great Gregory of Nyssa concerning the food of Paradise, and the 
Tree of Life, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. In 
the Twentieth Chapter of his Treatise on the Image he writes : 

818B 

818C 

818D 

819A 

PERIPHYSEON 

474 

819B 

819C 

Christ is the 
tree of life, 
for He is 
every good 

819D 

820A 

“Rightly is it said that man will not return into the same species 
of life : for if the species of the former life consisted in eating, in the 
after life we shall be released from this activity. But I, giving ear to 
Holy Scripture, recognise not only a corporeal food, and not only a 
fleshly joy, but also another kind of food, which bears a certain 
analogy to the nourishment of the body, a food of which the 
goodness is conveyed only into the soul. ‘Feed of My loaves,’ says 
Wisdom to the hungry, and those who hunger and thirst after this 
food are blessed of the Lord: ‘Blessed are they who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness,’ and: ‘If any thirst,’ He saith, ‘let him 
come to Me and drink.’ And the great Isaiah says to those who are 
able to appraise his greatness: ‘Drink of happiness.’ And there is 
also a kind of prophetic curse against those who are worthy of 
vengeance, that they shall be tormented with hunger. But this 
hunger is not a need for food and drink, but a deprivation of the 
Word. For it is not. He says, a hunger for bread or a thirst for water, 
but a hunger for hearing the Word of the Lord. Are not these 
delights, then, to be found in the Eden of God’s planting? For the 
meaning of Eden is ‘delights’. For that the trees there bore a certain 
kind of fruit, and that man was by it undoubtedly enabled to eat, 
and that the fruit of which he partook when he lived in Paradise was 
by no means transitory or mutable may be rightly understood from 
these words : ‘Of the fruit of every tree which is in Paradise thou 
shalt eat.’ Who shall give to him who hungers healthily for it the 
fruit of that tree which is in Paradise and which comprises every 
good thing, and whose name is therefore nav that is, ‘all’, and of 
which the law of nature makes man a participant? For by a 
universal and over-ruling reason every from of the good contains 
naturally in itself the whole, and is One. Who shall keep me away 
from this food mixed from the other tree ? For to the discerning it is 
by no means difficult to see what is that ‘all’, of which the fruit is 
Life; and what is that mixture of which the end is death? For He 
Who offers that enjoyment of that ‘all’ freely by everyone is the 
same as He Who by His Providence and by a certain principle 
prohibits man from its indiscriminate participation. And I think 
that this Law is explained by the great David and the wise master 
Solomon : for each of them understands that the permitted food has 
a single grace, the Good itself, which truly is, and which is wholly 
good. For David says ‘Rejoice in the Lord,’ and Solomon calls that 
food, which is the Lord, the Tree of Life. Therefore is not that tree 
whose food is given by the Law to him who is formed in the Image 
of God the Tree of Life and ‘All’-tree? Separated from it as a 

BOOK IV 

475 

contrary is the other tree, whose fruit is the knowledge of good and 
evil : it is not the case that this tree specifically produces in part each 
of the contrary things indicated ; it produces a confused and mixed 
kind of fruit, a composite of contrary qualities. And its fruit is 
forbidden by the Lord of Life : but the serpent commends it so as to 
prepare an entry for death. He persuades us giving us counsel, 
painting that fruit with the beauty of good and the delight of evil, 
that it might seem desirable, and that desire might lead us to 
tasting.” 

Again in the twentieth chapter of the same treatise he writes: 

“Now what is that tree whose fruit is the mingled knowledge of 
good and evil, a knowledge which is impregnated with the delights 820B 
of the senses? I think it would not be far wrong to say that the 
Greeks call the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil yvcoaiov, 
while the Tree of Life they call Tidv yvwBi. I employ the term ‘tree’ 
for the purpose of theoria. I think I should not be wandering far 
from the truth if by the understanding of the mind, in so far as these 
things can be understood, I employ the following argument : 

“I think that by ‘knowledge’ the Scripture does not mean ‘skill’, 
and I find that in the Scriptures a certain distinction is drawn 
between knowledge and judgment or discrimination. For as the 
apostle tells us, skilfully to discriminate the good from the evil is the 
mark of a perfect disposition, and of properly trained senses. And 
therefore he lays it down as a precept that all things should be 
judged and that judgment is the property of the spiritual man. But 
knowledge does not everywhere mean the skill and expertise of that 
which is signified, but an affection towards that to which Grace is 
given — as when it is written, ‘God knows those who are His,’ that 
is to say. He gives His Grace to His own. And to Moses He says : 

‘For I knew thee above all.’ But to those whose wickedness is proved 820C 
He Who knoweth all things saith : ‘I never knew you,’ that is to say, 

I never bestowed My Grace upon you. Therefore is it not the tree 
whose fruit is this mixed knowledge that is prohibited? But that 
fruit which has the serpent for its spokesman, that is, advocate, is a 
mixture of contraries, to wit, of good and of evil. And it is perhaps 
for this reason that pure evil, manifested by itself and in itself 
according to its proper nature, is never offered, that is, is never 
revealed naked. For no evil would be effective which was not 
coloured with good, by which it may attract him whom it has 
seduced, that is to say man, to lust after it. But now it is somehow 
mixed with good. It harbours destruction in its depths as in a secret 820D 

476 

821A 

The teachings 
on the tree 
called 
yvcoaxov 

821B 

821C 

PERIPHYSEON 

ambush, but outwardly displays, for the purpose of seduction, a 
certain appearance of good. Thus the beauty of material wealth 
seems to the greedy a good : but avarice is the root of all evil. And 
who would fall into the filthy swamp of intemperance unless he 
estimated pleasure as good and something desirable, and by this 
snare is enticed into passion? And it is the same with the other 
hidden sins, each distinguished by its own particular pleasure. They 
seem desirable as a good, through this allurement, to those who do 
not examine the matter carefully. Since then many take for good 
that in which the senses delight, and since that which seems to be the 
good, while it is not, has the same name as the Good which is ; that 
is to say, the true Good which is goodness itself : for this reason the 
concupiscence felt towards evil as though towards the Good is 
called by Scripture the knowledge of good and of evil, where the 
term ‘knowledge’ has the significance of a kind of interaction and 
concretion of good and evil. It is neither absolutely evil, for it is 
surrounded by good ; nor is it purely good, for evil is concealed 
within it : but Scripture tells us that the fruit of the forbidden tree 
which, it says, brings those who taste of it to death is a mixture of 
both. It all but proclaims this teaching, that the Good, which by 
nature truly is and is simple and uniform by nature, is free from all 
duality and mingling with its opposite. But evil is varied and is so 
formed as to have some good mixed with it but is found on trial to 
be different. For it is not found to be as it is estimated, but becomes 
the source of death and the cause and principle of corruption. 
Therefore the serpent shows the sinner the fruit in such a way as to 
represent on the face of it that it has no evil. For by an obvious evil 
man, probably, would not have been seduced, and so he adorned the 
obvious evil with a specious appearance, and made it enticing by a 
form which was pleasurable to the sense, and thus revealed it to the 
woman, persuading her to taste it. For the Scripture says : ‘And the 
woman saw that the tree was good to eat’ and that it was fair to look 
upon, and beautiful to know, and so she accepted the fruit and ate 
it. And so that food became for man the mother of death. Therefore 
it is fruitful of mixture, if we rightly interpret the obvious sense in 
which that tree is named the knowledge of good and of evil — 
because in the evil of the death-bearing properties which are in its 
sweetness, in so far as it sweetens the sense it appears good, but in so 
far as it corrupts what it touches it is the source of the worst evil. 
Therefore, when it worked in the life of man as a death-bearing evil, 
at that moment man, so great a thing and so great a name, the 
Image of the Divine Nature, is made like unto vanity, as the Prophet 

BOOK IV 

says. Therefore the Image is associated with what is understood to 
be our better nature : but the sad and unhappy things which relate to 
this life do not belong to the likeness of God.” 

See then of what nature Paradise, its trees, and its fruits were 
thought to be by this Theologian. 

A. I see very well. They were clearly spiritual and unlocalised. 
But I should like from you a clear and brief explanation of those 
things which he expounds rather obscurely. 

N. Whoever looks closely into the words of this Theologian 
will find that his teaching is none other than that the word Paradise 
is a mere figure of speech by which Holy Scripture signifies the 
human nature that was made in the image of God. For what God in 
truth planted is that very nature which He created in Eden, that is to 
say, in the delights of eternal bliss, in His image and likeness, that is, 
in an image which in every way resembles Himself save only, as I 
have said before, in His status of subject, a nature which by reason 
of the blessedness of its likeness to God is greater and more excellent 
than the whole sensible Universe, not in respect of size, but in 
respect of the dignity of its nature. And the fertile soil of this 
Paradise was the essential body, which possesses a possible immor¬ 
tality in potency. For the natural body is said to die because it 
appears to share the death of that which is added to it : but in fact it 
is always immortal in itself. For statements such as “It may die, it 
may not die” refer to that which it suffers as an adjunct to itself. For 
the body of the First Man, as St. Augustine says, might not have 
died, and would not have died if it had not been corrupted by the 
poison of transgression, but would have blossomed with the flowers 
of spiritual beauty, and would never have grown old with the 
accumulation of time. 

And the water of this Paradise is the sense of the incorruptible 
body able to receive forms and formed by the phantasies of sensible 
things without being deceived. 

And the air of this Paradise, illuminated by the Rays of the 
Divine Wisdom, was the reason, by which it might have knowledge 
of all things. 

And the ether was the Mind which was centred on the Divine 
Nature in an eternal and ineffable immutable motion and mutable 
stability, and on the other things which are to be predicated about 
the Divine Nature, but which, since they cannot be understood, 
must be honoured in silence. 

477 

821D 

822A 

Paradise 
means human 
nature 

822B 

822C 

478 

PERIPHYSEON 

822D 

823A 

The “All¬ 
tree” of 
Paradise 
823B 
which is 
Christ 

823C 

Therefore Scripture testifies that in this Paradise flows the 
Fountain of Life, from which we are told under an allegory of the 
four principal rivers of the sensible world that the four streams of 
the virtues divide, namely, prudence, temperance, fortitude, justice. 
And these spiritual rivers bursting forth from the Divine Wisdom, 
which is the fount of all life and all virtue, water the surface of the 
human nature ; first, arising in the secret recesses of humanity, in the 
most hidden channels, as it were, of the intelligible earth they issue 
in invisible virtues : then they spread out into the manifest effects of 
good actions and produce innumerable kinds of potencies and acts. 
For from them every potency and every act proceeds and into them 
returns : but they themselves proceed from the Divine Wisdom, and 
into It return. 

In the same Paradise there are two trees, of which, according to 
the exposition of our Theologian Gregory, “the one is called Trdv,” 
that is, “all”, “the other yvcoaiov,” that is “knowable:” but if we 
analyse the interpretation of this word, it does not satisfactorily 
express the meaning of the tree. Therefore, for the sake of a better 
understanding of what is signified by that tree we have decided to 
substitute for yvcoaiov the name mixed. 

But what is this Tidv, of whose fruit man was commanded to 
feed? ridv is that tree of which the Scripture says : “And the Lord 
God produced from the earth the All-tree that is fair to look upon 
and pleasant to taste and also the Tree of Life in the midst of 
Paradise.” Notice how the Prophetic Meditation describes and 
names one and the same tree in two ways : first as the All-tree which 
is fair to look upon and pleasant to taste, and then as the Tree of 
Life in the midst of Paradise. And a little later it is written : “From 
the All-tree of Paradise thou shalt eat,” where by “the All-tree” is 
meant a single tree. Now, let no follower of our Theologian’s 
doctrine imagine that there was in Paradise a large number of trees 
of different forms and different fruits, as though it were a forest 
thick with trees: there were but two, the one irdv, and the other 
yvcoaiov. And the 7tdv ^uX,ov that is, “the All-tree”, of Paradise is 
the Word and Wisdom of the Father, Our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is 
the fruit-bearing All-tree and is planted in the midst of the Paradise 
of human nature in two ways: first through His own divinity, by 
which He creates our nature and contains it and endows it with 
nourishment and life and light and godhead and movement and 
being, “for in Him we move and live and have our being;” and 
secondly through taking our nature upon Him in the unity of His 

BOOK IV 

479 

Substance in order that He might save it and recall it to its former 
state, so that He came to subsist in two natures, a divine and a 
human. And this is what the Scripture says: “And the Lord God 
produced from the earth,” that is, from our material nature, “the 
All-tree,” that is, the Incarnate Word, in Which and through Which 
all things are made, and Which is all things. For It alone is the 
substantial Good. For the other things which are called good are 
good not through themselves but through participation in Him Who 
in Himself truly is the Good Which is, and all good and goodness, 
and the fount and origin, the cause and principle, the end and 
perfection, the movement and rest, the middle and the end, the 
environment and the place, of all goodness and all good : and His fruit 
is life eternal, and His food is joy and bliss and ineffable delight, and 
His countenance is fair to look upon. For he is the Beautiful and the 
Beauty that lies in all things beautiful, and He is the cause and 
perfection of Beauty, and those who taste and feed on Him know no 
satiety : for the more they feed on Him the greater grows their desire 
for that repast. 

From this “All-Tree,” then, that is to say, this plentitude of all 
goods, the first human beings were ordered to take their food : and 
the whole human genus until now is bidden to live by it. But since 
our first parents refused to take their food therefrom, preferring to it 
the deadly fruit of the forbidden tree, not only they but the whole 
genus which sprang from them were by the most righteous decree of 
God expelled from the dignity of their nature and condemned to 
death. Do you now see what the holy Prophet, or rather, the Holy 
Spirit through the Prophet, wished to signify by the phrase “All¬ 
tree” ? 

A. I see clearly : nothing else, I think, but God the Word made 
man is the All-good of the whole of Paradise, that is to say, of the 
whole of our nature, and nothing else subsists than Him to partake 
of Whom (that is, to regard Him with a devout Mind, or believe in 
Him faithfully) is eternal life and incorruptible health; but not to 
know Him or to deny Him is eternal death and infinite corruption. 

N. You understand correctly. It now remains to speak of the 
yvcoaxov, that is, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. It 
has already been suggested that to make things easier the word 
yvcoaxov be translated not literally but in such a way as to give a 
true interpretation of its meaning, mixed. And in fact according to 
the above mentioned master whose teaching about Paradise we 
follow and reproduce in order to dissipate the obscurity of the 

823D 

824A 

824B 

The tree of 
knowledge of 
good and evil 
which is 
called 

yVCDOTOV 

480 

PERIPHYSEON 

824C 

The six parts 
of man 

824D 

825A 

825B 

problem, the yvoaiov is that evil disguised under the colour of good 
which is instilled into the senses of the body and is the direct 
opposite of the former tree, the 7idv. For just as in this all good is 
reflected and all good exists, so in that is the totality of all evil. The 
one, therefore, is all good which truly subsists, the other every evil 
which seduces all evil men by its appearance of good. 

Now it is not irrelevant to enquire why the account relates that 
both trees were in the midst of Paradise, the “All-Tree,” which is 
also called the Tree of Life, and the other tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and of Evil. And the answer, I think, is something like this : If 
it be first supposed that the whole of human nature was implied, 
that is to say, the visible and the invisible, the exterior and the 
interior, that which was created in the image of God and that which 
was added to it on account of sin, then anyone who has read the text 
of the blessed Gregory’s Treatise on the Image will find that there is 
in the whole of human nature, both generally in all and specifically 
in individuals, a sixfold division. First there is the division into the 
two principal parts of the body and the soul ; then body, that is, the 
exterior man, is logically divided into three subdivisions, of which 
the first is the body itself constituted out of formed matter, of which 
only being may be predicated, than which the understanding finds 
nothing lower in nature. The second part, which lies above it, may 
be called, and is customarily called, by many names. Thus it is 
named the nutritive and auctive part because it provides the body 
with nourishment and causes it to grow and holds it together that it 
may not fall apart and dissolve. It is also called Vital Motion, a 
name which is appropriate because not only does it give life to the 
body, but also motion, either locally through space or through 
numbers of place and time — by numbers of place I here mean those 
in which the fulness of the body’s parts is achieved, and by numbers 
of time those in which increases of ages are brought to perfection. 
The third subdivision, which is manifested in the five-fold bodily 
sense, receives the phantasies of all sensible objects which surround 
man externally and conveys them to the memory. 

In these three parts the whole of the exterior man is constituted. 
But the inner man, who subsists in the soul alone, and is made in the 
image of God, has also a three-fold division. For it possesses the 
Interior Sense, through which the soul distinguishes and forms 
judgments upon the phantasies of the sensible objects which she 
receives through the corporeal sense. Next she possesses Reason, 
through which she investigates the “reasons” of all things which are 

BOOK IV 

481 

apprehended by the intelligence or the sense. But the highest part of 
man is the Mind, above which there is found nothing higher in 
j human nature, and whose proper function is the government of the 
parts which are inferior to it, and the contemplation of what lies 
' above it, namely, God, and of what lies in it and subsists about it, 
according as it is allowed to ascend. 

I Is the sixfold division of human nature clear to you? Human 

I nature is, and lives and perceives through the body ; it perceives 
I outside of the body, and reasons, and intellects. But the three 
' properties which are discerned in the lower part of man are 
j corruptible and susceptible to dissolution, while the triad of the 
upper part, which is wholly and absolutely constituted in the soul 
i alone, is incorruptible and indissoluble and eternal as befits that 
I which has impressed upon it the Image of the Divine Nature. And 
therefore, as we have shown in the previous books, the Greeks give 
to this triad in human nature, which St. Dionysius tells us can 
neither be dissolved nor corrupted nor in any way destroyed, the 
names ouaia, 56vapiq and enepyeia. 

Therefore the limits of human nature are to be considered as 
the upper and the lower boundaries of Paradise, beyond which no 
created nature may be supposed to exist. For above mind there is 
only God and below matter, that is, only body, there is nothing — 
not that nothing which is called so and thought to be so because of 
the transcendence of its nature, but that which is conceived and 
called so because of its lack of all nature. You will also find, if I am 
not mistaken, that mind holds the highest place in human nature, 
and the material body the lowest. And if you now turn to the 
intermediate parts of the same nature you will find below Mind, on 
the upper side. Reason, and above body, on the lower side. Vital 
Motion, by which I mean the nutritive life principle; and again in 
the midst of this nature, as in the midst of Paradise, two senses, the 
exterior which adheres to the Vital Motion and the body, and the 
inner sense which is inseparably joined to Reason and Mind, and is 
consubstantial with them. Therefore, these two senses, occupying as 
it were the two middle positions of the Paradise of human nature, 
represent those two intelligible trees, Tidv and yvcoaiov : the interior 
7rdv and the exterior yvcoaiov. For in the interior of man abide truth 
and every good, which is the Word of God, the only-begotten Son of 
God, Our Lord Jesus Christ outside of Whom there is no good, 
since He is all good and substantial Good and Goodness. And to 
Him is opposed on the other side the evil thing and evil. And since 

825C 

825D 

826A 
The “all¬ 
tree” and the 
tree of the 
knowledge of 
good and evil 
in human 
nature 

482 

PERIPHYSEON 

there is no evil which is found to exist substantially in nature, nor 
proceeds from a fixed and natural cause, for considered in itself it is 
absolutely nothing but the irrational and perverse and imperfect 
motion of the rational nature, it can find no other abode in the 
universal creature save where falsehood resides : and the proper 
826B residence of falsehood is in the corporeal sense. For no part of 
human nature is the recipient of error except the exterior sense, and 
that is the means through which the interior sense, the Reason, and 
even Mind are very often led astray. Therefore it is in this place of 
falsehood and vain phantasies, namely in the corporeal sense which 
the Greeks call aiaGpoi^ and symbolise by the woman, that 
yvcoaiov, that is, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of Evil, is 
established, which is evil painted to resemble good, or evil in the 
form of good, or, to speak plainly, a false good, or evil hiding under 
the guise of good, whose fruit is a confused or mixed knowledge. 
For there is in it a confusion of hidden evil and apparent good which 
at first seduces the sense in which it lies as a woman is seduced, 
826C unable to discern the hidden evil under the appearance of good by 
which it is disguised. For in itself evil is a deformity and an 
abhorrent ugliness which, if the erring sense beheld undisguised, it 
would not only refuse to follow or take delight in, but would flee 
from and abhor. But the unwitting sense errs, and in erring is 
deceived, because it takes the evil for something which is good and 
fair to look upon and pleasant to taste. To take an example, when 
the phantasy of good, for instance, or of any other sensible material, 
is impressed upon the corporeal sense, the phantasy itself seems fair 
and lovely, because it is taken from a creature which is outwardly 
good. But the woman, that is the carnal sense, is deceived and 
delights in it without perceiving the evil which lies hidden in the false 
and phantastic beauty, that is to say, voluptuousness which is the 
826D “root of all evil.” “Whoso looketh upon a woman to lust after her,” 
saith the Lord, “hath already committed adultery with her in his 
heart,” meaning by that: Whoso implants in his carnal desire the 
phantasy which is taken from the female form has already committed 
adultery in his thought, for he is seeking the ugliness of lust which is 
enticing him secretly under that false appearance of the female form. 

So then, as we have said above, the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and Evil is pernicious and deadly wickedness masquerading 
under the form of good, and this tree is planted, as it were, in a 
woman, that is, in the carnal sense, which it deceives. And if the 
827A mind consents to the sense, then the integrity of the whole of human 

BOOK IV 

nature is destroyed. For if the highest part of that nature trans¬ 
gresses, what lower part will remain unharmed? and the fruit of this 
tree is the mingled knowledge of good and of evil, that is, the 
undiscriminating appetite of evil imagined as good, and love and 
lust and pleasure, through which in the form of a serpent the ancient 
enemy of the human genus first urged transgression and then 
brought death upon the whole of nature: upon the soul which 
abandoned God, and upon the body which was deserted by the soul. 
Knowledge, therefore, in this place signifies not some science of the 
recognising and distinguishing of natures, but an illicit motion and 
confused hankering after a coveted evil, that is, sin, which for the 
purpose of deception is disguised in the false appearance of a 
likeness to the good. 

But perhaps you wish to enquire whether it was God Who 827B 
implanted in the Paradise of human nature such a tree, whose fruit 
is the mixed and confused appetite for good and evil, whose nature 
is evil disguised under the phantasy of good, whose food was the 
cause of death? 

A. Certainly I wish to ask that, and I think it is proper that I 
should. For if God did create it. He might well be considered the 
creator of evil and the cause of death — which would be a most 
impious thing to say of Him Who is the Author of all good things, 
and all the more impious to believe or think it. But if it was not 
planted by God, whence was the seed of it sown in human nature? 

N. We must first consult Holy Scripture which unhesitatingly 
ascribes a divine planting to that tree which is called Tidv. For it 
says : “And the Lord God produced out of the earth the All-tree 827C 
that is fair to look upon and pleasant to feed upon,” and then, as 
though in explanation of the quality of that tree which is “all tree,” 

“also the Tree of Life in the midst of Paradise.” By this is meant that 
that tree is not only every good and every beautiful thing and every 
pleasant and spiritual food, but also the Tree of Life, by which that 
Paradise, that is, human nature, is alive, for it is planted in the midst 
of it. But it is not sufficiently clear whether that which follows, “and 
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of Evil,” is governed by the 
preceding words, so that we should read “and He brought forth the 
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of Evil in the middle of 
Paradise as He did the Tree of Life,” or whether the phrase is to be 
taken independently : “and there was the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and of Evil,” so that we should not take it to have been 
brought forth by God, but only opposed by its contrary quality to 827D 

483 

PERIPHYSEON 

the first tree, so that as that was all good and life and the cause of 
life in those who live, so this was all evil and death and the cause of 
death in those who die. Or perhaps, since it is the Tree of the 
Knowledge of Good and of Evil, we should understand that in 
respect of its form of good it is from God, for He is the Cause of 
every form and all beauty, whether that form and that beauty are 
perceived by the mind or the sense in some substance or whether 
they lie in the phantasies of sensible matter which are received by the 
senses and of which the bodily sense is the proper abode, since it is 
from the bodily sense that they are carried to the interior sense : but 
in respect of the evil itself which is clothed in the form of the good, 

828A but which in itself has no form and is unknown, it is neither from 
God nor from any sure or definite cause. For evil is inconstant and 
without cause, for as a substance it does not occur anywhere in 
nature. Therefore that tree in respect of its evil is not to be referred 
to any cause, because it is entirely devoid of being : but the form of 
good by which the unwary are deceived because it is taken from 
matter (by the phantasy of which it is formed) which is both made 
and made good by the Creator of all things, consequently can be by 
no means evil. Therefore the form by which evil seduces those whom 
it destroys is good, since it is the phantasy of a good : but the evil 
itself is absolutely evil and is not created by any good for it is the 
contrary of every good. 

828B And if you examine closely the nature of the phantasies by 

which evil is painted, for in her naked self she cannot appear, being 
without form or beauty or cause, you will see for yourself that it is 
altogether good. And this can be most clearly shown by the 
following argument : 

Let us suppose two men, of whom the one is wise and by no 
means tickled or stung by the goads of avarice, while the other is 
foolish and greedy, pierced and torn by the needles of his perverse 
desire, are brought into one place and a vessel offered them made of 
pure gold and set with most precious jewels, endowed with the 
loveliest form, fit for the use of a king. Both, the wise man and the 
greedy one, see it, both receive through the corporeal sense the 

828C phantasy of the vessel itself, both store the phantasy in the memory, 
both bring thought to bear upon it. But the wise man by a simple 
mental process entirely refers its beauty, the phantasy of which he 
ponders within himself, to the glory of the Creator of Natures : no 
enticement of cupidity steals upon him, no poison of voluptuousness 
infects the purpose of his pure mind, no lust contaminates it. With 

BOOK IV 

485 

the greedy one on the other hand it is altogether different. Directly 
he has absorbed the phantasy of the vessel he blazes with the fire of 
cupidity, he is consumed, he is poisoned, he dies: for instead of 
referring the beauty of that nature and of its phantasies to the glory 
of Him Who said “Gold is mine and silver is mine,” he plunges and 
is swallowed up in that most stinking swamp of cupidity. Notice that 
for both the phantasy of the same vessel was good and beautiful. 

But whereas in the sense of the wise man it is simple and natural and 828D 
free from all evil, in the greedy one it is a double phantasy, mixed 
with the contrary evil of cupidity, which is mixed with it and given 
form by it and coloured by it so as to seem good whereas it is a most 
poisonous evil. Evil, then, is not implanted in man’s nature, but 
established in the perverse and irrational motion of the free and 
rational will. And it appears that this motion comes not from within 
human nature but is induced from outside, by a bestial intemperance, 
and by the subtle devising of the ancient enemy it is tinged and 829A 
mingled with good so as to deceive the lustful affections of the 
carnal senses, and thus to destroy them by death. 

Now in saying this I do not wish to refute the interpretation of 
those who maintain that this Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of 
Evil is of its nature wholly a good, and that its creation in a local 
Paradise was an historical event, and that its fruit is the knowledge, 
that is to say, the experience, of good and evil. For if the first human 
beings had abstained from touch and taste of it, as they were bid, 
their experience would have been of the eternal life, of everlasting 
bliss without the interruption of death. But should they consent to 
the wiles of the devil and illicitly in their most wretched concu¬ 
piscence partake of the deadly food of its fruit, they would 
encounter the experience of eternal death and unhappiness. But 
whoever has thought it worth while to read with close attention the 
discussion that we have been conducting is in a position to choose 
from the above mentioned opinions of the Holy Fathers which we 829B 
have set on record the one which it seems best to him to follow, and 
to see that he cannot bring it against us that what we have said is not 
corroborated by any authority or is presumptuously invented as a 
counterblast to the traditions handed down by the Fathers of the 
Church. 

Here you have, then, what I think is as clear and brief a modest 
explanation of Paradise as my capacity can supply. 

A. Yes, but I should like you to make an dvaK8(pa>iai(oai(; or 17 
recapitulation which may embrace in the form of a conclusion and Recapitulation 

PERIPHYSEON 

make precise all the scattered remarks which you have made about 
Paradise. 

N. We have said : 

That the plantation of God, namely, Paradise, in Eden, that is 
to say, in the joy of the eternal and blessed happiness, is human 
829C nature made in the image of God. 

That the fount that is therein is Christ, concerning Whom the 
Prophet, addressing the Father, says : “For in Thee is the Fount of 
Life;” Who also invites all those who thirst after righteousness, 
saying: “If any man thirst let him come unto Me and drink.” 

That its rivers which flow from the Fount of Wisdom are the 
four cardinal virtues of the soul, and that from them every virtue 
and every good act is disseminated. 

That its “All-Tree,” of which it is written: “To him that 
overcometh I will give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in 
Paradise, planted by streams of water,” by which is meant that all 
the oracles of the prophets, all the symbols of either Law, the 
interpretations of those symbols, and all the exoteric and simple 
829D doctrines that flow about it, is the Word of God found in human 
nature and incarnate in human nature. 

That the tree of mixed knowledge in this Paradise is the 
undiscriminating or confused hankering of the carnal senses to 
satisfy the various lusts which are concealed under the appearance 
of good and which deceive and destroy unwary souls. 

That the man in this Paradise is mind, which presides over the 
whole of human nature. 

That the woman therein is the sense, to which if mind incau¬ 
tiously consent, it is lost. 

That the serpent therein is the forbidden pleasure by which 
830A those things which charm the senses are illicitly and damnably 
desired. 

And do not think that my theory that there were only two trees 
in Paradise, Tidv and yvcoaxov, is disproved by the reply which the 
woman is reported to have given to the Devil : “We feed on the fruit 
of the trees which are in Paradise:” for she did not say “We feed, 
that is are bidden to feed on the fruit of the All-Tree,” but of trees, 
in the plural, as though those were many trees of various kinds upon 
which they were permitted to feed. But it is possible to believe that 
what the woman called the All tree was in fact a great number of 

BOOK IV 

487 

trees, for the word “all” is not used in a singular significance but has 
reference to that which has a plural content. For all (every) man is 
the manifold number of human nature, and again this manifold 
number, since it partakes of a single nature, is wont to be described 
as one man. What would be surprising, then; if the term “All-Tree” 
meant a large number of trees? For God the Word, Who is All- 
Tree, that is, all good, and is One, is at the same time Many, and is 
the Source of all good, that is to say, of every virtue and wisdom and 
essence which bears fruit in human nature. Therefore all the rational 
motions of rational nature which man is permitted and commanded 
to perform, since they are the derivatives of the common good of all, 
that is, the Divine Wisdom, in human nature, that is, the plantation 
and Paradise of God, are described as a great number of fruit¬ 
bearing trees: but these trees all subsist, as it were, in that one in 
which all goods are one. Therefore the woman said well when, not 
yet deceived and still conscious of the virtues implanted in her 
nature, she called the single nav tree many trees, for in it are all good 
things. 

I do not wish it to be thought that I am only following the 
doctrines of the Greek writers about Paradise, and am either 
ignoring the Latin writers or am incapable of finding among them 
support for this interpretation : for I should then seem to have 
spoken rashly, proposing a doctrine that would not be supported by 
the masters of both tongues. Therefore it is necessary as well as 
relevant to insert into our discussion the opinions of St. Ambrose 
about Paradise, if you agree. 

A. Certainly I agree. For who but a madman would dare to 
reject the opinions of so great and wise a man? 

N. St. Ambrose, then, writes in his book On Paradise as 
follows : 

“There are some who think that that precept, to eat of the Tree 
of Life and not to eat of the forbidden tree, is neither appropriate to 
the Creator of Heaven and earth and all things nor suitably 
addressed to the inhabitants of Paradise, for the life that they led 
there was similar to that of the angels. Therefore they cannot accept 
the view that this food was earthly and corruptible and for eating, 
for the inhabitants of Paradise neither eat nor drink but shall be as 
the angels of God in heaven. Since, therefore, there is in food neither 
a great prize, for it is not by what we eat that we are commended to 
God, nor a great danger, for not that which enters into the mouth 

830B 

830C 

18 

Here Saint 
Ambrose 
attributes his 
830D 

interpretation 
not to himself 
but to others 

83IA 

PERIPHYSEON 

defiles a man, but that which proceeds forth from the mouth, there 
seems to be no question but that the precept was unworthy of such 
an Author unless you identify this nourishment with that perfect 
food which the Lord promises to His Saints as their great reward: 
‘Behold, those who serve me shall feed, but you shall go hungry.’ 
For this is the food which contains eternal life, which if any man 
lose he shall die the death — for the Living and Heavenly Bread is 
the Lord Himself Who gives life to this world. Therefore He Himself 
says: ‘Unless you eat My Flesh and drink My Blood you shall not 
have eternal life.’ There was, then, a certain bread which God 
commanded the inhabitants of Paradise to eat. What was that 
bread ? Hear what it is : ‘Man ate the bread of angels.’ Good bread is 
also doing the will of God. Do you wish to know how good that 
831B bread is ? The Son Himself feeds on it, for He says : ‘My food is to 
do the will of My Father Who is in heaven.’ ” 

Observe what kind of food the great master teaches that it was 
which the Lord commanded the inhabitants of Paradise to eat : not 
a corporeal or corruptible food, but spiritual, none other than the 
Word of God and His will. 

A. I observe, and I greatly marvel how well he agrees with the 
interpretation of Gregory the Theologian, who also, as we saw, 
“unhesitatingly asserts that the food and fruit and drink of Paradise 
are spiritual and intelligible.” Furthermore, if the food of Paradise 
is spiritual and intelligible, it necessarily follows that that “All- 
Tree”, whose fruit that food is, must also be regarded as intelligible 
831C and spiritual. For it is incredible and is contrary to reason for an 
incorporeal and intelligible fruit to grow from a corporeal and 
sensible tree. Again, if both the fruit and the trees are spiritual, does 
not this compel us to believe and maintain that the place in which 
they subsist is not corporeal either but spiritual? 

N. What you say is to the point, is reasonable, and very like the 
truth. But in order that we may have the unshakable support of this 
father Ambrose, let us look more closely into what he has written in 
this book about Paradise and almost everything which the Divine 
History declares that it contains : 

“Many careful students are puzzled as to how, if at first it was 
831D God’s gift to men that they should be set in Paradise, or at the end it 
was as a reward for their great merits that every just man is snatched 
up into Paradise, animals also, both the beasts of the field and the 
birds of the air, are said to have been in Paradise. Hence for the 

BOOK IV 

489 

most part they believe that Paradise is the soul of man, in which the 
seeds of the virtues, as it were, germinate : but that man, that is, the 
mind of man, is placed there to till and to guard Paradise. For it is 
by the virtue of the mind that the soul seems to be tended ; and not 
only tended, but thereafter protected. But the beasts of the field and 
the birds of the air which are brought to Adam are our irrational 
emotions, because the beasts and cattle are the various passions of 
the body, either the more violent or the more sluggish ones. And as 
to the birds of the air, what else should they be but the empty 
thoughts which hover birdlike about our souls, and often lead it in 
varied motion to one thing or another? Therefore there was found 
no other similar helpmeet for our minds but the sense or aia0r|aiq ; 
only that could our mind find like to itself. 

“But perhaps you will argue that these things also, the passions 
of the body and the vanity of the empty vacillating thoughts, were 
placed in this Paradise by God, and that therefore He Himself was 
the author of our transgressions? Consider what He says: ‘You 
have power over the fishes of the sea and over the birds of the air 
and over all creeping things which creep upon the face of the earth.’ 
You see that He has given you power to make judgments upon them 
and by the sober definitions of your Judgment discern the genus of 
each. God called all things to you that you might learn that your 
mind should be supreme over them all. Why have you desired to 
cleave to those things which are not of your kind, and to Join 
yourself to them? He gave you a sure sense by which you might 
know all things and Judge your thoughts. With Justice you were 
driven forth from that fertile field of Paradise, for you could not 
keep His commandment. For God knew that you were a fragile 
thing. He knew you were incapable of Judgment ; and it was for that 
that He said to you, as to rather fragile creatures : ‘Judge not, that 
ye be not Judged.’ Therefore because He knew you to be uncertain in 
your Judgments, He desired that you should be obedient to His 
mandate, and so laid a command upon you : and if you had not 
transgressed it you could not have incurred the dangers of your 
unsure Judgment. But since you willed to Judge and so dared. He 
therefore added: ‘Behold Adam has become one of us, so as to 
know good and evil.’ You willed to arrogate Judgment to yourself: 
you should not then refuse the punishment for perverse Judgment. 
But He has placed you over against Paradise so that you may not 
lose the memory of it. Finally the righteous are often snatched into 
Paradise as Paul was, and heard there ineffable things spoken. And 
you, if through the vigour of your mind you be rapt from the first 

The beasts 
and birds of 
Paradise 

832A 

832B 

832C 

PERIPHYSEON 

490 

heaven to the second and from the second to the third, seeing that in 
the first each man is a body, in the second a living body, and in the 
third a spirit, you will be so rapt to the third heaven that you may 

832D see the splendour of the spiritual Grace: for the animal man does 
not know the things of the Spirit of God. And therefore the 
ascension to the third heaven is necessary for you in order that you 
may be rapt into Paradise and you may now be taken there to judge 
all things without peril: for the Spirit judgeth all things and is 
judged of none.” 

See how Ambrose confirms the interpretation of Origen but 
weakens that of Epiphanius. For Origen maintains that Paradise is 
in the Third Heaven, which is the intellectual heaven, that is, in man 

833A himself as Mind. But Epiphanius, as we have shown above, giving 
an over-simple interpretation, considers Paradise to be some earthly 
place, and the trees to be earthly and the fountains sensible : but this 
is not acceptable to right reason. For it is not to be believed that the 
Paradise into which the Apostle was rapt was other than that in 
which the first man was made in the image of God and from which 
he was thrust out in punishment for his sin. For the Divine History 
mentions but one Paradise and but one man created in it — though 
the one man includes both male and female, if the words of the Holy 
Fathers are to be followed. For the male is the Intelligible Principle 

833B of human nature which the Greeks call vouc;, the female is sense 
which they call by a word in the feminine gender, aia0r|ai(; : by 
whose mystical marriage the future union of Christ and His Church 
is prefigured. And this man and woman, that is, mind and sense, 
were not only permitted but enjoined by the Divine Law to eat of 
the Tree of Life, that is to say, of the Wisdom and Word of God, 
Which is the Lord Christ. For He is planted in the midst of the 
paradise of human nature, and is the spiritual Bread which is the 
food of angels and of perfect men whose conversation is in heaven. 
They are forbidden, however, to hanker after the undiscriminating 
and confused knowledge of good and evil which is implanted in 
imperfect souls by delight in the beauty of material objects. To 
abstain from this is to merit eternal life, wrongly to use it is to incur 
eternal death. 

833C But as to the other things which Scripture has to say about 
Paradise, although they are introduced by anticipation and as 
having taken place in Paradise, they are more and more reasonably 
understood to have occurred outside after the Fall, seeing that they 
were added to human nature as a penalty for its transgression and 
concern the outward man. 

BOOK IV 

491 

For instance : “Therefore the Lord God formed man of the clay 
of the earth, and breathed in his face the breath of life, and man 
became a living soul.” How is that which is created in the image of 
God formed out of the clay of the earth? And how could the same 
thing be said of him, “man became a living soul,” as was said of the 
other beasts, which had been brought forth from the earth : “Let the 
earth bring forth living soul?” Have we not here good reason to 
believe that there were two creations of man? For first it is written : 
“And God created man in His own image in the image of God 
created He him.” This is the first creation, in which there is no 
mention of the clay of the earth nor of the living soul. But then 
follows a second creation which began with the division of his 
nature into two sexes as a punishment for transgression : “Male and 
female” he says, “created He them.” First, by the use of the 
singular, the unity of human nature before the Fall is indicated : “In 
the image of God created He him :” but then the plural is used with 
reference to the division of that nature after the Fall: “Male and 
female created He them.” 

19 

The first and 
833D 
second 
creation of 
man 

834A 

From this division followed the assimilation to the irrational 
animals: “Man” he says, “was made a living soul.” He does not 
say : “a life-giving spirit.” “The First Man,” says the Apostle, “is of 
the earth earthy, the Second Man,” in Whom the whole of human 
nature is restored, “is of heaven heavenly. And first,” that is to say, 
in the First Man, the transgressor, “there was not that which was 
spiritual but that which was animal : then,” that is, in the Second 
Man, the restoring, “that which is spiritual.” Moreover this is made 
perfectly plain by the text of the Divine History. For after the 
second creation of the earthy man from the clay of the earth as a 
living soul in the likeness of the rest of the animals has been 834B 
introduced, to avoid confusion with the first creation in the image of 
God there is a particular reference to the latter: “Now the Lord 
God had planted a Paradise of pleasure from the beginning,” that is, 
from the first creation. Clearly this means : Do not relate to the first 
creation the text “and man became a living soul,” but to the second. 

Take the first to be the plantation of Paradise: for God planted a 
Paradise of pleasure, that is to say, God planted human nature in 
Eden, in the joy of eternal bliss. And where had He planted it? In 
the Beginning, that is to say, in the Word, in which God made 
heaven and earth. 

Notice the precise meaning of the verbs. In speaking of the 
second creation the Prophet used the verb in the past tense, “Man 834C 

492 

PERIPHYSEON 

The 

nakedness of 
Adam and 
Eve 

834D 

835A 

835B 

became a living soul but in the first the verb is in the pluperfect : 
“The Lord God had planted a Paradise,” so that you may know 
that the first is prior to the second, not of course in time, but in 
dignity and blessedness. And in the First Man had been a creature of 
so spiritual a nature that he did not require the use of any corporeal 
sense, but could depend wholly on the function of his intelligence. 
To this too St. Ambrose bears witness : 

“And their eyes were opened and they knew that they were 
naked.” “And before that they were naked,” he says, “but they were 
not without the covering of the virtues : they were naked because of 
the simplicity of their habits and because their nature was innocent 
of the cloak of deceit. But now the human mind is veiled in many 
concealments of pretence. So after integrated and incorrupt natures 
are robbed of their sincerity and simplicity, they begin to seek after 
earthly and artificial things with which to cover the nakedness of 
their minds with delights and conceal their hidden genital organ. 
For how did Adam use his body, who saw all living things and 
endowed each with a name? How did they know? By an inner and a 
higher knowledge they knew that they lacked not tunics but the 
coverings of the virtues.” 

So in the same way in which he saw all the animals, he 
recognised his own nakedness, that is to say, with the sole eye of the 
interior knowledge and the simple eye of the mind, without the aid 
of the perishable and corporeal sense. By this we are given to 
understand that the First Man before he was despoiled of the 
garment of the virtues was able to contemplate all the animals and 
birds which, we are told, were created from earth and water and 
were distributed about the spaces of the earth in their own places 
and natural lairs, by contemplation not of a localised kind nor by 
the corporeal sense, but by the observation of the mind alone (which 
excels every corruptible sense, and all place and all time) of the 
principles according to which they were created. 

There is also a reference to the First Man’s nakedness in 
Gregory the Theologian’s Treatise on Easter: 

“Such a condition became man in the beginning, to be naked 
by reason of his simplicity and his artless life and his freedom from 
every veil and barrier.” 

Maximus explains these words in the Forty-First Chapter of the 
Ambigua : 

BOOK IV 

493 

“Naked perhaps, as the master says, by reason of the manifold 
contemplation and knowledge of natural objects, and a life that was 
artless in regard to act and power, subsisting apart from varied 
artificiality, having for its raiment the immaculate principles of the 
virtues. And without any veil or barrier, because it is not in need of 
that knowledge which resides in the sensible perceptions and visible 
objects to introduce the understanding to divine matters, since it 
possesses access to the simple vision of the uniform and continuing 
power and knowledge of the things which are next after God ; an 
operation which requires only to be put into action to manifest itself 
spontaneously. Therefore they who desire to rise again through 
philosophical reasoning from the fall of our first father, let them 
begin by the total removal of sensual passions; then flying above 835C 
preoccupations with the reasons of the arts and finally natural 
contemplation, let them look upon the eternal and immaterial 
knowledge that is absolutely without forms impressed from sense, 
or intellection deriving from the lead of reason. Then just as God 
made the First Man in the beginning, they will be naked in the 
simplicity of knowledge, unbounded life, and the death of the law of 
the flesh.” 

And the trance which the Lord God sent upon Adam must be 
interpreted in the same way. For that sleep appears to be both the 
cause of sin and also sent upon, or rather, permitted after, sin. For 
Scripture often employs a figure of speech which describes what 
God permits to be done as though He Himself does it. So that trance 
was the deflection of the intention of the mind, which ought always 
and inflexibly to have been fixed upon its Creator, to the delights of 835D 
material objects, and it was the lust for carnal copulation, as the 
blessed Ambrose explains : 

“What is that trance,” he asks, “other than the turning of our 
mind for a while to sexual intercourse when we seem to incline the 
eyes that were intent on God’s Kingdom and bend them to some 
sleep of this world, and to fall asleep for a while to divine matters, 
taking our rest in profane and worldly things?” 

After this trance, that is, this turning away of the mind from 
eternal to temporal things, from God to the creature, there follows a 836A 
sleep. “After God” he says, “sent the trance upon Adam, Adam 
slept,” that is to say, he separated himself entirely from the vigour of 
eternal and blessed contemplation and, emptied of every virtue, fell 
into the delight of sensible things, abandoning completely the 
spiritual senses. 

20 

Adam’s sleep 

494 

PERIPHYSEON 

And here it is to be noted that after Adam fell asleep Scripture 
introduces the creation of woman, by which it is implied that if 
human nature had not by the irrational motion of the free will 
deserted the simple and pure integrity of its constitution in which it 
was made in the image of God, but had always and unchangeably 
remained in the contemplation of the truth, it would on no account 
have suffered division into two sexes in which it becomes like the 
irrational animals, but would propagate in the same way as the 
836B number of the angels is multiplied without the aid of sex. But since 
of his own accord he fell asleep, that is, human nature willingly fell 
from its dignity, it acquired the division of that nature and a 
generative process similar to that of the beasts of the field. 

836C 

The first and 
second Adam 
but 

contrariwise 

“And when he had fallen asleep” he says, “He took one of his 
ribs and replaced it with flesh, and the Lord God fashioned the rib 
which He had taken from Adam into woman.” Now although under 
the figure of this one rib which God took from Adam seem to be 
signified both the division of his nature into two sexes, and the 
taking away from him of the guardianship of the universal inner 
virtue which was within him before he had sinned ; and by the flesh 
which was put in the place from which the rib was taken seems to be 
meant that most unhappy alteration whereby the guardianship of 
virtue and blessedness was exchanged for the deadly folly of vice 
and wretchedness: yet I think we are rather to understand here a 
prophetic prefiguration of the mystery of Christ and the Church. 
For as the Apostle teaches, the First Man, Adam, is always a figure 
of the Man to come, Christ : but an inverse figure. For in the First 
Man nature was split into male and female : in the Second Man it is 
brought together, for in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor 
female. In the First Man all nature was expelled from the blessedness 
of Paradise : in the Second Man it is recalled and re-established into 
that same blessedness. In the First Man flesh is put in the place of 
rib, that is to say, weakness in the place of power: in the Second 
Man weakness and death are swallowed up while power and eternal 
life are bestowed upon human nature, “for as in Adam all men die, 
so in Christ are all men made alive.” 

836D Therefore, as St. Augustine says, “Adam sleeps and Eve is 
made : Christ dies and the Church is made.” While Adam sleeps Eve 
is made from his side: when Christ is dead His side is pierced that 
the sacraments may flow forth upon which the Church is built. For 
the Blood stands for the consecration of the Cup, the Water for the 
consecration of baptism. 

BOOK IV 

In the First Man human nature puts on tunics of skin, that is to 
say, mortal bodies, renouncing the nakedness, that is, the purity and 
simplicity, of its proper nature : in the Second Man she has the 
tunics of skin taken from her, and all the folly of mortal bodies is 
removed, and the nakedness, or simplicity, of her former state is 
resumed. 

So, as I have said before, although we read the events described 
by Scripture as taking place after the trance had been sent upon 
Adam as apparently occurring in Paradise, it is more reasonable and 
accords better with the truth to believe and understand that they 
were added to human nature as a punishment for disobedience after 
the transgression and therefore outside Paradise. For if the Paradise 
of God which He planted in delights is the human nature which was 
created in the image of God and was not disfigured by spot of sin, I 
do not see how we can understand that anything which is held to be 
outside the dignity of that nature and the cause of its Fall was not 
also outside Paradise. But I am not unaware that Holy Scripture 
very frequently makes use of that figure of speech which is called by 
the Greeks uaxepov irpoiepov and by the Latins praeposterum or 
anticipation, the equivalent of the Greek 7rp6}ir|V|/i(; ; Matthew the 
Evangelist uses it when he describes the passion and Resurrection of 
the Lord. For he writes of the events which took place at the 
moment of the Resurrection as though they occurred at the time of 
the Passion : 

“Now Jesus crying again in a loud voice yielded up His Spirit, 
and behold the veil of the Temple was rent in two parts from the top 
to the bottom, and the earth was moved, and stones were split, and 
tombs were opened up, and many bodies of the Saints which had 
been asleep arose and coming forth from their tombs after His 
Resurrection came into the holy city and were seen by many.” 

All these things occurred in a series of events after the 
Resurrection of the Lord, but the Evangelist wished to adopt this 
figure of speech and so described them as taking place just after the 
Passion. For it is not to be believed that the tombs of others were 
opened before He opened His own tomb, or that witnesses to the 
truth of the Resurrection were already resurrected before He of 
Whose Resurrection they are witnesses should Himself have arisen. 

So the drowsiness of Adam, and the sleep that followed it, and 
the removal of the rib, and the division of the one nature into two 
sexes, and the mystical recognition of his wife, and all the other 
events which prefigure Christ and the Church ; as well as their 

495 

837A 

The things 
which we 
read were 
suitably done 
after the sin 

837B 

837C 

496 

PERIPHYSEON 

837D 

838A 

No sooner 
was man 
838B 
created than 
he fell 

The fig-tree 

838C 

recognition of their nakedness, that is, of the purity of their nature 
(which did not at first cause them to blush because they were clothed 
in the raiment of the virtues which is unspotted by the delights of the 
irrational emotions), which in sinning they lost, and in losing 
became conscious of, and the deceptive and crafty persuasion of the 
serpent, and the conversation between the woman and the serpent, 
and her seduction by him, and the illicit plucking of the fruit of the 
forbidden tree, and the fatal tasting of it, the willing consent and fall 
of the man, not because he did not know that it was a sin but 
because he thought it but a light one to consent unto his only wife 
(for it was not Adam but the woman who was seduced ; for he did 
not sin unwittingly, and therefore was worthy of a severer punish¬ 
ment), the opening of their eyes wherein they saw their nakedness, 
the sewing of girdles from fig-leaves, the hearing of the voice of the 
Lord walking in Paradise, the flight of them both, Adam and his 
wife, from the face of the Lord God and their hiding of themselves 
in the tree, and all the other events up to the expulsion of man from 
Paradise ; — all these things Holy Scripture records by anticipation 
and out of their proper sequence as having taken place in Paradise, 
whereas they are the consequences of sin. For if Paradise is human 
nature as it is made in the image of God and established on an 
equality with the blessed state of the angels, then as soon as it willed 
to turn away from its Creator, in that very moment it fell from the 
dignity of its nature. For even before he consented unto his wife he 
began to wax proud. For if the Divine History records no temporal 
interval between his creation and his fall, how else can this omission 
in Scripture be interpreted than that soon after man was created he 
waxed proud and was therefore ruined? But the weightiest proof of 
this is in the Devil’s guilt of manslaughter : for he “was a man-slayer 
from the beginning, and did not abide in the truth.” He too without 
any intervening delay fell by pride as soon as he was created and by 
his not surprising envy of the man who was created together with 
himself and by his destruction of him with the poison of his guile. 

But you have heard enough of Paradise, I think. 

A. It would perhaps be enough if only you would give your 
opinion about that fig-tree from the leaves of which they sewed their 
girdles, and of the Lord God’s walking in Paradise. 

For the tunics of skin have been dealt with already. 

N. That fig-tree is not inappropriately regarded as the divine 
precept of the law given to the first human beings in Paradise. Now 

21 

BOOK IV 

497 

that precept was as follows : “Of every tree of Paradise thou shalt 
eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and of evil thou shalt 
not eat.” And that they might keep the precept the more carefully 
the peril involved in transgression was not hidden from them : “For 
on the day on which thou eatest of it thou shalt die the death.” 
There was then a law given to the first human beings in Paradise, 
and that they kept the words of it in their memories is clear from the 
reply which the woman gave to the serpent : “Of the fruit of the trees 
that are in Paradise we may feed, but of the fruit of the tree which is 
in the midst of Paradise God commanded us not to eat nor to touch 
it, lest we die.” But the serpent put a wrong interpretation on the 
words of the Law so that first he might seduce the woman, that is, 
the sense, and then through her gain access to the man, or mind. He 
belittled the true and saving power of the Divine Precept, which if 
that woman had known and loved and revered, she would not 
perhaps have been seduced by the serpent, nor have enticed her 
husband to his downfall, nor would they have sewn together for 
themselves girdles, that is to say, practices according with the desires 
of the flesh and its pernicious obscenities, of figleaves, that is, of the 
words only of the Precept ; but would have taken and eaten of the 
fruit of the fig-tree, that is of the true and life-giving power and 
understanding of the divine Law, and would have lived in bliss for 
all eternity. Thus when the Divine Law is perversely interpreted and 
is only observed according to the letter and is corrupted by the 
superstitions of man or devil, it becomes favourable to the lusts of 
the flesh and wears girdles sewn together from irrational emotions, 
as though from empty leaves, being devoid of every virtue and true 
intelligible principle. But when it is well and spiritually understood, 
and is purged of every carnal sense and superstition, it brings forth 
saving and life-giving food for those who eat of it, that is, who 
understand it rightly according to the spirit. 

Of this fruit the first human beings were unwilling to eat, and 
were therefore all the more ready to believe the interpretation of the 
false-tongued serpent. They did not accept the fruit of the fig of the 
Law for the nourishment of their spirit, but only leaves, empty of 
nourishment and full of deceit, that is to say, they accepted only the 
verbal sense, words woven together by the subtlety of the Devil, by 
which they could cover up the obscenity of their lusts. 

And here we are in agreement with St. Ambrose, who in his 
book on Paradise explains the fig-tree as follows : 

838D 

839A 

The girdles 

839B 

The fruit of 
the fig-tree 

498 

PERIPHYSEON 

“They sewed figleaves and made themselves girdles. As to the 
interpretation of fig in this place, we have a whole series of divine 
texts to instruct us. The Scriptures record that those are secure who 
shelter beneath the vine and the fig; and Solomon has said: ‘Who 
plants a fig-tree and does not eat of the fruit of it?’ and the Lord 
839C came to a fig-tree and was offended at it because He found no fruit 
but leaves only. So I learn from Adam what those leaves are, for 
after he had sinned, he made himself girdles of the leaves of the fig, 
who should rather have tasted of its fruit. The righteous man 
chooses the fruit, the sinner the leaves. What is the fruit ? The fruit 
of the spirit, says the Apostle, is charity, joy, peace, patience, 
kindness, modesty, continence, and love. He did not have fruit who 
did not have joy : he did not have faith who was about to transgress 
the precept of God : he did not have continence who tasted of the 
tree which was forbidden him. Therefore whosoever transgresses the 
Precept of God is despoiled and stripped and naked, and becomes a 
thing abhorrent to himself, and wishes to cover himself with certain 
figleaves, perhaps certain empty and obscure treatises, which the 
sinner stitches together with fabricated pronouncements, taking 
839D them word by word, to form a veil wherewith to cover up the 
shamefulness of his consciousness of thought and deed, that his 
shameful parts may be hidden. Thus he who desires to hide his own 
guilt, or records the fact that the Devil is the author of his sin or 
draws attention to the traps into which the flesh may fall, or 
840A suggests some other agent for his transgression sews leaves on 
himself. And he often produces instances from the scriptures of just 
men falling into sin, quoting ‘If a man be taken in adultery,’ and 
Abraham’s sleeping with a handmaid, and David’s love for the wife 
of another, and his taking her as wife. These leaves he sews to 
himself, these examples from the text of the prophetic Scriptures, 
but the fruit of them he thinks he can do without. Do you not think 
that the Jews also sew on leaves when they interpret in a corporeal 
sense the words of the spiritual Law? Their interpretation loses all 
the fruit of its verdure and is damned with the curse of eternal 
sterility. Therefore the good interpretation, namely the spiritual, is 
the fruitful fig-tree under which the righteous and the saints take 
their rest, and he who has planted it in the souls of others (as Paul 
840B says ‘I planted, Apollo watered’) shall eat the fruit thereof. But the 
evil interpretation will not be able to bear fruit nor preserve its 
verdure. It was all the more serious then that Adam girdled himself 
with this interpretation in the place where he should have girdled 
himself with the fruit of chastity.” 

BOOK IV 

You have heard Ambrose on the fig-tree. Hear him now on the 
Walk of God in Paradise, that is, in human nature as He had created 
it in His own image, which He never abandoned nor gave over to 
destruction, in which after a mystic and spiritual manner He is 
always walking, examining the hearts and the reins of each, 
enquiring in an intelligible voice after the causes of our transgression, 
and rebuking and correcting us with a mercy greater than the justice 
of His vengeance. These, then, are the words of the said master : 

“And they heard the voice of God as He was walking towards 
evening. What is meant by the walking of Him Who is always 
everywhere? But I think there is a kind of walking of God through 
the sequence of the Holy Scriptures : for they seem to be pervaded 
by the Divine Presence, as when we hear that He beholds all things, 
and that the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and when we 
read that Jesus knew their thoughts, and when we read : ‘Why think 
ye evil in your hearts?’ So when we recall these passages, we 
recognise the voice of the Lord as He is walking. So the sinner had 
run away not in order to hide from the sight of God, but because he 
desired to hide his works within his own conscience, not wishing 
them to be brought into the open. For to the righteous man it 
belongs to see God face to face, because the mind of the righteous 
man is not only present to God, but even reasons with God, as it is 
written : ‘Judge the child and justify the widow and come, let us 
reason together, says the Lord.’ Therefore when the sinner reads the 
Holy Scriptures, he hears the voice of God as though walking 
towards evening. What can the words, ‘towards evening’ mean but 
the lateness of the recognition of his fault and of the shame that he 
has of it now that it has been committed, but which he should have 
felt before he committed it? For while sin boils up in the body, and 
the soul is agitated by the corporeal passions, the sense of the 
transgressor does not think of God, that is to say, he does not hear 
Him walking in the Holy Scriptures, he does not hear Him walking 
in the minds of men. For God says : ‘Seeing that I shall dwell among 
them, and walk among them, and I shall be their God.’ Therefore 
when the fear of the Divine Power returns into the senses of our 
soul, then we blush, then we try to hide ourselves, then are we taken 
in the consciousness of our sins, in the midst of the Tree of Paradise, 
where we have committed our offences, wishing to lie concealed, 
and thinking that God does not look into the hidden places.’’ 

From these words of our master you may understand that that 
tree in the midst of Paradise in which the fugitive sinners had 

499 

The Lord’s 
walking in 
Paradise 

840C 

840D 

The evening 

84IA 

The tree 
where the 
transgressors 
tried to hide 
themselves 

500 

PERIPHYSEON 

thought they could hide themselves is none other than the secret 
places of man’s thought and conscience. 

“But,” he goes on, “He Who looks into our souls and our 
thoughts and penetrates even to the division of the mind said to 
The voice of Adam I ‘Adam, where are you ?’ In what way does God speak ? With 
God ^ corporeal voice? Not so, but by that power which is greater than 
the voice of the body, and which pours forth oracles; the Voice 
which the Prophets have heard, the Voice which the faithful hear, 
the Voice which the impious do not understand.” 

Anyone who examines closely the meaning of such treatises 
may see for himself that Paradise is not a localised or particular 
piece of woodland on earth, but a spiritual garden sown with the 
seeds of the virtues and planted in human nature, or, to be more 
precise, is nothing else but the human substance itself created in the 
image of God, in which the Tree of Life, that is the Word and 
wisdom of God, gives fruit to all life ; and in the midst of which 
streams forth the Fountain of all good things, which again is the 
Divine Wisdom. There that fig-tree which is the divine Law has its 
roots, of which the true and spiritual interpretation is the fruit of life 

841C to those who eat of it, that is to say, to those who devoutly and 
perfectly understand it, while the perverse and carnal interpretation 
according to the letter is the empty and unfruitful leaves with which 
the transgressors of the Divine Law strive to cover their faults by 
deceitful excuses, daring even to place the blame upon the Lawgiver 
Himself, or upon the Devil, or upon some other person, or 
comparing them with deeds which the Holy Patriarchs symbolically 
performed, interpreting them literally in a carnal sense without at all 
understanding the spiritual meaning, and bringing forward such 
examples taken from the Holy Scriptures as relevant to their 
transgression, of whom the Apostle aptly says : “The letter kills but 
the spirit makes alive.” 

841D In this intelligible Paradise God goes walking. For He is the 
Guardian and Inspector of the Garden which He has made in His 
image and likeness. His is the Voice which cannot be expounded: 
“Adam where are you?” This is the voice of the Creator rebuking 
human nature. It is as if He said : Where are you now after your 
transgression? For I do not find you there where I know that I 
created you, nor in that dignity in which I made you in My image 

842A and likeness, but I rebuke you as a deserter from blessedness, a 
fugitive form the true light, hiding yourself in the secret places of 
your conscience, and I enquire into the cause of your disobedience. 

BOOK IV 

501 

Do you suppose that I do not know what you have done or whethei 
you have fled or how in fear of My voice you have concealed 
yourself or in what way you came to a late recognition of your 
nudity, that is, of the purity and simplicity of the nature in which 
you were created? Have you not gone through all this because you 
have eaten of the tree of which I commanded that you were not to 
eat? For if you had not eaten perhaps you would not fear the voice 
of your Creator as He walks within you, nor flee from His face, nor 
have become aware of the nakedness which you lost when you 
sinned. 

Now although about the Forbidden Tree itself we have already 
said a great deal in the preceding chapters, taking Gregory of Nyssa 
as our guide, I think we must speak a little more about it, 
introducing this time the exposition of that most noble master, the 
monk Maximus. For he understands the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and of Evil to be the visible creature which man followed 
when he abandoned his Creator. For within the visible creature is 
voluptuous delight and the occasion of anxiety and the fruit of 
death, which is a kind of compound of the false good of lust and the evil 
of the sorrow which is to follow. For there is no pleasure provided 
by the visible creature which is not followed by want : and want is 
followed by anxiety and the sorrow of death. And although when 
pleasure smiles, the anxiety and cause of death lie hid, they are 
already there in the human soul, being born at the same instant. The 
anxiety lies concealed beneath the false beauty of pleasure and it is a 
kind of fruit compounded of manifest lust and latent anxiety. But 
when pleasure and delight in the visible creature begin to fade there 
remains revealed in all her nakedness the anxiety which is born of 
the craving for the visible good which is no more. St. Maximus 
writes as follows : 

“Were a man to say that the Tree of the Knowledge of Good 
and of Evil is the visible creature, he would not be far wrong. For it 
has the perception which naturally produces pleasure and anxiety. 
Or since the creature possesses both spiritual principles of visible 
things and the principles which nourish the mind, and again a 
natural power of delighting the sense, but of corrupting the mind, it 
is called the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of Evil. For 
considered under its spiritual aspect it has the knowledge of good, 
but taken corporally it has the knowledge of evil. For to those who 
receive that knowledge with their bodies it becomes the mistress of 
the passions, bringing upon them forgetfulness of divine things. 

22 

842B 

842C 

842D 

502 

PERIPHYSEON 

Therefore God meanwhile intervened to forbid man to have per¬ 
ception of the visible creature, so that at first, as was very just, he 
might by participation of Grace learn his proper Cause, and the 
immortality with which he was through Grace endowed, and might 
then through perception of this tree be perfected in impassibility and 
immutability. And as though made God by deification he might by 
communion with the blameless Deity contemplate the creatures of 
God and have knowledge of them as a god and no longer as a man, 
843A having through Grace in wisdom the same knowledge of the things 
that are as God has, because of the same transmutation of mind and 
sense to deification. This is the interpretation of the Tree which 
must be accepted according to a solution which meets all the 
considerations.” 

See how beautifully and how clearly he explains the meaning of 
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and of Evil. It is, he says, the 
nature of visible things, which when comprehended in a spiritual 
sense in its principle provides the knowledge of good and a spiritual 
fruit to those who comprehend it. But those who incontinently lust 
after it in carnal concupiscence, and put it to a use contrary to the 
laws of God it infects with a deadly knowledge. Thus the cause of 
evil is not implanted in nature itself, but in the intemperance of 
those who use her wrongly. And this is that woman, or, I might say, 
that tree, of whom the Lord says : “Whoever looks upon a woman 
to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his 
843B heart.” For the outward appearance of material things, although it 
is in its nature beautiful, gives occasion of death to the senses of 
those who incautiously and lustfully consider it. For God created 
the visible creature to this purpose, that through it, as through the 
invisible. His glory might abound, and that He, Who cannot be 
known as to what He is but that He is, might be known as the One 
Creator of the whole creature, visible and invisible. And for that 
reason God forbade human nature to take pleasure in knowledge of 
the visible creature until it had attained the perfection of wisdom, in 
which having achieved deification it might reason together with 
God concerning the principles of visible things. Nor could that 
woman, that is to say, carnal sense, have enticed that man, that is to 
843C say, mind, to delight in the material creature exteriorly considered, 
if he had wished to possess the knowledge of the Creator before that 
of the created. The order of the Divine Law, then, was first to know 
the Creator and His ineffable beauty, and then to contemplate the 
creature with the reasonable sense controlled by the dictates of the 
mind and to refer all its beauty to the glory of God, whether the 

BOOK IV 

503 

inner beauty of the principles or the outward beauty of the sensible 
forms. But man in his pride despises this order of the Divine Law, 
and places the love and knowledge of his Creator beneath the 
outward beauty of the material creature, and thus incurs the danger 
of the wrath of God, and falls into the death of the body and the 
soul and the destruction of his whole nature, for he has neglected to 
observe the most just and beautiful order of the Divine Law. 

In speaking thus of the Forbidden Tree I have had regard for 
the interpretations of reputable commentators of Holy Scripture. 843D 
The same interpretation is introduced by St. Augustine into the 
Eleventh Book of his Hexemeron : 

“But I am not unaware that it is the opinion of some that it was 
by their overhastiness that those first human beings anticipated their 
desire for the knowledge of good and evil, and because they wished, 
before the time was ripe, for that which was being reserved for them 
at a later and more opportune occasion ; and that the object of the 
tempter’s action was that by plucking too soon fruit that was not 
suitable for them they might offend against God, and, exiled and 844A 
damned, they might be debarred from the use of His creature, which 
had they approached at the proper time, as God willed, they could 
have profitably enjoyed. These things we have spoken for the benefit 
of such as may wish to take that tree not in the literal sense of a real 
tree with real fruit, but in a figurative sense, so that they may come 
to some conclusion that can be approved by right belief and truth.” 

But our master Augustine seems neither to support nor reject 
this theory of a spiritual Paradise : this is consistent with his belief 
that there were two paradises, the one earthly and local and 
possessing the properties of sensible nature, the other entirely 
spiritual, in the image of which the earthly and sensible one was 
made. 

A. Those who hold such opinions concerning the Forbidden 
Tree do not seem to me to depart from the truth : for it is likely and 844B 
quite in accordance, I think, with sound reason that man should 
have been driven by the most righteous judgment of his Creator 
away from the sweetness of the Tree of Life, that is to say, from the 
delights of the internal contemplation, in which and for which he 
was created, at the very moment that he began to feed on the 
Forbidden Tree, that is, to presume to make improper use of the 
sensual knowledge of sensible matter. For if he had followed the 
natural and rational procedure, that is, if he had first devoted the 
whole of his attention to the contemplation of the Cause of all 
things, and then of the principles according to which and in which 

504 

PERIPHYSEON 

all things were made, he would neither have been excluded from the 
intelligible food of the Tree of Life, which is the internal awareness 
of the Divine Wisdom, nor have been prohibited from tasting the 
forbidden apple, which is the knowledge of visible matter, at the ripe 
844C and convenient time when that Wisdom should have been perfected 
by which he should know first God and then the creature without 
error and without taking delight in the lusts of the flesh. For it is 
impossible that knowledge of the creature could be an impediment 
to the rational soul, in which the perfect contemplation of the 
Creator begins to shine forth. But where the observation of created 
nature precedes the knowledge of the Creator, there is no way of 
escaping the phantasies and illusions of sensible things. Consequently 
there cannot be freedom from error save in those who, bathed in the 
splendour of the Divine Ray, take the path of right contemplation 
and seek themselves and their God ; for in these the knowledge of 
the Creator precedes the knowledge of the creature. 

Therefore, the creature is not evil, nor is the knowledge of it 
844D evil, but the perverse motion of the rational soul abandons the 
contemplation of her Creator and turns herself with lustful and 
illicit longing to the love of sensible matter, pursuing a fatal path 
from which unless she is first set free by the Grace of God there can 
be no return. For, as St. Augustine says, because human nature 
possesses free will she is capable of doing herself injury. But once 
she is wounded and disabled she is no longer capable through free 
845A will of healing herself. But now we must discuss the matters which 
still remain to be discussed. 

23 N. What remains ? Elas not enough been said about Paradise? 
For of the action of the man when, rebuked by the voice of God, he 
brought the charge against the woman in order to attenuate his and 
her guilt by laying the blame upon Him Who had given him the 
woman, and of the action of the woman herself in transferring the 
cause of transgression to the serpent, I do not think it is necessary to 
speak, for the matter has been sufficiently discussed by the com¬ 
mentators of Holy Scripture. 

A. On the contrary, I think it both useful and necessary. For 
there may be those who think that these accusations by which the 
man laid the blame for sin upon the woman whom God had given 
him, and thus upon the Giver of the woman, and the woman upon 
the serpent, are reasonable and justifiable defences excusing them from 
845B punishment, unless they are convicted by right reason and rejected 

BOOK IV 

505 

as unjustified and reprehensible and shown to deserve the highest 
penalty which sin may be awarded. 

N. Let us consider the words of Scripture itself : “Adam said, 

The woman Thou gavest me to be my companion, gave me of the 
tree and I did eat.” Pray tell me, Adam, who gave you the woman? 

The Lord, you say. Who made her. And why did He make her and 
give her to you? Why, when you were sleeping, that is to say, when 
you were turning the attention of your mind from the contemplation 
of truth to the love of a carnal spouse, did He take the rib from your 
side and make of it a woman and give her to you when you were 
sinning and abandoning Him? Why did He not make the woman 
whom He gave you in the same way as He made yourself? You 
yourself, as is fit in one who chose earthly things for heavenly 
things, were made of the dust of the earth. It is fitting that the 
woman should have been taken out of your side, seeing that the 845C 
cause of your transgression originated from yourself. You will reply, 

I think, that God made all these things because He willed them. And 
so He made them, because He “foresaw that they were so to be 
made. Who made all things whatever He willed.” But I am still 
asking you why He thus desired to make for you a woman. You will 
answer: Who can investigate the causes of the Will of God? “For 
who knows the sense of the Lord ?” You do not know, therefore, for 
what reason God made the woman whom He gave you? I do not, 
you will say, unless it were for assistance in procreation and in the 
multiplication of the human nature which was made in me in the 
beginning and received from me the beginning of its propagation. 

Here I disagree with you and refute your contention by sound 
reason. For human nature would not have required the shameful 
mode of procreation by male and female which resembles that of the 845D 
irrational animals if it had not by pride and contempt of the beauty 
of its simplicity in which it was created in the image of God 
abandoned the angelic mode of propagation which, as I have now 
said many times, is entirely independent of the sexual act. So you 
must look for another reason why the woman was given you. For 
the one which you have put forward is false. The Image of God in 846A 
which man was made is free and independent of all sexuality. I know 
of no other reason, you reply, save that which I have given and 
which I perceive that you have refuted. I am surprised to hear you 
say that you are ignorant of those things which happened as a result 
of your pride and disobedience. For I, who have sinned in you and 
in sin have died, am not ignorant. For there cries out in me a very 

506 

PERIPHYSEON 

clear and irrefutable reason, and one which bears the authority of 
many of the Fathers. If human nature had remained in that most 
pure and most simple bliss of the Divine Image, it would never have 
succumbed to sexuality, nor ever have been subjected to the 
shameful manner of procreation of the irrational living creatures. 
But since it was not willing to continue in that dignity in which it 
was created, but chose to propagate its species ingloriously among 
846B the other animals, its Creator Himself, foreseeing all things which 
man would do and be, when he had been destroyed by the perverse 
motion of his free will, added to his nature the two-fold sex to 
enable him to breed like the beasts. Why then do you transfer to the 
woman the guilt of your transgression, when it was from yourself, 
from your own pride and contempt and consequent desertion of 
God that the cause of the making of the woman proceeded? This is 
also made quite clear by God’s ironical words : “It is not good for 
man to be alone. Let Us make for him a companion like unto him.’’ 
The meaning is : Man whom We have made in Our image and 
likeness does not think it good to be alone, that is, to be a simple 
and perfect nature abiding everywhere without the division of his 
nature into sexes, being wholly in the likeness of the angelic nature, 
846C but prefers to tumble down headlong into earthly couplings like the 
beasts and so to multiply out of his seed the unity of his nature 
through carnal generation and the sexual organs of his body, 
holding in contempt the mode of propagation of the heavenly host. 
Let Us then make for him a companion like unto him through 
whom he can perform what he longs to do, that is to say, a woman 
who is fragile and unstable like the male, and is eager for earthly 
lusts. This is indicated in the Scriptures by anticipation : “Male and 
female created He them,’’ vessels, that is, for the carnal procreation 
of offspring, since the dignity of the spiritual propagation and of the 
Divine Image were now despised. Why then do you attempt to 
transfer the cause of your transgression, which is attributable to 
yourself, upon the woman whom your Creator gave you, and indeed 
846D upon the Creator Himself? Such a shift of the guilt is no defence but 
rather an aggravation of the offence. 

But perhaps someone will say that in maintaining that the 
division of human nature into male and female, by which sexual 
intercourse and matrimony and procreation and the increase of the 
species are made possible, were the penalties of transgression, we are 
attacking wedlock and the procreation of children. To such we 
would reply : We do not attack wedlock so long as it is a legitimate 

BOOK IV 

507 

union for the purpose of procreating children and not for the 847A 
gratification of lust, and so long as the faith and chaste modesty of 
each sex is preserved. Indeed we praise these institutions since they 
are permitted and ordained by God. For He says : “Increase and 
multiply and replenish the earth and none of the orthodox would 
doubt that each sex, without which carnal intercourse could not 
take place, is created by God. For the Scripture says : “Male and 
female created He them,” and in another place: “What God hath 
joined let no man put asunder.” On the other hand we unhesitatingly 
affirm that carnal intercourse, although it be the legitimate union of 
God-fearing persons, cannot be unaffected by the lustful and illicit 
itch of the flesh. For it is in this that children born after the flesh 
inherit the guilt of everlasting death, a guilt from which they are 
freed only by baptism into the Catholic Church. We further declare 847B 
that those carnal couplings whereby human nature is propagated in 
space and time would not have been necessary if man had not 
chosen to adopt a method of procreation similar to that of the 
beasts of the field in exchange for the angelic mode of increasing his 
nature. Thus David says : “Man did not understand that he was in 
honour and so came to compare himself with the irrational beasts of 
the field, and was made like unto them.” 

But let us turn now to the reply of the woman, in which she 
passes the blame for her sin on to the serpent. “The Lord God said 
to the woman, why have you done this? She replied. The serpent 
deceived me and I did eat.” And you, woman, why do you transfer 
the charge to the serpent when you yourself are the creator of your 
sin ? The very serpent to whom you attribute the fault creeps within 
yourself : carnal concupiscence and delight are your serpent, which 
is begot upon the corporeal sense by the motion of the irrational 847C 
soul. Vainly, then does the woman, that is, the carnal sense, 
transfer her blame upon the serpent, that is, upon irrational delight, 
of which she herself is the origin. For the illicit delight in material 
things does not spring from nature but from the imperfect and 
irrational motions of the sinning soul who in her fatal lustfulness 
bursts through the corporeal sense into the love of sensible things. 

And the ancient enemy would not have had access to the male part 
of the soul, that is, the mind which is created in the image of God, 
unless first he had seduced the corporeal sense, which is, so to speak, 
a woman : and the mind would not have consented to the pernicious 847D 
delight in material things and the monstrously abused enjoyment of 
the corporeal sense if proud presumption had not already existed in 

508 

848A 

848B 

848C 

The divine 
curse 

848D 

PERIPHYSEON 

him. So the pride of the mind and the illicit delight of the corporeal 
sense by coupling together gave human nature over to death ; from 
which only the humility of Christ and the love of spiritual things in 
faithful souls won her back and set her free. So there is nothing and 
nobody, woman, to blame for yourself save yourself, for you are 
proved to be yourself the author of that illicit desire upon which you 
attempt to shift the blame. 

In this connection you ought to study well the text of the divine 
words, which because of the sluggishness of our wits and the carnal 
senses which subject us, corrupted by our original sin, to this spatio- 
temporal existence, has set out as though taking place in space and 
time, but in a marvellous order full of mystic meaning, things which 
occurred simultaneously and which are not divided by any intervals 
of time. Thus the first to be interrogated is appropriately enough the 
man, that is, mind, for he presides over the whole paradise of human 
nature and should properly be the guardian who sees that the Divine 
Precept is not violated. And he is interrogated thus: Adam, where 
are you? Of which the meaning is: Adam, you who before you 
sinned were established beyond all space and time, where are you 
now, transgressor, answer Me. You were in heaven, a blessed 
creature, like unto the angels : you are now on earth, proud creature, 
like unto the brutes. Then it is the woman’s turn to he questioned, 
and she is asked why she did what she did. Note here that the 
sentence of the examining judge is not given upon the man and the 
woman together, but time seems to be allowed for the correction of 
their wicked excuses, and space is given for indulgence. At last, 
however, when the serpent’s turn comes, he is not interrogated, nor 
is any time allowed him to shift the blame on to some other person 
or thing, for that he could not do, being the Primordial Cause of all 
evil; but the sentence of the righteous Judge follows on him 
immediately, for God says to the serpent : “Because thou hast done 
this, cursed art thou among all animals and among the beasts of the 
field.” Notice that neither the man nor the woman but only the 
serpent is cursed. For God does not curse the things which He 
made, but blesses them ; and mind and sense are both creatures of 
God. But carnal delight arises outside of divine creation from the 
irrational passions of the human soul, and therefore comes under 
the severity of the divine sentence, because it supervenes from 
outside on the nature which was created by God. So this cursing of 
God is nothing else but the most righteous and irrevocable con¬ 
demnation of the things which are outside nature and defile it. 

BOOK IV 

509 

But the significance of those living creatures and beasts of the 849A 
field in which principally resides the carnal delight by means of 
which the Devil seduces the soul and lives as it were in his principal 
abode is excellently and exhaustively expounded by St. Ambrose in 
his book On Paradise. They are all the irrational passions of our 
rational nature which is signified in Scripture by the word “Earth”. 

Do not let it surprise you that both carnal delight and the subtlety of 
the Devil are indiscriminately signified as though mingled together 
under the figure of the serpent : for sometimes the serpent is a direct 
representation of the Devil himself, at others of the lustful appetite 
of the carnal soul, that is, the soul which lives according to the flesh, 
which is caught in his toils, at others again it is a confused and 
indistinct representation of both, implying that the one is involved 
in the other, for the one cannot exist in separation from the other. 849B 
For wherever there is a lustful thought in the soul, there at once will 
be an entrance for the unclean spirit ; and wherever there is an 
entrance for his diabolical subtlety, there will be present the itch of 
universal evil. And in whatever corporeal sense, which is signified by 
the woman, these two come together, there must necessarily follow 
the illicit tasting, or wrong use, of the forbidden fruit of the beauty 
of material objects : and this brings death to the soul, of which death 
the death of the body is the shadow. 

But concerning the curse which damned the serpent and the 
sentences which were delivered upon the woman and her husband 
Adam, sentences in which there was more of mercy than of 
vengeance, I think it would be superfluous for me to speak now. For 
it will not be considered necessary for me to expound what has 
already been satisfactorily expounded by the Holy Fathers ; for why, 849C 
it might be asked, should we repeat what has been made so clear and 
plain in their writings, as though we thought we could produce a 
better explanation? God forbid that this should be thought of us, 
who are barely able to follow in their footsteps. 

A. It certainly would not seem necessary if this were not the 
only occasion when you have experienced such diffidence. But it will 
seem strange and inconsistent with the method and exposition of 
your discourse if, after having considered it proper to speak of 
practically all that the Scripture has recorded concerning the nature 
of the spiritual Paradise and the things that were created in it, 
although your disquisition was little more than a cursory and brief 
epitome of the opinions of the Holy Fathers, this one passage you 
should have left wholly untouched, passing it by in awed silence. 

510 

PERIPHYSEON 

849D 

24 

The belly of 
the serpent 

850A 

850B 

850C 

Therefore it is not right that you should entirely ignore these 
matters, but rather give a brief but plain account of them. 

N. Let us hear the consideration of the divine indignation 
against the serpent : “On thy belly shalt thou go, and earth shalt 
thou eat all the days of thy life.” We have already said that in this 
passage the Scripture describes the serpent as signifying both the 
subtlety of the devil, and the indulgence of the flesh, and both 
bound together in an indiscriminate and indissoluble embrace. 

A. Good, and lucid, and not inconsistent with the truth. 

N. The belly of this serpent is the prudence of the flesh in 
which the cunning of the devil’s deceitfulness is dominant. And his 
belly is also empty and false-sounding wisdom which does not edify 
the mind but only inflates it. Thus the serpent’s belly is both carnal 
prudence and empty and false wisdom, both of which God shall 
bring to destruction : “I shall destroy the wisdom of the wise and the 
prudence of the prudent shall I reprove.” But if you ask what is the 
difference between the prudence of the flesh and empty philosophy, 
here is a formula which discriminates the one from the other : The 
prudence of the flesh is the false virtue which paints the vices with 
the colours of virtues; which shades wickedness to resemble good¬ 
ness ; which clothes baseness in the garment of honour : but the true 
and simple virtues it conceals by drawing them out of the sight of 
the mind so that it may not be able to recognise their pure face, and 
thus it deceives the carnal senses and deludes and ruins souls with 
deceitful images of false virtues and brings them down to the 
darkness of eternal death. Empty and useless wisdom is best 
exemplified among the perfidious Jews and venomous heretics ; it is 
the wisdom which follows only the letter of Holy Scripture, and 
hates, despises, neglects and has no knowledge of the spirit or 
mystical sense of it ; it is that which deludes the souls of carnal men 
by inventions entirely devoid of truth about the nature of the 
Universe, despising the truth of the natural principles in accordance 
with which the universal creature was created, and drawing attention 
by the use of strange and far-fetched expressions to its pompous and 
grandiloquent style, or disguising itself by means of the tortuous 
intricacies of false propositions and syllogisms under the form of 
truth which shall deceive the unwary. 

Of these two vices, therefore, the belly of the serpent, that is to 
say, the subtlety of the devil and the enticement of fleshly indulgence, 
is composed. It is upon this — his belly, that is — that the serpent 

BOOK IV 

511 

goes, that is, on which he is raised and in which he boasts, usurping 
the human state. This may be understood from the words of the 
Prophet : for he did not simply say : Upon your belly shall you creep 
or crawl, but, figuratively. On your belly shall you walk. This of 
course is a figurative expression for no one would claim that the 
serpent was literally a walking animal and not a creeping one. But 
no creeping animal goes erect upon the earth : they all drag 
themselves along the ground. But everything which walks must 
before it starts to walk be raised from the ground. Therefore “Upon 
thy belly shalt thou walk” means “You shall be raised up in pride 
upon your subtlety and cunning, which is composed of empty 
wisdom and carnal prudence, by which you have deceived deluded 
man and reduced him to your power, and have bound him in the 
chains of sin, and have merged him in the whirlpool of eternal 
death, and you shall walk towards the increase of vices and the 
accumulation of your damnation, elated and vainglorious in the 
success of your evil in the hearts of infidels.” “And earth shalt thou 
eat” means “You shall feed upon the earthly cogitations, and the 
carnal desires and the deadly deeds of those who hanker after 
earthly things.” “All the days of thy life” means for as long as your 
kingdom, like a false light, shall shine and prevail over human 
nature. For not forever will you reign a conqueror over the Divine 
Image, but either man will while yet in this life be set free from your 
power that is in Christ the Redeemer, or generally at the end of the 
world, when death the last enemy will be destroyed through the 
same Christ Who is the Word of God, and human nature will be 
universally restored to its pristine state. 

“I shall place enmity between thee and the woman, and 
between thy seed and her seed.” Woman is the corporeal sense 
which is naturally implanted in human nature, through which — in 
those, that is, who are perfect — the beauty of the visible creature is 
referred to the Glory of God. Between this, that is to say, the 
woman, and the serpent, who is the lustful indulgence in material 
beauty and the subtlety of the Devil which resides in it, a great 
enmity has been established by God. For the woman, that is to say, 
the perfect sense of the perfect, hates the carnal desire for material 
things, but the serpent has a hostile intent towards spiritual and 
divine virtues. 

“And between thy seed and her seed.” The seed of the woman 
is the perfect, natural and multiple knowledge of visible things, free 
from all error. For it is to this end that corporeal sense is established 

850D 

The food of 
the serpent 
851A 

The seed of 
the woman 
and that of 
the serpent 

851B 

512 

PERIPHYSEON 

851C 
The head of 
the serpent 

851D 

The change 
of doctrine 
from sense to 
wisdom 
852A 

852B 

in man, that by means of phantasies it might become the inter¬ 
mediary between the sensibles and the intelligibles. But the seed of 
the serpent is the deadly increase of innumerable transgressions, a 
fact of which no true philosopher is ignorant. 

“She shall bruise thy head.” The head, or beginning, of the 
serpent is compounded as it were of two parts : for every evil has 
taken its origin from the irrational motion of rational nature and the 
hateful subtlety of the Devil : and this head is bruised by the sense of 
the perfect and faithful because the subtlety of the Devil does not 
deceive them nor do they offer any entry to the secret and creeping 
approach of the first promptings of sin nor do they accommodate 
access to the irrational motion. Although that head is regarded as 
one, it is divided into a number that is infinite, for the universal evil 
is so manifold that there is no part of it from which the seeds of the 
vices may not spring; and this multitude is crushed by that woman 
to whom Solomon is referring when he says : “Who shall find a 
virtuous woman ?” that is to say, the virtue and wisdom which lodge 
in the senses of the perfect and faithful. The prophetic author of the 
Psalms also refers to this woman when he says : “Thou hast broken 
the heads of the dragon and thou hast given him as food for the 
people of the Ethiopians.” The people of the Ethiopians are the 
multitudes of the nations which believed in Christ, and which are 
symbolised figuratively under the form of this woman, of whom 
Isaiah says : “The people which sat in darkness have seen a great 
light.” For by Ethiopians are meant those who are darkened or 
humiliated by virtue of their changed condition, and it is a 
description which may be appropriately applied to the people of the 
gentiles who, before the coming of the True Light, Which is God the 
Word, were in darkness, that is to say, were surrounded by the 
darkness of ignorance and the most dense cloud of eternal death. 
But when they have humbled themselves and accept the faith, they 
are enlightened and refreshed by a spiritual repast, which the Divine 
Wisdom prepares from the bruised heads of the dragon, that is, 
from the pluralities of universal evil which He has overcome. 

The Psalmist says of this dragon : “The dragon himself which 
Thou hast formed to be deluded.” The dragon himself, the devil, 
that is, and his universal body, that is, the plenitude of universal 
evil, is that which Thou hast formed to be deluded by Thy Saints 
who outwit his pernicious and deceitful ambush, lay bare and 
destroy the stratagems of evil with which he attempts to demolish 
the bastions of goodness, and shatter with the hammers of the 

BOOK IV 513 

virtues the principles of evil which sprout from him in abundance. 

This opinion is consistent with the words of the Holy Job : “This is 

the beginning of the creation of God, which He created that it might 

be deluded by his angels.” But how can that spiritual dragon with all 

his members which follow after him in evil be called a divine 

creation or formation? There are two ways in which he may be 

called* so. Firstly, because all the rebellious angels and all men who 

follow them have been created, in so far as they subsist in their 

natures, by God, they are not improperly called a divine creation 

and formation. Secondly, because symbolical expressions like these, 

which occur in such passages of Scripture as these, do not always 

signify the natures of demons or wicked men in which the Creator of 

all things established them, but those parts which were added as a 

punishment for the disobedience of both the angelic and the human 

creature to the Essence which was created in them : for example, the 852C 

aerial bodies of demons and the earthly members of mortal men unclean 

which should unhesitatingly be accepted and understood as the supe^radded 

penalty for transgression, which has been added to the simplicity of to the spirit 

the nature which was created by God. But as to whether the nature 

of the demons shall be set free from the aerial bodies which have 

been added to it in the same way as human nature, assisted by the 

Grace of its Redeemer, shall at the moment of the Resurrection be 

liberated from its animal and corruptible bodies, must be discussed 

in another place. 

And now a brief summary. Not only the celestial powers which 
never abandoned their Creator, but also the rebellious powers shall 
eternally and inseparably possess those natural bodies which were 
made at the creation of the angels, for these bodies are spiritual and 852D 
therefore incorruptible. But what is added thereto from the qualities 
of this world in punishment for their wickedness grows old as doth a 
garment with that from which it was taken and so may be regarded 
as perishable. Therefore when the Prophet says: “That dragon 
which Thou formedst to be deluded,” it seems that we should not be 
far from the truth in taking him to mean by the dragon the deadly 853A 
subtlety of the Devil and his members whether found in angels or in 
evil men ; by the creation or formation (for there is a disagreement 
in the interpretations of the Hebrew expression which have been 
made for the service of the Church), either their nature in which 
before their fall they were established by God, or that which was 
added to them in consequence of their pride. But in whatsoever way 
we interpret creation and formation, whether as nature, or as what 

514 

PERIPHYSEON 

853B 

The teeth of 
the wise with 
which they 
crush the 
853C 
serpent’s 
head 

853D 
The heel of 
the woman 

854A 

is added to nature, the Devil with his whole body was made to be 
outwitted by the Saints and the Holy Angels not as to the nature in 
which he was created, but as to his future state when through pride 
he should have abandoned the dignity of his nature. For he will be 
outwitted by the angels of God because by the goodwill and Grace 
of their Creator they remain fixed in that state of happiness in which 
they were created ; whereas he, deceived by his proud ignorance 
which prevented him from foreknowing his fall (for had he known 
perhaps he would have taken steps to avoid it), and puffed up with 
the rage of envy, of his own will tumbled into his misery. But 
righteous men who have been set free and enlightened by their 
devotion towards their Creator and Redeemer outwit him when, 
seeing through his disguise of goodly shape and the speciousness 
with which he tempts them into vice, and the deadly poison of 
wickedness, at once bruise his head, and grind with the teeth of 
inward discrimination the spiritual food, which is the Divine 
Providence, and which distinguishes vices from virtues so that no 
subtle guile may deceive them, and feed on the pure banquets of the 
good which are cleansed from all admixture of evil. Nor is their 
woman, that is, their sense, deceived by the beauty of material 
objects, through which by the mediation of lustful delight the 
ancient serpent pours the deadly poison of the vices into the minds 
of imprudent men. Therefore the woman, or sense, which incited, 
moved, assisted, supported and led to the perfection of action and 
contemplation by the virtues of the Stronger Woman which is the 
Word of God, distinguishes evil from good, and bruises the head of 
the serpent and the primordial heads of diabolical suggestion and 
crafty delights, whereby these righteous men win joy and divine 
refreshment. For what greater joy can there be for those who spend 
their lives after the spirit than first to conquer in themselves the 
serpentine and lustful wiles of the devil, and then to ward them off 
from those of the faithful who are less advanced in action and 
contemplation than they, lest they too be captivated by the same 
tricks of the deceiver? “And thou shalt lay siege to her heel.” The 
heel of the woman, who is aia0r|oi^, is the phantasies of sensible 
things, that is to say, the images which are imprinted by the 
corporeal manifold upon the five senses. Therefore that heel must be 
five-fold. For it is divided into the familiar five organs of sense, 
namely, sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. Now some of these 
extend far beyond the framework of the perceiving body, like sight 
and hearing. For I behold the sun and the moon and the other stars 
which are situated far from that place where the mass of my little 

BOOK IV 

body roams. For where they are, there I behold them in the rays of 
my eyes which dart out thither without a moment’s delay, and in 
which are formed the phantasies of the afore-mentioned stars. You 
see then how far, in the organ of vision, this woman can extend her 
heel. The same applies to those things which are near, or in the 
middle distance. We find the same property in the function of the 
natural organ of hearing. For hearing fares forth from the confines 
of the body to receive imprinted upon it the forms of sounds or 
voices which are produced by the clashing of cymbals either from 
near or from afar. But others of the senses, in the opinion of many 
who study their nature, are retained within the limits of the body, 854B 
such as smell and taste. But there are some who think that the sense 
of smell leaps out of the body, and their opinion is not to be 
despised ; for we can smell odours, either good or otherwise, which 
originate at some little distance from our bodies. But as to touch no 
physicist doubts but that it operates both inside and outside the 
body. For it exercises its power alone and without the other senses, 
whereas none of the other four can without its co-operation fulfil 
their function : neither can vision see unless it touches what it sees, 
nor hearing hear unless it touches what it hears, nor smell smell 
unless it touches what it smells, nor taste taste unless it touches what 
it tastes. 

This, then, is the heel of the woman, the five-fold sense formed 854C 
by the phantasies of sensible things, to which the subtle serpent lays 
siege. To the sense of sight it lays siege when it persuades unwary 
souls to lust dangerously after the beauty of shapes and colours. 

And we must think in the same way of the harmony of voices, the 
suavity of odours and the delights of savours and of those things 
which are in the reach of the sense of touch. All these things, when 
perceived by the soul through the corporeal sense with imprudent 
desire, that is, with carnal concupiscence, distil the mortal poison of 
disobedience to the divine precepts, and nourish the seeds of all the 
sins. This is what is meant by the earlier Scriptural passage, in which 
it is said : “Therefore the woman saw that the tree was good to eat 
and fair to look upon and of a pleasing aspect, and she took of the 854D 
fruit and did eat, and gave unto her husband.’’ The woman here is a 
figurative expression of the exterior sense, which is entranced and 
deceived by the phantasies of sensible things, while the man signifies 
the mind, which by illicitly consenting unto the corporeal senses, is 
corrupted, that is to say, separated from the contemplation of the 
innermost truth. 

515 

516 

PERIPHYSEON 

25 
855A 
The sorrows 
and 

conceptions 
of the woman 

855B 

To the woman also He said : T will multiply thy sorrows and 
thy conceptions : in labour shalt thou bring forth thy sons’.” Here it 
is clearly given to understand that if man had not sinned he would 
have contemplated the natures and the principles of all things in a 
most pure manner with the utmost ease not only by the interior 
intellect but also with the exterior sense, for he would have been 
freed from the necessity of all logical discourse. But after he had 
sinned, the mind perceives through the corporeal sense only the 
surfaces of sensible things, with their quantities and qualities, their 
positions, their conditions, and the other aspects which submit to 
corporeal perception. And all these it reaches not in themselves, but 
through their phantasies, in interpreting which, its judgment very 
frequently errs. Therefore not without the manifold labours of 
study, which Scripture calls the sorrows of the woman, can he arrive 
by means of the same sense at a multitude of conceptions, that is, at 
the rudiments of an understanding of intelligible beings, and at the 
procreation of sons, that is to say, of right judgments concerning 
nature. 

Now it is for this that the Divine Authority imposes upon the 
exterior sense the sorrows and the conceptions and the sons : 
because every work of wisdom, and every conception of the mind, 
and pure knowledge of truth take their origin from the bodily sense, 
for reason ascends step by step from lower to higher things, and 
from outer to inner. 

“And thou shalt be under authority of the man, and he shall be 
lord over thee.” Here the Divine Voice promises the restoration of 
the natural order of human nature, and the Return to the condition 
in which it was first created. For the natural order should be as 
follows : the Mind subordinated to the authority of its Creator and 
remaining ever obedient to Him ; and then the sense freely subject to 
855C the authority and injunction of the Mind; and finally the body 
subordinated to the sense. For so the creature would be at peace and 
in harmony in itself and with its Creator. But now after the 
transgression of the Divine Mandate, this order, for the preservation 
of which man was created, and this peace and communion between 
Creator and created, is upset. For of his own accord and under no 
compulsion but corrupted by his love of sensible things, man has 
abandoned his God ; although there is no other good in our 
substance but to abide in Him. Therefore God, wishing to humiliate 
the pride of human nature, permitted man to abuse his own 
irrational but willed motions, so that he might himself become a 

BOOK IV 

proof of what the Grace of his Creator and the reward of obedience 
would have conferred on him, and what the irrational emotions and 855D 
the proud transgression of God’s Mandate had brought him. And 
hereupon there followed a kind of divorce between the male and the 
female, that is, between mind and sense. For the corporeal senses 
did not obey the precepts of mind according to the laws of nature. 

And this divorce has been clearly and beautifully alluded to by the 
Apostle : “In my mind I serve the Law of God, but in my flesh the 
law of sin.’’ By flesh he means the carnal sense which disobediently 
resists the rational motions of the mind even in those who are 
perfect. In another place he writes : “I see in my members another 
law which contendeth with the law of my mind, making me captive 856A 
unto the law of sin.’’ You see here the discord between the law of the 
mind and the law of carnal sense, which dominates the members of 
those who live according to the flesh, and contends with the minds 
of those who live according to the spirit in mortal members for the 
exercise of virtue, and for that reason is called by the Apostle the 
law of sin, that is, of carnal sense. But when our nature is restored 
and recalled to its proper order, this discord and divorce shall be 
changed into the peace of a spiritual and natural wedlock, in which 
the body will conform and be subject to the sense, the sense to the 
Mind, and the Mind to God. This becomes clearer to us if we 
examine the Septuagint text : “And thy conversion shall be towards 
thy husband, and he shall be the lord over thee ;’’ words which 856B 
express most clearly the Return of human nature to its former order. 

Now in the words to man which seem to be written in the form 26 
of a curse, “And the earth shall be accursed in thy work,” etc., it is 
not easy to see what is meant by that earth which is accursed in 
punishment for the transgression of the Mind, which is the male part 
of human nature, nor what is meant by the curse itself, whether it is 
the severity of God’s wrath, or a kind of mystical rebuke ; nor is it 
clear to see why the Mind itself, which committed the fault by 
listening to the voice of the woman and eating the forbidden fruit, 
did not incur the curse ; nor what those labours may be in which he 
devours the accursed earth, nor what the days of the life of the 
Mind, nor of what kind are the thorns and tares which the earth is to 
bring forth, nor its grass which he devours, nor the sweat, nor the 
face, nor the return of the Mind into the earth from which it was 856C 
formed, nor the dust. No problem, or at least, no very serious one, 
arises if these things are given, as by many authors, an historical 
interpretation, that is to say, are regarded as sensible objects 

517 

518 

PERIPHYSEON 

856D 

857A 

Another 

theory 

occurring on this earth which is inhabited by man and arise from it. 
But if they are taken as referring to human nature itself, as in the 
case of the earlier discussion about Paradise, they require a consi¬ 
derable amount of elucidation. 

In the opinion of St. Augustine, they are, on the one hand, to be 
taken as actual historical events, and, on the other, as containing a 
prophetic meaning, as he writes in the Eleventh Book of the 
Hexemeron : 

“Because you have listened to the voice of your wife, and have 
eaten of the tree of which I had commanded you that of that only 
you should not eat, the earth is accursed in your works. In sorrow 
shall you eat of it all the days of your life. Thorns also and thistles 
shall it bring forth for you, and you shall eat the grass of the field. In 
the sweat of your face shall you eat bread till you return to the earth 
from which you were taken : for earth you are and unto earth shall 
you return. ‘Who,’ asks St. Augustine, ‘does not know this, that 
these are labours of the human race on earth?’ Nor can it be 
doubted that they would not have been if that felicity had been 
preserved which had existed in Paradise. There is therefore no 
objection in taking the words in the first instance in their normal 
meaning. But we should also look for and preserve the prophetic 
significance which particularly at this point is intended by God 
when He speaks.” 

You see how he bids us that this text of Holy Scripture be given 
both a literal and a figurative interpretation ? He does not, however, 
in this book explain what the prophetic and figurative meaning is. 
Had he done so, I think it would have been sufficient for us, and we 
should not have asked for another explanation : but since he does 
not, let us, with the help of God, hold a brief enquiry into the 
meaning of these words which were spoken by God. 

A. Let us do so. For they should not be passed over altogether. 

N. It will be sufficient, I think, to put forward the solution of 
the blessed monk Maximus : and in order that that solution may be 
expressed the more clearly, let us propose his enquiry. 

A. We could do no otherwise. 

N. In the Fifth Chapter of his Scholia, then, he proposes the 
following problem : 

“What is the allegorical interpretation of the earth which is 
accursed in the works of Adam, and his eating of it in sorrow, and 

BOOK IV 

519 

his feeding on the grass of the field after the growth of thorns and 
thistles, and lastly his eating of bread in the sweat of his face ? For 
no man was ever seen eating earth or grass, nor is it recorded in the 
judgment of history that man ever ate bread in the sweat of his face. 

Answer : The earth itself, accursed in the works of Adam, is 
the flesh of Adam, which is always created by the works of Adam. 
(These works are the passions of his knowing mind). It is cursed 
with a barrenness of virtues, that is of the works of God. This earth 
he eats in anxiety and much sorrow, enjoying its own brief pleasure. 
And this flesh, through this corrupting enjoyment, spawns in him 
thoughts and cares like thorns, and great temptations and dangers 
like thistles, and irrational fury and luxurious concupiscence which 
all prick him on all sides : so that it is well nigh impossible for him to 
get and feed on, that is, achieve, the health and integrity of that 
flesh, for it is like withered grass : and then after many appalling 
vicissitudes he eats bread in the sweat of his face, that is, in that very 
lowliness of the flesh in its sense and in the toil of tedious 
consideration for sensible things, he gets the bread to sustain this 
present life, either by skill or by some other device provided for the 
maintenance of this life. Or is the earth rather the accursed heart of 
Adam which through transgression is exiled from the celestial 
goods ? This earth, through practical philosophy, he eats with many 
tribulations, purged as it is through consciousness by the cursing of 
the baseness of its works ; and again, subjecting to reason thoughts 
germinated in it, like thorns, concerning the generation of bodies 
and teeming ideas, like thistles, concerning the providence and 
judgment of Incorporeals, it plucks, spiritually, as it were grass, a 
physical contemplation. And thus, as though in the knowable sweat 
of the face of intelligence he eats the bread of theology in accordance 
with the knowledge whose face is incorruptible, the bread which 
alone is the bread of life and which preserves the generation of those 
who eat of it to incorruptibility. So the earth if well eaten is itself a 
purge through the action of the heart, but the grass is knowledge 
itself based on the contemplation of the nature of those things which 
have been created : but the bread is true doctrine based on the 
theology of the mysteries.” 

Thus far Maximus. Now I think that the days of the life of the 
mind in which it tolls purging the earth of its heart signify not only 
those days through which the seasons of the present life pass and in 
which the body is sustained by the soul, but also that temporal 
interval in which the souls, relinquishing the control of their bodies. 

857B 

857C 

857D 

Practical 
(philosophy) 
purges the 
vices Physical 
purges 

harmful ideas 
on the nature 
of things 

Theology 
supplies the 
858A 

bread of solid 
contemplation 

520 

PERIPHYSEON 

Souls, freed 
from their 
bodies, can 
be purged up 
to the day of 
858B 
judgment 

You are earth 
and into 
earth you will 
go 

abide in another life until they take back their bodies. For we believe 
that souls can be purged both in this present life, which soul and 
body spend in company, and in the other life after the death of the 
body, that is, after its dissolution and its Return into the four cosmic 
elements from which it was gathered up and composed, until the end 
of the world and the resurrection of the bodies and the day of 
judgment. These then are the days in which the mind eats the earth 
of its heart, that is, performs the function of purgation. For after the 
end of the sensibles we read that no further purgation will be 
practised for then will have occurred the Return of nature to its 
original purity. And perhaps this is the meaning of the text, “Until 
you return to the earth from which you were taken,” which could be 
interpreted : For such a length of time your face, that is, the rational 
enquiry into truth, will sweat from the labours of your purgation in 
practice and theory, until you return to the earth from which you 
were taken, that is to say, into the immutable stability of the 
Primordial Causes, from which you derive your origin. When you 
have arrived there you will sweat no longer. 

Now there are many scriptural passages which clearly indicate 
858C that by the term “earth” is meant the bliss of eternal life and the 
stability of the Primordial Causes, from which all things which are 
have their origin. For instance, to Abraham it is said: “Go forth 
from thy country and from thy kin and from thy father’s house, and 
come unto the land which I shall have shown unto thee,” and later : 
“Abraham set out thence and came to a southern country, and 
dwelt between Cades and Assur,” that is, between sanctification and 
beatification, where all the bliss of the Saints is established in eternal 
rest. For being sanctified, that is, being purged from every disease of 
body and soul, they shall live in bliss according to the laws of 
nature. And if we consider another meaning of Assur, which is 
Mesopotamia, we shall find a more estimable subject for contempla¬ 
tion and one most apt to the present matter. For Mesopotamia is so 
called because it is in the midst between the rivers. Now, are we to 
believe that the abode of the holy souls and of the whole of restored 
858D human nature will be anywhere but in the midst between the rivers 
of the virtues? — these rivers which flow from the Source of all 
good things? And what else but this is mystically signified by the 
Land of Promise to which the people of God were led after they had 
been set free from the Egyptian captivity and slavery? This is the 
land of the living, in which the Saints shall possess a double blessing, 
that of the body and that of the soul. It is of this too that the Lord 

859A 

BOOK IV 

Himself speaks when He says : “Blessed are the meek, for they shall 
inherit the earth.” 

But the following phrase, “Earth thou art and unto earth shalt 
thou return,” or, according to another version. “For dust thou art 
and unto dust shalt thou return,” can be understood as follows : 
Since the mind’s nature, which is made in the image and likeness of 
God, took its origin from the fertile soil of the Primordial Causes, 
we therefore believe that it must of necessity return there. And if it 
be asked why in the other translation this earth is given the name of 
dust, there can be no other reason than that, as it is from the dust of 
the sensible earth that all things born of earth take the cause of their 
birth, so the numerical multiplicity of all things visible and invisible 
is generated from the fertility of the Primordial Causes, and at the 
end of the world shall return to it again. But this we say not in 
refutation of the simplicity of those who accept the historical truth 
of this scriptural passage, and who try to maintain that these words 
signify the dissolution of the human body into the four elements of 
this world, which are included under the general term of earth, 
although they do not perceive what great difficulties lie in this 
interpretation. For if the voice of God spoke thus about the 
dissolution of the body, why was it predicted of the man alone? 
Why not of the woman also, whose body is no less destined for 
dissolution? Again, why does Divine reproach condemn the whole 
man to dissolution, when it is only the lowest and least valuable 
parts of him, namely the body and the bodily sense, that are 
dissolved, while the natural simplicity of the soul, free from all 
compositeness, by no means undergoes dissolution but remains 
forever indissoluble, whether its movements are rational or irra¬ 
tional? — unless perhaps they would say that we are to take this 
passage as a synecdoche, a figure which occurs very frequently in 
Holy Scripture, whereby the part is understood from the whole. 
This is possible if the words are taken to refer not to the mind itself 
but to the male sex alone which is extended to include the female 
sex. Finally why do they not observe that the works speak not so 
much of dissolution or corruption as of restoration? For at the very 
moment when the corruptible and mortal body is done away, the 
incorruptible and immortal is restored. For no one’s body is 
destined to return to corruption. So these words foretell the Return, 
not into this earth, but rather to the spiritual nature. 

But let each choose the theory he will : I, however, taking my 
reasoning from the opinions of the Holy Fathers, of Ambrose and 

859B 

859C 

860A 

522 

PERIPHYSEON 

860B 

The divine 
nature 
neither 
creates nor is 
created 

27 

860C 

Augustine, and also of the venerable Gregory Nazianzen who is 
also called the Nyssaean *, and of his commentator Maximus the 
monk, have put what seemed to me the more probable opinion 
before you, sometimes in answer to your questions, sometimes in 
comments upon your expositions. And as there are certain things 
which at the beginning of this book we promised to discuss, but 
which its lengthiness has prevented us from mentioning, we must 
postpone the examination of them to the next volume. And in the 
same volume we have also determined to treat at some length of the 
Return of the natures into their Primordial Causes and into that 
Nature which neither creates nor is created, that Nature which is 
God Himself. But if you are impatient to know why it is said of the 
Divine Nature that It neither creates nor is created, I will say a few 
words here by way of foretaste. 

The Divine Nature, therefore, for this reason is believed not to 
be created because It is the Primal Cause of all, and there is no 
principle beyond It from which It can be created. On the other hand, 
because after the Return of the created Universe of things visible 
and invisible into its Primordial Causes which are contained within 
the Divine Nature, there is no further creation of nature from the 
Divine Nature nor any propagation of sensible or intelligible 
species ; for in It all will be One, just as even now in their Causes 
they are One and always have been so. Therefore we can rightly 
believe and understand that this Nature creates nothing. For what 
should It create when It alone is all in all things? And now, if you 
agree, let us put an end to this book lest it run on too far. 

A. I quite agree, for I have been anticipating the end for some 
time. 

Eringena sometimes confounds the two Gregories 

PERIPHYSEON 

BOOK V 

N. “Now, therefore, may he not perchance put forth his hand 
and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat of it, and live forever?” 
Before we consider the prophetic virtue of these words, which give 
the clearest promise of the Return of human nature to that same 
bliss which in sinning it had lost, a preliminary indication of the 
arrangement of this whole chapter must be given, in which it will be 
clear to the careful reader that the Prophet Moses was speaking in 
allegory. The sequence of the chapter is then as follows : 

“The Lord God also made for Adam and his wife tunics of skin 
and clothed them therewith, and said. Behold, Adam has become as 
one of Us. And the Lord God sent him forth out of Paradise, that he 
might labour on the earth out of which he was formed. Now 
therefore, may he not perchance put forth his hand, and take also of 
the Tree of Life, and eat of it, and live forever. And he cast Adam 
out, and set Cherubim before the Paradise of pleasure, and a 
flaming sword turning every way to guard the path to the Tree of 
Life.” 

Then, concerning the words, “Now therefore, may he not 
perchance put forth his hand,” and so on as far as “live for ever,” 
there might be some doubt as to who spoke them, whether the 
prophesying Theologian or the speaking God, were it not made 
clear in the Septuagint version which has : “And now,” said God, 
“May he not at some time extend his hand, and take of the Tree of 
Life?” But I think no attentive reader could doubt that however the 
words are taken they contain the promise of the Return of human 
nature to its pristine state. For I do not regard as careful readers 

1 859D 

The 

expulsion of 
man from 
Paradise and 
on man’s 
Return 
860D 

861A 

524 

PERIPHYSEON 

those who think that in this passage the particle ne has a negative 
rather than an interrogative meaning, expressing as it were a doubt, 
and believe that man’s expulsion from Paradise was for the express 
purpose of preventing him from taking from the Tree of Life and 
living for ever. For how could human nature after it had sinned take 
861B of the Tree of Life and eat of it and live for ever, when it was not yet 
liberated from sin, or from death which is the wage of sin, seeing 
that even before its transgression it neither took of this tree nor ate 
of it, as any careful examination of the Scriptures will show? For 
were it to have taken and eaten, then certainly it would neither have 
sinned nor fallen, but would have lived in bliss to all eternity. 

Furthermore, if that Paradise from which man was expelled 
was local and terrestrial, and if the Tree of Life which was planted in 
the midst of it was an earthly and sensible tree, and brought forth 
fruit that was suitable for bodily consumption, why would God not 
have driven man forth only from that tree, and fenced him off in 
another part of Paradise from which he could not gain access to it? 
861C If the eating of the Tree of Life, which was permitted only to 
rational creatures, were the sole cause of man’s living in eternal 
bliss, why could not man after sinning have passed his wretched and 
mortal life of temporality in some other part of Paradise? If the 
other animals, and especially that serpent through whom the ancient 
enemy practised his malice, were in Paradise, and yet, as we believe, 
were not able to live eternally in bliss, since they were not created to 
feed on the Tree of Life, why could not man be permitted to remain 
among them, since right reason would teach us that the rational 
creature, even if it sin, is superior in the dignity of its nature to every 
861D irrational creature even if it has not sinned? If then the irrational 
creatures remained in Paradise after man had been driven forth, 
why was not he, being more excellent than they, permitted to remain 
among them in Paradise even though he had sinned? 

Or was it that the other animals were expelled with him from 
Paradise ? But if anyone should believe that, let him search the Holy 
Scriptures or the testimony of the Holy Fathers, or from both, for 
evidence that the animals to whom man before his sin gave names in 
Paradise were expelled from Paradise with him when he sinned. And 
862A if he fail to find it, let him cease to think of Paradise and its animals 
in a carnal sense, and let him at once turn to the spiritual meaning 
which is taught by truth, for that is the one and only way of 
penetrating the approaches to the mystical writings. Come then, and 
pay close attention to the power of the divine words. 

BOOK V 

A. I am alert and ready to learn the lesson you will teach me : 
for it is very important, and few, I think, have dealt with it before. 

For concerning the Return of human nature and of all things 
contained within it and dependent upon it into the eternal “reasons” 
from which it proceeded, and concerning its restoration to its 
pristine dignity I have not read or heard of any text, although here 
and there among the holy books and the writings of the Holy 
Fathers the outline of such a doctrine is frequently discernible. 

N. The Return of which we speak is implied in the Voice of 2 
God saying: “Now therefore,” or as the alternative translation 
more explicitly puts it, “And now, said God.” Here we are to 
understand that the Divine Mercy and infinite Goodness, so ready 
to forgive and pity us, to sigh over the fall of the Divine Image, and 
in His clemency to condescend unto us and to bear in patience the 
arrogance of man is saying: Now therefore, I behold man driven 
forth from Paradise ; formerly blessed, now become wretched ; once 
rich, now needy; once an eternal being, now a temporal; once 
enjoying everlasting life, now mortal ; once wise, now foolish ; once 
a spiritual creature, now an animal; once heavenly, now earthly; 
once enjoying eternal youth, now growing old ; once happy, now 
sad ; once saved, now lost ; once the prudent son, now the prodigal ; 
straying from the flock of the heavenly powers I behold him, and I 
grieve for him. For it was not to this end that he was made: he 862C 
whom you his neighbours and friends now behold driven forth from 
Paradise into the region of death and misery was formed for the 
possession of eternal life and blessedness, to consort with the 
heavenly orders who had adhered to their Creator and remained in 
everlasting bliss — though a number of them were lost in man’s 
transgression. Do you see the largeness of the divine compassion 
which is compressed within the single temporal adverb Now, and a 
single causal conjunction Therefore? This same divine compassion, 
converting the lamentation for man to a consolation both of man 
himself and of the Heavenly Powers, promises under an ambiguous 
and interrogative form of speech the Return of man into Paradise. 

For He says : “May he not perchance put forth his hand and take of 
the Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever?” The meaning is: We 862D 
must not mourn unduly the death of man, nor weep so profusely for 
his fall from Paradise ; for hope of the Return is not entirely taken 
away from him. It may be that he will put forth his hand, that is, 
stretch his zeal for good conduct by practising the virtues, so that he 
may take of the fruit of the Tree of Life, which is the Spiritual Gifts 

525 

526 

PERIPHYSEON 

863A 

863B 

863C 

863D 

of the Word of God, and eat the food of pure contemplation, by 
virtue of which he shall live forever and never revert to the poverty 
of temporal things, which shall perish altogether at the end of the 
world, but pass wholly into God and be One in Him. 

What follows in our text makes this clear ; for it says : “And He 
cast Adam forth, and set Cherubim before the Paradise of pleasure 
and a flaming sword turning every way to guard the path to the Tree 
of Life.” I do not suppose you have forgotten how in the Fourth 
Book, following the opinions of the Holy Fathers of either tongue 
who are learned in expounding Paradise, we made it quite clear, at 
least in our opinion, that the Paradise from which man was driven 
forth was nothing else but his own human nature which was formed 
in the Image of God. It was from the dignity of that Image that the 
same human nature, contemning God’s order fell. Whence it follows 
that the sending or driving forth of man is nothing else but the loss 
of that natural felicity for the possession of which he was created. 
For it was not his nature that was lost (that, being made in the image 
and likeness of God, is necessarily incorruptible), but the felicity 
which would have been his if he had been obedient to God instead 
of treating Him with contempt. 

A. No, I have certainly not forgotten. It is all fixed firmly in my 
memory. 

N. What is it, then, that is said? “And He set before the 
Paradise of pleasure” — that is, before the spiritual delights of 
human nature — “Cherubim.” What is meant by this name? Is it 
that heavenly Power which holds the third place in the first 
Hierarchy of the angelic orders, in which the sacred tradition 
reckons the Seraphim, the Cherubim and the Thrones; or is the 
word used solely in the literal sense or is that name intended to teach 
some other doctrine by a higher significance? In order to answer 
this question we must first show what is the literal meaning of this 
term. Cherubim is translated “the variety of knowledge,” or “the 
outpouring of wisdom,” as St. Dionysius the Areopagite tells us in 
his book On the Celestial Hierarchy. And he has the support of 
Epiphanius who, in his book On Hebrew Names, interprets Cherubim 
as “full knowledge,” or “the knowledge of many things.” But if 
Scripture means here the heavenly essence then we must admit that 
Paradise is of a spiritual nature. For reason does not permit us to 
believe that the spiritual nature, which is placed next to God, and is 
ever moving before His face, could be set in front of a local and 
earthly Paradise. We should have to say that it was not really 

BOOK V 

Cherubim that was set before Paradise, but one of the lowest orders 
of the Heavenly Powers, which is called near-angelic, and that it is 
given the name of Cherubim because it is by Cherubim that he is 
ordered to place himself before Paradise. For whatsoever is per¬ 
formed in nature by the lower orders of the heavenly beings is to be 
referred to the higher orders, since the lower do nothing but what 
they are instructed by the higher to do. That is why it is recorded 
that Seraphim purged the Prophet Isaiah although, as St. Dionysius 
the Areopagite shows, “it was not by his own act that Seraphim 864A 
purged the prophet, but through one of the lowest orders of the 
angelic and celestial essences,” who merited the name of Seraphim 
because it was at the command of Seraphim that he purged the 
prophet, and because that purgation is not to be attributed to the 
immediate purgator but to him who ordered that the prophet should 
be purged. 

But even so, are we not faced with the same difficulty? For it is 
not likely that an angelic substance even of the lowest order could be 
situated in some earthly place. But if we accept in this context only 
the significance of the name without relating it to the celestial 
essence (to which that name belongs), we can say that God placed 
Cherubim, that is, the variety of knowledge, or the pouring forth of 
wisdom, before the Paradise of pleasure, that is to say, before the 864B 
sight of rational human nature although it had been driven forth 
from Paradise, that is, removed from the dignity of its first creation, 
so that it might have a means of regaining its knowledge of itself, 
and so that, when purged by practice and theory, and disciplined by 
the study of wisdom, it might have the will and power to return into 
its former felicity which in sinning it had abandoned. From this we 
may understand that the Divine Compassion exceeds the Divine 
Vengeance in driving man forth from Paradise. For it was not the 
will of the Creator that His Image should be totally destroyed, but 
rather that it should be fashioned anew, and be disciplined by the 
variety of science, and “watered” and enlightened by the pouring 
forth of wisdom, and be rendered worthy to draw near once more to 
the Tree of Life from which it had been removed, and to partake of 
its fruit, so that it should not perish but have eternal life. 864C 

But should anyone wish to look deeper into the matter he will 
see that by the word Cherubim is signified not inappropriately the 
very Word of God Itself. For the Word of God, in Which are 
concealed the treasuries of science and wisdom is always, without 
intermission, present to the powers of observation of human nature. 

527 

528 

PERIPHYSEON 

advising, cleansing and enlightening it, and eventually leading it 
back to the pure perfection of its nature. For is there anything 
strange in the word Cherubim signifying the Wisdom of God, for 
that Wisdom is called the Power and the Angel of Great Counsel. 
Hear what the Apostle says of God the Father: “For from the 
creation of the world the invisible things of God are understood and 
864D perceived through the things that are made, and also His eternal 
Virtue and Power,” and in short by a kind of wonderful metaphor 
the Wisdom of God is intimated in Holy Scripture by the names of 
all the Heavenly Essences. Similarly it would not be wrong to take 
the flaming sword to mean the Word of God Itself. For It consumes 
and divides : It consumes our faults, for “God is a consuming fire,” 
and cleanses the irrational filth of our nature. And It divides that 
865A nature, and separates it from those things which have been added to 
it as the result of sin and mar it and deface it and make it to be 
dissimilar from its Creator. That Sword, which is the Word of the 
Father, the only-begotten Son, is rightly held to be wisdom and 
virtue which turns every way, because, though by nature immutable. 
It is yet moved by Its ineffable compassion and mercy to save 
human-kind. 

Such, then, is the Cherubim, such the flaming Sword which 
turneth every way and which is set before the eyes of our soul, that 
is, before Reason and Mind. 

Again : “To guard the path of the Tree of Life.” This it does 
that we should not consign to oblivion the Tree of Life, but should 
always, as indeed we must, have before the eyes of our heart the 
memory of that Tree and the Way which leads towards it. 

And do not think it strange that I should have taken the word 
Cherubim as a singular noun when the blessed Jerome has declared 
865B that such Hebrew nouns ending in -im are masculine plurals. For I 
follow Saint Dionysius the Areopagite, who takes both Seraphim 
and Cherubim as singulars ; in fact, both in Greek and Hebrew one 
is accustomed to put singular for plural and plural for singular. 

But what is that Way which leads to the Tree of Life ? and what 
is that Tree to which it leads ? Is it not the Son of God, Who says of 
Himself : “I am the Way and the Truth and the Life?” And as to His 
being the Tree of Life, that is clearly stated in many passages of 
Holy Scripture, so that there is no lack of evidence. 

In this part of Holy Scripture, then, a whole mass of symbolical 
names for the Word of God are accumulated. For It is called 

BOOK V 

Cherubim, and a Fiery Sword that turneth every way, and the Way, 
and the Tree of Life ; by which we may see that the Word Itself never 
recedes from human consciousness, and that It is always most ready 
to enlighten us and nowhere and at no time does it permit us to be 
unmindful of the bliss we lost through sin, desiring that we should 
return to it, and until that shall be accomplished, by taking pity 
upon us It stimulates us to tread with the firm footsteps of theory 
and practice the journey which leads thither. “I have come,” He 
says, “to bring fire upon the earth, and what do I wish but that it 
should kindle?” 

But before we treat of the Return of our nature, I should like, if 
you agree, to draw from the sensible world some very convincing 
evidence which sets the Return beyond all doubt. 

A. Certainly I agree. For from examples based on the nature of 
the sensibles a logical dialectic can lead us to a clear knowledge of 
spiritual things. 

N. Ask yourself then whether even the local and temporal 
returns accomplished by members of this visible world do not 
contain some mystical meaning. 

A. I could not easily deny that they do. For it is my opinion 
that there is no visible or corporeal thing which is not the symbol of 
something incorporeal and intelligible. But I should be grateful if 
you would briefly cite one or two examples of these returns on 
which you wish to base your argument. 

N. I think it is as clear as day to all who study either by 
abstract speculation or concrete experience the nature of the 
physical Universe that the heavenly sphere of the fixed stars is 
perpetually revolving, and returns to its original position every 
twenty-four hours. In like manner the Sun arrives at the same point 
on the equinoctial diameter at the same moment of time, i.e., 
sunrise, after a space of four years ; and the moon returns to the 
same point on the zodiac where it first began to shine after a period 
somewhat more than twenty seven days and eight hours. And about 
the return of the other planets it would be superfluous to speak, for 
it is very well known to all that are skilled in astronomy. For the 
natural laws governing the revolutions of the two greatest luminaries 
will provide sufficient evidence of the doctrine I am trying to affirm. 
The moon is recalled to the beginning of its course after the 
conclusion of the nineteenth year, the sun at the end of the twenty- 
eighth. Multiply these two numbers together and you get a total of 

529 

865C 

Examples 

from 

sensibles by 
which the 
Return is 
proved 
3 

865D 

866A 

866B 

530 

PERIPHYSEON 

532 years. At the end of this period these two luminaries, having 
fulfilled the complete Paschal Cycle, are said to return to the same 
numbers and positions of places in the zodiac and times in the Great 
Year, and to fulfil the entire harmony of their course. And what of 
the air? Is it not recalled to the same qualities of cold and hot or 
temperateness at regular intervals? And what of Ocean? Does it not 
866C in all cases follow the course of the luminary, and keep the regular 
periods of its return? In the daily tides, whether ebbing or spring or 
neap, it does not interrupt the regularity of the various natural 
returns. And what of the creatures of sea and land, the grasses and 
the twigs? Do they not in like manner keep their proper seasons for 
generation of foetus, flower, leaf and fruit? In short, there is no 
corporeal creature enlivened by the Vital Motion which does not 
return again from the beginning from which it set forth. For the end 
of every movement is in its beginning : it is concluded in no other 
term but that origin out of which its movement began, and to which 
it ever seeks to return in order that therein it may have peace and 
rest. And this can be said not only of the parts but of the whole of 
866D the sensible world. For the end of it also is its beginning, which it 
seeks and in which it will rest when it has found it ; a rest which will 
not consist in the abolition of its substance, but the return into those 
“reasons” whence it sprang. “For,” says the Apostle, “the figure of 
this world shall pass away.” The Holy Father Augustine briefly 
expounds this sentence of the Apostle as follows : “figure, not 
867A nature,” meaning by “nature” essence, I think, by a use common 
both in Latin and Greek. For the Greeks very frequently put (puaiq 
for ouQia and ouaia for The proper use of these words is 

ouaia, essence, for that which in every creature, visible and invisible, 
can neither be corrupted nor increased nor diminished — cpuoiq 
“nature,” for the bringing to birth of essence in space and time into 
some material which can be corrupted and increased and diminished 
and affected by different accidents. For ouaia is derived from the 
verb elpi, “I am,” of which the masculine of the participle is o3v, 
the feminine ouaa, whence ouaia : but (puaiq comes from the verb 
cpuopai meaning “I am born,” or “I am planted,” or “I am 
generated.” Hence every creature, in so far as it subsists in its 
867B “reasons”, is an ouaia : but in so far as it is procreated into some 
material, it is a (puaig. But, as I have said, just as among the Greeks 
ouaia is used indiscriminately for (puau; and cpuaiq for ouaia, so 
among the Latins “essentia” is used for “natura” and “natura” for 
“essentia,” although neither has lost its proper meaning. 

BOOK V 

531 

The essence, then, of sensible things, which is what this Father 
meant by “nature,” will, as true reason faithfully teaches, abide for 
ever, for it is created unalterably in the Divine Wisdom beyond all 
space and time and change. But nature is brought forth in space and 
time, and becomes the nucleus of the other accidents, and at a 
moment fore-ordained by the Maker of all things is destined to 
perish, as no student of philosophy can doubt. Now what is the 
mystical meaning revealed to us by the general and particular 
movements of the sensible world, and others like them, these 
revolutions, these undeviating returns from the beginnings of 
movement to the same beginnings again — for that which as the 
source of movement is called “beginning” is the same as that which, 
when motion is consummated in it, is called “end ;” and among the 
Greeks “beginning” is called t8>io^, which really means “end :” they 
name both beginning and end zeXoq without distinction — what but 
the Return of our nature to its beginning, out of which it was made, 
and in which and through which it moves and towards which its 
tendency is always to return? For all men in general, whether 
perfect or imperfect, chaste or defiled, redeemed through knowledge 
of truth in Christ, or lingering in the darkness of the ignorance of 
the Old Man, have one and the same natural yearning after being 
and well-being and being forever and, in the comprehensive phrase 
of St. Augustine, after living in bliss and escape from misery. For 
this activity of living and subsisting in bliss comes from Him Who is 
Ever-Being and Well-Being and Being in all. And if it is a necessary 
rule that every natural activity is ceaseless and unresting until it 
attain the end it seeks, what can check or restrain or arrest the 
necessary activity of human nature from arriving at that towards 
which it naturally tends ? For there is no creature which desires and 
tends towards not-being ; and does not rather shun it lest it should 
happen to cease to be, and indeed, how hard it would be for 
anything which is made by Him Who truly is and is beyond being to 
return to nothing. But if perchance a God-like nature is by some 
principle of unlikeness separated from its Archetype, it ever strives 
to return thereto, in order that it may regain the likeness which it 
has destroyed. For if the visible fire when it is ablaze in some 
material and lifting up the mane of its flames is ever striving 
upward, nor ever seeks by the movement of its blaze a downward 
path, how can it be believed that the intelligible fire of the substance 
which is created in the Image of God should ever be retained in the 
depths of death and unhappiness from arriving by its natural 
yearning and the aid of the Grace of its Creator to the heights of life 

867C 

All human 
nature will be 
freed 

867D 

868A 

868B 

532 

PERIPHYSEON 

Examples 
from 
intelligibles 
by which the 
868C 
Return is 
demonstrated 

4 

868D 

869A 

and blessedness? But by this we mean not that the nature of all 
things will be equally blessed, but that it will be equally free from 
death and unhappiness. For being and living and immortality will 
be common to all, good and evil alike ; but well-being and blessed 
being will be the special property of those only who are perfect in 
practice and theory. Or how could it be convincingly proved that 
that most loving Creator of rational nature should prevent the 
rational motion thereof from attaining its God? 

But it is not only by examples taken from the sensibles, but also 
from those things that can only be apprehended by the mind, that 
led us to suppose, believe, and understand that all things under 
stress of natural law return to the beginning of their movement and 
their Primordial Causes : such are those arts to which philosophers 
give the name “liberal,” of which I perceive I must say a word or 
two in support of my argument, if that will not seem tedious or 
superfluous to you. 

A. Neither tedious nor superfluous does it seem to me, but 
extremely useful and relevant that just as we have taken some 
illustrations of the Return of nature from the sensible world, so in 
like manner we should introduce as evidence of the same Return 
theories of the intelligible world which are only apprehensible to the 
perception of the mind, especially as these proofs have a greater 
validity of establishing belief in a doubtful matter which are drawn 
from the invariable laws of the true arts than those which are taken 
from the conjectures of the corporeal sense — and indeed without 
the guidance of reason and intelligence these can neither be dis¬ 
covered nor proved, for the true knowledge of sensibles cannot be 
attained by the corporeal sense alone. 

N. How does it seem to you? Does not that art which the 
Greeks call “Dialectic” and which is defined as the science of good 
disputation, concern itself with ouaia as its proper principle, from 
which every division and every multiplication of those things which 
that art discusses takes its origin, descending through the most 
general genera and the genera of intermediate generality as far as the 
most special forms and species, and again perpetually returning 
according to the rules of synthesis by the same steps by which it 
descended until it reaches that same ouala from which it issued 
forth, does not cease to return to it, in which it yearns to rest 
forever, and in the neighbourhood of which it seeks to operate by an 
activity wholly or largely intelligible? 

BOOK V 

533 

And what of Arithmetic? Does not that also start from the 
Monad, and descending through the different species of numbers, 
return once more, the problem solved, to the same Monad, beyond 
which it can ascend no further? For all numbers, and all species of 
numbers, begin from the Monad and have their end in it, and subsist 
in it both actually and potentially, in the same way as all genera and 
all species are contained and preserved in ouaia. 

In Geometry the same applies. In just the same way it starts 
from its principle, called in Greek appeiov, in Latin signum, and 
using plane and solid figures, surfaces, sides and angles, constructs 
spaces of length and breadth and depth. When all these are resolved, 
it returns to its principle, the point, in which all the potentiality of 
the art resides. 

And what of Music? Does not that also begin from its 
principle, called the note, and build up harmonies whether simple or 
compound, and then resolving them again seek once more its note, 
its principle, in which resides all its act and all its potency? 869C 

And as to Astronomy, who does not know that its chief 
function is to study the movements of the stars through space and 
time, beginning its journey from the indivisible unit, and ending in a 
recourse to the same when the temporal intervals have been 
resolved. 

So that you see that these concepts of the rational mind all seek 
back to their principles in which they find the end of their activity. 

For in all these, as we said, the beginning and the end is the same 
thing. 

A. Yes, I see. And in my opinion the method of demonstration, 
which makes use of the intelligibles, effectively substantiates the 
theory we are now discussing, namely the Return of Nature. But I am 
not quite clear why, when you were bringing forward the Liberal 869D 
Arts as evidence, you omitted Grammar and Rhetoric. 

N. Know, then, that they were omitted not for one reason 
only: firstly, because many philosophers, not without reason, hold 
that these two arts are in some sort branches of Dialectic ; secondly, 
for the sake of brevity; and lastly, because Grammar and Rhetoric 
do not deal with the nature of the Universe, but either with the laws 
of human speech, which Aristotle and his school show to be not a 
natural phenomenon but one arising out of the behaviour of 
articulate beings, or are concerned with particular causes and 870A 
persons, which has no relation to the nature of the Universe. For 

534 

PERIPHYSEON 

when Rhetoric attempts to treat of common situations relevant to 
nature she uses not her own resources but those of Dialectic. I do 
not mean by this that Grammar and Rhetoric have no principles of 
their own, for the one starts from the letter, the other from the 
hypothesis or stated problem, and into these they are resolved again, 
the art of good writing returning to the letter, the art of good 
disputation to the hypothesis. I mean rather that arguments taken 
from the nature of things are better for defending or refuting 
870B propositions which are made for enquiry into matters of doubt, than 
arguments thought out by the inventiveness of man : and the arts of 
good writing and good disputation have been discovered and 
constituted by human reasonings. 

A. Why, then, are they reckoned among the Liberal Arts, if 
they belong not to nature but to the human mind? 

N. As far as I can see, for no other reason but that they cannot 
be separated from the mother of all the arts. Dialectic. For they are 
like branches springing from her or tributaries flowing into her, or 
better still the instruments through which she displays her intelligible 
discoveries for the use of man. 

A. I will not quarrel with this reply, for it seems probable. For 
it is possible for the rational soul to discuss within herself the 
Liberal Arts without recourse to the utterance of articulate speech 
870C or fluent disquisition. It remains to be seen in what way all this is 
relevant to our present discussion. 

N. What do you mean ? 

5 A. What else but to corroborate from authority that the 
beginning of natural motions is identical with their end, and differs 
from it in nothing. 

N. If that is what you want, listen to the words of the Blessed 
Maximus in the Nineteenth Chapter of his Ambigua : 

“Everything that is naturally in motion is moved entirely by its 
cause ; and everything that is moved by its cause exists entirely by its 
cause; and everything which exists by its cause and is moved by its 
cause, has as the sole principle of its existence that cause by which it 
is and from which it is impelled into being. But the end of its 
movement is the same cause through which it moves and towards 
870D which it is drawn. But everything which exists and is moved by a 
cause is likewise begotten by that cause. But if the end of its 
movement is that cause by which it is moved, that by which it is 

BOOK V 

535 

made is the same cause. Therefore of every existent whatsoever and 
of everything which is naturally in motion the one cause is the 
beginning and the end, namely the Cause through which everything 
which exists and is moved moves and has its being. For this 
subsisting power, being active, both as principle divinely creates the 
things that are created and sends them forth : and as end draws them 
back to itself and terminates their existence. But if everything which 871A 
moves is also created, it is by a cause that it is and moves and is 
created : and nothing which does not exist through a cause is either 
created or moved. For that is not moved which does not in all things 
and through all things possess a cause of being : but if that which is 
uncaused is likewise wholly motionless, then the Divine is motion¬ 
less ; for It has no cause for Its being, being Itself the Cause of all 
things that are.” 

You see how very clearly he shows that the Cause of all things 
and the end of all things is the same. 

A. Yes, I see. But how this concerns the present problem I do 
not understand. For it seemed to me that your present subject is not 
God, Who is the Beginning and End of all things, for from Him and 
through Him and in Him are all things, and to Him all things tend : 
but the temporal principles of sensible nature, which are perceptible 
through their movement in generation and through space, and the 
theoretic origins of the intelligibles, which are perceptible to the 3713 
mind. And it is not yet clear to me how such things as you have 
indicated can serve as illustrations for reasoning about God. 

N. I am surprised that you are so slow of wit that you do not at 6 
once see where this discussion is leading. Do not all the arguments 
which we have taken from the nature of the sensibles and the 
intelligibles point in one direction, namely, that as each must by its 
nature return to its own principle, whether that principle be sensible 
or intelligible, so also human nature, as we must have no hesitation 
in believing, and as is clearly shown by these very sound arguments 
taken from physical nature, must also return to its own principle, 
which is none other than the Word of God in Which it was created 871C 
and immutably subsists and lives? For if God is the Principle of all 
things which are and all things which are not — by which I mean, of 
the things which are subject to the bodily senses and the mind, and 
of those which, by reason of the excessive subtlety and excellence of 
their substance elude the perception both of the bodily senses and 
the mind — and if He is the Object of their desire ; and if that desire 
is not prevented by any cause from attaining its End ; why should we 

536 

PERIPHYSEON 

871D 

872A 

The hidden 
incorruptible 
body which 
872B 
shall rise 
again 

872C 

doubt that in the case of human nature, which was specially created 
in the image and likeness of the single common Principle of all 
things, it shall return thither whence it came — all the more because 
it did not issue forth from that Principle in such a way as to abandon 
It altogether; for, says the Apostle, “in Him we live and move and 
have our being;” but because through sin it has become tarnished 
by a kind of un-likeness, we speak of it as having fallen away 
therefrom. For likeness brought it near, unlikeness removed it to a 
distance. For it is not by bodily paces but by the affections of the 
mind that it moves away from, or draws near to, God. It is not by 
spatial interval that we recede from the light of the sun, but by the 
loss of our eyes, or the closing of them, or by the setting of the sun 
itself. It is not space that separates us from health, but pain. In like 
manner, when we take leave of life, blessedness, wisdom, or any 
other virtue, it is by the deprivation of those virtues, either by death, 
or unhappiness or folly or sin. And as the skin of the human body is 
smitten by the ugly contagion of leprosy, so human nature is 
infected and corrupted by its insolent disobedience, and rendered 
hideous by it, becomes unlike its Creator. But when by the medicine 
of the Divine Grace it shall be cured of that leprosy, then shall it be 
restored to its former beauty; what is more, in itself the nature 
which was created in the Image of God never did lose the bloom of 
its beauty nor the integrity of its essence, nor could it do so : for the 
divine form, though enabled by sin to acquire corruptible qualities, 
itself ever remains immutable, as we may learn from the words of 
the Blessed Gregory of Nyssa. For in the twenty seventh chapter On 
the Image, which treats of the Resurrection, he writes : 

“It is not incredible that the resolution or Return of the rising 
bodies is from the mixture of the four universal elements of the 
world to the proper state of nature (of the hidden and incorruptible 
body which rises.) For the fluidity and mutability of our nature is 
not all-pervasive. If it were so it would be altogether unknowable, 
for we should have by nature no stability : but a more careful 
analysis shows that there are some things in us which endure, while 
others arise from mutability. For the body undergoes change by 
increase and diminution, like garments, which are changed with the 
changing of one’s age. But throughout all these changes there is a 
form which abides and is itself unchangeable, never giving up those 
marks which were inscribed at one time on it : and this with its 
marks is apparent in all bodily changes. But change, which results 
from some passion and which is an accident superimposed on our 

BOOK V 

537 

form, is removed through the Word of God. For that deformity 
through formlessness, like some strange face, takes its own form; 
but when that formlessness is removed by the Word — as in the case 
of Naaman the Syrian and the lepers as told in the Gospel — the 
form obscured by the disease will shine forth in health again along 
with its marks. Therefore in the conformity of the soul to God, it is 
not that which displays the flux of mutability and the capacity for 
transformation which is the innate quality of the soul, but that 
which is permanent, and likewise unchanging in our composition, 872D 
that is placed in our soul.” 

See how clearly and explicitly the Nyssaean demonstrates not 
only that the form of the soul is made in the Image of God, but also 
that the natural form of the body, which copies the image of the 
soul, remains ever incorruptible and immutable. For whatever is 
added to the natural body from the mixture of the elements, and 
whatsoever is added to the soul from the impurity of irrational 
motions, is for ever in a state of flux and in process of decay. And 
this, he says, is admirably represented by the story of Naaman the 873A 
Syrian and of those ten who were cleansed by Our Lord, as the 
Gospel relates. For that Syrian, and those ten, had not lost the 
human countenance ; they had only been smitten and covered up by 
the tumours and filthiness of the leprosy; from which we are to 
understand that our nature is neither lost nor changed, but tarnished 
by the stains of vice. That this Syrian stands for the type of human 
nature is obvious : for the meaning of Naaman is “comely” ; and the 
meaning of Syria is “the contemplation of heavenly things.” Would 
not this have been the state of human nature had it not succumbed 
to pride? For it was made comely and for the contemplation of 
heavenly things, but because of its transgression it was smitten with 
leprosy. But Naaman, descending into Judaea and returning again 873B 
into Syria at the command of the Prophet Elijah left his leprosy in 
the River Jordan and renewed the skin of his body. And will not our 
nature too, when it becomes aware of its slothfulness and the 
foulness of its vices, descend into the confession of its wretchedness, 
and returning again into itself be purged? And who will purge it? 

Elijah means the Saviour, or salvation of God. Is not our Elijah Our 
Lord Jesus Christ the Word of God, the Saviour and Salvation of 
God? For He shall be the Salvation of our nature in its return into 
Syria, that is to say, when He shall command us to return to our 
former nature, namely, the contemplation of the intelligible powers. 

And where shall He purge us? In Jordan, a word which means “The 
Descent of the Lord,” or “The Descent of Judgment,” or “Power,” 

538 

PERIPHYSEON 

873C or “The Furthermost Land,” or “Their Ascent.” And when do we 
The return of hope and believe that the salvation and Return of our nature into 
nature to Syria of heavenly contemplation will occur? Is it not when the 
intellect Lord shall descend in His glory, when He shall descend to judge the 
quick and the dead, and shall show forth His power to the furthest 
lands, that is, at the end of the world, when heaven and earth shall 
pass away in their ascent, that is to say, in the raising up of the 
Saints into eternal bliss, in fact, in the general resurrection ? For the 
general resurrection is the ascent of all from death into life, from the 
animal and corruptible body into the spiritual and incorruptible. 
Moreover, all the leprosy and corruption of human nature will be 
transferred to Gehazi and be heaped upon him. Gehazi means “He 
who beholds a valley,” or “separation from vision,” and is intended 
to represent the Devil, who, being the wicked servant of our 
873D Saviour, without Whose command and permission he may not 
perform the operations of his malice, is continually gazing out into 
the valley of destruction and eternal death, and is cut off from the 
contemplation of truth in penalty for his pride. Therefore our 
leprosy, which had marred the Divine Image by the hue of the 
Devil’s envy shall be returned to him again, overcome with grief at 
our salvation and restoration, and the pains of it will be heaped 
upon him. 

What shall I say of the ten lepers ? Are they not too types again 
874A of our nature, which has been redeemed by the Redeemer, and 
which is being redeemed day by day in the individuals, and which 
will be redeemed and set free universally at the end of the world? 
For it is not unusual for human nature to be represented by the 
Decad, thus : without doubt human nature consists of soul and 
body ; now the body exhibits a fivefold nature, namely the four 
material elements and the form which contains and forms them ; but 
soul also shows a five-fold nature, for it consists of Mind and 
Reason and the Two-Fold Sense (interior and exterior), and the 
Vital Motion by which it administers the body. Here you have, I 
8748 think, the Decad of man which will be released, as though from 
leprosy, by the Grace of his Creator and Redeemer from all the 
misery that has been added to him, and will be reduced to the 
Monad, so that not as a Decad but as Mind alone he may remain as 
One in the pure contemplation of the One Truth. This is the 
significance, I believe, of the one leper who alone returned to the 
Lord to offer glory to God for his healing, coming back as it were 
from the far off country of dissimilarity to abide with his Liberator 

BOOK V 

539 

and Healer. But the other nine were not to be found. For the whole 
of human nature will be resolved into the single Mind so that 
nothing shall remain therein save that Mind alone by which he shall 
contemplate his Creator. 

But before speaking of the purgation of human nature and its 7 
Unification with itself and its Creator, in Whose Image it was made, 

I think it would be appropriate to say something about the Return 874C 
itself. For unless something is first said about the depth to which it 
fell and from which its Return begins, and by what steps it ascends 
and to what it tends, and where it will end, it will be difficult to 
make our argument convincing. 

A. I think you are quite right. For who could give a satisfactory 
demonstration of the Return unless he had first shown by sound 
logical reasoning whither our nature fell, and whither and by what 
means it shall return? 

N. Among the faithful there can be no doubt as to whence it fell 
and where it arrived, for the Psalmist says : “Man when he was held in 
honour abandoned the intelligible principle, and is numbered 
among the foolish beasts, and is made like unto them.” He 
relinquished, then, the honour of the Divine Image and of his 
equality with the Heavenly Powers, and fell into the likeness of the 
irrational animals. His nature, which was in itself naturally fitted for 
seeking and loving heavenly things, is oppressed with earthly lusts 874D 
and carnal desires ; that which was fashioned to delight in reason is 
tossed about by irrational emotion : for there is no bestial emotion 
which is not found in man once he has sinned: and sure reason 
teaches us that what is praiseworthy in beasts is reprehensible in 
man. 

Why is this? Because in the beast irrational emotion subsists in 
accordance with its nature, but in man it is contrary to his nature. 

Now whatsoever is implanted according to nature is good ; but 875A 
whatsoever is added contrary to nature, however good it may be in 
the bestial substance in man is improper and alien : and these 
irrational emotions of human nature derive from no other source 
than the substantial influence of the beasts to which by sin that 
nature has become assimilated. This is shown by the same Gregory 
of Nyssa in the Eighteenth Chapter On the Image : 

“I think it is from this source, namely, from likeness to the 
irrational animals, that there appear in human nature the particular 
passions also, like a river bubbling up from a spring. This is shown 

540 

PERIPHYSEON 

by the fact that our own passions are related and equally manifest in 
us and the beasts. For it is not right to suppose that a passionate 
disposition could have its source in the human nature which was 
formed in the Divine Image. For man’s likeness to God does not 
875B consist in his rage, nor was it from lust that that transcendent image 
was created. Likewise, fear, and ferocity, and desire for the greater 
and hatred for the less and all such emotions are far removed from 
the stamp of the Divine beauty. Therefore it must be that human 
nature draws them to itself from its irrational part. For the forces 
upon which the irrational life depends for its preservation, when 
transferred to the human life, become the passions.” 

It was, then, as no wise man doubts, into these irrational 
emotions which belong naturally to the bestial life, but are found in 
human life as passions, that man fell, and from these again that he 
suffered a further decline into bodily death and dissolution. Nor 
could there have been so great a fall, nor deeper pit. For there is in 
nature nothing lower than that which is bereft of life, reason and 
875C sense : nothing lower than the corruptible body — for no nature is 
permitted to return into nothing. It is from this lowest depth of his 
Fall that the Return begins. 

This lowest depth of the Fall is the dissolution of the body. 
Therefore the dissolution of the body is the starting point of the 
Return of nature. In the death of the flesh, therefore, although 
considered the penalty for sin, is conferred upon human nature not 
so much a vengeance as a boon : so that the dissolution of the flesh, 
which we call death, should more reasonably be called the death of 
death than the death of the flesh. For if the sages are right in giving 
the name of death to this mortal life which is spent in the corruptible 
flesh, why should the end of that life be called death, when it does 
not so much bring death to the dying as the liberation from death? 
So the Blessed Maximus in the Twenty Eighth Chapter of the 
Ambigua writes : 

875D “It is wrong, I think, to call the end of this present life death : 
rather it is a separation from death, a release from corruption, a 
liberation from slavery, a rest from turmoil, an end to warfare, a 
way out of confusion, a return from darkness, an easement from 
sorrows, a silence from ignoble pomp, and leisure from instability; 
876A it draws a veil over baseness, and affords a refuge from the passions ; 
it is the wiping away of sins, and in short the end of all evils.” 

BOOK V 

541 

The end of this present life, then, is the beginning of the next ; 
and the death of the flesh is the token of the restoration of our 
nature, and the Return to our pristine integrity. 

The first step in the Return of our human nature is taken when 
the body suffers dissolution and turns back into the four elements of 
the sensible world from which it was composed. 

The second is fulfilled at the Resurrection when each shall take 
his own body out of the common fund of the four elements. 

The third when body is changed into soul. 

The fourth when soul, and in fact the whole human nature, 
shall revert to its Primordial Causes, which ever and immutably 
abide in God. 

The fifth when that spirit with its Causes is absorbed into God 
as air is absorbed in light. For when there is nothing but God alone, 
God will be all things in all things. 

By this I am not trying to prove that the substance of physical 
nature will perish, but that by these aforesaid states it will change 
into something better. For how should that perish which is clearly 
seen to turn into something better? So the change of human nature 
into God is not to be thought of as a perishing of the substance but 
as a miraculous and ineffable Return into that former condition 
which it had lost by its transgression. And if every subject which has 
unobscured intelligible knowledge becomes one with the object of 
the intelligible knowledge, why should not our nature when it 
contemplates God face to face become, in those who are worthy and 
as far as the capacity of our nature for contemplation allows, by its 
ascent into the cloud of contemplation become One with Him and 
within Him? 

And I do not wish here to dispute the opinion of those who say 
that no body can be changed into a life-giving principle, nor any 
life-giving principle changed into a body, especially as this appears 
to be the teaching of the Holy Father Augustine; but I am simply 
taking as my guides through this discourse on the Return of Nature 
Gregory the Theologian and his commentator Maximus, as well as 
St. Ambrose in his Exposition of the Gospel according to St. Luke. 

Neither do I wish to compel anyone to believe what is to him 
incredible. Of these stages of the Return of which I have been 
speaking some are universally accepted by traditional theology, 
while others are the subject of the widest disagreement. Thus, there 

8 

Here arises 
the question 
of the 
properties 
and 

differences 
after the 
resurrection 

876B 

876C 

542 

PERIPHYSEON 

876D 

877A 

Here arises 
the question 
of the 
deification of 
Christ’s 
humanity 

877B 

877C 

is no dispute about the return of the body into the elements from 
which it came nor of its temporal resurrection into itself : but 
concerning the passing or transmutation of body into soul, or of 
soul into the Causes, or of all into God, opinions differ greatly, and 
almost every possible teaching has its supporters. Many, accepting 
only the dissolution of the body into its elements and its return to its 
proper condition at the moment of the Resurrection, deny any 
further ascent, bringing their teaching to an end with a discussion of 
the nature of the post-resurrection body. As to the transfusion of 
bodies into souls, of souls into Causes, and of Causes into God, 
some deny it altogether, while others express doubt, and are so 
cautious that they even hesitate to allow that the Humanity of 
Christ could have been converted into Divinity. And since their 
authority is too important to be ignored, we ought to say a few 
words about their opinion on the matter. 

The Blessed Aurelius Augustine in the Tenth Book of the 
Hexemeron writes as follows : 

“First, let us be quite sure of this, that neither can the nature of 
the soul be changed into bodily nature so that that which was once 
soul now becomes body, nor into the nature of the irrational soul so 
that that which was once the soul of man now becomes the soul of a 
beast, nor again into the nature of God so that that which was once 
soul now becomes God ; nor on the other hand can the body or the 
irrational soul or the substance of God be changed so as to become 
a human soul.” 

Note that he here denies either that the human soul, or rational 
nature, can be changed into God, or that the body can be changed 
into soul. Boethius also, in the Second Book On the Trinity, 
declares : 

The human soul is not transmuted into the Divinity from 
which it derives. But if neither the body nor the soul could be 
changed into Divinity, then certainly humanity could not be trans¬ 
muted into Deity; still less is it possible to believe that body and 
soul can be changed into one another, for neither can the incorporeal 
become corporeal nor the corporeal incorporeal, since there is no 
common substance upon which the accidents of the one could be 
changed into the accidents of the other.” 

It is not possible to interpret the words of these authorities in 
any other way than that no corporeal nature can be changed into an 
incorporeal. Yet, far from raising any objection to their opinion, we 

BOOK V 

gladly accept it : but we are fully aware that the Greek theologians 
thought otherwise ; and although we have had frequent occasion to 
cite them in the foregoing discourse concerning the Return of 
Nature, I consider it necessary to have recourse to them again. The 
Blessed Gregory the Theologian in his Funeral Oration for his 
brother Caesarius speaks of the Resurrection as follows : “And a 
little later, the soul will receive that which was born with her, 
namely, the fleshly body, and therewith contemplates the things 
which are Yonder, that is, in the future life. And God, who put it 
together and took it apart, through the medium of a certain material 
which we believe to be clay, namely, the flesh, shall after a manner 
known to Himself make it Yonder a fellow-heir of glory. And as the 
body, which was born with the soul, shares her labours, so it shall be 
wholly absorbed into her from its mortal and passing life and 877D 
partake of her joys and, liberated from this mortal and transitory 
life, shall be with her one soul, one mind and one God.” 

Maximus explains this passage as follows : 

“As the flesh is through sin absorbed in corruption, and the 
soul is made corporeal through the acts of the flesh, and the soul’s 
knowledge of God is turned into such ignorance that she no longer 
knows if God exists : so at the moment of the Resurrection, in 
accordance with a happy future conversion, through Grace of the 
Incarnate God in the Holy Spirit, the flesh will be absorbed by the 878A 
soul in spirit, and the soul in God, Who is truly the Life, and the 
whole soul shall manifestly possess Him as the most unique Whole 
of all things. And to speak plainly, that divine Grace of Resurrection 
shall through converting us from present things about which we are 
now occupied shall in the future show us all the things that are ours, 
so that. Just as here death has been given the strength to swallow us 
up through sin, so Yonder it is Justly enfeebled and deposed through 
Grace.” 

See how clearly and openly these theologians express their 
unhesitating conviction of the Return of the body into the soul. And 
lest any should think that we can find no Latin author who supports 
this view of the unification of nature, that is to say, of the Return of 
the lower orders into the higher, I shall quote here the opinion of the 
Blessed Ambrose which is to be found in that place of his Com¬ 
mentary on Luke where the Gospel speaks of the woman who hides 878B 
three portions of yeast that they may ferment into one : 

“The Apostle teaches us that we should walk not in flesh but 
in the spirit, so that sanctified through the vessel of regeneration. 

543 

544 

PERIPHYSEON 

and putting off the old man with his lusts and clothing ourselves 
with the new man who is created after the Image of Christ, we may 
go forth not in the old way of the letter but in the new way of the 
spirit, by which we may obtain at the moment of the Resurrection 
the incorruptible communion of body and soul and spirit.” 

And a little later : 

“Thus, if in this life the three ingredients of body, soul, and 
spirit endure in one and the same leaven, that is, in the union of the 
Church, until they are fused into one so that there is no difference 
between them and we no longer seem to be composed of three 
different ingredients, so in the future life those who love Christ will 
878C possess an incorruptible unity and we shall no longer be composite. 
For we who are now composite shall be one, and shall be trans¬ 
formed into a single substance. For in the Resurrection there shall 
not be one part inferior to another, as in this life our weak and 
corruptible flesh (is inferior), rendered by the condition of corporeal 
nature susceptible to wounds and injuries, and weighed down by 
material bulk from rising above the earth and walking on high ; but 
in the resurrection we shall be formed into the beauty of a simple 
creature : then that shall be fulfilled which was spoken by John, 
“Most beloved, now are we sons of God and it is not yet revealed 
what we shall be ; but we know that when it shall be revealed, we 
shall be like unto Him.” For since the nature of God, Who is a 
878D Spirit, is simple, so shall we also be when we are formed into the 
same Image; for as is the Heavenly One so shall be the heavenly 
ones. So as we have borne the image of that earthly body, let us also 
bear the Image of this heavenly which it behoves our Mind to put 

But we should not understand Ambrose, that most admirable 
Doctor, to mean that there will be a confusion or transmutation of 
substances, but rather a certain ineffable and incomprehensible 
becoming one of our substances which is the clear purport of his 
8'79A teaching. For nothing exists in human nature which is not spiritual 
lubstanceof intelligible, for even the substance of the body is intelligible, 
the body is And it is not incredible, nor repugnant to reason, that intelligible 
incorporeal substances should become together so as to be one, and yet each not 
cease to retain its own subsistence and property — though in such a 
way that the lower are contained within the higher. For it conflicts 
with sound reason that the higher should be contained within the 
lower, or be attracted to it or consumed by it. But it is of the nature 
of the inferior to be attracted to the superior, and to be absorbed by 

BOOK V 

it — not in such a manner as to cease to exist, but rather so as to be 
preserved in it, and subsist in it, and be one with it. For air does not 
lose its substance when it is wholly converted into the light of the 
sun, even though nothing appears in it that is not light : but the light 
is one thing, the air another. It is only because the light prevails over 
the air that the light alone appears to exist. Iron, or any other metal, 
when melted in the fire, is seen to be converted into fire, so that it 
appears to be pure fire : and yet the substance of the metal is 
preserved. It is in the same manner, I think, that the substance of the 879B 
body will pass into the soul, not so that that which it is shall perish, 
but so that it shall be preserved in the better essence : and we should 
believe the same about the soul herself when she passes into mind : 
she is preserved therein in a more beautiful aspect, and one more 
like unto God. And I would not say otherwise of the transference, 
not yet of all substances but of rational substances, into God, in 
Whom all things shall find their end, and shall be one. 

Now, for all that has been said concerning the unification of 
human nature without the destruction of the property of individual 
substances support can be found in the teaching of Maximus. For 
commenting on the Sermon on Hail by the great Gregory of Nyssa 
at the place where he writes, “And the ineffable Light shall receive 879C 
us, and the contemplation of the Royal and Holy Trinity Which 
illuminates us more plainly and more purely, and is wholly mingled 
with the whole of our mind, and which alone I hold to be the 
Kingdom of Heaven,” Maximus adds : 

“In every rational creature, whether angel or man, those who 
have not corrupted through negligence any of the divine reasons, 
naturally bestowed on them by the Creator, in its motion towards its 
end, but have rather saved themselves through temperance, knowing 
that they are and ever shall be unchangeably as it were organs of the 
Divine Nature, who are wholly inspired by the Whole of Deity, just 
as if their bodies were constituted like their souls, these, made for a 
transcendent Lord, He turns to His Will and fills with their proper 
glory and blessedness, and to them He gives through nature and 879D 
through Grace an eternal and ineffable life — altogether free from 
any knowledge of the constituent character of this present and 
characteristically corrupt life — which life, that is eternal life, is 
made not by air that breathes nor channels of blood which flows 
from the liver, but by the total participation of Himself totally by 
them. Who was Joined to a body as is a soul and embraced a body 
through the medium of mind as He Himself knows — so that the 

545 

546 

PERIPHYSEON 

soul may put on immutability, the body immortality, and the whole 
man deity through the Grace of the Incarnate and God-making 
God, the whole man yet remaining soul and body according to his 

880A nature, and the whole man made in soul and body God through 
Grace and through the divine Ray of blessed glory which radiates 
his whole being, than which no brighter nor more exalted light can 
be comprehended. For what is more to be loved than ecoau; or 
Deification, conferred upon the worthy ? For through Theosis God, 
united to those whom He has made gods, has wholly established 
through Goodness His Allness.” 

See what he says : the whole man remains in soul and body 
according to his nature, and yet he is made through Grace in soul 
and body wholly a god. The property of each nature (soul and body) 
will be preserved ; but they will form a unity : the properties of the 
natures will not destroy the unification, the unification will not 
destroy the properties of the natures. 

880B A. Although what you say seems consistent with reason, to less 
skilled philosophers it will seem like the self-contradictory ravings 
of a madman. For you quote the great Gregory of Nyssa as saying 
“that the soul shall absorb the whole of her body into herself, and 
shall be with it one, a soul, a mind, and a God,” an opinion 
supported by Maximus where he says : “Certainly at the moment of 
the Resurrection, in accordance with a happy future conversion, 
through Grace of the Incarnate God in the Holy Spirit, the flesh will 
be absorbed by the soul in spirit, and the soul in God,” and then you 
add the opinion of the Blessed Ambrose on the unification or 
Return to the One of human nature, so as not to give the appearance 
that you were following the authority of the Greek writers only 

880C without corroboration from the Latins, even of those concerned 
with philosophy. His teaching is that human nature consists of three 
entities, body, soul, and mind, like three brands of flour, I will not 
say mixed together, but united as it were into a single leaven at the 
moment of the Resurrection by the bond of charity so as to produce 
not a composite nature but an utter simplicity and indivisible unity. 
For, he says, “It shall not be restored to the Image of God unless as 
pure spirit, free from all composition.” 

But then, after giving the opinions of these Fathers concerning 
the most simple unification not only of human nature in itself but of 
human nature in God, you introduce this saying of Maximus : “The 
whole man remains in his nature as body and soul, and yet the 

880D whole is in body and soul made God through Grace.” What are we 

BOOK V 

547 

to understand from these words but that the bodily nature will 
remain for ever as it is, and will by no means pass either into soul or 
into mind or into God, in spite of the fact that the blessed and 
incorruptible glory of the Resurrection is to consist in its unification 
with soul and mind and God? In like manner he understood, I 
suppose, that the nature of the soul and the nature of mind shall not 
pass away but each remain in its proper substance. And there is no 
small difference between soul and mind, for the latter is concerned 
solely with divine matters, whereas the former is concerned with 
creatures. But if this is so, how are these opinions to be reconciled? 

N. Why these things should perplex you I do not know. I have 
done my best to persuade you that the unification of intelligible 
natures can be achieved without accumulation or composition, and 
without endangering the permanence of individual properties. For, 
as I have many times stated in the previous books, there abide in 
every substance whether embodied or disembodied (if there can be 
any substance save God which has not a body of some kind, either 
intelligible or sensible) three things that can neither change nor be 
removed, essence, potency, and natural act. Are not these three one, 
one not by composition, but an utterly simple one and an inseparable 
unity? None of these can exist without the others because all belong 
to one and the same substance : and yet, when we think of them, we 
are aware of certain differences between them. For to be is not the 
same as to possess the potency to act, nor the act itself. It is one 
thing for a tree to be, another for it to have the potency of growth, 
still another thing to grow. It is one thing for a man to be, another 
thing to have the potency of intellection, another thing to grasp with 
the intellect that over which he has the potency of intellection. And 
there is no doubt that these three are present to every creature, 
whether visible or invisible. 

Here is another example of the unification of natures, free from 
confusion, mixture or composition. Is it not a fact that in one 
species there are many individuals, and in one genus many species, 
and in the one essence many genera, but in such a way that, as true 
reason teaches us, in the single ouoia each genus preserves its proper 
principles distinguished from those of another, not confused nor 
mixed nor compounded together, but unified so as to form, as it 
were, a one which is both multiple and simple ? And the same is true 
of the species in the genus, and the most special individuals in the 
species. For each one of these severally possesses both its own 
property and unification (with the rest), without any composition. 

881A 

9 

The 

unification of 
intelligible 
natures, their 
properties 
and 

differences 

persisting 

881B 

10 

881C 

548 

PERIPHYSEON 

Another example, taken from numbers abstracted from matter. 
Is it not a fact that all numbers, whether finite or infinite, that is, 
whether they can be comprehended in the consideration and 
specification of reason or whether they transcend the contemplation 
and thought of the human mind while still in this life, subsist in the 
881D Monad ? And yet there is in the Monad no composition of numbers, 
nor confusion nor mixture : nevertheless each preserves therein in 
potency and act its own individual principles. For who could fairly 
argue that two and three are so compounded in the Monad that the 
number two which is in the Monad is twice one, or the number three 
is three times one? For if that were the case, it would not be a 
Monad but an accumulation of many divers parts and a mass of 
882A disunited members. But the Monad is rather the single source of all 
numbers in a marvellous oneness : and in it two and three are one, 
while preserving their proper principles, and by it they are brought 
into harmony, dwelling therein without any corporeal mass or 
phantasy or phantasm of discursive reason, or the combination of 
phantasy and phantasm, subsisting in the simplicity of the intelligible 
intellect, whence they issue forth into corporeal or incorporeal 
objects by act and operation either of nature, i.e., by a natural or 
artificial action, or of arithmetic. And it is exactly the same case 
with all the numbers which proceed from the Monad and return to it 
again. 

And consider the point, from which all lines proceed, and to 
which they all return. In the point they are one, nor is that one a 
882B composite, but unification from various principles. 

Similar examples occur among the sensibles. You will not deny, 
I think, that the rays of the eyes and that the radiations from the 
celestial bodies and other sources of light are sensible and corporeal ? 

A. Who would deny it? For if the light of the luminaries is 
corporeal, why not also that of the eyes? Were they not so they 
could hardly occupy place or have spatial extension. 

N. And whether the light of eyes and luminaries is corporeal 
or not, nobody would deny that it is sensible. 

A. No one. But why do you hesitate there, as though doubtful 
whether light is or is not a body ? I should like to have your definite 
opinion on that. 

11 N. The nature of light is not now under discussion : but since 
882C you ask me I will say briefly what I think about it. A rational 
enquiry into the nature of the physical Universe discovers therein 

BOOK V 

549 

three principles: for everything that exists is either body, or 
bodiless, or something between the two which is called “corporal.” 
It is so called because, though itself neither corporeal nor incorpo¬ 
real, it is perceived in association with bodies. Now a body is that 
which is extended in length, breadth and depth, and may either be a 
physical object or a geometrical figure : the bodiless is without 
spatial extension, of which life, when isolated from matter, is an 
example. The corporal, however, is such a thing as colour, shape, 
and so on, which are not themselves bodies but the attributes of 
bodies : and are not incorporeal since they are always found in 
association with bodies. Now light is colour, and its function is to 
reveal the shape of visible things : I see no reason, therefore, why we 
should not say of it that it is neither a body nor bodiless, but that 
intermediary which is called corporal and is sensible. 

A. Resume the discussion. There is no need to linger further 
over this matter, for I shall have no difficulty in accepting that the 
light of the eyes or of the luminaries is colour, and consequently 
neither corporeal nor incorporeal. But I am still a little uncertain 
whether, for instance, the ray of sunlight or the ray from the eye of 
an animal is a body or corporal, nothing more, that is, than the 
colour which is perceived in association with bodies. Therefore I 
shall ask you to define the word “ray.” 

N. My opinion is that a ray is a fiery substance of maximal 
subtlety, simple, pure, swift, mobile, brimming with light, from 
which proceeds a brightness which illuminates and reveals the places 
and bodies into which it penetrates. 

A. This definition carries conviction. But what follows from 
it? 

N. From this definition you may understand how it is possible 
that the vision of a countless number of men and other animals that 
are gifted with sight can at one and the same time be directed upon a 
single visible object. For instance, a little golden ball placed upon 
the topmost pinnacle of a tower is simultaneously visible to all that 
stand about it in any direction, and each one of the beholders fixes 
upon it the rays of his sight, and no one says to another. Remove 
your sight so that I may see what you are looking at : for all may see 
at once. If then so many rays may flow together into one, without 
any confusion or mixture or composition between them, for each 
one of the observers retains his own proper sight, so that all are by a 
wonderful unification directed upon one and the same object: why 

882D 

883A 

12 

The 

unification 

883B 

and 

separation of 

spiritual 

bodies 

550 

PERIPHYSEON 

883C 

13 

883D 

884A 

What it is of 
the body that 
will return to 
soul 

should not all men be restored into some mystical unity, although 
each retains unimpaired the properties of his body, his soul and his 
Mind? 

Here is another example taken from the sensibles, which 
Dionysius the Areopagite also employs in speaking of these matters. 
Suppose a number of lamps burning simultaneously in a church, 
and radiating their light from different positions. The light which 
they give is single, is it not, so that no bodily sense can distinguish 
the light of one lamp from that of another? And yet it is most 
certain that the lights of the many lamps are by no means confused, 
though formed into one light. For if someone were to remove one of 
the lamps from the building in which they are burning, and carry it, 
still alight, into another place, it will leave behind it no trace of its 
own light in the brightness of the other lamps, nor take any of theirs 
with it. And the same would be true of any of the other lamps, no 
one of which, if removed, would take with it the light belonging to 
another, nor leave behind any of its own. 

Can we not apply the same principles to the human voice and 
the sounds of musical instruments : For every sound, whether of the 
human voice, or of the pipe, or of the lyre, retains severally its own 
quality while many of them in unity produce with suitable agreement 
a single harmony. Here also the argument from acoustics makes it 
clear that the sounds themselves are not confounded, although they 
are unified. For if any one of those sounds were to be muted, it 
alone will be silent, and none of the other sounds will supply the 
melody that came from the one that is now silent. From this it is 
clear that when it sounded with the others, it retained the property 
of its own quality. For if it had been confused with the rest, it could 
not have withdrawn the whole of it when it fell silent. For that which 
is confused or mingled cannot easily recover its own property. 

From these and similar examples taken from the intelligibles 
and the sensibles you may easily see how there can be a unification 
of human nature without sacrifice of the properties of individual 
substances. But since our discourse is about the Return, we must 
now enquire what it is of the body that will return into soul so as to 
become with her, as Gregory the Theologian says, “one soul, one 
mind, one God,” or, as the Blessed Ambrose puts it, “that it may be 
fermented into an incomposite unity for the substance of the body 
is to remain immutably without transformation. The same 
St. Gregory answers this question in a few words : “by being 
absorbed from its mortal and fleeting life.” By this he means: 

BOOK V 

“When whatsoever in the body is mortal and fleeting has been 
absorbed from life.” The Apostle teaches without equivocation the 
same thing when he says : “It is sown an animal body, it will rise a 
spiritual body,” and again, “When this corruptible shall have put on 
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality.” 
Therefore, the earthly, mortal and transitory mass, which is made 
up and composed of the different qualities of the sensible elements, 
under the form which is subject to the corporeal senses (because, as 
we have shown in the preceding books, it was something added as 
the punishment of sin to the natural and substantial body) shall be 
done away and changed into something better, into spirit and stable 
substance, which knows neither transience nor death ; and it is this 
which will return on the day of resurrection. For we hold the very 
wholesome and orthodox belief of those godly men Gregory the 
Theologian and Maximus, and are imbued with the doctrine which 
they support by inconfutable arguments, that the Creator of human 
nature created the whole of it at once, and not the soul before the 
body nor the body before the soul. Therefore we not unreasonably 
maintain that when we were first created, body as well as soul 
subsisted without the capacity for corruption and death. For it 
would be contrary to reason to suppose that He Who created our 
whole nature together made one part of it (the soul) immortal and 
incorruptible, and the other part (the body) mortal and corruptible. 
Therefore we have the right, I think, to suppose that the whole of 
human nature, soul and body, was at first created immortal and 
incorruptible. 

The wise aver that the angels were also created in this condition, 
not doubting that they were established as immaterial spirits and 
spiritual bodies free from all corruption. But they say that to men 
and the disobedient angels there were added as punishment for sin 
corruptible bodies of earth and air; earthly bodies for men, and 
aerial bodies for the angels. But that which was added to us because 
it was taken upon Himself by our Redeemer, Who emptied Himself 
and received the form of a servant, shall be changed into spirit and 
into that same substance which God created in the beginning; 
“when death is swallowed up in victory,” and the whole man, the 
outer as well as the inner, the sensible as well as the intelligible, will 
be made one by Unification. 

But if anyone finds it impossible to believe that the earthly 
body can be transformed into spirit, let him observe how the 
qualities of sensible objects change into one another while the 

551 

884B 

884C 

The soul is 
not before 
the body nor 
the body 
before the 
soul 

884D 

885A 

552 

PERIPHYSEON 

substances of which they are the qualities remain unaltered. Let him 
observe how the quality of water is transformed into the quality of 
fire ; how the clouds concentrated out of the air are resolved again 
into air so refined that no trace of their solidity remains ; how the air 
likewise, as we have often remarked, is consumed by the light of the 
sun ; how smoke is changed into flame. Finally, let him consider the 
most telling argument of all : if the qualities of corporeal objects are 
themselves incorporeal, a fact which no opponent could reasonably 
deny, and if all earthly bodies are the results of concentrations of 
885B these same qualities, it is all the less strange or incredible that that 
which is composed out of incorporeal qualities can return to the 
condition of an incorporeal object. 

A. To anyone who has a clear conception of the substances of 
objects and their qualities, of their transformations and composi¬ 
tions, and also of their unifications, their descents from the 
Primordial Causes and their Return to them again, it will, I am sure, 
appear neither strange nor incredible. Certainly to myself, who am 
without bias towards any particular opinion or inclination to attack 
any, even if it differs from yours, what you say seems to be well 
reasoned. For I do not need further evidence to be persuaded that 
the unification of substances does not involve a disruption (of the 
nature of the substance) or transformation or confusion or mixture 
or composition ; and that at the same time the Return and resolution 
of the qualities from which all these sensible bodies are compounded 
885C is into those very substances a part from which they could not subsist. 
For no quality or quantity or accident of any kind can subsist by 
itself. Therefore I do not think it would be incautious to say that this 
Return of which we are now speaking will not be a Return of 
substances, for these remain immutably and indissolubly what they 
always were, but of the qualities and the quantities and other 
accidents, which of themselves are unstable and transient, subject to 
the conditions of space and time, susceptible to birth and decay. 
And if that is the case, as true reason persuades us that it is, there 
arises a question which should not be overlooked but on the 
contrary be examined with diligent care. 

N. Tell me, I pray, what is this question which requires us to 
exercise our wit in such close enquiry? 

A. The question whether the substance of created things, and 
885D their essences, and their “reasons” proceed and descend from the 
Primordial Causes through generation in space and time, and the 

BOOK V 

553 

acquisition of a variety of accidents ; and then, when time runs out, 
that is, when this sensible world comes to an end, they return once 
again to those Causes from which they sprang: or if they remain 
immutably in their Causes beyond all birth and decay, all space and 
time, and in short all accidents whatsoever, so that it is only those 
additional but naturally innate auppdpaia, or accidents, appro¬ 
priately termed passions by the learned, which proceed from the 
Causes and by putting on matter produce this visible world, and 
these only which, sharing in the eventual dissolution of this world, 
return to their proper substances to abide there and terminate their 
mutability therein, being there free from every vacillation of birth 
and passing away and from the quantitative changes which are 
conditioned by spatiotemporal relations, and united with their 
spiritual substances by that mystical unification whereby they 
become with them an eternal, indivisible, immutable One. 

N. This is a very deep enquiry, and one that has not been 
brought into the open before in the debating chamber of the mind. 
But because you have posed it with the utmost discretion and in an 
orderly fashion, we can dispose of it without too much trouble : in 
fact, you have almost answered it yourself. 

I imagine that you do not doubt that the Universal Causes 
which are created and substantiated in Wisdom reside there eternally 
and immutably, never withdrawing therefrom to any other place, 
and never sustaining any fall into a condition that is lower than It. 
For if in any way they fell short of It they would no longer be 
subsisting in themselves. 

A. No, I have no doubt whatever concerning the immutable 
permanence of all the Causes in that Divine Wisdom Which is the 
Word of God the Father, in Which and through Which they were 
created and do subsist. For both Holy Scripture and the tradition of 
the Fathers uncompromisingly proclaim this doctrine. 

N. What is your opinion about substances, which were created 
and do subsist in these Causes? Do you not think, indeed, is it not 
an article of our faith, that these too, the substances, ever and 
immutably abide in their Causes, and never in any manner fall away 
therefrom into any other place ; but that, just as the Primordial 
Causes do not separate themselves from Wisdom, so neither do the 
substances separate themselves from the Causes, but subsist in them 
for ever? And as the Causes cannot exist apart from the substances, 
so the substances cannot flow forth from the Causes. 

886A 

The world is 
not made of 
causes or 
substances 
that remain 
unchanging 

886B 

886C 

554 

PERIPHYSEON 

The world is 
made of the 
qualities of 
causal 
substances 
only and not 
of other 
matter 
886D 

887A 

15 

887B 

A. Nothing is more likely, nothing more comprehensible, 
nothing closer to the truth or worthier to be believed and firmly 
held. 

N. It must then be from the qualities of these substances (I use 
the term in the sense to which the philosophers have familiarised us, 
to denote all things which happen as accidents to the substances, 
and are mutable and dependent upon those substances) that this 
world is shaped and compacted, and it must be back into them again 
that it will be resolved. For to everything which begins to have its 
being in time there must be an end of being. But I do not believe that 
these qualities of substances wholly abandon the substances upon 
which they depend so as entirely to immerse themselves in the 
matter of the sensible world : but in a miraculous and mysterious 
manner known to their Creator alone they continue to remain 
associated with their substances in an inseparable bond. At the same 
time, through intelligible intercourse with one another, they generate 
this world of which they are the component parts. For we have 
reason to believe that not only the Causes but also the substances of 
all bodies, whether of the general bodies or the particular, which 
make up the Universe exist in a realm above this visible world. And 
it is from these, which are incorporeal and intelligible, that the 
corporeal and sensible derives its origin. 

A. Let it rest at that: for I see that no other solution of the 
question can be found. Nevertheless, I should still like you to show 
briefly how we may distinguish between the Causes and the 
substances if both are incorporeal and intelligible. 

N. Causes we name the “reasons” of the first order or generality 
which were established instantaneously and together in the Mind of 
God : while substances are the individual and most special properties 
and “reasons” of individual and most special objects, properties and 
“reasons” which are distributed among the Causes and established 
in them. 

A. A brief but explicit distinction. It was, then, from the 
Causes and substances that our world, formed by combinations of 
their dualities, issued forth ; and it will be to them again that she will 
return and into them that she will be transformed when the time 
comes for her dissolution. 

N. Yes, we should convince ourselves that nothing is closer to 
the truth than that. For Truth Himself has said : “Heaven and earth 
shall pass away but My words shall not pass away.” But into what 
shall heaven and earth pass away? Into nothing? 

BOOK V 

555 

A. God forbid. That cannot be admitted, if by “nothing” is 
meant the absence and deprivation of all things which are and which 
are not : in that sense no creature, whether visible or invisible, can 
fall into nothing. 

N. To what place, then, is it that heaven and earth and all that 
is in them shall pass away? For that which Truth has spoken shall 
inevitably come to pass. 

A. To no other place, I suppose, than into those principles 
whence they sprang : and as it was from the Causes which are the 
first order of generality, and from the most special substances that 
through the materialised qualities and with the addition of form 
they proceeded; so it will be to these that they will undoubtedly 
return. But I should like to know what are those words of Truth 
which will not pass away. INJo not imagine they are the sort of words 
which are produced by the vibrations of the air, such as Truth 
Himself used in His speech with men when He was present in the 
flesh : for these were transitory, as are the words of others. 

N. I should say that by these words of Truth, or one might call 
them words of the Word, for Truth is the Word, are meant none 
other than these Causes and substances, for these are immutable 
“reasons” of things, created in the Wisdom of God, and in 
accordance with which all things visible and invisible were created, 
and into which heaven and earth shall pass away. But they 
themselves shall never pass away, and we may think of them as 
ineffable and immutable words eternally present in the Only- 
begotten Word of God. It was these words, I believe, which were 
heard by the Apostle when he was snatched into Paradise. For what 
man or angel can express or know the essence, quality or number of 
the “reasons” of nature which before all time and before every 
creature the Father created in the Beginning, that is to say, in His 
Word? 

A. Are not, then, the Causes and substances of nature cons¬ 
tituted in the Word of God to be counted as creatures ? For you said 
that they were before all time and before every creature. 

N. No, I do not consider them as creatures : for the proper 
definition of a creature is that which issues forth by generation at a 
given time into its proper species, whether this be visible or invisible. 
But that which was established before place and time, for the very 
reason that it is outside place and time is not properly to be called a 
creature, although by the figure of speech known as auvcKSoxf) the 

887C 

The causes 
are the words 
of Wisdom 
which do not 
pass 

887D 

888A 

556 

PERIPHYSEON 

17 

Local and 
temporal 
motion 
888B 

He speaks of 
corporeal 
places 

888C 

888D 

889A 

Universality of things, which is subsequent to God, is called a 
creature because it was established by Him. 

But there is another question. Must it be that all things which 
move in time likewise move in place? Here we encounter a great 
diversity of opinion not only among Christian metaphysicians but 
also among pagan. Some say that these two, place and time, are 
outside the corporeal creature and envelop it round about, so that 
the creature is contained within them and bounded by them. And 
because that which contains is obviously greater than that which is 
contained, place and time are not to be counted among the parts of 
the Universe but extend beyond it. Moreover, since they are 
incorporeal they cannot, it is held, be regarded as bodies. 

Others, on the other hand, include place and time within the 
created Universe : for they say that they were brought forth and 
created simultaneously with the other things which are contained in 
it, and as all these issued forth from their Causes, so in like manner 
did place and time : for before place and time were created their 
“reasons” had from the first been within the Word of God, in 
Which all things are made. And they argue further that if place and 
time were prior to the world then they must be eternal, and if eternal 
they must be either God Himself or else the universal Primordial 
Causes which subsist in the Divine Wisdom. But this is absurd : for 
the two greatest errors to which mankind is prone are, according to 
St. Augustine, “to think that there is a place above heaven, or a time 
before the world.” Therefore secular time came into being with and 
at the same moment as the world, and cannot be regarded as prior 
to it. 

Thus sound reason compels us to reckon place and time among 
the contents of the world, and consequently not only is everything 
which comes into the world produced in place and time (for the 
birth and change of everything may be measured in terms of place 
and time), but simultaneously with place and time, and with them 
goes forth from the general Causes which are before the creation of 
the world. 

Now, as to our question whether everything which moves in 
time must also move in place, there is again disagreement in the 
teachings handed down by the Catholic authorities. All start from 
the position that only God moves by Himself without place and 
time ; but when they come to the movement of the spiritual creature 
which is free of all material mass, they begin to diverge in various 
ways. Some affirm that the spiritual creature moves in time but not 

BOOK V 

557 

in place, whereas (as they not unreasonably maintain) the corporeal 
creature moves both in time and place. This opinion commands 
widespread support including that of St. Augustine, who says of 
God: “He moves Himself without place or time; He moves the 
created spirit through time but not in place ; He moves the body 
through place and time.” 

But others, who, as Maximus shows us in his Ambigua, follow 
the teaching of Gregory the Theologian, are convinced that place 
and time are inseparable concepts, so that every temporal thing is a 
local thing and conversely every local thing is a temporal thing, and 
a thing which could be moved in time without being moved in place 
or moved in place without being moved in time is not to be 
discovered in nature. 

It is not for us to decide which of these two opinions is the more 
worthy of adoption : Let each exponent who is concerned with this 
matter decide for himself which of the two seems to him the more 
reasonable. But as for us, we must return to our subject. 

A. A cautious observation. It is best not to attempt rashly to 
judge between the judgments of venerable authorities : for you can 
hardly prefer the one without appearing to slight the other, which 
gives great and immediate cause for dispute. 

N. No Catholic philosopher, I think, who studies the sense of 
Holy Scripture would say that place and time were created before 
the world. 

A. Certainly I would not contradict them in their belief and 
understanding. For their belief is wholesome and their understanding 
is pure. For what but eternity itself can antedate the world. Does not 
the Scripture say : “All things were made in the twinkling of an eye,” 
where the word “all” must include place and time; and also: “He 
Who dwelleth in eternity created all things at once.” 

N. What then shall we say if place and time did not exist before 
the world, and only eternity is antecedent to it? Would it not be 
reasonable to deduce that correspondingly they shall not remain 
after the world? For if place and time are to be reckoned among the 
contents of the Universe, how can they remain after it has come to 
an end? For the whole must either abide as a whole or perish as a 
whole : to remain in part or to perish in part is impossible. For if a 
single part of the whole perish, the whole no longer exists : for by the 
removal of that single part it ceases to be a whole. Similarly, if a 
single part is preserved and the rest perish, the whole is destroyed. 

The motion 
of the 
spiritual 
creature 

889B 

18 

889C 

When the 
world is 
ended, will 
places and 
times persist? 

558 

PERIPHYSEON 

Therefore the whole world either wholly perishes or wholly shall 
889D abide forever. But it shall perish : therefore it shall wholly perish ; no 
part shall be left undestroyed after its destruction. But place and 
time are parts of it : therefore place and time shall perish in it and 
with it. 

I speak of place here not in the sense of definition, which 
permanently resides in the mind, but in the sense of that space in 
which the quantity of a body is extended. 

These two components of the world, place and time, are called 
by the Greeks d)v dv8u, that is components without which the others 
cannot exist. I think we can safely adopt this expression as 
applicable as long as the whole of which they are components 
890A endures ; but once the world has passed away it has no longer any 
significance. For when that which required to be located and 
circumscribed is no more, how shall place continue to exist ? For if it 
is the place of nothing it is not place : what is meant by place when 
the placed thing is taken away? There is no such thing as a place 
which is not the place of something. And it is the same with time. 
For when there is no motion to be measured by or divided into 
temporal intervals, how can there be any time? For time is the exact 
and natural measure of movements and pauses. So when the 
measurable thing passes away, the measure must perish also: in 
what does time consist when motion ceases to be observed? As 
890B motion only subsists in a moved object, so time only subsists in 
measurable motion. Therefore just as there will be no motion when 
no part of the world is moving, so there will be no time when no 
motion is being measured. 

Now concerning the end of the world and its passing away there 
is no uncertainty among Catholics. Reason, natural necessity and 
the most reliable authority of Holy Writ all demonstrate that it must 
pass away. And it is for this very reason that the greatest of the 
natural philosophers have hesitated to admit or to teach that this 
world came into being in time through the process of generation: 
for they could not do so without being forced to concede that it shall 
pass away in a temporal end. For if they allowed that the world 
began in time, they must admit that it shall end in time. Therefore 
some of them have attempted to prove that the whole Universe, 
890C matter and form, is coeternal with God: others, that the unformed 
matter only is eternal, attributing to God only the creation of its 
form — for they say that though matter is eternal, and subsists 

BOOK V 

559 

co-eternally with God, it has need of God to endow it with form, 
having no power in itself to form itself. 

Now the wholesome doctrine of the Church most firmly 19 
believes and most clearly perceives that the One Omnipotent God 
Who is the Principle and Cause of all things, of the things that are 
and of the things that are not, endowed the world at the moment 
when He willed to do so, with both matter and form ; and shall, at 
the moment determined by Himself, make an end of it. For He Who 
made all things in their eternal Causes before they were established 
in time is also the End of all things : for to Him shall return all things 
which from Him proceeded and in Him have their movement and 
stability. The Lord Himself, in the words which we have just quoted, 
says of the passing away of the world : “Heaven and earth shall pass 890D 
away, but My words shall not pass away.” And lest anyone should 
suppose that these words can mean that the passing away of the 
world is from one place to another place, or from one time to 
another time, or from one visible form to another visible form, or 
from one quality to another quality, or from one quantity to 
another quantity, let him consider the way in which the Prophet 
addresses the Creator of the World : “The heavens are the works of 
Thy hands; they shall perish, but Thou remainest.” By using this 
unequivocal phrase, “They shall perish,” he makes clear the meaning 891 A 
of “They shall pass away.” 

Now if “the heavens shall pass away” what is to be thought of 
those things which are contained within their bound? If the most 
excellent part of the Universe is to perish, is it to be supposed that 
the inferior parts will remain? And if that which bounds and 
contains shall perish, shall that which is contained and bound be 
preserved? It is hardly likely that the better passes away and the 
worse survives ; and the Prophet did not say : “Heaven is the work 
of Thy hands ; it shall perish,” but : “The heavens are the works of 
Thy hands ; they shall perish ;” by which we may clearly understand 
that not only the heaven of the fixed stars which circumscribes and 
surrounds the totality of sensible creation, but also the etherial 
heaven in which the seven planets have their orbits, and the aerial 
heaven which occupies the space between the earth and the moon, 891B 
are also to perish. For the corporeal air which is nearest to the earth 
is sometimes called heaven. As in Genesis, where the birds are made 
to fly beneath the firmament of heaven — though at other times it is 
called earth, as in the Psalm : “Praise Him on earth, ye dragons.” If 
then all the regions of heaven and even the most subtle bodies are to 

560 

PERIPHYSEON 

perish, do you think that the waters and the lands will remain, 
whose nature is more passive than that of fire or air, and more 
susceptible to corruption? John the Theologian, prophesying about 
the end of the world, wrote in his Apocalypse : “For the first heaven 
and the first earth have passed away, and the sea is no more and 
Solomon : “Everything which was is that which shall be, and there is 
nothing new under the sun,” by which he meant : Only God, and the 
891C universal Causes which are in Him, was before the world ; and only 
He, and the universal Causes in Him shall be after the world. But 
the world itself, which is under the sun, and which took its origin 
from the Eternal Causes, shall into these same Causes return. It 
shall not be what it now is. For everything which begins to be that 
which once it was not, ceases to be that which it is, and already is 
not. 

Consider the most unequivocal opinions of Holy Scripture 
concerning the end of the world. In saying that “heaven and earth 
shall pass away” God brings together the most divergent species 
into a single genus. In saying “The heavens are the works of Thy 
hands : they shall perish,” the Prophet brings together the less 
divergent regions of ether and air. Finally John the Evangelist 
says : “The sea is no more.” These sentences teach us that there will 
remain no part of the Universe which shall not be done away. This 
doctrine cannot be questioned. 

A. What, then, are we to say when the same Solomon declares : 
“Generation comes, generation goes, but the earth abides in eter- 
891D nity ?” If it shall pass away, how does it abide, and how shall it abide 
in eternity? 

N. By these words we are not to suppose that Solomon is 
referring to that part of the Universe which lies at the centre, and 
which is the lowest (because beneath it there is nothing), which is the 
habitat of the human race while it is still in its mortal condition, but 
that earth of which the Prophet speaks: “Who foundest the earth 
upon its stability : it shall not waver forever and ever” — for it is the 
immutable stability of all natures in their essential and substantial 
Causes, whose immovable foundation is the Wisdom of the Father, 
which shall not waver forever and ever. For Holy Scripture cus¬ 
tomarily gives the name of “earth” to the immutable stability of 
892A natures, and especially to the pernanence of human nature. Thus the 
Apostle says : “Mortify your members which are above the earth,” 
by which he means : Mortify your vices, which are above the 
permanence of your nature, so that when they are weeded out the 

BOOK V 

561 

seeds of your virtues may grow. This is the Land of Promise into 
which the multitude of the faithful shall return when they have been 
set free from Egypt, that is, from toil or darkness (for Egypt has 
both these meanings), and have passed through the sea of baptism, 
and have been disciplined in the wilderness of this present life. This 892B 
is the land which the sons of the spiritual Israel shall possess when 
they see God face to face. This is the land which was revealed in a 
figure to the Patriarch Abraham, and given him for an eternal 
possession. But if these texts taken from the Divine Scriptures are 
not sufficient evidence of the impermanence of this earthly mass in 
which we now live the lives of the beasts of the field, other scriptural 
passages must be added. Peter the chief head of the Apostles writes 
in his Second Epistle: “Now the heavens which now are, and the 
earth, are laid up by the same word, reserved for the fire in the day 
of the judgment and the destruction of wicked men and John in 
the Apocalypse : “I saw a new heaven and a new earth : for the first 
heaven and the first earth are done away, and the sea is no more.” 

Now the followers of Gregory Nazianzen the Theologian, in applying 
“the new heaven and the new earth,” to, as Peter says, “the new 
heavens and the new earth,” to the restoration of human nature to 892C 
its former state, and to its return to its ancient dignity, are not, I 
think, very far from the truth. 

A. We have now been talking long enough about the end of the 
world, or rather, about its Return into the eternal Causes from 
which it issued forth. But I should like to have a clearer idea about 
the consummation of this process. 

N. I am surprised that you should ask this, when you yourself 20 
just now had no hesitation in defining the end of the world as the 
Eternal Causes which subsist always without change in the Word of 
God. And we had already agreed before that of all things that are in 
motion or at rest, or in mobile rest or stable motion, if I may use 892D 
such an expression, the beginning does not differ from the end but is 
one and the same. So it follows that if the principles of the world are 
the Causes out of which it originated, its ends will lie in the same 
Causes, and to these it must return. When it has completed its 
course it will not be brought to nothing but led back to its Causes, 
and there it will be preserved and rest for all eternity. But if the 
Word of the Father, in whom all things are made and have their 
being, is the Cause of all causes both visible and invisible, will not 
the final end of the world be this Cause of Causes? Shall they not 
end in Him, when all movement shall find rest in that towards which 893A 

562 

PERIPHYSEON 

it moves, and which is none other than the Word of God, an End 
beyond which the appetite of no creature can reach further? For 
there is no further goal to be sought or longed for : the common end 
of the whole creation is the Word of God. Thus both the beginning 
and the end of the world are in the Word of God, indeed, to speak 
more plainly, they are the Word Itself, for It is the manifold end 
without end and beginning without beginning, being dvap%o(;, save 
for the Father. 

Hence we may make a brief summary of the argument which it 
has required so much exposition to prove, and define the position 
thus : All things are from Him and to Him all things return : for He 
is the Beginning and the End. And this is most clearly the conclusion 
reached by the Apostle when he says : “Seeing that from Him and 
through Him and in Him are all things.” 

It is also very clearly manifest in the five-fold division of all 
893B created nature, which, as Maximus in the thirty-seventh Chapter of his 
Ambigua says, “is handed down by the authority of the Apostles.” 
For here too we find the Return and the Unification of all things 
through the same divisions and mutations of the whole creature into 
the One, and finally into God Himself. 

The fivefold 
separation 
and 

unification of 
all natures 

The first division of all natures is that which divides what is 
created from what is not created, which is God. The second divides 
created nature into sensible and intelligible. 

The third divides the sensible into heaven and earth. The fourth 
distinguishes Paradise from the habitable globe. The fifth and final 
division segregates mankind into male and female. 

In man every creature is established, both visible and invisible. 

893C Therefore he is called the workshop of all, seeing that in him all things 
which came after God are contained. Hence he is also customarily 
called the Intermediary, for since he consists of soul and body he 
comprehends within himself and gathers into one two ultimate 
extremes of the spiritual and the corporeal. That is why the sacred 
account of the Creation of the Universe introduces him at the end of 
all, signifying that in him is the consummation of the totality of 
created nature. 

So it is from the unification of the division of man into the two 
sexes that the Return and unification through all the other divisions 
will take its start. For in the Resurrection sexual differentiation will 
be done away, and human nature will be made one, and there will be 
only man as it would have been if man had not sinned. 

BOOK V 

563 

Next, the inhabited globe will be made one with Paradise and 
there will be only Paradise. Then heaven and earth will be made one, 
and there will be only heaven. And note here that it is always the 
lower nature that is transformed into the higher. The sexually 
differentiated mankind is transformed into man, for sexuality is 
inferior to humanity ; and so the inhabited globe, which is inferior to 
Paradise, is transformed into Paradise. Earthly bodies, being inferior, 
will be changed into heavenly bodies. Next, there is a unification of 
the whole sensible creature, followed by a transformation into the 
intelligible, so that the universal creature becomes intelligible. 
Finally the universal creature shall be unified with its Creator, and 
shall be in Him and with Him One. And this is the end of all things 
visible and invisible, for all visible things shall pass into intelligibles, 
and all intelligibles into God Himself. But, as we have often said, 
this wonderful and ineffable unification does not involve the 
confusion of the individual essences and substances. 

Now this whole process was perfected by Our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ in Himself by rising from the dead and showing a 
foretaste of all things that are to come. For when He rose He was 
not a sexually differentiated man. For although the form in which 
He appeared to His disciples after His Resurrection to confirm their 
faith was the form of male sex in which He had been born of a virgin 
and had passed His life among men until His Passion (for they 
would not otherwise have recognised Him had He not revealed 
Himself in the form in which they knew Him), it is impossible for 
the faithful to believe or even imagine that after the Resurrection 
His being was limited to a single sex ; “for in Christ Jesus there is 
neither male nor female,” but simply the true and whole man, that 
is, body, soul and mind, without the addition of any sexual feature 
or other comprehensible mark, for these three are in Him One, and 
are made in Him God without alteration or confusion of their 
special properties. For He is wholly God and wholly man : a single 
Substance, or, to use the commoner term, one Person, not subject to 
change in place or time, for He, both God and Man, transcends all 
times and all places; without form and yet the Form of all things, 
and the Image of His Father’s Substance ; like unto none, and yet all 
things seek to be like Him. For the Humanity of Christ, made One 
with God, is contained in no place, is moved through no time, is 
limited by no bodily shape characteristic of sex, since it is exalted 
above all these things, and not only above these, but “above all 
virtues and above all powers,” and all the other spiritual orders, for 
“He sitteth upon the right hand of the Father,” a position to which 

893D 

894A 

Christ’s 

resurrection 

sexless 

894B 

894C 

564 

PERIPHYSEON 

no creature can attain. Therefore we should be right to oppose those 
who attempt to locate the Lord’s post-Resurrection Body in some 
particular part of the world, and to show that it moved in space and 
time, or that it was confined within the world in that sex in which it 
appeared in the world. For how can a body which in the Oneness of 
the Divinity is above all things be one among them ? And it must be 
remembered that He Who rose from the dead has returned to 
Paradise. For it is not to be believed that any interval of time 
894D elapsed between His return from the dead and His entry into 
Paradise, nor that that Paradise into which He entered when He 
rose from the dead is localised or contained in any part of the 
sensible world, nor that when He manifested Himself to His 
disciples He was outside Paradise, but that at one and the same time 
He was within Paradise and manifest to His disciples. He was 
already in Paradise because in Him human nature was restored : but 
those to whom He revealed Himself were not yet in Paradise, that is 
895A to say, were not yet in their restored nature. And when He vanished 
out of their sight. He did not depart from them in a local sense, but 
veiled Himself in the subtlety of the spiritual body which as yet was 
imperceptible to the fleshly eyes of the Apostles. From this we learn 
that the Paradise which He entered when He rose from the dead is 
nothing else but that very integrity of human nature which He 
restored in Himself, and in which the First Man, had he not sinned, 
would have continued in glory. That is the Paradise which is 
promised to the Saints. Partly, in their souls, they have entered it 
already ; partly, in their bodies, they are still outside. So did He in 
Himself achieve the unification of Paradise and the inhabited globe. 
He was the Paradise of the inhabited globe itself. For everything 
which He took upon Himself from the inhabited globe, the material 
flesh with its accidents (except for sin) and His masculine form. He 
changed in Himself into a spiritual nature. 

895B And then, not only did He exalt and bring back the humanity 
which He had received and refashioned in Himself to a parity with 
the angelic nature (as we see from His Ascension into heaven, when 
before the eyes of His disciples He was lifted into the air and 
received out of their sight by a cloud, which demonstrates both His 
perceptibility and His subtlety : for before His Passion He said : 
“Father, show forth Thy Son.’’) — not only that, but also exalted it 
above all angels and heavenly powers, and, in short, above all things 
that are and all things that are not. And that which He perfected in 
Himself particularly. He shall at the time of our Resurrection 
perfect generally in the whole of human nature — that is, not only 

BOOK V 

shall He convert into spirit all things which humanity acquired from 
this material world after its transgression, but also shall bring it into 895C 
an equal share of the heavenly glory of the angels. 

And do not be surprised that we repeat again here matters 
which were fully dealt with in earlier books ; for it is required by the 
order of discourse we must necessarily follow that the same theories 
and arguments be re-introduced and repeated many times, and 
recalled to the memory by a kind of dvaKccpaXaicoaK;. I say this 
because in the earlier books we have already had a considerable 
amount of anticipation of the doctrine of the Return of Nature in 
the form of extracts from the Blessed Maximus. But now this 
preliminary treatment must be elaborated. 

Maximus treats of the unification of Creation not only in his 
Ambigua but also in the Scholia, where, in the forty-eighth Chapter, he 895D 
gives the mystical interpretation of the Towers which Ozias built in 
Jerusalem : 

“Perhaps the scriptural account means by the angles the 
different unifications appointed through Christ for the various 
creatures. For by mystically transforming into spirit the division 
into male and female and by liberating human nature from those 
accidents which in both male and female are the effects of the 
passions He achieved the unification of man. Then He achieved the 
unification of the sensible world which comprises the sensible 
Paradise and the habitable globe by removing the barrier which 
keeps them apart. Next he unified earth and heaven, showing that 
the whole nature of the visible Universe was in itself a unity. Then 
He unified the sensibles and the intelligibles, and showed that the 896A 
nature of all created things understood by a mystical reason was 
one. Finally, by a reason and method exceeding nature He effected 
the unification of the created nature with the Nature that is not 
created.” 

A. What am I to say to all this? In what way and by what 
analogy are we to believe that when Our Lord arose from the dead 
He was not defined by any sensible form, and particularly not by 
that which He received when He was born of the Virgin ? And since 
He was and is the Exemplar of the general resurrection that is to 
come, it must necessarily follow, if He rose without any sexual 
characteristics, that all men generally must be without sex at the 
resurrection and thereafter. 

565 

566 

PERIPHYSEON 

N. Further discussion of this matter is superfluous, for in the 
previous books we have repeatedly shown with good reason sup- 
896B ported by the opinions of the Blessed Gregory and his commentator 
Maximus that in the life to come after the resurrection there will be 
no distinguishing mark of sex whatever in human nature, that is, no 
distinction of form between male and female ; for human nature will 
have returned into that form which was made in the Image of God. 
The Image of God is neither male nor female; this division in our 
nature came about as the result of sin. 

A. So there will be neither male nor female in the future life, 
for the simplicity of our nature, alone surviving, shall have swallowed 
up into itself the double nature of sex which now is. 

N. Why do you show so much hesitation over this? For 
speaking generally of mankind in the resurrection, the Truth says : 
“They shall not marry nor be given in marriage, but shall be as the 
angels in heaven.” Do we not hold that the angels consist of 
spiritual and intelligible body? Yet we have no difficulty in thinking 
of them as free from any limitation of form. For we need not 
896C suppose, because the Divine Account has stories of them appearing 
in the likeness of men, that it is of their nature to be confined in such 
a shape. It is assumed for the occasion, for by no other means was it 
possible, or at least it would not be easy, to appear before men and 
speak with them. If then the angels are entirely free from limiting 
form, why should we be surprised that men, once they have become 
equal with the angels, shall be free from all sexual qualifications and 
all distinguishing form? They could not otherwise be equal with 

them. 

And there is nothing in this which is an obstacle to belief. 
Bodies do exist which, being liquid or spiritual, are not confined to a 
896D precise form. I cannot accept that a liquid or spiritual substance of 
the purest nature is limited to a definite size or circumference or by 
any other physical factor: reason does not allow us to do so. The 
four simple elements of the world are not bound to particular 
shapes. For they are in the world everywhere, and there is no part of 
it where their concourse is absent. But how can that which is in the 
world everywhere be confined to any form? There are such things, 

then, as bodies without sensible form. Another example is provided 
by the rays of light from the eyes : are they not also corporeal and 
yet shapeless ? 

Now, if you were to say that the angels possess intelligible form 
I should entirely agree : and it follows that men also in the 

BOOK V 

resurrection will similarly possess intelligible forms : far from deny- 897A 
ing it I stoutly maintain it. But what and of what kind those forms 
are which the angels already possess and which men are destined to 
possess I confess I do not know at all. St. Augustine has a phrase: 

“Until my body pass into the disposition of my will.” But this I do 
know, that many eminent philosophers hold widely different views 
concerning man’s post-resurrection body, and it will be as well to 
bring them into the scheme of this volume, lest I should seem either 
to despise them or not to have read their books. 

A. The method of discourse which we are following requires 
that you refer to the opinions held on these matters by all the 
theological writers whom you have read (for I fancy you have not 
read them all. That would be an impossible feat for anyone). In this 
way the reader will be given the opportunity of choosing the opinion 
he prefers to follow. But at this point I should like to ask you why 897B 
we say that a thing perishes when we know that it will return into its 
own Primordial Causes, and indeed into God Himself. It should 
rather be said of it that it lives forever, than that it dies and passes 
away. 

N. An easy and succinct way of replying to your question 21 
would be to refer to Dionysius the Areopagite’s exposition of the 
prophetic text, “Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His saints.” According to his interpretation the death of the saints 
means in this passage nothing less than their ascent into God 
through the loftiness of their contemplation whereby though still in 
the body they have transcended all things visible and invisible. Was 
not Peter himself, the head of the Apostles, dead to every creature 
and did he not ascend into God when, upon Our Lord asking, 
“Who say ye that I am?” he replied: “Thou art Christ, the Son of 897C 
the Living God?” And was not John the Evangelist dead to all 
created things when he transcended all things by the loftiness of his 
contemplation when he summed it all up by saying: “In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God” — and all the rest of that marvellous and ineffable 
Theologian’s contemplation? And consider the Apostle who, when 
still in the bonds of the mortal body, pronounced himself to be dead 
and crucified : “The world is crucified unto me and I unto the 
world.” Such then is the death of the saints, who by the power of 
their contemplation ascend into God Himself, transcending all 
things even their own natures deified by the excellence of Divine 
Grace. 

567 

568 

PERIPHYSEON 

And just as those who are filled with virtue and wisdom even 
897D while they are still established in this world die in their mind, though 
not with their body, so shall it be with the whole world at its 
consummation. For it shall return into Him Who, because He 
transcends being, is called Not-Being, not so as to be wholly deified 
or made one with God as the heavenly powers and those human 
intelligences who are illuminated, purged and perfected, but in such 
a manner that, as I have frequently stated, each one of the parts of 
which it is constituted shall return into its Cause. But the Causes of 
all things subsist in God, as no one of the faithful will deny. For 
898A anyone who does so is either an unbeliever or a fool. We can, 
therefore, in a sense, say of that which is brought back to its cause 
that it has returned to God. And lest you should suppose that it was 
too bold of me to describe God as Not-Being, or that I have no 
authority for doing so, hear the words of the Blessed Dionysius the 
Areopagite in the first chapter on the Divine Names: 

“In our exposition of the theological outlines, we said that the 
One Unknown Super-Essential, Which is in Itself the best that is. He 
Who is namely, the Three-fold One, opoGeoq and 6|iodya0O(;, can 
neither be uttered nor comprehended. But the angelic henads of 
holy powers which must be regarded as contemplating or participat¬ 
ing in the Good Which is more-than-unknowable and more-than- 
light, are themselves hidden and unknown, and subsist alone in 
those of His angels who, for reasons that transcend the knowledge 
of the angels, are worthy thereof. Human intelligences that have 
898B achieved unification, in so far as it is permitted them to do so, in 
imitation of the angels become conformable to God, seeing that 
they rest from every intelligible operation, and thus is brought about 
the unification of deified intelligences with the Supreme Light,” that 
is, with God. “By discarding all things that are they offer to Him the 
most powerful praise. Thus they are verily and supernaturally 
enlightened by the most blessed unity with God Which is the Cause 
of all things that are, and Which because It is superessentially 
898C exalted above all things that are is Itself Nothing.” 

Notice how the theologian has no hesitation in ascribing the 
name Nothing to the Supreme Light, or God, Which lightens every 
intelligible and rational creature. And he gives his reason for doing 
so : “Because It is superessentially exalted above all things that are.” 

It is, then, the common end of all created things to return, by a 
kind of dying, into the Causes which subsist in God; and it is the 
property of the intelligible and rational substance, by the power of 

BOOK V 

569 

contemplation, to become One with God ; and, through Grace, to 
become God Himself. 

A. I plainly perceive that the end of the world is nothing else 
but its return into its Causes, and is therefore a transmutation into 
something better than what it now is. But because the most 
important part of the sensible world is the body of man, not because 
of its size but because of the dignity of the rational soul which forms 
it and gives it life and rules and contains it, it is, if I am not 
mistaken, concerning the return of this that the method of our 
treatise compels us to speak. 

N. You are right. That is the course which we must now 
pursue. 

A. Proceed then. 

N. It is the common doctrine of the Universal Church that the 
second stage in the Return of the human body (for the first stage 
consisted in the dissolution of its elements) is its resurrection. 

A. It is meet and right that all believers should agree that the 
second stage of the body’s Return is nothing other than its 
resurrection and re-integration from the four universal elements 
into which it has been dissipated. But the question is whether the 
resurrection of the body is the consequence of Grace or of nature, or 
of the combined operation of the two. For I have not found many 
authorities to guide me in this matter. 

N. I do not recall either having seen mention of it among the 
Latin authors : not, I imagine, because it has not been dealt with by 
some writer whom I have not yet come across (for it is not to be 
believed that the authors of the Roman tongue have entirely ignored 
so great a matter, or having taken note of it have refrained from 
comment); but because if any treatment of the question has been 
undertaken it has not come my way. Therefore it is as the result of 
lengthy speculation of my own that I now put forward the view that 
the general resurrection of the dead, of the wicked as well as of the 
good, could not be effected without the Grace of the Redeemer of 
the world : and that natural virtue is insufficient to achieve it : so 
that if God the Word had not been made flesh and had not made 
His dwelling with men and had not taken upon Him the whole of 
our human nature, in which He Himself suffered and arose from the 
dead, there would be no resurrection of the dead at all. I had been 
led to this opinion by what He Himself has said: “I am the 
Resurrection and the Life.” For this implies that only through His 

22 

898D 

Will the 
resurrection 
be according 
to nature or 
899A 
grace or 
both? 

23 

899B 

570 

PERIPHYSEON 

899C 

899D 

Natural 
examples of 
resurrection 

900A 

Incarnation this gift which is shared by all without exception was 
bestowed upon the human race, namely the resurrection from the 
dead, or the restoration and reintegration of the whole of human 
nature, which is constituted of body and soul. But if the Word of 
God had not taken human nature upon Him and had not risen 
therein from the dead, nobody at all would have received the grace 
of resurrection, but the bodies of men like the carcasses of the other 
animals would lie forever in the dust of the earth. 

I found further inducement to this belief in the words of the 
Apostle : “God the Word is the first fruits of the dead.” 

Such, then, was my theory concerning the resurrection of the 
dead. But when I read the Homily on Faith by Epiphanius the 
Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, which is called Ancoratus, and the 
dissertation of the great Gregory the Theologian On the Image, I 
changed my opinion, setting less store by it than by the need for 
agreement with their teaching, and I accepted the view that the 
resurrection of the dead would be effected by innate virtue. I think, 
therefore, it would be not inappropriate to insert into our discussion 
the words of these doctors. Epiphanius, in speaking of the resur¬ 
rection, and attempting to convince the Greeks who totally denied 
it, writes as follows : 

“Now the Greeks find the resurrection wholly unacceptable, 
for they have no knowledge of God or of His ordinances. Neverthe¬ 
less they will rise again in spite of themselves. The very creation 
itself affords them proof of it, providing by daily instances types of 
the resurrection. The day wanes, and we undergo a kind of death : 
but when night is past day returns again and breathes life into us, 
revealing to us a symbol of the resurrection. The harvest is gathered 
in, and this year’s sheaves are cut, a clear figure of our passing 
hence : but the seed thereof is sown in the earth, and is fruitful ; for 
the seeds that are planted after the harvest,” that is, after the fruit 
has been gathered in, “shall rise again. The locust dies and is buried, 
but the earth conceives from that which was ejected from it and after 
a while brings forth that which was entrusted to it. The seeds of 
fruits are sown and at first die: for if they do not first die, they 
cannot be made alive. In our own bodies also God has wrought 
signs of the resurrection, for in our ten fingernails and ten toenails 
He furnishes evidence of our hope ; and in the hair which crowns 
our heads He foretells our resurrection. For hair and nails, which in 
us seem to be inanimate bodies, are cut every day, and yet they 
always grow again, thus signifying our hope in the resurrection. 

BOOK V 

571 

“It is not idle fabling to draw these examples from nature for 
instruction of the unbelievers. Doves, animals that do not fly fast 
together, die for six months and (then) after forty days they 
straightway come to life again. KdvGapoi, i.e., dung-beetles, feeling 
that death is near, conceal themselves in balls of dung, and, hiding, 
bury the balls in earth ; and then they are found by virtue of a bodily 
fluid to rise again from their dead bodies. Of the Phoenix of Arabia 
it is not necessary for me to speak — for the fame of it is known to 
many, both of the faithful and the unbelievers. This, however, is its 
case : after living for five hundred years it becomes aware that its 
death is near. It constructs for itself a sepulchre of aromatic 
branches and carries it into the city of the Egyptians which is called 
Heliopolis, that is, the City of the Sun, and after inflicting many 
wounds upon its breast with its talons it generates fire from its body 
wherewith it kindles the material which it has laid beneath its 
sepulchre, and is thus entirely consumed, both flesh and bone. But 
by the operation of God a cloud appears and rains upon it, and 
extinguishes the flames that are consuming its body, but the bird is 
already burnt to death. When the flame dies down the ashes of the 
carcass are abandoned ; and after they have been inert for one day, 
they generate a worm, and the worm puts on plumage, and becomes 
a new Phoenix ; and on the third day it attains its full stature, and in 
that form reveals itself to those who search out the place to tend it, 
and then returns to its own country whence it came, and thus that 
which was consumed with fire is made youthful again.” 

Such are the words of Epiphanius. If then there is a natural 
power which effects these restorations in nature and renews the 
parts of the human body and brings irrational animals to life again, 
as our author shows by his examples : we should not be surprised to 
find that there is a vital and an innate virtue which never abandons 
the human body and is capable of restoring the body itself to life 
and to the fulness of its human nature. For the divers and particular 
bodies of the other animals, and of all sensible things, shall in 
general pass away with the world, according to that manner of 
passing away which has already been described. For the vital 
motion that is in them and which is active and mobile so long as 
they are held together by their forms ceases to operate when they are 
dissolved. And yet it by no means abandons their substance: for 
since all sensibles and all intelligibles are established in the plentitude 
of human nature, is it so unreasonable of us to suggest that the 
whole earth, with all its parts, shall by a kind of general resurrection 
rise again when the time shall come for the restoration of that nature 

900B 

900C 

900D 

The vital 
motion does 
not desert the 
901A 

572 

PERIPHYSEON 

substances of 
bodies. The 
general 
resurrection 
of all things 
with the 
world in man 

(i.e., human nature) in which the whole of it is contained ? Especially 
as, on rational consideration, we find that the nature of all the 
sensibles is itself one and the same, and has nothing to do with the 
dimensions of the corporeal bulk of this world but consists of a 
unification of incorporeal substances not made up of an accumula¬ 
tion or composition of parts : just as in the Monad and in the centre 
of the circle we do not see the quantity or quality of the numbers or 
the lines (which inhere in them) but only a virtue which has neither 
area nor volume, neither quantity nor quality. For throughout the 
whole it is wholly itself, confined to no place and moving through 
no time. 

Further, if in the universe of sensible things human nature is 
supreme, and if higher natures always attract lower natures to 
901B themselves (for we cannot reasonably allow that higher natures are 
absorbed into lower natures, since the proof that lower natures pass 
into higher is certain), is it not a rational supposition that human 
nature shall in the end of all things gather into herself all things 
which were first established within her and beneath her so as to 
produce a single unification? 

But I do not think we should pass over what the same 
Epiphanius has to say concerning the spiritual subtlety of the 
post-resurrection body of man. When he is discussing the post¬ 
resurrection Body of Christ, in which we have before us the most 
perfect example of the resurrection of all mankind, he writes as 
follows : “He made His way through closed doors ; for He raised up 
His fleshly body as a spiritual body, and yet not as something other 
than what it was. And that which it was He made one with His 
Deity, so that it possessed the subtle nature of spirit. For if there was 
901C not in it the subtlety of spirit, the body which He received would 
have possessed weight. But to show that this corruptible body of 
ours shall in truth put on incorruption (for if it is mortal, it shall put 
on immortality). He made His way through closed portals — 
showing that His solid limbs were now spiritual limbs. His mortal 
body an immortal body. His corruptible body an incorruptible 
body. And in order to convince all those who are in doubt about our 
salvation, by which I mean our resurrection, in accomplishing His 
resurrection He exchanged His body for a subtle spirit.” Note with 
what assurance he affirms the resurrection of spiritual bodies and 
the ineffable Return into a subtle state, and the absorption by spirit 
of all the turgidity of that earthly bulk which is subject to the 
901D corporeal senses and is limited to space and time. In this he shows 

BOOK V 

573 

his complete understanding of the words of the Apostle : “It is sown 
an animal body, it will rise a spiritual body.” 

A. I take note of it, and I readily embrace the teaching of this 
great man. As to the spirituality and non-localisation of human 
bodies after their resurrection, when human nature, which consists 
of soul and body, shall be made equal with the angels, I had already 
been convinced of it by the teaching of the Fathers as well as finding 
evidence for it within myself, for I consider nothing more likely or 
closer to the truth than that our bodies, changed into a heavenly 902A 
quality, lay aside every earthly characteristic, and become inappre¬ 
hensible to mortal sense and free from all limitation of place. For if, 
as we have often said, the elements of this sensible world in their 
simple form penetrate everything which lies within their sphere, and 
are not hindered by the density of any circumscribing body from 
being diffused in all directions (for what careful exponent of the 
nature of this visible mechanism, what explorer into the subtlety, 
nay rather, into the incorporeality, of its catholic elements, would 
not unhesitatingly declare that the subtle air freely penetrates, 
without obstacle to delay it, all the realms of heaven and earth, as 
well as those of the atmosphere and the sea, and that the fiery 
nature, even more marvellous, and more closely akin to the subtlety 
of spirit, being simple, pure, and inapprehensible to every corporeal 902B 
sense, fills and contains not only all the regions of the world, but 
also invades by reason of its greater degree of subtlety and closer 
similarity to the spiritual nature, since it is the innermost of all 
elements, that most subtle element of the air itself? And we must 
have the same notion concerning water and earth in their uncom¬ 
pounded states : for these too penetrate to a proportionate extent all 
bodies everywhere) — if this is so, why should we marvel if the 
resurrection body rise above every sensible quality, and is un¬ 
encumbered by bulk and unconfined by place, and, if I may say so, 
wholly transmuted into spirit, and becoming most like to life itself, 
is raised because of its ineffable and spirit-like tenuity above 
everything which the bodily sense can grasp? 

As to your view that the resurrection of the body is brought 
about with the co-operation of its innate virtue, and is not entirely 902c 
due to the Grace of the Incarnate Word, I am now for the first time 
beginning to wonder whether this is not so ; and whereas I formerly 
had doubts whether the innate virtue could effect resurrection (for, 
like yourself, I attributed the restoration of man wholly to his 
Redeemer) now at last, guided by reason, I feel assured on this 

574 

PERIPHYSEON 

902D 

903A 

The gift and 
grace of 
divine 
goodness 

903B 

point. For we have been told that there has never been any miracle 
in this world which is contrary to the nature of God : but such 
manifestations of power as are recorded in the Sacred History, 
though prompted by the Will of God, are wrought by the effectual 
administration of natural causes. And if the general resurrection of 
the dead, of which we have the supreme example in Christ, may be 
considered as the very miracle of miracles, for almost all other 
natural phenomena may be taken as symbols thereof, would it not 
be reasonable for us to suppose that resurrection is brought about 
by the actualisation of the potency of natural causes controlled by 
the Divine Will? 

N. Resurrection is effected, then, by the co-operation of both 
agents, nature and Grace. 

A. So I believe. But how much of the operation is attributable 
to Grace and how much to nature I am not sure. For no shrewd 
explorer into the secrets of wisdom would allow that the two are 
identical. 

N. No, the difference between them is great, and worthy to be 
examined by diligent enquiry and set forth in clear exposition. 

Now this branch of learning should be treated under three 
heads : There is first the inexhaustible and infinite diffusion of the 
Divine Goodness through all created things; and then the twofold 
stream thereof into those things that are given by nature and those 
things that are donated by Grace. Thus the three things to be 
considered are : Goodness ; Its gifts ; and Its Graces. Our reason is 
keen enough to discern one from the other, and to attribute to each 
its properties. 

A gift of the Divine Goodness is that which is supplied to all 
nature, distributed among the genera and species of all creatures, 
and which the Superessential Goodness Who is God universally 
bestows upon all from the highest to the lowest, that is, from the 
intelligible nature, which is the highest of all creatures, to the 
corporeal nature, which occupies the last and lowest place in the 
Universe. For instance, it is a gift of Goodness for the nature of the 
created Universe to be, for it was Goodness which brought it forth 
from non-existence into existence. Thus the Blessed Dionysius in the 
fourth chapter of the Celestial Hierarchy writes : 

“First of all it is true to say that the Superessential Divinity by 
conferring out of His universal goodness essence upon the things 
that are, brought them forth into being. For it is proper for the 

BOOK V 

575 

Cause of all things and the Goodness that is above all things to call 
all things that are into its own community, that each one of the 
things that are, be limited by its proper measure. All things therefore 
that are participate in the Providence which flows forth from the 
Superessential and all-causative Divinity. For I suppose that none 
of the things that are would have obtained their essence, had they 
not obtained it from their Principle. All existents therefore partici- 903C 
pate in His being; for the Divinity Which is beyond being is the 
being of all things.” 

Thus far Dionysius. But the Superessential Goodness bestows 
upon all things not only the gift of being, but also of eternal being. 

For every essence and substance derives its being and subsistence 
from no other source but the Superessential and Supersubstantial 
Goodness Which in Itself truly is and truly subsists. For there is no 
substantial or essential good which exists of itself save that alone by 
participation in which all things receive the gift of well-being, and 
the elect alone the Grace of deification. And there is no essence or 
substance established in the Divine Goodness which does not 903D 
eternally and immutably endure : for whatsoever things cannot 
endure perpetually are accidents superadded to substances and 
clustering about them like accretions, and destined to return to 
them. Every nature, therefore, which has been brought into essence 
and is preserved from perishing to all eternity is a gift of the Divine 
Goodness. 

Now between being and eternal being there is an intermediary, 
which is called well-being. Without this intermediary the two 904A 
extremes, being and eternal being, although existing, cannot rightly 
be said to exist truly : for if you take away well-being, being is not 
truly being, nor eternal being truly eternal being: only that which 
exists well and blessedly truly is and truly is eternal. But this 
intermediary, well-being, is a Grace of the Divine Goodness, 
associated with the free and good motion of the will of the 
intelligible and rational creature. Well-being, in fact, is the product 
of two causes : free will, and the divine contribution which Holy 
Scripture calls Grace. This contribution, however, is not bestowed 
generally upon all, for only the angelic and human natures receive 
the Grace of deification, — and not even upon all men and angels, 
but only upon those angels who are aflame with love of their 
Creator and remain in constant contemplation of the Truth, and 904B 
only upon those men “who are called according to (the divine) 
purpose.” Furthermore, the contribution of Grace is not contained 

576 

PERIPHYSEON 

within the limits of created nature, and does not operate by natural 
power, but produces its effects superessentially and independently 
of the causes of created nature. Therefore, if the resurrection of the 
dead will depend upon Divine Grace alone, all innate virtue will be 
useless as also that vital motion which never abandons the substances 
of nature, whether, as in the case of the numbers in the Monad, it is 
by act and potency latent, or as in the case of the numbers when they 
issue forth from the Monad and in the other instances of effects 
issuing out of their causes into the open, it is by act and potency 
patent ; or if, on the other hand, innate virtue is capable without the 

904C aid of Grace of effecting the resurrection : how is it possible to 
believe that the power of the Redeemer of the human race is needed 
for the resurrection of the dead, although He has said : “I am the 
resurrection and the life?” For these words of Our Lord should be 
applied not only to the resurrection of souls from the death of 
unrighteousness and impiety to the life of righteousness and holiness 
which is the contemplation of Truth, but also to the resurrection of 
bodies, of which He gave us the supreme example in His own Flesh. 
Therefore, if we are to be true to our faith we must attribute the 
power to effect the resurrection both to the gift of the Divine 
Goodness which is given to us in accordance with our natural 
capacity, and also to the bestowal upon us by the same Goodness of 
His Grace which exceeds all natural powers. 

904D The Apostle James distinguishes these two, gift and Grace, 
from one another as follows : “Every good gift and every perfect 
Grace is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights.” 
Which is as much as to say : Every gift of substance and restoration 
of natures, which is the combined effect of nature and Grace, and 

905A every perfect deification, or Gewaiq, as the Greeks call it, of those 
who are worthy to receive eternal bliss, comes from a single source, 
namely from above, and from the Father of Lights. This should 
teach us that the gift, as we have said, is received universally by all 
creatures in their subsisting substance, but the Grace is specially 
reserved for the superessential deification of the elect. For it was not 
the Will of the Divine Providence, nor was it proper nor even 
possible, that the Universe should be ordered in any other way than 
that first He should bestow the gifts of essence and substance, and 
then that He should adorn them with Graces, namely the virtues 
that are appropriate to the dignity of the angels and men “whom He 
foreknew and foreordained to become images of the Only-Begotten 
Word of God.” 

BOOK V 

577 

To conclude briefly : Nature is a datum, Grace is a donum. It is 
nature which brings things out of non-existence into existence : it is 
Grace which brings some of the existents beyond all existents into 
God Himself. For right reason does not allow us to reckon with the 
rest those who participate in the divine Unity which transcends the 
rest. For Truth Itself says, speaking of Itself : “Where I am, there 
shall My servant be.” We have no hesitation in believing that He is 
above the rest. Therefore His servants likewise are above the rest : 
while others, who do not attain to the power of pure contemplation 
(of the hierarchy of theophanies), occupy subordinate positions 
either among the theophanies or in the realms of lower natures. I say 
“in the theophanies” in the plural because the intelligible and 
rational natures would not contemplate truth in the same manner, 
but the level of contemplation is apportioned and defined in each 
according to its proper proportion. He is referring to the angelic and 
human natures, which occupy the highest place in the Universe. 

I do not wish to imply that any creature save the Human 
Nature of the Word can transcend all the theophanies, or ascend 
without any theophany intervening to Him “Who only has immor¬ 
tality, and inhabits the inaccessible Light,” but that some of the 
theophanies are so exalted that they are understood to be exalted 
above every creature in a contemplation very close to God: these 
are regarded as theophanies of theophanies. For God in Himself is 
visible to no creature whatsoever, but in the cloud of contemplation 
is seen and shall be seen, as the Apostle says : “We shall be rapt into 
the clouds before Christ, and so we shall be ever with Him.” But the 
other natures which were created by Truth not for the contemplation 
of Truth but that through them the contemplative virtues might give 
glory to Truth, remain and ever shall remain at rest in their proper 
stations, free from all limitation of space and time. For when the 
world which is governed by space and time shall come to an end, 
what is left to be limited to space or subject to the mutability of 
time? When nothing more shall come into the world by generation 
or go back into it by decay, all things shall be at rest. For when the 
world passes away no part of it shall remain. And if no part of it 
shall remain, then the whole shall be done away. For it shall pass 
into the Causes whence it came, in which there is neither space nor 
time, but only the simple and uncompounded “reasons” of space 
and time, in which all things are one, and not distinguished by any 
accidents. For all things shall be simple, without composition of 
substance and accidents, and, if I may so express myself, there will 
be a simple unity consisting of a manifold unification of all creatures 

905B 

The order of 
theophanies 

905C 

905D 

906A 

906B 

578 

PERIPHYSEON 

in their principles and Causes, and of the principles and Causes 
themselves in the Only-Begotten Word of God, in Whom all things 
have their being and subsistence. Herein lies the difference between 
nature and Grace, datum and donum, and the properties which are 
peculiar to each, as well as those which they share in common. 

A. Yes, I think I understand, and I should like briefly to 
recapitulate your teaching. 

N. Do so. 

A. Nature, you said, is a datum, Grace a donum. 

N. Yes. 

A. You then gave a property of each : to nature that of having 
come from nothing and of abiding forever, to Grace the power of 
deifying, that is, of bringing into God those men whom the 
accession of the Divine Goodness freely and without the aid of 
906C nature or antecedent deserts raises up over all things that are and are 
contained within the bounds of the created Universe. But there is 
something which these two, nature and Grace, share in common : 
and this is held to be the resurrection of the human substance, that 
is, the passing of mortal bodies into immortal, of corruptible into 
incorruptible, of animal into spiritual, and of spatio-temporal into 
eternal bodies free from all (local) limitation. 

N. You have summarised my words correctly. This is what I 
wished to convince you of, and I see that I have succeeded. 

A. There is still one doubt remaining in my mind, however. I 
do pot fully understand how you can assert that there can be a 
906D resurrection not only of human nature, but also of the sensibles 
which are contained in the world. 

N. I am always surprised that you are so doubtful about 
907A questions of this sort, when, as you yourself have more than once 
admitted, you have been told that all things visible and invisible are 
created in man, and are therefore destined to rise again with him on 
the last day. It is not my intention to speak here of the resurrection 
of the invisibles. It is the resurrection or Return into their Causes of 
sensible bodies that we are discussing. If then human nature is a 
composite of the intelligibles and sensibles, that is, of soul and body, 
it is not surprising that the totality of all the sensibles should rise 
again in the human body and pass over into whatever state the 
human body passes into, — though not of course into that 
deification which is a Grace bestowed only upon the perfectly 
purged intellects, but into the Causes only. 

BOOK V 

579 

If you want a convincing proof of this, listen carefully to what 
follows. To start from the simplicity of the Catholic Faith, from 907B 
which every ascent to the purest knowledge of nature must take its 
beginning, you would agree, I suppose, that all things that are and 
all things that are not, all things, that is, that are subject to sense and 
intellect, and all things that transcend every sense and intellect and 
yet are inferior to God, and in the words of St. Dionysius the 
Areopagite, move about Him, are created in the Word of God 
beyond the comprehension of natures subordinate to Him. 

A. This I believe unhesitatingly, and in so far as I am illu- 24 
minated by the Light from on high, I grasp it with my intellect, for 
we are told by Holy Scripture that “in the Beginning God created 
heaven and earth.” For by the Beginning is meant the Only- 
Begotten Word, in whom the Father created all things; and by 
heaven and earth are signified the visible and invisible creations. 

And in another place it is said in a simple and general manner: 
“Thou madest all things in Thy Wisdom.” By this is meant that the 
totality of creatures is made in the Word of God. 907C 

N. Do you then hold that all things that were created in the 
Wisdom of God are living or lifeless? Or to put it more clearly and 
accurately, that everything which was created in the Wisdom of God 
is life and wisdom, and participates in Life and in Wisdom, or not? 

And if everything which was made in the Wisdom of God is life and 
wisdom, did it originate in time, or did it exist from all eternity so 
that there was no time when it was not? And if so, there will be no 
time when it shall no longer be ; for if its beginning was in time then 
it must end with time. 

A. God forbid that it should enter into the hearts of the 
faithful to believe of everything that was made in the Word of God 
that it is not life, and life endowed with wisdom and lasting 
eternally, having no beginning or end in time. For even corporeal 907D 
natures, and every sensible creature, are in Him life endowed with 
wisdom and eternal existence, so that in Him, in a mysterious and 
incomprehensible yet credible manner every creature lives and is 
life. And since without Him there is nothing. He brought forth all 
created things from Himself, as though into an external place. For it 
is possible to say of the eternal creature that it is both within and 
without Him : for the Causes and principles of nature are said to be 908A 
within Him because of their likeness to Him and their simplicity: 
but the effects of those Causes and principles are considered to be 
outside Him owing to their unlikeness to Him : for they are variable 

580 

PERIPHYSEON 

in place and time, and are differentiated into genera and species by 
properties and accidents. Therefore they are said to lie outside the 
simplicity of the Divine Wisdom, although without It there is 
nothing and in It all things are simple and universal life. For what 
could be contained within the Wisdom of God that was wanting life, 
or was not itself life, seeing that Wisdom Itself is the True Life and 
More-than-Life, and there is nothing in It which is not either Itself 
or a perfect image of It? And does not John the Theologian say: 
“All things were made through Him and without Him nothing was 
908B made that was made : in Him was the life?” 

N. Every creature, then, exists and lives in the Word, Which is 
the Wisdom of God; and nothing which is in it can perish. For if 
that which contains, namely Life and Life Eternal, abides and lives 
without change, then everything which is contained within it of 
necessity exists, and abides forever, and is eternal life. 

A. To deny this would not only be impious but excessively 
foolish, for the whole weight of scriptural authority and all the 
theologians agree that every creature exists eternally in the Word of 
God. Thus, St. Augustine has declared briefly but most convincingly 
in the sixteenth chapter of the twelfth Book of the City of God that 
God not only was always the Creator of all creatures, but is also their 
Lord as well, and just as there was never any time when He was not the 
Creator, so neither was there a time when He was not Lord. 
“Wherefore,” he says, “if the Lord God was always Lord, then He 
must always have had a creature to be lord over, — a creature not 
begotten of Himself, but created by Him out of nothing, and not 
908C co-eternal with Him. For He was before it, although there was no 
time when it was not ; for He is not antecedent to it by an interval of 
time, but by His unchanging perpetuity. But if I am to reply to those 
who ask how the Creator could always have been the Lord if the 
creature over which He is Lord did not exist from all eternity, or if it 
did exist from all eternity how the creature could have been created 
and was not rather co-eternal with its Creator, I am afraid I should 
give the impression of asserting what I do not know instead of 
teaching what I do know.” 

These words of the Father may be interpreted as meaning that 
creatures possess not so much eternity as late arrival. For if, he 
908D seems to be saying, I should assert, what I most certainly know, that 
God is from all eternity both Creator and Lord of his creation, and 
that therefore there could not have been at any time lacking a 
creature for Him to be Lord over, for if the creature had not been 

BOOK V 

581 

from all eternity subject to the Lord, it would follow that neither 
would the Creator from all eternity have been Lord over His 
creation. But He was always Creator and Lord: therefore it must 
follow that the creature over which He is Lord was always a created 
being. For it is not an accident in the Creator of all things to have 
created what He has created, but if He is antecedent to His creation 
and extends beyond it it is only because of the perpetuity: I am 
afraid (he is speaking ironically) I should perhaps give the impression 
of affirming what I do not know instead of teaching what I do 
know. For of this I am sure : that the creature and its Creator, the 
Lord and that over which He is Lord, could not be separated one 
from another. But I do not mean by that that the creature is co¬ 
eternal with its Creator, or that that over which He is Lord is 
co-eternal with the Lord ; for the Creator is prior to the creature, 
and the Lord to that over which He is Lord, by eternity — though 
not in time, but because the Creator and Lord is the Principle of the 
creature and of that over which He is Lord, and the Creator and 
Lord is Himself dvapxog, that is, without principle. But we declare 
our Creator and Lord to be the one and only God, that is, the most 
high and holy Trinity, one Essence in Three Substances : and in this 
Trinity, if considered in Itself, the Father only is regarded as 
dvapxoc; ; the Son and the Holy Spirit are not altogether dvapxoi, 
for they have a Principle, namely the Father. For the Son is begotten 
of Him, and the Holy Spirit proceedeth from Him. 

N. I think you will agree that it was only the Primordial Causes 
that were created in God and serve Him as their Lord, and not their 
effects which are rightly regarded as the materials from which this 
world is composed. 

A. Precisely. I hold that the Causes of nature were created 
from all eternity, but that their effects have issued forth into this 
world at different times in different places, and are still issuing forth 
and will continue to do so. 

N. An opinion which is not inconsistent either with Catholic 
doctrine or with genuine intelligence. Well then : is it your view that 
it is only the Causes of nature that have existed from all eternity, 
while their effects are temporal; and that therefore it is only the 
Causes that will abide forever, whereas their effects will be done 
away with ? 

A. I had always supposed so: but since embarking on this 
present discussion with you, I begin to be drawn by the inexorable 

909A 

909B 

909C 

582 

PERIPHYSEON 

process of our reasoning to the view that not only the Causes but 
also their processions, which philosophers call the effects, are to 
endure forever, although in such way that the processions will not 
have permanence in themselves but by returning into their Causes. 

N. Am I right in supposing that you still have some doubts 
about this ? 

A. I cannot deny it. For although right reason urges me to 
909D change my former opinion, there are a number of novel ideas in 
your theory which are not quite clear to me. 

N. Tell me, please, what is clear to you, and what it is about 
which you are either wholly in the dark, or which you partly 
understand and are partly prevented from doing so by the obscurity 
and subtlety of the subject. 

A. Of the creation from eternity of the Causes, of their 
everlasting permanence, and of their enduring into infinity, my 
mind is perfectly clear. That is something which I fully understand 
without a shadow of doubt, chiefly because I am quite firm in my 
910A belief that they are created in the Wisdom of God, and in my 
understanding of what that implies. None but the impious and the 
foolish can doubt that that which is created in the Wisdom of God 
shall abide forever. But about the effects, which you agree with the 
philosophers in calling the processions, I have for some time been in 
doubt whether they shall endure as the Causes do, or perish with the 
world so as not to return into their Causes and be preserved in them 
but so as to be reduced to that nothing out of which they were 
created, and have no further existence whatsoever. 

N. By the effects of the Causes we here mean the whole sensible 
world with all the parts of which it consists. For as to the intelligible 
910B world there cannot be two opinions : it will never perish, because in 
it there is nothing which is susceptible of corruption. It will abide 
forever as will the Causes of which it is the effect, namely the 
celestial essences — although the Blessed Dionysius the Areopagite 
asserts that certain angelic powers shall ascend to a higher degree of 
the contemplation of God than that which they now occupy, “until 
God shall be all in all.” 

25 A. I have hitherto been in some doubt about the effects of the 
invisible Causes, that is, about the invisible world, as to how they 
can be said both to perish and to abide. For these two processes, 
perishing and abiding, appear to be mutually contradictory : how 
can that which abides perish or that which perishes abide? 

BOOK V 

N. Have you not just admitted that your chief reason for 
certainty about the eternity of the Causes was the fact that they were 910c 
created in the Word of God? For (you argued) nothing can perish 
which is contained within the Everliving Word, in Whom all things 
are eternal life, subject to no corruption or decay. 

A. Recalling the words of the Apostle, “in Whom we live and 
move and have our being,” I am so certain of this that I would 
sooner deny my own existence than profess ignorance of it. For if I 
am not in Him I cannot be at all. And if I do not know this I am 
brought into the death of folly and ignorance. 

N. Tell me, then, whether the Word of God, in Whom the 
Causes of all things eternally subsist, came into the effects of those 
Causes, that is to say, into this sensible world, or not. 

A. Whosoever would deny this would be a stranger to the True 910D 
Faith which worships one God and preaches the Incarnation of His 
Word. For Theology teaches us : “And the Word was made flesh,” 
that is to say, the Word was made man : for “flesh” is substituted for 
“man” by a figure of speech known as the part-for-the-whole 
construction. Moreover the Incarnate Word Itself says of Itself : “I 
went forth from the Father and I came into the world, and now I 
leave the world again and go unto my Father.” By this is meant : I 911 A 
Who am equal in divinity to the Father, and of one and the same 
essence with Him, went forth from Him that is, emptied myself, 
taking upon me the form of a slave, that is to say, I was made flesh, 
and received the whole of human nature ; and now I leave the world 
again and go to my Father, that is to say, I transport beyond every 
world into my Deity, above all things that are and are not, the form 
of the servant, and the whole of human nature, body and soul and 
Mind and in general everything which I took upon me from that 
creation which consists of visible and invisible existence, preserving 
the principle of the natures of which I subsist. 

He went forth, then, from the Father, and came into the world, 
that is to say. He took upon Himself the human nature in which the 
whole world subsists : for there is nothing in the world which is not 
comprehended in human nature. And then He left the world again 
and went to the Father, that is to say. He raised up the human 91 IB 
nature which He had taken upon Himself above all things visible 
and invisible, above all the heavenly powers, above everything 
which can be uttered or imagined, by unification with His Deity 
which is equal to His Father. For although He preserved wholly in 

583 

584 

PERIPHYSEON 

9I1C 

911D 

912A 

Himself and in the whole human genus the whole of human nature 
which He wholly took upon Him, restoring some to their former 
state of nature, raising others because of the excellence of their 
worthiness beyond nature to the state of God : yet nowhere but in 
Himself alone is humanity united to the Deity in a single substance, 
so that transmuted into Deity itself it transcends all things. For the 
Head of the Church reserved this property for Himself alone, that 
His humanity should not only participate in Deity, but, after He had 
ascended to His Father, should itself become Deity : to such a height 
none but He has ever ascended nor shall ascend. This is the meaning 
of what He explicitly says of Himself in another place : “No one has 
ascended into heaven but He Who came down from heaven, the Son 
of Man Who is in heaven.” That is to say : No one has ascended to 
the Father but He Who came down from the Father, and yet in 
coming down from the Father He did not leave the Father’s side: 
He abideth ever in the Father, for the Father abideth inseparably in 
Him, and He in the father. “For,” He says, “I and the Father are 
One.” He alone has brought His humanity into this union, for the 
others whom He deifies He sets beneath Himself in a mere 
participation in the Deity each according to the height attained by 
his contemplative power, and establishes in Himself as in a house, 
all whom He has chosen to become of like form with Himself. 
Therefore God the Word of God, in Whom all things are created 
according to their Causes and subsist, descended in His Divinity 
into the effects of the Causes which subsist in Him, that is, into the 
sensible world, taking upon Himself our human nature in which is 
contained every creature visible and invisible. 

A. In this you have the full agreement of Catholic doctrine. 
For the Word of God made Man Himself after his Resurrection 
from the dead instructed His disciples with these words : “Preach 
the gospel unto every creature.” By “every creature” He meant 
“man,” for He did not command them to preach His gospel to the 
irrational minds of insensible creatures, but to man alone, in whom 
every created nature is comprehended. 

N. Every creature, then, is in man ? 

A. We must have no hesitation in saying so. 

N. You admit, then, that the word of God, in Whom and 
through Whom and for Whom according to His Divinity all things 
were made, descended according to His humanity into the effects of 
the Causes? 

BOOK V 

A. Most certainly I do. 

N. Why did He descend? 

A. Tell me, I pray. 

N. For this reason only, I think: that in His humanity He 
might save the effects of the Causes which in His Divinity He 
possesses eternally without change; and that He might call them 
back into their Causes that they might be preserved in them by a 
mystical unification, just as the Causes also are preserved. By this is 912B 
meant that if the Wisdom of God did not descend into the effects of 
the Causes which enjoy everlasting life in it, the principle of the 
Causes would perish : for no Cause could survive the destruction of 
the effects of the Causes, any more than the effects could survive the 
destruction of their Causes. For because Cause and effect are 
relative terms, they come into being together, they pass away 
together, or together they endure for ever. 

A. Therefore in the Only-Begotten Word of God, Incarnate 
and made man, the whole world is restored even now according to 
its species, but at the end of the world will return universally and in 
its genus. For what He wrought specially in Himself He will perfect 
generally in all : and not only in all men but in every sensible 
creature. For when the Word of God took upon Himself our human 
nature He also took upon Himself every created substance which is 912C 
contained in that nature. Therefore in assuming human nature He 
assumed every creature. If then He has saved and restored the 
human nature which He assumed. He has also restored every 
creature, visible and invisible. Hence we rightly believe and under¬ 
stand that the Incarnation of the Word of God was beneficial to 
angels not less than to man. For just as it conferred upon man the 
benefit of redemption and the restoration of his nature, so it 
conferred upon the angels the benefit of gnosis : for before the Word 
was made flesh It was incomprehensible in every visible and 
invisible creature whether intelligible or rational, whether angel or 
man, for It was then hidden in secret above all things that are and all 912D 
things that are not, and transcended everything that can be uttered 
or conceived. But at the Incarnation It descended from Its secret 
place by a marvellous and ineffable and infinitely manifold theo- 
phany into the knowledge of the angelic and human natures, and 
That Which transcended the knowledge of all natures took from all 
a nature wherewith It might be known, and thus by an incompre¬ 
hensible harmony brought about the unification in Itself of the 

585 

PERIPHYSEON 

sensible and intelligible worlds. The inaccessible Light gave access 
to every intelligible and rational creature. This is the burden of the 
angels’ song which the universal Church on earth and in heaven 
never ceases to sing in sensible and intelligible melody : “Glory be to 
God on high and in earth peace to men of good will.’’ 

Thus we may briefly conclude : All things visible and invisible, 
that is to say, the sensible and intelligible worlds, are restored in 
Him, and recalled to an ineffable unity : in hope now ; in fulfilment 
in time to come ; in faith to-day ; in form to-morrow ; in theory now ; 
in fact then : already in that Man in Whom it was achieved specially ; 
in the future to be perfected in all generally. Let no man therefore 
think it a slight matter that the Word of God was made man as 
though only human nature was saved thereby : but let it most firmly 
be believed and most clearly understood that by the Incarnation of 
the Son of God every creature in heaven and on earth was saved ; 
and by every creature I mean body, vital motion, sense, as well as 
reason and Mind. For except for God Himself can you think of any 
other nature besides these? 

N. None. In the whole of creation there is no other division 
For whatever is is either the known or unknown Mind, or Reason, 
or Sense, or the Life which gives nourishment and growth to bodies, 
or body itself : and all these were assumed by the Word of God at 
His Incarnation. 

A. How are we to apply this ? Are we to say that the irrational 
animals, and even trees and plants, and all parts of this world from 
the highest to the lowest, are restored by the Incarnation of the 
Word of God? 

N. I wonder why it is that you so often return to this question. 
When the Word assumed the nature of man, did He not take upon 
Himself every creature, visible and invisible, and was He not the 
Saviour of everything which, being in man. He took upon Himself? 
And if in taking human nature He took upon Himself every 
creature, then He is the Saviour of every creature, and every 
creature will be saved by Him to all eternity. 

A. Are then the physical objects which are extended in space 
and time and composed of many different parts, as well as the 
visible forms by which they are prevented from coalescing into one 
indeterminate mass, to be included in the general resurrection of 
man? And if even the parts arise into the masses and shapes and 
species by which the visible world is adorned and of which it is 

BOOK V 

587 

composed, must it not follow that the whole physical world will not 
perish but return into the same state? For if the parts are to be 
restored, why not the whole? 

N. We do not say that the masses and forms of visible and 
sensible bodies will be resurrected, but that in the resurrection of 
man, as we have often agreed, they will return with man and in man 
into their Causes and principles which were created in man. And in 
this condition all animals will have a better right to be called 
animals than in the corporeal and sensible effects. For it is there 
where they subsist that they are truly animal. And the same applies 
to all the sensibles, whether in heaven or on earth. For all things 
which vary according to place and time, and which are subject to the 
corporeal senses, should not themselves be regarded as truly sub¬ 
stantial existents but as transitory images and verifications derived 
therefrom. We may take as an illustration of this the voice and its 
image which the Greeks call ; or bodies and the shadows which 
they throw either in the pure air or in water or in any other medium 
capable of producing them. All such can be shown to be not 
themselves real, but false images of the real. So, just as the echoes of 
voices and the shadows of bodies do not subsist of themselves 
because they are not substances ; neither can sensible bodies, which 
are a kind of image of substantial things, subsist of themselves. For 
our natural reason teaches us that not even the bodies of men which 
now have spatial extension and vary by increase and diminution and 
move from place to place ; nor their forms, whether those common 
forms in which all human bodies participate or those special forms 
which are controlled by the size of each body, will play a part in the 
resurrection, but will pass into the spiritual nature which cannot be 
confined by space or time or any particular forms which are derived 
from their quality or size. I am not at the moment rejecting the 
opinions of those who hold a totally different theory about the 
resurrection of bodies, asserting that those of human beings will rise 
with the same quality and form in which they fell, and that they will 
keep their sex, whether male or female. About these I shall have 
something to say later. But that the nature of the resurrection of 
animate nature will be as I have described, that is a Return into their 
Causes, can be firmly corroborated from the words of St. Dionysius, 
who in the sixth chapter of the Divine Names speaks as follows of the 
Divine Life : 

9I3D 

914A 

914B 

914C 

The return of 
animals into 
their causes 

“The life and immortality of the immortal angels and the 
imperishable nature of their perpetual activity exists and subsists 

PERIPHYSEON 

588 

from it” i.e. from the Divine Life, “and through it. For that reason 
they are said to be everliving and immortal — and yet they are not 
immortal, for it is not of themselves that they possess the gift of 
immortal life and immortal being, but from that Cause which is the 
Giver of Life and the Creator and Preserver of all life. And so, just 
as we declare It to be in onte'^ (he is speaking of essence: for the 
Greeks call the Divine Essence ov as well as ouaia), “because It is 
914D the Cause of Being, so also do we declare It to be in this,” i.e. life, 
“since the Divine Life is Life-in-Itself, vital and substantial, and 
Universal Life, and the Vital Motion springs from this Life which 
transcends all life and every principle of universal life. From It do 
souls derive their indestructibility, and all animals and plants 
possess the power of living according to the lowest harmony of the 
915A soul. And when this,” i.e. the general life and the special and 
particular life, “is withdrawn, all life perishes from the earth, in the 
words of the Scriptures, and perishing through their incapacity to 
participate in life, they turn and become animals once again.” 

915B 

Any life 
cannot vivify 
a corruptible 
body for long 

915C 

These words of the Theologian are not to be taken as 
implying a resurrection of irrational animals or a restitution of 
insensible objects into the original shapes and sizes with which this 
world is filled, but the return into their Causes from which they 
proceed and in which they substantially exist. For he did not say 
that the Divine Life was the Cause of only the angelic and human, 
that is to say, of the intelligible and rational life, but of all life 
generally. Now every life, as has been abundantly demonstrated in 
the earlier books, is either rational, or irrational, or nutritive and 
active, that is to say, either angelic, or human, or animal, or 
insensible, as in trees, grasses, and such, in which the vital motion 
operates by itself. Therefore it is not of human life only, but of all 
forms endowed with the breath of life ; and not of human bodies 
alone, but of all bodies which the spirit of life supports, that the 
Divine pronouncement is made : “Thou shalt take away their spirit 
and they shall fail and return unto their dust.” For there is no life 
rational or animal or nutritive, which for long, still less forever, can 
enliven and administer corruptible and mortal bodies. Therefore it 
abandons them, and the bodies abandoned by it shall fail and shall 
return into their dust. And this is what he means by saying “they 
shall fail,” that is, the animals and plants, through their incapacity 
to participate in life, for because of the weakness and fragility of 
earthly and corruptible bodies they cannot participate in life 
forever. Now, whatever life performs in human bodies, whether it 

BOOK V 

589 

controls them or abandons them, is referred to the Creator. 
Therefore it is written : “Thou shalt take away their spirit.” It does 
not mean that God Himself takes away the spirit from anybody, but 
that in course of time He permits spirits that are weighed down by 
corruptible bodies to retire from them so that they may by their 
natural motion return to them again when they are changed into 
incorruptibility and spirituality. For that which is born together 
with them into this world cannot abandon them forever, but at the 
end of the world they shall take them again, when that in the Causes 
which governs and that which is governed shall, by a mysterious 
harmony become an inseparable unity. Therefore it is written : 
“Send forth Thy Spirit, and they shall be made by which is 
meant : Send forth the vital spirit, which Thou hast made, or rather : 
permit it to be sent forth and return by its own natural volition into 
the bodies which it has abandoned for a while. “And Thou shalt 
renew the face of the earth:” that is: When the bodies are 
inseparably united to their vital forms. Thou shalt restore the 
integrity of their nature, to which is given the mystic name of Earth. 

And if anyone should deem it incredible and contrary to 
common sense that irrational and insensible natures should pass 
into the nature of man, let him first carefully observe how the lower 
parts of human nature such as the corporeal sense and the nutritive 
life and the body itself closely resemble the state of the irrational, 
insensible and material bodies. And if that is so, what is strange or 
incredible in the fact that like changes into like, so that a one like 
unto itself is produced out of many like things, and subordinate 
likenesses pass into superior natures of which they are likenesses? 
For common sense cannot accept that the higher natures should be 
changed into the lower, but the lower naturally tends towards the 
higher and desires to be made one with it. 

Let him next consider how the passions of the irrational 
creature which after man’s fall from the glory of the Divine Image 
human nature put on as something added to it for a punishment for 
sin and which, although now part of that nature, it did not possess 
before its transgression, can change, in those who are made perfect, 
into natural virtues. Now by the passions I mean pleasure and pain, 
lust and fear, and the emotions that arise from them. There is no 
doubt that these can be changed into virtues : lust can be changed by 
those who so wish into an intellectual longing for the things of God ; 
pleasure may take the form of innocent delight in the nutritive 
function of the soul ; fear, a precaution against the future punishment 

9I5D 

916A 

The passing 
of irrationals 
and 

insensibles 
into human 
nature 

916B 

590 

PERIPHYSEON 

916C 

916D 

26 

Resurrection 

917A 

917B 

of sins ; sorrow, repentance which checks our present ill deeds. 
If then the passions, which the rational nature has won over 
to herself from the irrational, can be changed into the natural 
virtues of the soul, why may we not believe that irrationality itself 
may not be changed to rationality? For even pride, which is held to 
be the chief of all vices, is in the virtuous man changed into love for 
the high places of heaven and contempt for the frailty of earthly 
things, as the Apostle tells us : “Be wise in the things that are above, 
and not in things that are on earth.” Briefly then, there is no vice 
that cannot in wise men, by the operation in them of the Grace of 
God, be changed into virtue. And so good may come out of evil, 
though evil can never come out of good. For goodness has the 
power of swallowing up its opposite in itself, while the foulness of 
evil can never stain the radiance of goodness. If then we admit that 
vice can be changed into virtue, although the one is the contrary of 
the other, why should we not also admit that by a marvellous 
unification lower natures can be transformed into higher natures, 
which are not their contraries? But I have spoken enough on this 
subject. 

A. Quite enough. 

N. Now since in teaching that the resurrection of bodies is 
effected by natural virtue with the co-operation of the Grace of God 
through the Incarnation of the Saviour of the world we introduced 
the testimony of Epiphanius, I think we should also cite the views of 
Gregory the Theologian on the same subject. 

A. It is necessary to do so. For we are taught that that which is 
established out of the mouths of two reliable witnesses is sure 
evidence. 

N. In the twenty second chapter of the Treatise on the Image, 
where he is arguing that the hope of resurrection depends not so 
much on scriptural prophesy as on the very necessity of nature, he 
writes as follows : 

“Evil is not strong enough to prevail over the power of 
goodness. Nor is our ignorance and folly superior or more singular, 
i.e., more simple than the Wisdom of God. For it cannot be that 
that which is changeable and inconstant is more powerful and 
simpler than that which ever remains the same, and is firmly 
established in the Good. But the purpose of God everywhere and in 
every way remains immutable, while our nature cannot remain 
firmly established in evil, because it is variable. For that which is 

BOOK V 

ever moveable, if its progress is towards the Good, because of the 
exaltation of the Good, will never desist from its upward journey. 
For it will never reach the end of its quest, which would bring to rest 
the movement of him who should attain it. But if it moves in the 
contrary direction and pursues a course towards evil and reaches the 
very depths of evil, then that which is ever-moving finds because of 
its nature no resting place, for when it has crossed the expanse of 
evil its motion must of necessity be directed towards the Good. For 
since evil does not extend without limit, but is kept within the 
bounds of necessity, it follows that Evil ends and there Good begins. 
And so it is that, as we have said, our ever-moving nature shall come 
at last into the good way, where it is punished by the memory of its 
former miseries so that it fall not into the like again. So that as a 
result of the necessary limitation of evil, our course will eventually 
lead us back to the Good. For just as, according to the astronomers, 
the whole Universe is full of light, and darkness is caused by the 
shadow thrown by the earth intervening when it turns away from 
the rays of the sun, a shadow that is in the shape of a cone, because 
the sun is many times the size of the earth and its rays spread out 
around it on all sides and join together to form the apex of the cone, 
so, on our hypothesis, if the virtue of anything exceeds the measure 
of that which casts a shadow, it will be altogether plunged in light 
when it has passed beyond the darkness of that shadow : and this is 
the case with our nature, for when we pass beyond the bounds of 
evil, when we attain the apex of the shadow of evil, we shall be 
changed into light once more, since the nature of good is infinitely 
more abundant than the measure of evil : and we shall once again 
attain to Paradise, and to that Tree which is the Tree of Life, and to 
the Grace of the Image (of God) and to the dignity of our First 
Principle.” 

You see how clearly and logically and with what conviction he 
argues, first, that evil cannot be eternal but of its very nature must 
come to an appointed end, and at the appointed time shall be done 
away with. For if the Divine Goodness, which is active for good not 
only in good things but also in evil things, is eternal and infinite, it is 
obvious that its contrary can be neither eternal not infinite: 
otherwise it would not be its contrary, nor opposed to the Good. 
For eternal natures, although they may differ in quality, yet share 
the same eternity. The Divine piety and severity differ in quality, 
since one punishes sins and the other is forgiving : both nevertheless 
are eternal. But evil is altogether opposed to the Divine goodness. 
Therefore evil must have an end, and there is no nature in which it 

591 

Human 
nature always 
seeks God by 
a natural 
motion and 
never finds 
what it seeks 
because it is 
infinite 

917C 

918A 

918B 

592 

PERIPHYSEON 

can endure for ever, but in all things the divine goodness will be 
active and manifest. Therefore our author can assure us that our 
nature is not established in evil, nor is destined to be held forever in 
the bonds of evil, but all evil being done away with, shall return to the 
918C good once more. For just as the extent of the shadow of the earth 
which is called night into the regions of the air and the ether is not 
infinite, but, as the physicists tell us, is of a length of 126,000 stades ; 
and the rays of the sun which envelop the earth close round it on all 
sides pressing the shadow into the shape of a cone so that eventually it 
contracts into nothing, so evil, which is like the shadow of sin 
afflicting our nature, is compressed by the abundance of the eternal 
Goodness from on high so as to be entirely done away with, while the 
irrational emotions of the human soul shall be changed into the 
rational affections of truth. 

Then he goes on to assure us that our human nature is always in 
919A motion (a view which is shared by almost all theologians) in its 
search for the Supreme Good Which was also the source of its 
motion, and towards Which it hastens as to its proper end. For 
every rational creature, of whom it is proposed to suppose that all 
subsist in human nature, even in the toils of its sins and perversities, 
is always seeking its God, from Whom it has its being and for the 
contemplation of Whom it was created. For rational nature never 
seeks the evil, though it is often deceived and led astray into the way 
of error approving the false for the true, which is the property of 
error, so that it does not follow the proper direction towards the 
Supreme Good — even so, it is still the Supreme Good that it is 
seeking. It is this erratic movement to which the name of evil is 
properly given. For evil is the intellectual soul’s forgetfulness of 
natural goods, and its failure to actualise the virtues that inhere in 
919B nature, and the irrational orientation of her natural powers in some 
direction other than her proper end, which is brought about by 
erring judgment. By her proper end I mean the cause of all things 
that are, towards which all things naturally tend. Furthermore, since 
this irrational motion, which is the cause and accomplishment of all 
evil and wickedness, is circumscribed and brought to a complete end 
by the abundance of Goodness, human nature will eventually, by 
exercise of its reason and in accordance with the natural virtues 
which inhere in it, moved by its search for its proper cause, ascend 
and return into Paradise, by which is meant delight in the virtues 
which, innate in it, it lost in sinning; and in its ardent desire for the 
919C fruit of the Tree of Life, which is the contemplation of the Word of 

BOOK V 

God, it is eager to put on once more the dignity of the Divine Image 
in which it was created. But since that which it seeks and towards 
which it tends, whether it moves in the right or wrong direction, is 
infinite and not to be comprehended by any creature, it necessarily 
follows that its quest is unending, and that therefore it moves 
forever. And yet although its search is unending, by some miraculous 
means it finds what it is seeking for : and again it does not find it, for 
It cannot be found. It finds It through theophanies, but through the 
contemplation of the Divine Nature Itself it does not find It. Now by 
Theophanies I mean the species of all things visible and invisible, by 
the beauty and order of which it is made known that God exists, and 
it is found not what He is, but only that He is : for God’s very nature 
is unknowable and unutterable, since the Inaccessible Light tran¬ 
scends every intellect. This is the meaning of the Psalmist’s words : 

“seek the Lord and be confirmed in Him ; ever seek His Face.” This 919D 
is that spiritual way which leads to the Infinite, and which is trodden 
by all purged and perfected souls who seek their God. For even the 
Heavenly Powers ever seek Him upon Whom they ever long to gaze, 
and this is the cloud about which Dionysius the Areopagite writes to 920A 
Dorotheas : 

“The divine cloud is the Inaccessible Light in which God is said 
to dwell. While it is invisible owing to the excess of its brightness 
and the inaccessible superexcellence of its superessential radiation, 
everyone is worthy to know and see God in it, without however 
seeing or truly knowing the Light in which He is beyond sight or 
vision, knowing this only, that He is in all things, sensible and 
intelligible, according to the words of the Prophet : ‘Thy Wisdom 
hath become marvellous for me and I shall not be able to attain unto 
it.’ Moreover, as the divine Paul is said to have known God, 
knowing Him as existing above every intellect and every knowledge 
(for which reason he says that His ways are not to be traced, and 
that His judgments are inscrutable and His Graces indescribable, 
and that His peace passes all understanding), so he finds Him above 920B 
all things, and by this he knows that He is above every intellect, 
because He is above all things the existing cause of all.” 

The same author in his letter to the monk Gains writes : 

“The darkness is blotted out in the light, and the brighter the 
light the more blotted out it becomes; the sciences blot out 
ignorance, and many sciences blot it out the more. Taking the word 
ignorance not in its privative but in its supereminent sense, you may 
declare, with more than truth, that our ignorance of God is hidden 

593 

594 

PERIPHYSEON 

(is hidden because even those who possess this incomprehensible 
Light do not know what it is they possess, as the Evangelist bears 
witness : ‘And the Light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness 
hath not comprehended it.’ Therefore the Divine Light is given the 
name of darkness, for it is incomprehensible. Similarly the gnostic 
power of those who contemplate it, because it is beaten back by it, is 
920C also frequently called darkness, for it is hidden from them that have 
the Light and the knowledge of nature.) For the Darkness which 
transcends all light is impenetrable to all light and conceals all 
knowledge. And if anyone who saw God understood what he saw, it 
would not be God that he saw but one of those creatures which 
derive their existence and knowability from Him. For He Himself 
resides above Mind and above Being, and is therefore utterly 
unknowable and invisible, being superessential and known above 
Mind. And it is this perfect ignorance, understood in the higher 
sense of the term, which constitutes the true knowledge of Him, a 
knowledge beyond all things.” 

The Evangelist did not overlook this, for he says : “No man 
hath seen God at any time.” And Ambrose says : “As He never was 
visible, so He never shall be visible.” And the very Truth Himself 
920D says : ‘^No man knoweth the Father save the Son, and no man 
knoweth the Son save the Father.” 

But as to the question whether the humanity of the Word of 
God is, like His divinity, incomprehensible to every creature and 
transcends every intellect after it has been taken up into the Deity of 
the Word and is made one substance with It without confusion of 
the two natures, human and divine, of which those who adhere to 
921A the Catholic Faith believe and understand that the One Christ Our 
Lord and Saviour consists ; or whether it is knowable to our rational 
and intelligible nature, and is confined within the limits of the 
created Universe, that is to say, within the number of things which 
can be known and defined : let each hold the opinion he prefers. As 
for myself, I have no hesitation in following in the footsteps of those 
who prudently declare that the humanity of Our Lord Jesus Christ 
is so united to His divinity that it is (save for the distinction of the 
natures) One in it and with it, for the humanity and divinity of 
Christ are one Substance, or, to speak in more familiar language, 
one Person; and as His Divinity surpasses every intellect, so also 
His Humanity, which is exalted above the Universe of visible and 
921B intelligible creatures, above all place and time, above all limit and 
definition, above all the heavens, above all virtues and powers. 

BOOK V 

595 

above everything which can be uttered or conceived, above every¬ 
thing which comes after God, and above Being itself, is incompre¬ 
hensible and inscrutable to every creature. And this we have already 
taught in an earlier part of this book. 

A. The exaltation to a superessential sphere above all things of 27 
the Incarnate Word, together with the flesh which It took of the 
Virgin and the whole manhood with which It made Itself One, has 
been fully demonstrated by you and is corroborated by the Holy 
Fathers. But I am still not entirely convinced (for there are many 
conflicting opinions on the matter) that the whole of human nature, is the whole 
loosened and set free from the chains of its wickedness as your of human 
discourse has already taught, shall ascend to the same place whither 
Christ, the First Fruits of that nature, ascended : for I had thought freed in 
that only partly, in respect of the elect, was it to be set free, while the Christ? 
rest, that is, the wicked, were to be kept forever in the torment of the 
everlasting fire. For if the whole of human nature shall ascend 921C 
thither, or, to put it more plainly, shall return into that state which it 
abandoned through sin — if He has, by redeeming it, raised it 
wholly, what are we to say ? Does it not follow that there will be no 
everlasting death of misery, no eternal punishment of the damned? 

For what will be left to be tormented, if the whole nature, in which 
both the good and the wicked participate, shall be not only entirely 
set free from death and sin, but shall even return into God Himself? 921D 
What has become of that flaming heat of eternal fire to which the 
severity of the most righteous judge shall commit the wicked, 
saying : “Depart, accursed, into the everlasting fire which is prepared 
for the devil and his angels?” What has become of the eternal 
punishment which the impious shall incur, if no part of human 
nature is to remain which may be subjected to it? For if all evil is 
done away with, what evil man is left? For every evil man is evil 
because of evil, and thus when evil comes to an end, the evil man 
must cease to exist also. For when the cause ceases, the effect must 
cease likewise. 

The same principle applies to life and death. For if “death shall 
be” wholly “swallowed up in life” as sin is swallowed up in 
goodness and suffering in bliss, who will be tormented by death and 
suffering when no man is excluded from life and bliss? 

But what a multitude of awkward inconsistencies and arguments 
contrary to right reason would confront anyone who asserted that 
while a part of human nature should return into God, the other part 
should remain in eternal punishment : He would be compelled to 

922A 

The 

difficulties 
that arise for 
those who 
hold that part 

596 

PERIPHYSEON 

of human 
nature will be 
freed in the 
blessed, part 
tortured in 
the unhappy 

922B 

922C 

922D 

admit that God the Word took upon Himself not the whole of 
human nature, but only a part of it, and that therefore it was not His 
will to save the whole human genus, nor did He do so : which would 
be an absurd belief. Moreover, true reason and sound speculation of 
nature would deride his division of the simplicity of human nature 
into parts, and the implied view that it is composed as it were of 
many like and unlike parts, whereas it is in fact one and simple and 
free from all composition and unlikeness and multiplicity of parts : 
for were it not so it could not have been made in the Image of God, 
but rather in conformity with the manifold variety of mortal and 
corruptible bodies — a thing which it would be most foolish and 
most dishonourable to believe, and totally contrary to the truth. 
Further, if human nature is the image and likeness of God, the 
whole Image is in it as a whole, and in each individual which 
participates in it, and admits neither in itself nor in another any 
division or partition or possibility of division or partition, whether 
in potency or in act, of its uniform simplicity. For if the Divinity in 
Whose Image humanity is created is one and indivisible, it must 
follow that the latter also is one and indivisible, and that all men 
without exception are in it One. But if anyone doubts that I have the 
warrant of the authority of the Holy Fathers for my view that 
humanity is simple and indivisible, let him hear the words of the 
blessed Origen in his third book on the Epistle to the Romans. He is 
commenting on the text “I have said, ye are gods and sons of Him 
Who is on high,” and he adds the word “all,” thereby bringing the 
whole human genus into the context. Then he goes on to say : 

“Now, as you are men, you shall die. Hence it is written : ‘And 
God repented that He had made man upon the earth, and God 
grieved in His heart and said, I will destroy man whom I made, 
from the face of the earth. This, I think, is said not only in relation 
to the destruction of the Flood, but something from this is 
mysteriously prophesied for the future, so that one should under¬ 
stand by ‘I will destroy man’ that which God says through the 
prophet : ‘For behold, I blot out thine iniquities like a cloud,’ that it 
may be understood that in destroying man according to that which 
he is. He shall afterwards fashion him as a god, in that time when 
God shall be all in all.” 

Let him also read Gregory, the great theologian, where, 
discoursing on human nature in the seventeeth chapter of the Treatise 
on the Image he says : “What are we to make of this ? The text ‘God 
made man’ refers to the whole of humanity, without limitation. For 

BOOK V 

597 

Adam is not named here in common with the rest of creation, as in 
the later parts of the account. The name is applied universally to 
created man, but not to anything else. Are we not, therefore, led by 
this term applying to the universal nature (of man) to some 
persuasion that all humanity was embraced in the Divine Fore¬ 
knowledge and Power in the first creation? For we must suppose 
that for God nothing that He has created is infinite, but that the 
Wisdom of the Creator is the defining measure which limits every 
one of the things that are. Therefore just as every man is limited to 
the size of his body, and his measure is the magnitude of his 
substance, a magnitude which is proportionate to the surface of his 
body, in the same way, I think, in the gnostic virtue of God the 
whole plentitude of human nature was comprehended within one 
body. This is the meaning of the words ‘And God created man, in 
the Image of God created He him.’ The Image is not a part of that 
nature, nor was this a special Grace conferred only upon certain 
individuals out of those which are considered to be made in it, but a 
property conferred upon the whole genus. An indication of this is 
the fact that mind is established in all alike, for all possess the power 
of understanding and taking counsel and all those other functions in 
which the Divine Nature is imaged forth in that which is created in 
it. Such also is the condition of that man who was manifested when 
the world was first created, and who will appear again after the 
consummation of the Universe: both equally show forth in them¬ 
selves the Divine Image. The whole human genus is called one man 
for this reason, but in the (gnostic) virtue of God nothing is past and 
nothing is present, but all things that are seen are contained equally 
for Him in a present comprehensive operation of the universe. 
Therefore the whole of human nature from first to last appears (to 
Him) as a single spectacle of that which truly exists. But the 
differentiation of the genus into male and female is an addition 
subsequent to the establishment of its form.” 

Therefore, if the Word of God took human nature upon Him, 
it was not a part of it (for that would be nothing) but the whole of it 
universally. And if He took upon Himself the whole of our nature, 
then clearly it is the whole of it which is restored in Him, for all 
things are restored in Him, and no part of that humanity which was 
wholly assumed by Him is abandoned to the eternal punishments 
and inexorable toils of sin, the precursor of torment. For in no man 
does God condemn that which He created, but He punishes only 
that which He did not create. Not even in the case of the transgressing 

923A 

923B 

923C 

598 

PERIPHYSEON 

angels does He punish their nature, nor shall He do so : He will 
923D rather extinguish in them their wickedness and impiety and baneful 
power, as He will also in those wicked men who are their adherents, 
and perhaps we may say that their eternal damnation will consist in 
the total abolition of their wickedness and impiety. 

Thus I am in a quandary, buffeted on either side by mutually 
opposed doctrines as though between the stormy billows of the 
ocean and the rocks against which they break, and I am wearied by 
long and inconclusive arguments. No way of escape do I see. For if, 
to put briefly what has been stated above more fully, I say that the 
whole of human nature is taken up into the Word of God, and 
924A therefore by the cooperation of the natural capacity for resurrection 
which does not permit any nature to perish nor be punished forever, 
must be saved in Him, what remains to be handed over to 
everlasting damnation? It will look as though I am going against 
Holy Scripture which explicitely threatens eternal punishment to the 
devil and all his host. If on the other hand I put forward the opinion 
that not the whole of human nature was assumed and saved by 
Christ or shall be liberated through its natural capacity for resur¬ 
rection, but only a part of it shall return into the glory of the Divine 
Image, the rest remaining captive in eternal damnation, shall I not 
be refuted both by right reason and divine authority? For reason 
most clearly shows that nothing can remain in permanent opposition 
to the supreme Goodness and Life and Blessedness ; for goodness 
sets bounds to evil, and utterly consumes it, as life does to death, 
and blessedness to unhappiness, and virtue to vice and its causes and 
924B all such things : while divine authority declares : “I am thy death, O 
death; I am thy devourer, O hell,” and again: “The last enemy, 
death, shall be destroyed” — referring to the devil, who is the 
author of death, and indeed death itself. This word in Greek is 
masculine, ©dvaioq : and therefore the text reads ©dvaioq, 

that is ©dvaiog the enemy. And again, the angel says to the prophet 
Daniel in a vision : 

“Seventy weeks are abbreviated to thy people, and to thy 
sacred city, that its prevarication may be consummated and that its 
sin may have an end and its iniquity be destroyed and that my 
everlasting justice may be shown.” 

By the symbolic number of seventy weeks the whole of time 
924C from the first until the second coming of the Saviour is signified. For 
the course of this life, which runs through seven “days,” is implied 

BOOK V 

599 

by the number seven. It is said that this course is abbreviated. For 
compared with eternity all times are brief. 

Trembling therefore I stand in this narrow pass, pierced as it 
were by weapons from either side, not knowing which way to turn, 
or which path I had better follow. For the choice is not easy between 
the two alternatives : either to eliminate the eternal punishment of 
wicked angels and wicked men ; or remove from a part of creation 
the dominion of the divine Goodness and Blessedness wherein all 
sin and sorrow shall be done away. 

N. Be patient. For light will come to the mind whereby the 
hidden places of the darkness are illuminated, obscure things are 
made plain, things hitherto unknown revealed, elusive things re¬ 
called, the unlimited restrained, the indefinite defined, ambiguities 
brought into some kind of sure opinion. First, let us consider how 924D 
far we are in agreement, what has been clearly defined and how 
much is still left undecided, and how we should enquire further into 
the latter. 

A. There is no other reasonable course in the investigation of 
nature. 

N. In your report on your speculations I find much that is 
firmly established in accordance with reason. But as to the matters 
in which you admit you are still in doubt, I think we must 925A 
recapitulate the points where you find yourself unsure, so that 
setting at rest your perplexity we may offer a definite opinion on the 
topics under discussion and we may no longer appear to be 
equivocating and avoiding bringing anything to a proper conclusion. 

A. Let it be so. 

N. No philosopher of nature doubts that all things are con¬ 
tained in the Divine Mind. 

A. To do so would be ridiculous, for all philosophers are in 
agreement here, following the teaching of the Apostle: “From Him 
and through Him and in Him and for Him are all things.” 
Dionysius the Areopagite, in the Seventh Chapter on the Divine 
Names, says : 

“It is rightly said that of every mind and every reason and every 
sense the Divine Wisdom is the Principle and the Cause and the 
Substance and the Consummation and the Preserver and the 
Source.” 

600 

PERIPHYSEON 

The blessed Ambrose, in his Commentary on Luke says, referring 
to the Apostle : 

925B “In the Lord Jesus are established all things in heaven and on 
earth, all things visible and invisible, and He is before all men, and 
all abide together in Him.” 

But to quote the opinions of the rest of the Fathers on this 
subject would be a lengthy matter, and unnecessary. 

N. If then all things subsist in the Divine Mind, it follows that 
outside It there is nothing. 

A. Above, below, and without It there is nothing. 

N. He is, then, altogether all things. 

A. Just so. For what else do we mean by all things than the 
knowledge of them in the Divine Mind, as Dionysius says in the 
same chapter : 

“The Divine Mind contains all things by a wisdom that 
transcends all things, for in the same measure as He is the Cause of 
all things He contains in advance within Himself the knowledge of 
all things. Before the angels were created He knew them and 
brought them forth as angels, and all other things by knowing them 
He brought forth from within Himself, Who is, as it were, their 
925C Principle, and conferred being upon them. This, I think, is what is 
meant by the saying : ‘He knew all things before they were brought 
forth.’ For the Divine Mind did not know existing things by learning 
of their existence, but He had foreknowledge of them, and had 
already elaborated them from Himself and in Himself, and it was 
this process that constituted their cause. Not that He considered 
each object in its species, but that He knew and comprehended all 
things in one comprehensive cause, just as the light contains within 
itself as cause the foreknowledge of the dark, knowing not the dark 
save as derivative of the light. Therefore in knowing Itself the Divine 
Wisdom knows all material things after an immaterial mode, and all 
divided things after an indivisible mode, and the many as One, 
knowing all things and bringing them forth in Himself, Who is One. 
For if, as we are taught, God is the One cause of all existents, it is in 
this same One Cause that He knew all things as existing from Him 
925D and already subsisting in Him. And it is not from existing things 
that He will receive knowledge of them, but He Himself will be the 
bestower upon all things severally of their knowability.” 

BOOK V 

601 

N. The Divine Mind, then, knows no evil and no sin. For if He 
did, they would have substantial existences, and would not be 
without a cause. As it is, however, they have no cause, and therefore 
are not essentially in the number of created natures, and conse¬ 
quently are quite alien to the Divine Knowledge. 

A. True reason will not have it otherwise. For the Divine 926A 
Knowledge is the Cause of all existents, and therefore whatever He 
knows must exist in nature. But whatever is not found in nature can 
by no means be found in the Divine Knowledge. 

N. God, then, does not know wicked angels or wicked men or 
any transgressors of His Law. 

A. He knows their substances, and everything which He 
created in them, and which subsists in Him. But He is altogether 
ignorant of what is added as a result of their perverse motions, 
which is accidental to that nature which takes its substance from 
Him. For whatsoever He did not create is wholly alien to His 
knowledge. 

N. I imagine you have no doubts about the eternity of the 
Divine Nature and of all things which are created in It and through 
It and for It and from It, and that It alone is truly and uniquely 
eternal, and that every eternal is eternal through participation in Its 
eternity ? 

A. How could I have any doubt about this, when so much 
evidence is provided by reason and divine authority? For if the One 
God is the Cause and End of all things it follows that He alone is 926B 
uniquely eternal, and everything which partakes of Him is only 
(derivatively) eternal. For what else can be eternal save Himself and 
that which is created in and from Him? 

N. Do you consider that sin, and its henchmen death and 
damnation, and the divers penalties of the damned were created by 
God or participate in His virtue? For as to the text, “Life and Death 
are from the Lord God,” the reference is not, I think, to the death 
which humanity suffers because of sin, and by which it pays the 
punishment of corruption which follows the sin, but that of which 
the Psalmist says “Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His Saints,” which means. Right dear is the passing of the purged 
and perfected souls into the inmost contemplation of Truth, which 926C 
truly is true Blessedness and everlasting life. This is the death 
experienced even in this life by those who live religiously, and 
piously and chastely seek their God, in which they behold as in a 

602 

PERIPHYSEON 

mirror darkly that which they seek, but in the life to come when they 
return into their former glory of the Divine Image to which they 
were created, raised above all things they shall see their God “face 
to face”, in so far as it is given to the comprehensible and intelligible 
creature to behold the incomprehensible and unintelligible Cause of 
the Universe. By “face to face” is meant “in the highest possible 
theophany,” as the Apostle says : “We now behold as in a mirror 
darkly but then face to face,” meaning by the word “face” a certain 
apparition, comprehensible to the human intellect, of the Divine 
926D Virtue which in Itself is perceived by no creature. Further, if evil and 
death and unhappiness are contrary to the nature which has been 
created by God, and are not created in the Cause of all things nor 
participate in it, I am surprised that you are still hesitating over the 
possibility that evil and the death of eternal torment shall for ever 
afflict that human nature which the Word of God set free by taking 
it wholly upon Himself, although right reason shows that nothing 
contrary to the Divine Goodness and Life and Blessedness can be 
coeternal therewith. For the Divine Goodness shall consume evil, 
eternal Life shall swallow up death. Blessedness shall absorb 
927A unhappiness. For it is written : “I am thy death, O death, I am thy 
devourer, O hell.” But perhaps you still feel that the Lord Jesus, in 
taking human nature upon Him and saving it did not take upon 
Him or save the whole of it, but merely a small fragment? But such 
an opinion is refuted by reasons already given. 

A. Now I perceive that there is no way out for me, and no 
argument remains to show that evil, death and damnation shall 
finally overwhelm human nature either in whole or in part : for it is 
wholly redeemed and liberated in the Word of God Who has 
brought it wholly within the unity of His Substance. So, defeated by 
927B the force of sound reason, I am compelled to admit that the whole of 
human nature must be set free in all who participate therein, and 
that every bond of evil and death and damnation must be loosened 
when that nature returns into its Causes, which subsist in its 
Saviour. But convinced as I now am about human nature, I am still 
uncertain whether it is in every creature that evil shall be done away 
with, or only in human nature. For I am of the opinion that the 
demonic intelligences shall never be without evil and all its 
consequences ; and therefore while granting that, by the bestowal of 
the Grace of God in cooperation with natural virtue, evil shall be 
wholly eliminated from the nature of man, I think that in that of the 
demons it will endure forever, and will be co-eternal therein with the 

BOOK V 

603 

Divine Goodness ; and therefore evil will not be eliminated from 
every nature. 

N. I think you have not yet quite grasped the fact that God 927C 
punishes no nature created by Him, whether in human or demonic 
nature ; but that in all natures He punishes what He has not created, 
i.e., the irrational motions of the perverse will. But to remove all 
doubt once and for all, hear what the blessed Augustine says on the 
subject of evil and the demonic nature in the eleventh book of his 
Hexemeron : 

“Some believe that (the Devil) did not deviate into evil of his 
own free will, but was wholly created therein, although he was 
created by the Supreme Lord God and Creator of all natures. And 
they call upon the evidence of the Book of Job, where it is written of 
the Devil : ‘This is the beginning of the creation of God, which He 
made in order that it might be played upon by His angels.’ — a 
passage consistent with the words of the Psalmist : ‘This dragon 
which Thou hast fashioned in order to play upon him’ unless by the 927D 
words ‘whom Thou hast fashioned’ he means something different 
from the phrase ’this is the beginning of the creation of God,’ which 
seems to imply that He had fashioned him from the beginning as an 
evil and envious seducer, so that he is absolutely diabolical, not as 
the result of corruption of the will, but created so. But how can this 
interpretation be harmonised with the words ‘God made all things, 
and, behold, they were exceeding good,’ when it is found that the 
Devil, not because he was corrupted by his own will, but because he 
was so created by the Lord God, is essentially evil? Let them try to 
answer that. 

“A wiser and more subtle theory is the following : Not only in 
its first creation but even now after the corruption of so many wills 928A 
all created things generally, i.e., the universal creature, is exceeding 
good, not because in it the evil are good, but because their evil 
cannot succeed in upsetting and debasing the order and harmony of 
the Universe which is under the command of the Divine administra¬ 
tion, i.e., the power of His Wisdom, for to every will, evil as well as 
good, there are yet certain appropriate limits of power and measures 
of award, so that even the evil wills are justly and suitably ordered, 
and the Universe is fair and lovely. But as to the opinion, and it is 
clearly a just one, that it would be contrary to His Righteousness 
that God should in any nature condemn, for no prior offence, that 
which He has created therein, while the condemnation of the Devil 
and his angels is established by the evidence of the Gospel, where 928B 

604 

PERIPHYSEON 

the Lord proclaims that to those on the left hand He will say 
‘Depart into the eternal fire which is prepared for the Devil and his 
angels;’ we must believe that it is certainly not his nature, which 
God created, that must submit to the punishment of the everlasting 
fire, but his own evil will.” 

Ambrose, in his Commentary on Luke, shows most clearly that 
the evil of the demons is not eternal : “The demon,” he says, “begins 
to pray for the power of entering into the swine. And first he ought 
to observe the clemency of the Lord, Who Himself never condemns 
any man at once, but each man is the author of his own punishment. 
The demons are not sent (unwillingly) into the swine, but they 
themselves ask for it, because they cannot bear the brilliance of the 
heavenly light, any more than those with weak eyes can bear the 
928C rays of the sun, but choose shady places, shunning the light. So the 
demons flee from the brightness of eternal Light, and fear before the 
time is due the torments they deserve, not because they foresee the 
things that are to be, but because they recall the things that have 
been prophesied. For Zacharias had written : ‘And it shall be in that 
day that the Lord shall destroy the names of the idols out of the 
land, and there shall be no memory of them, and I shall purge the 
foul spirit out of the earth.’ So we are taught that they shall not 
remain forever, lest their evil should be eternal. Now therefore, 
fearing that penalty, they cry : ‘Hast Thou come to destroy us before 
the due time?’ But because they desire to prolong their existence 
even though they must relinquish their human habitation, on 
account of which they know they must undergo punishment, they 
ask to be sent into the swine.” 

But in case you should suppose that not only the wickedness in 
the Devil but also his substance shall be done away with (for by 
substance he means not the nature created by God, but the whole 
928D consequence of the Devil’s apostasy, i.e., the prompting of his pride, 
the hostile will, the baseness of his idolatry; for in so far as he is 
named Devil, he subsists entirely of these and their like, as though 
they were his members, and the same may be understood of the 
aerial body which was added to his nature), and lest you should 
think that death and the sting of death, which is sin and all evil, shall 
929A not perish in every rational creature, but that only in part of 
creation shall these be abolished (while in part they shall remain), 
hear what the great Origen, that most diligent enquirer into the 
nature of things, says in the third book of the Treatise on First 
Principles, concerning the end of the world, that is to say, concerning 

BOOK V 

605 

the Supreme Good to Which the whole of nature is hastening that 
God may be all in all (for according to his teaching the end of the 
world is nothing else but the being of God as all things in all things) : 

“Let us ask ourselves what is meant by the ‘all things’ which 
God shall become in all. My own opinion is that this phrase ‘God is 
said to be all things in all things’ means that even in individuals He 
is all things. In individuals He will be all things in such a way that 
whatsoever the rational mind, purged from all filthiness of sin and 
utterly cleansed from the fog of evil, can either feel or understand or 
think will be God, nor will that mind behold any more anything else 
but Him, nor cleave to any but Him, and God will be the mode and 
measure of every one of its motions. Thus God will be all things. 
For there will be no more any distinction between good and evil 
because evil will be no more : and in him who no longer has contact 
with evil God is all things : and he who resides evermore in the Good 
and for whom God is all things no longer shall desire to eat of the 
tree of the knowledge of good and of evil. Therefore if the end shall 
be brought back to the beginning, and the outcome of all things 
shall be related to their origin. He shall restore that condition which 
the rational nature possessed at the time when it had no need to eat 
of the tree of the knowledge of good and of evil, so that all sense of 
evil being removed and converted into purity, God alone. Who is 
One will become for it all things, not in few or in many instances but 
in all, for death will be no more, the sting of death will be no more, 
evil will be no more at all. Then indeed will God be all in all. 

“But some hold that that perfection and blessedness of rational 
natures shall at last come to rest in that state which we have 
described, so that all things shall possess God and God shall be all 
things in them, only if no association with corporeal nature removes 
them. For otherwise, they think, the glory of the transcendent 
blessedness will be limited, if an admixture of material substance is 
added. We have treated and thrashed out more fully the ideas on 
this matter that we encountered earlier on. But now, since we find 
that the Apostle Paul has made mention of the spiritual body, let us 
consider how we should interpret his teaching only as far as we can. 
As far as I can understand it, I think that the quality of the spiritual 
body is such as to be a fitting abode not only for all hallowed and 
perfected souls, but also for the whole creature that is to be liberated 
from the servitude of corruption. It is of this body also that the 
Apostle says ‘We have a dwelling not made with hands, being 
eternal in the heavens, i.e., in the mansions of the blessed.’ This 

929B 

929C 

929D 

606 

930A 

The 
simplicity 
and unity of 
bodies after 
the 

resurrection 

930B 

930C 

930D 

PERIPHYSEON 

gives US an indication of the purity and subtlety and glory of that 
body compared with those which are now, even the most splendid 
and heavenly, visible and made with hands. But of the other we are 
told that it is not made with hands, but is eternal in the heavens. 
Since, then, those which are visible are temporal whereas those 
which are invisible are eternal, all these bodies which we behold or 
can behold on earth and in heaven and which are made with hands 
and are not eternal are far excelled by that which is neither visible 
nor made with hands but eternal. 

“This comparison gives us an indication of the glory, splendour 
and brightness of the spiritual body; and hence the truth of the 
saying ‘that the eye has not seen nor the ear heard nor the heart of 
man conceived the things which God has prepared for those who 
love Him.’ But it cannot be doubted that the nature of the body 
which we now possess can be changed into the quality of the most 
subtle and most pure and most glorious body by its Creator, in so 
far as the state of nature shall summon it, and dues of its rational 
nature shall demand. Finally, when the world was without variety 
and diversity, matter presented itself in all humility through diverse 
appearances and forms, as to its Lord and Creator, so that He might 
make from it the diverse forms of heavenly and earthly things. But 
since nature hastens to that end, that all may be one even as the 
Father with the Son is One, it follows that where all things are one 
there will be no more diversity. Therefore even the last enemy, the 
Devil, who is also called death, is said to be destroyed : so that there 
is no sorrow any more, for there is no more death, no more 
diversity, for there is no enemy. 

“The destruction of the last enemy is to be understood not in 
the sense that his substance, which is made by God, perishes, but 
that the hostile intention and will, which proceeds not from God but 
from himself, shall be done away with. He shall be destroyed, then, 
not in the sense that he will cease to be, but that he will cease to be an 
enemy and death. For to the Omnipotent nothing is impossible, and 
nothing is irreparable to its Creator. For to this end He made all 
things that they should be, and those things that were made in order 
that they should be cannot not be. And to this end shall they be 
endowed with mutability and variety, that in accordance with their 
deserts they should obtain a better or a worse condition. But 
substantial destruction cannot happen to things which God has 
created to the end that they should be and that they should endure.’’ 

BOOK V 

Thus, what Ambrose left in doubt, Origen makes clear. For 
when Ambrose says “We are taught that the demons shall not 
remain forever, lest their evil should be eternal,” it is uncertain 
whether he means that the substance of the demons shall perish 
together with their evil, or only the evil on account of which they are 
called demons, while their nature remains incorruptible. But Origen 931A 
unhesitatingly affirms that in demons the substance created by God 
shall abide forever, while the evil which is found in their perverse 
will shall perish eternally. For the expressions “demon,” “devil,” 

“the enemy,” and “death” are not applicable to the nature but to 
I' the evil will. Therefore St. Augustine has taught you that “in the 
\ Devil God shall punish not that which He created but that which He 

I did not create ;” and Origen that the substance of the Devil shall 

never be done away with, but only his evil. And to convince yourself 
more surely of this read what the great Dionysius the Areopagite 
says in the book On the Divine Names, where he argues that there is 
no evil in the nature of the demons, and that that nature can neither 
be corrupted nor diminished. 

“But not even the demons are evil by nature. For if they were,” 28 
he says, arguing from the premiss that the demons are created from 
the Good, and have a natural subsistence, and are turned away from 
1 the Good by abandoning it, “they could neither have been created 

I'* from the Good, nor have any place among existent things, nor even 

have turned from the Good by nature, but would have been evil 
from all eternity. Next, are they evil to themselves or to others ? If to 
themselves, must they not destroy themselves? If to others, what is it 
^ that they destroy, essence, potency or act ? If essence, that would be 

!;j contrary to nature : for they could not destroy things which by their 

very nature are indestructible, but only those things which are 
susceptible of destruction (i.e., they destroy no nature, for no 
nature is susceptible of evil). Even so, destruction is not in all cases 
and in every respect an evil. No existing thing is destroyed, insofar 
as it is an essence or a nature, but the reason of its harmony and 931C 
proportion is weakened by a failing in natural order, whereas it 
should remain as it was. Again, this impairing is not absolute : for if 
it were so, it would annul the destruction as well as the thing 932A 
destroyed : such a destruction would destroy itself, and that cannot 
be an evil but a deficiency of good. For that in which there is no 
trace of the good will not be among existent things. And we may 
apply the same argument to the destruction of potency and act. 

(Just as nature cannot be destroyed, so neither can natural potency 
and natural act suffer destruction.) 

PERIPHYSEON 

“Then how may we say that the demons, which were made by 
God, are evil? For whatsoever things are brought forth and 
substantiated by the Good must themselves be good. One could say 
that they are called evil not with reference to their nature, for they 
came into being from the Good and derive therefrom a good 
essence; but with reference to what they are not, through their 
incapacity, as the Scriptures say, to preserve their own principle. 

932B For, tell me, in what do the demons offend save in ceasing from 
their condition and activity in the sphere of the Good? If it were 
otherwise, if the demons were evil by nature, then they are always 
evil. But in evil there is no permanence. If, then, they eternally 
preserve their self-identity, they cannot be evil. For to remain 
always the same is the property of the Good. But if they are not evil 
eternally, then they have not evil by nature, but by a deficiency in 
the angelic virtues. But they are not altogether deprived of the 
Good, for they have being, life and understanding, and there is in 
them a certain tendency of motion. They are called evil simply 
because of a deficiency in their natural operation. Their evil consists 
in a decadence, a desertion and a paralysis of the qualities that are 
proper to them, an imperfection and a failing in power, a flaw in the 
faculty of preserving their perfection, a taking away, a fall. What 
else in the demons is evil ? Irrational rage, a mad lust, an intemperate 
932C fancy. But although these are found in demons, they are not 
confined to them, and are not found in all, and are not evil in 
themselves. For in other animals it is not the possession of them, but 
the deprivation and destruction of them that causes evil in the 
animal. The possession of them rather constitutes and preserves the 
animal’s nature, which possesses them. 

“So the race of demons is not evil insofar as nature is observed, 
933A but rather insofar as it is not. Nor is the good with which they are 
endowed taken away from them, but it is they that depart from it. 
Nor must we say that the angelic graces conferred upon them have 
ever undergone change — for they preserve their integrity and are 
manifestly present — it is the demons who stop up the sense by 
which they can contemplate their own good. Therefore that which 
the demons are is derived from the Good, and therefore they are 
good, and seek the Beautiful and the Good ; for all things that are 
tend towards being, life and understanding. They are called evil, and 
rightly so, because of their deprivation of, flight and fall from the 
goods that are proper to them : that is to say, they are evil according 
to what they are not ; and since they are desirous of what does not 
exist they are desirous of evil.’’ 

BOOK V 

Notice the force and subtlety of his language. First he makes 
the brief general statement that the demons are not evil by nature, 933B 
“But not even the demons are evil by nature.” Then he gives the 
reason : “for if they were they could neither have been created from 
the Good,” that is, by God, Who alone derives His Goodness from 
Himself : for everything which is created by Him is good, for evil 
cannot come out of good, nor can it be reckoned in the number of 
natures which exist. 

“Nor even have turned from the Good by nature.” That is, it is 
not in their nature that they are changed from good angels into the 
malice of a perverse will. For such are the words our author is 
accustomed to apply to the transgressing angels. 

“Turned.” This refers to the change from nature of the good 
angels, and the fall from wisdom. 

“But would have been evil from all eternity.” The negative is 
understood from the preceding phrase, and the meaning is that they 
are not evil from all eternity. For that which is evil by nature cannot 
always have existed : it is impossible for the nature of evil and 
wickedness to be eternal. But the demonic substance is imperishable : 933C 
therefore it cannot be evil by nature. 

Thereafter the argument is maintained by means of questions. 
“Next, are the demons evil to themselves or to others?” That is to 
say, if it were a fact that they were evil by nature, they must be evil 
either to themselves or to others. 

And “if to themselves, must they not destroy themselves ?” Yes, 
destroy ! Impossible, for no nature can destroy itself. For in every 
nature destruction is an accident. Therefore if the nature of demons 
were evil it would not be so to itself, for it cannot destroy itself. For 
evil is the destruction not of evil, but of good. 

“If to others.” If they were by nature evil to the others, the 
good angels, “what do they destroy” in them, “essence, potency or 
act?” He means they can destroy none of these three: for essence, 933D 
potency and act are in all things incorruptible, for in these three 
every nature subsists. Hence he goes on to say : 

“But if essence, that would be contrary to nature.” We are 
speaking of the essence by which nature subsists. That is, “they 
cannot destroy things which by their nature are indestructible,” i.e., 
essence, potency and act, “but only those things which are suscep¬ 
tible of destruction,” things which can be destroyed, like the natural 
accidents, the qualities and quantities and the other attributes which 

609 

PERIPHYSEON 

934A can be made greater or smaller, and are described as being in a given 
subject. But it is not by evil that they are destroyed. For the 
accidents of a substance to become greater or less is not an evil, nor 
a destruction, but a kind of issuing forth (from the nature of the 
substances) and a falling away from their capacity. Therefore he 
says : 

“Destruction is not in all cases nor in every respect an evil,” 
that is, not even are the things which are susceptible to destruction 
destroyed by evil, because it is not wholly evil. For in this text the 
single negative is to be understood twice : '"not in all cases and not in 
every respect evil.” For what, having no existence of its own, could 
destroy? For every kind of destruction of which we have experience 
in the nature of mutable things is either a falling short of perfection 
or a change from one rational species to another, or a transformation 
of the general into the particular or of the particular into the 
general: these things are not evils, but the natural qualitative and 
934B quantitative events and conversions which affect natural objects. 
The rest of this chapter (of the Divine Names) is straightforward and 
does not require exposition. For its teaching is very plain : none of 
the things which exist are to be destroyed as far as their essence or 
nature is concerned ; the term “destruction” is to be interpreted as a 
falling short of their proper rank, and a flaw in the harmony. For it 
is through these two faults that the mutables are prevented from 
eternally preserving their self-identity. Therefore destruction is not 
an evil, but an insufficiency of good. For if it were evil it would have 
no place in nature. 

St. Dionysius also teaches that the demons are not evil in what 
they are, for they derive from the Highest Good and participate of the 
Highest Essence ; but they are called evil because of what they are 
934C not. And he shows quite clearly what it is in them that is called evil, 
namely, their incapacity to abide by their Principle, i.e., the Highest 
Good, from which they derive being ; and they neglect and abandon 
their proper condition and activity in relation to divine goods; as 
well as other things in respect of which the wretched state of the 
demons is expounded by our Master with admirable lucidity, as he 
also expounds the goodness of their nature and the fact that none of 
the graces with which they were endowed at their creation is 
changed in them or annulled, “but that the integrity and purity of 
their nature abides forever, although the demons themselves no 
longer comprehend their speculative powers,” which are innate in 
them for the purpose of contemplating their Creator should they 

BOOK V 

611 

desire to do so, ’’but fleeing from the True Light and falling away 
from” the contemplative energy of the angels who are perfect in 
their connaturalness with them, “they seek that which is not” : that 
is all that is meant when we speak of evil and wickedness. 

You see, then, that the nature of demons is both good and a 
creation of the highest Good, and that it is on account of what they 
are not and not of what they are that they are called evil. From this 
it naturally follows that the only part of them which is permanent 
and which is never to be punished is that in them which is created by 
the Most High God ; while that in them which is not of God, that is, 
their wickedness, will be done away with, lest evil come into existence 
in any creature whatsoever, whether human or angelic, everlasting 
and coeternal with the good. 

The same thing is to be understood concerning death and 
damnation, lest anything which is contrary to Life and Blessedness 
could be thought coeternal with them. But if wickedness and death, 
and the sting of death which is sin, and all damnation, and above all 
the last enemy, which is the malice of the demons and universal 
impiety (and the true death), shall be totally abolished from the 
whole of nature, would not the consequence be that nothing would 
remain but the whole creation purged from every stain of wickedness 
and impiety and utterly free from all death and destruction ? This is 
the general resurrection of the universal creature, which shall be free 
from servitude, and the renewal of nature, which is typified by the 
earth in the words of the Prophet : “Thou shalt take away their 
breath, and they shall fail and shall return to their dust : Thou shalt 
send forth Thy Spirit and they shall be made, and Thou shalt renew 
the face of the earth.” And again he says that “the Lord rejoices in 
His works, when the sinners and evil-doers shall fade from the earth 
as though they had not been.” For how can anyone derive his nature 
from sin, when sin does not exist? or how can there be an evil man 
when evil is done away with ? As the Prophet says again : “the impious 
shall not rise on the day of judgment.” For when humanity is 
restored in the resurrection, it shall be purged of all impiety and 
damnation and death. Therefore there shall be no resurrection of 
the evil and the wicked : for only nature shall rise again ; evil and 
wickedness shall perish in eternal damnation. 

A. What then of that eternal fire, and the penalty of the lake of 
burning brimstone, and the worm that dieth not, and all the other 
torments which Holy Scripture reserves for the Devil and all his 
host ? If these are regarded as historically true and have the property 

934D 

935A 

935B 

935C 

PERIPHYSEON 

935D 

29 

936A 

936B 

of sensible objects, then they must have a physical existence in some 
part of the physical world. And if so, it must mean that either the 
whole or part of this world shall be reserved for the perpetual 
damnation of the damned, and therefore it shall not entirely be 
drawn up into the consummation of the Return into its Causes when 
“God shall be all in all,” — for that and nothing else, as we have 
already agreed, is what is meant by the consummation of the world, 
namely, God’s being all in all things. And furthermore, and more 
importantly, what is left to be punished if no substantial subject 
remains worthy of punishment? Moreover, if the whole world, and 
the whole universal creature which has been created by God is not 
to return into the eternal Causes in which it has its subsistence, then 
our whole discourse up to this point is proved vain, and breaks 
down completely. 

N. If that were so, not only should we indeed have laboured in 
vain, but the testimonies of the Holy Fathers upon which we have 
drawn would be brought into contempt : which God forbid. 

A. Then come to my assistance and give a satisfactory expla¬ 
nation of these forms of torment which are foretold by the History 
that does not lie. 

N. It is our belief that the various kinds of punishment will not 
be found localised in any place anywhere in the whole of this visible 
Universe, or, to be succinct, anywhere within the length and breadth 
of the nature which is created by God. Moreover they never shall 
exist, any more than they do at present, save in the perverse motions 
of evil and corrupt wills and consciences, and consist in late and 
unavailing repentance, and in every kind of perversion of power, 
whether in the human or the angelic creature. Now that which is 
perverted is that which is wholly destroyed; and what shall be 
wholly destroyed is every capacity for sin, for evil-doing, and for the 
practice of impiety. But when the faculty for all wickedness is wholly 
removed, will not the sole occasion for that faculty, the perverse 
will, be extinguished also? — just as “faith without works is dead?” 
For faith without works is mute : and so it is in the case of sin when 
there is no occasion for sinning; evil where there is no evildoing; 
and impiety where there is no worship of idols. For although the lust 
and fever of evil-doing will always be present in perverse wills, 
seeing that the object of lust can never be attained, and the flame of 
evil will have nothing but itself to consume, what else is left but 
stinking corpses lacking all vital motion, lacking, that is, all 
substance and potency of natural goods? And here it is, perhaps. 

BOOK V 

613 

that we have the most severe torments of evil men and evil angels, 
the lust for evil combined with the impossibility of assuaging it 
either before or after the Day of Judgment. 

The view that it is not in any spatial locality or in any corporeal 
prison but each within the confines of his own evil will that the Devil 
and his associates shall be punished is clearly put by the blessed 
Ambrose in his Commentary on Luke where he expounds the 
passage from the Gospel: “He shall be bound hand and foot and 
cast into the outer darkness, where there shall be weeping and 936C 
gnashing of teeth 

“What” (asks St. Ambrose) “is the outer darkness? Is it in 
some prison or quarry that sentence must be served? Not at all. But 
whosoever lies outside the disposals of the Heavenly Precepts is in 
outer darkness : for the Precepts of God are Light ; and whosoever is 
without Christ is in darkness, for Christ is the inner light. Neither 
therefore is there any physical grinding of teeth, nor any eternal fire 
of corporeal flames, nor is that worm a corporeal worm, but the 
meaning of these expressions is that just as fevers and worms are the 
effects of an ill-balanced diet, so he who does not temper his sins by 
the practice of sober abstinence, but rather adds to them other sins, 
contracts from the mixture of old and new sins an illness, and will be 936D 
consumed in the fire of his own fever and devoured by the worms of 
his own body. Hence Isaiah also says : Walk in the light of your fire, 
and in the flame which you have kindled. The fire is that which is 
produced by the wretchedness of our transgressions. The worm is 
the bite of irrational sins upon the mind and the physical sense, 
which devour the bowels of conscience and which like worms are 
ever generated one from another, as though out of the body of the 
sinner. Finally God, speaking through the mouth of Isaiah has 937A 
declared the following: And they shall behold the limbs of the men 
who have transgressed against me, and their worm shall not die, and 
their fire shall not be extinguished. And a gnashing of teeth reveals 
the agony of the unworthy, for the fact that his repentance is too 
late, too late his remorse, too late his self-rebuke, for having sinned 
with such persistent wickedness.” 

Note then in what kind of place our Theologian locates the 
torments. Where is Judas chastised, who betrayed our Saviour? Can 
it be anywhere but in that defiled conscience in which he betrayed 
his Lord? What kind of penalty does he pay? The tardy and 
ineffectual repentance with which he is eternally consumed. What 
does Dives suffer in hell? Is it not the lack of those sumptuous 

614 

PERIPHYSEON 

banquets upon which he used to feed in this present life? What is the 
flame that consumes that most impious King Herod but the rage 
937B which drove him to slaughter the Holy Innocents? These examples 
of the perverse motions of evil wills, by which through a most 
righteous recompense they torment themselves for their sins and 
these wounds caused by various lusts are enough for our purpose. 
For each evil liver shall be tormented as though by an inextinguish¬ 
able flame by the lust of his own sins with which he burned when in 
the flesh. And as to the punishment of the perverse wills of the 
demons, what should we think it to be but the eternal bridle that 
holds them in check, and the eternal destruction of their wickedness ? 
For what worse punishment can the wicked suffer than the inca¬ 
pability of actualising their wickedness or of doing harm to anyone ? 
This is the chain with which our Lord Jesus Christ bound the Devil 
when He descended into hell ; taking away from him the power of 
destroying those whose belief in Christ was perfect and devout and 
937C those who observe His Commandments : — although before the 
Day of Judgment the demons beg not to be punished, but to be sent 
into the swine, that is to say, into licentious men, in whom they may 
continue to exercise their powers. For they are condemned to a 
closer bondage after the judgment when every creature shall be set 
free from the Devil’s power, and wholly absolved from servitude, 
and shall return into its proper Cause, that is to say, into God, Who 
is the Beginning of all things and their End. “For,” says blessed 
Maximus, “the administration of visible things in terms ot generation 
and passing away will be brought to an end in the great general 
resurrection, by which man is born into the immortality of immu¬ 
table substance, for the sake of which the nature of visible things 
took unto itself being through the mode of generation, and with 
which it shall receive through Grace the non-corruptibility of 
937D essence. Therefore it is to loosen these bonds of the visible creature 
that the Word of God is born of man in the flesh without sin of man, 
and is baptised into the spiritual Sonship, for our sakes voluntarily 
undergoing generation, God according to His Essence, and the Son 
of God according to His Nature ; that he might bring to an end 
generation out of the body. He is born as a body without sin, and 
through baptism into the spiritual sonship the Nature of God was 
willing to suffer for us His Nativity. For since Adam of his own free 
will abandoned the spiritual generation into deification, and was 
938A born after the flesh into corruption. He in His infinite goodness and 
mercy became man for the sake of our sin, and He Who alone is free 
from sin convicted Himself for us and condescended to be born by 

BOOK V 

615 

generation in the flesh, thereby showing Himself stronger than the 
weight of our condemnation and restoring the birth of the mystical 
body in the spirit. And loosening in Himself for us the chains of 
fleshly birth, He gave us power through birth in the Spirit to become 
the Sons of God, not after the flesh and the blood, but as believers in 
His name.” 

And it is envy because of this which is the greatest torment the 
Devil suffers within himself. For he is tortured by the sight of the 
great general resurrection of the human substance, and in it of all 
visible things into an immutable immortality, by which they have 
eluded his clutches, although he had decreed that their substance 
should be surrendered to him for imprisonment and utter destruc- 938B 
tion, and that it should be kept in the pains of eternal death and 
everlasting torment. For when the mutability of fleshly birth and 
passing away shall have come to an end, wherein shall be found the 
power of the Ancient Enemy? Nowhere. 

A. I think that everything you have said is in accordance with 30 
reason and could be verified by authority. But there still remains, it 
seems to me, one very difficult problem ; Upon whom will those 
punishments actually fall, which, the Divine Testimony declares, are 
destined not only for the devil but for sinners. To select a few from 
many possible examples. Our Lord in the Gospel warns us that He 
will say : “Depart from me, ye wicked, into the eternal fire which is 
prepared for the devil and his angels,” indicating that the devil and 938C 
his angels are to be consumed in everlasting fire. And in the 
Apocalypse we find this : “The devil, who seduced them, is cast into 
a lake of fire and sulphur where the beasts and the false prophets 
shall be tormented day and night forever,” where by “day” we 
understand the damnation of the wicked which is revealed to the 
pure intellects of angels and of men, and by “night” the depth of the 
Wisdom of God which is known to none. Observe that I am not now 
enquiring about the nature or location of the punishments, for I am 
sufficiently convinced by what you have just said on the authority of 
Ambrose, that they will be neither physical nor sensible nor in time 
nor in any place. That must clearly be so, for when the world comes 
to an end, there will be neither corporeal nor sensible entities nor 938D 
space nor time in which we could conceive those torments taking 
place. For all these things will come to an end with the world, since 
all bodies will be resolved into spirit, all place into a non-extended 
simplicity, all time into eternity. Therefore we should interpret the 
eternity of that fire about which Our Lord shall say “Depart from 

PERIPHYSEON 

me, ye wicked, into eternal fire,” and in another place : “They shall 
939A depart into eternal torment,” and again in the Apocalypse, “They 
shall be tortured by day and by night forever” not as duration or as 
an infinite succession of temporal revolutions, but as referring to the 
irrevocability and incommutability of the decree of the most 
righteous of all judges. The same is true of the eternity of the life of 
the blessed, which we must not look upon as an extent of time, for it 
remains forever unchangeably in itself, transcending all time without 
beginning and without end. Hence anything that is called eternal 
must be thought of as being nowhere but in God, lest we should 
imagine that there could be any eternity outside Him Who alone is 
eternal and Eternity itself. Thus the attribute of eternity could be 
properly applied either to the unalterable severity of His most just 
decrees whereby in the wicked He allows the eternal punishment of 
that which He did not create, or to His ineffable and supernatural 
grace by which He deifies and exalts above all things those whom 
He foreknew and predestined to take the form of the Image of His 
Son. For nothing is coeternal with God, just as nothing is contrary 
939B to Him. He, then, alone is eternal in those who are in Him 
and live in bliss eternal through His Grace freely bestowed : but to 
those who are without Him, since they are not from Him, and 
therefore although they are said to exist in fact have no being at all. 
He is eternal in the severity of His judgment. So it is not about the 
corporeality, the locality or the temporality of the punishments that 
I am questioning you : for it is clear that the torments of the wicked 
will be of a spiritual nature. But I am still not satisfied in what we 
ought to consider these punishments to lie. For since the punish¬ 
ments are accidents they must belong to some subject. If there can 
be no accident unless it be in a subject, and if subject is to be defined 
939C as that which subsists of itself, then it must follow that the 
punishments will lie in some subject which subsists of itself. Further, 
if everything that subsists of itself obtains its subsistence from Him 
Who is the cause of all that subsists (for anything which is not from 
the cause of all that subsists, is altogether nothing and does not 
subsist in the number of existing things), then it must follow that the 
condemnation to punishment must exist in some substance which 
obtains its subsistence from God. But if we allow that, we shall no 
longer be able to say that the Divine Justice does not punish in any 
creature that He has created that which He has created, for in all 
things which are from Him everything which He, Who is impassible 
and indestructible, created must likewise be impassible and indes¬ 
tructible and susceptible to no passions. Now, by passions here I do 

BOOK V 

not mean those which are innate in its nature, such as the senses of 939D 
the body, but those that are alien to its nature, and which hover 
about the bodily matter in this our mortal life: for these cannot 
affect or destroy the trinity of our nature, which is essence, potency 
and act, although they seem to be attempting to assault it. The 
passions to which I refer are : sexual propagation in the manner of 
the irrational beasts ; bodily increase and decrease ; all the diseases 940A 
to which the body is heir, including its final dissolution ; also the 
irrational impulses to which the rational soul is subject, and which, 
deriving from matter, revolve about it. None of these things are part 
of the primal creation of man, but originate from his general sin; 
and therefore they will perish with the matter which they have 
infected when that primal creation of man shall be freed from these 
passions and all others like them, and be purged in the spiritual fire 
of the divine grace and goodness. This is what the prophet Isaiah 
means by Jerusalem when he says : “I will sanctify her in flaming 
fire and it will devour matter like hay.” Here the fire is not that 
which by a most just decree tortures the wicked, but that which by a 
most merciful grace purges away the uncleanness of our nature. But 940B 
if the Divine Justice in every creature excludes from punishment 
anything which was created by the Supreme Good, so that not only 
may it exist but also that it may endure forever impassible and 
unaffected by conflicting passions, how may that be punished which 
is clearly seen to have no existence in nature whatever? How may 
such be the subject of chastisement? Or, how can the torments of 
the damned exist without a subject to afflict? 

N. An extremely knotty problem, and difficult to solve, as you 
say. In this question we have three choices, one to be accepted and 
the other two to be rejected. For we are bound to admit : either that 
that which has no existence in nature whatsoever can be punished in 
itself in the absence of any subject (a proposition which reason 
cannot accept, for how can that be punished which does not subsist 
in anything?); or that there is in nature some subject which 
undergoes punishment (which you have seen for yourself to be even 940C 
more offensive to reason and to authority ; for everything which has 
been established in nature by the Supreme Good, whether as 
substance or as accident, is excluded from punishment by the Divine 
Justice and providential care, so that there should be no sorrow or 
suffering found in the universal creature); or that that which is 
punished does not exist in itself but is punished in some subject 
which exists and is free of all punishment. Choose which of these 
three we shall adopt. 

617 

941A 

31 

The praise of 
humanity 

618 PERIPHYSEON 

A. I should choose the third, which is a combination of the 
first two, if it were possible to defend it. For we are prevented by our 
previous investigations from saying either that that which does not 
exist and is not found in nature can be tormented ; or that a natural 
subject can be punished. But it does seem credible and likely to me 
940D that a vice which does not exist of itself but is in some subject which 
exists of itself and is impassible, because it is not allowed to suffer, 
could suffer punishment — though at the moment it escapes my 
mind if such a thing could be. 

N. Truth comes with eagerness to those who sincerely and 
devotedly seek her, and reveals herself to them : she reveals what 
escapes their minds. But let us seek her together, proceeding in a 
logical manner, taking turns as to who shall lead the discussion and 
who shall follow. 

A. Do you lead first. 

N. We are speaking about the Return of human nature, and of 
all things which are created in it and for it, in it and with it into its 
First Cause. For I am not discussing now the substance of the 
demons, which the creator of all things created in them good and 
indestructible, nor am I enquiring as to whether that nature too 
when it is purged shall be brought back to its First Cause which by 
its transgression it abandoned, or whether it is to persist in its 
perversity and refuse to contemplate the Truth forever. With regard 
to that let us for the time being be content to be assured of this : that 
the demonic nature itself is not punished nor ever shall be punished 
but that the glory of its primal state before it waxed proud and 
seduced mankind abides in it eternally and immutably without any 
diminution and shall ever so abide ; while the wickedness which it 
941B contracted through pride shall be totally destroyed lest it should be 
coeternal with the Goodness of God. But concerning its salvation 
and its conversion or Return into its proper Cause we presume to 
say nothing, for this reason : that we have no certain knowledge of it 
either from sacred scriptures or from the Holy Fathers that have 
dealt with this matter, and therefore we prefer to honour its 
obscurity with silence, lest in searching into matters which are 
beyond us we should rather fall into error than ascend into the 
Truth. Let us, then, rather, by God’s aid, pursue our enquiries into a 
matter which does not lie beyond us, namely, our own nature. 

A. It is right for us to do so : for not only are we permitted but 
941C are actually enjoined to make this enquiry. For Solomon says : “If 

BOOK V 

you do not know yourself, walk with the beasts of the field.” For he 
who is ignorant of his own nature and that of his fellow beings is not 
much better than a brute beast. Again, Moses says: “Look to 
yourself,” and read as in a book the history of the activities of your 
soul. For if we are unwilling to learn and know about ourselves, that 
means that we have no desire to return to that which is above 
ourselves, namely our proper cause, and shall continue to wallow in 
the bed of carnal matter and the death of ignorance. For there is no 
other way to the most pure contemplation of the First Cause than 
the certain knowledge of Its image which comes after It. For 
between the archetype and its image and likeness, that is, between 
God and man, there is no intervening nature. It was because they 
understood this that the Greeks called humanity dv0po)Tria that is, 941D 
dvcoTpoTTia a turning towards what is above or dvco iripouaa OTila 
that is, “holding the gaze aloft.” For man was created for the 
contemplation of his Creator, without any creature interposed. 

N. Come then, tell me, do you think that that human nature, 
which has no creature interposed between it and its creator, is a 
simple indivisible nature, not susceptible to partition? 

A. That is what I believe. For otherwise it would not be the 
Image of God, Who is a single and indivisible One, and One Essence 942A 
in three substances; and herein too man is understood to be His 
Image in the trinity of esse, uelle, scire (being, willing, knowing), as 
is stated by St. Augustine in his Confessions. But Dionysius the 
Areopagite teaches that this trinity consists of essence, potency and 
act. There is, however no disagreement here, only a verbal difference, 
and not even that in each case, for both call (the first member) esse. 

But the second member is called by one uelle, by the other potency 
— but even here there is no real difference, for there is no potency 
which belongs more properly to the nature and substance of man 
than to will well. Again although one says scire (knowing) where 
another says act, what is the act proper to a rational nature if it is 
not to know itself and its God, in so far as That Which is beyond all 
knowledge can be known? This then is the act which is proper to 
our nature, and it is not beyond us but within us. What else should 942B 
we desire to know but our Cause, Which by Its ineffable Providence 
is within us and by Its incomprehensible power is beyond us? But 
about these matters enough has been said, I think, in the earlier 
books. 

619 

PERIPHYSEON 

620 

N. Quite enough. But don’t be afraid or think it not worth 
while to run over them again if you think that will make the subject 
clearer to you. 

A. Certainly not. 

N. Human nature, then, is in itself a simple creature, but in its 
“reasons” it is infinitely manifold ; just as its Cause also is in Itself 
simple and more than simple, but in Its effects in the nature that was 
made by It It is infinite and more than infinite. Now the cause of 
human nature is that Supreme Goodness Which alone is good in 
Itself to which humanity is most similar; and just as the Cause is 
everywhere wholly in Itself, so human nature, as the Image which 
942C most perfectly resembles It, is also everywhere wholly within itself. 
And just as the Divine Goodness is wholly in every nature which 
partakes of It, and is not prevented by the malice or folly of anyone 
from pervading the Universe which It has established, so human 
nature is distributed through all men, and is wholly in all, and 
wholly in each individual, whether good or evil. For no man’s folly 
repulses it, no man’s malice restrains it, no man’s vice corrupts it; 
no filth defiles it but it is pure in all ; it is not puffed up in the proud, 
it does not sicken in the cowardly ; in the greater bodies it is not 
greater, nor in the smaller less, but in all it is equal, and proceeds in 
equal measure into each of the natures which participates in it ; it is 
not better in the good than in the evil, nor worse in the evil than in 
the good ; in perfect bodies it is not more perfect than in those which 
942D for some reason have lost their perfection or have never attained it. 
An illustration : the sun’s ray penetrates the pure and the impure 
alike, but it itself remains pure in all, and is not more pure in 
brightly shining natures than it is uncontaminated in tarnished 
natures. For it exists (wholly) in all things which it illumines. It 
shines in the darkness and, lo, it allows no darkness within itself, 
while it comprehends within itself the causes of darkness, not only 
as shadows but as deprivations of light : for there is no darkness in 
nature which is not bounded by light. For if it is in bodies, no matter 
how far those bodies extend, in the end the light will encompass it ; 
943A and if it is in spiritual natures in the form of ignorance of the Truth, 
the brightness of Wisdom will set a limit to it. In like manner there is 
no deprivation which is not caused by that of which it is the 
deprivation. For if the light had never shone forth, then the 
darkness, which is the deprivation of light, would not have followed. 
The deprivation, therefore, and that of which it is the deprivation. 

BOOK V 

621 

belong to one genus : as light and darkness of one genus, sound and 
silence, form and formlessness, and all pairs of this kind. 

But who can worthily describe the Image of God, and who can 
find worthy objects with which to compare it? But that you may 
know that human nature is equal in all men consider the common 
form of human bodies: no one human being is more human than 
another ; for if he be afflicted with any deformity or marked by any 
distinguishing feature, that deformity and that feature do not derive 
from his nature, but from some corruption of the perfection of his 
body, or from some accident which comes from without and which 
attaches to individuals certain distinctive marks, while the form 
remains the same as it was generally imposed by nature upon all. 
One fivefold bodily sense is present to all alike, even though in many 
its organs, by which I mean the eyes, the ears and the other 
instruments through which the exterior sense operates, are imperfect. 
And what of reason and mind? Are they not innate in all men 
generally, even though all do not make good use of them ? For many 
abuse their natural goods and thus are the causes of their own 
damnation. And there are many other equally apparent indications 
of the community of human nature in all men. 

What true philosopher, then, or careful observer of the nature 
of things would not at once declare that the irrational impulses of 
evil wills can be punished in those who partake of a nature which is 
good, rational and impassible; but that as the evil will does not 
contaminate the goodness of the nature, so neither does the torment 
which is inflicted on the evil will torment the natural subject in 
which the evil will is the accident and in which it is contained? For 
just as that nature in itself is free, and utterly untouched by any sin, 
so is it universally free and untouched by any punishment that is 
inflicted for sin. For even worldly judges, provided that in passing 
sentence on the guilty they are not actuated by a spirit of vindictive¬ 
ness but by the desire for correction, — even worldly judges seek to 
punish not the nature of the criminal, but his crime. It is only 
because they cannot punish the crime in itself in isolation from the 
nature that is its subject, that they have to punish the body together 
with the crime. But the most excellent creator of all natures and 
their most righteous Providence and most just Avenger of the crimes 
of those who despise Him or know Him not, punishes in the nature 
which He created only the crime which He did not create; but 
liberates and isolates from the crime that which He has created, and 
in a mysterious manner acquits that which He has created, and 

943B 

943C 

What suffers 
pain and 
where? 

943D 

944A 

PERIPHYSEON 

punishes, or rather allows to be punished only that which He has 
not created. For sins do not pertain to the nature but to the will : the 
cause of all sin, whether in angel or in man, is his own perverse will ; 
but the cause of the perverse will itself is not to be found in the 
natural impulses of the rational and intelligible creature, for the 
Good cannot be the cause of evil. Therefore it is uncaused, and has 
no natural origin. So we are confronted with this inexplicable 
mystery : the evil will of transgressing angels and men, although it is 
itself uncaused, is the efficient cause of every sin and every 
punishment of sin. And if anyone should say that the beginning of 
all sin is pride, let him see if he can find pride subsisting in nature : it 
is neither essence nor potency nor act, nor is it a natural accident : 

944B rather is it a deficiency of inner virtue, and a perverse will to power, 
as it is written : How can he who is dust and ashes be proud? for 
even in life his bowels decay. Pride is said to be the beginning, not 
the cause of sin, because it is the first step and flood of the first 
sin, in which all have sinned: but it cannot be called a cause for 
there is nothing in which it subsists naturally, and in itself it is 
absolutely non-existent. 

Therefore what is punished is the irrational impulse of the 
perverse will which arises in rational nature, but that nature remains 
everywhere what it was and in all things that partakes of it it is good, 
unmenaced, undamaged, unharmed, uncontaminated, incorruptible, 
impassible, immutable, for it eternally participates in the Supreme 
Good ; everywhere it is blessed, most glorious in the Saints, in whom 
it is deified, most excellent in sinners, to whose sins it sets the limit, 

944C so that their proper substance shall never be reduced to not being 
and so that they shall never suffer the destruction of those natural 
goods which were bestowed upon them at their creation; in those 
who inherit perfect bliss she rejoices in the contemplation of the 
Truth, in those who are paying the penalty for their sins she rejoices 
in the preservation of their substantiality; in all alike she is whole 
and perfect and the Image of her Creator; purged from all the 
filthiness of vice which from without in this mortal flesh has defiled 
and deflowered her, she returns restored to the pristine glory of her 
former state, to which she has been recalled by the grace of her 
Redeemer and Preserver. 

From this we may understand that at the end of this sensible 
world there will in the nature of things abide no wickedness, no 
corrupting death, nor any of that suffering which in this life still 
afflicts our fragile matter; for all things visible and invisible shall 

BOOK V 

623 

rest in their Causes. Only the lawless will of wicked men and angels, 944D 
smitten with the memory and conscience of its evil ways shall abide 
in torment, and of those things which in this life it had lusted after, 
and in the future life it had hoped to obtain, nothing will be found : 

“for in that day shall perish all their imaginations.” Their imagina¬ 
tions will perish, he says, not their substances. But what are those 
imaginations of which he speaks? Surely the vain phantasies of 945A 
those sensible things which in this life they long for with insensate 
desire, and which haunt the minds of those who through their 
wickedness have been blinded by irrational affections. And those 
who invent these phantasies shall themselves become very like them. 

For nowhere will they find the solidity of real truth, but will be 
tormented by empty dreams. Hence Maximus in the sixteenth 
chapter of his Ambigua writes : 

“Those who meditate wisely on the divine words, say that 
perdition and hell and the sons of perdition and similar phrases refer 
to those who make to themselves in the affectation of their minds a 
substance of that which is not, and thus become themselves in all 
things like the phantasies they invent.” 

I might add what St. Augustine says in the twelfth book of his 
Hexemeron where he argues that while souls are still established in 
this flesh their joys and sufferings are insubstantial, existing in 
phantasies ; but in the future life, when they have received back their 
bodies, while the righteous shall rejoice in the solid contemplation 
of the Truth, the wicked shall weep from what they suffer from the 
insubstantial simulacra of sensible things. But in each case the 
substance will go unharmed and unpunished. 

For there are two kinds of passion : one whereby the deified are 
rapt into the most pure knowledge of their Creator: and the other 
whereby the wicked are submerged into the most profound ignorance 
of the Truth. And it is no wonder if that which the wicked suffer in 
their dreams while still imprisoned in this corruptible flesh and 
thereafter in phantasies suffer in hell, they shall suffer in torment 
even more keenly when they have received their spiritual bodies, 
awaking as it were out of a heavy slumber; so that, as Augustine 
says, they shall suffer true punishments, they shall have false images 
in things not true, real sorrow, real lamentation and real terror, 945c 
tardy repentance and the consuming fire of their thoughts. 

The passion of the just, on the other hand, shall be this : when 
they have received their spiritual bodies and when their minds have 

PERIPHYSEON 

624 

been deified they shall enjoy true blessedness in contemplation of 
the Truth, true joy, and true happiness, because everything which in 
this life they accepted by faith they now see face to face. 

But each shall behold that Vision in his own way. For, says the 
Truth, “in My Father’s house are many mansions.” Good and 
wicked alike, therefore, will be confronted by phantasies or appear¬ 
ances, but those of the righteous will be the representation of divine 
contemplations : for not in Himself, but through certain apparitions 
of Himself appropriate to the capacity for contemplation of each 
945D one of the Saints, shall God be seen. These apparitions are the 
clouds of which the Apostle speaks : “We shall be snatched up into 
the clouds going before Christ.” By the clouds he means apparitions 
of the divine phantasies which vary according to the height of 
contemplation attained by each of the deified. 

But the wicked will be given over to phantasies of mortal things 
and manifold false appearances corresponding to the manifold 
946A impulses of their evil imaginations ; and just as the deified shall 
ascend through an innumerable number of stages of divine contem- 
Good and written : “The Saints caught up in the clouds of 

vision shall go from virtue to virtue and shall behold the God of 
experiences gods in Sion,” behold Him, that is, not as He is in Himself, but in 
the mirror of the divine phantasy; so those who are separated from 
God shall ever descend through the different degrees of their vices 
into the depths of ignorance and into the outer darkness, where 
“there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 

But in both the good and the evil, their human nature will ever 
remain undamaged, unimpaired, uncontaminated, and free from all 
the conflict of the passions : for both the good and the evil there will 
be a body equally spiritual, containing no trace of animality; 
equally indestructible, containing no element of corruption; of an 
equally noble nature, from which all reproach has been removed ; 
946B equally essential, and equally eternal. These are the natural and 
general goods which the whole of human nature after its regenera¬ 
tion, shall share : these are “the gifts which descend from above 
from the Father of Lights,” distributed universally among all, so 
that no one is excluded from participation in them and no one is 
deprived of them, for without them no one can subsist. No man’s 
unworthiness can prevent their bestowal; no man’s worthiness is 
worthy of them, for they exist before every merit. It is solely due to 
the widely flowing plentitude of the Divine Goodness that they flow 
in endless streams everywhere through all things upon all men. In no 

BOOK V 

625 

man are they increased : in no man are they diminished : but they are 
equally present to all men, good and evil alike. From no man are 
they withdrawn, but they shall abide eternally and substantially in 
all, when all taint of corruption and the conflict of the passions has 
been removed. They may, however, acquire contrary accidents, 
namely good will and evil will and they are capable of virtue and of 
shame : good will and virtue are present to them by nature and by 
Grace : but the harmful impulses of the evil will, which are rightly 
and properly held to be no more than accretions to our true nature, 
are present to them as accidents which have no cause either natural 
or supernatural, and therefore the natures which experience them, 
whether within themselves or without, remain unaffected by them. 
For that which by deprivation is nothing comes neither from nature 
nor from Grace : for it is neither a substance nor a natural accident, 
nor any one of those four natural virtues which clothe the soul, 
prudence, temperance, courage, or justice ; nor either one of their 
two sources, wisdom or mercy, which in turn flow forth from love ; 
nor is it any one of the forces which proceed from these, which I will 
not mention, as it would take me too long and would be irrelevant 
to my theme ; nor is it the supernatural excellence of the ineffable 
deification which transcends every creature, and which “neither the 
eye hath seen nor the ear heard nor the heart of man been able to 
attain.” For that is not to be found in the totality of nature but 
above it ; and it is not included among the powers of created nature. 

But lest you should be surprised that I say that human nature 
can receive contraries without being affected by them or having the 
calmness of its simplicity disturbed, here are some examples of such 
a case : 

The air which surrounds us and which by inhalation and 
exhalation through our lungs as through the smith’s bellows ever 
fans the fire of our hearts, a process which the animal nature never 
allows to cease for a moment, bears clouds, some bright and others 
dark, some receptive of the sun’s light, others repelling it; the 
former acquire the bright translucency which illumines them and 
which closely resembles the purity of the ether, from the upper 
regions, while the latter derive from the lower regions the obscure 
density which resists the light and which resembles the impurity of 
earth. But the air itself always retains, unchanged in the one and in 
the other, its subtle and serene quality : it is not densified in the 
clouds, nor disturbed by the disturbances, which it carries : while it 
receives both light and darkness, its own nature is neither increased 

946C 

946D 

The similarity 
of the nature 
947A 
of the just 
and the 
impious 

PERIPHYSEON 

947B 

by the light nor diminished by the darkness : while it receives both 
the hot and the cold, its own substance is affected neither by the one 
nor by the other. The “body” which it acquires from earthly and 
aquatic vapours can become hot in it or cold, or can accumulate 
into clouds or move about in the winds or liquify into rain or 
solidify into snow or hail or into those other forms which, originating 
from the vapours I have mentioned (called by the Greeks dxpiSeq, 
are carried by the simple and spiritual nature of the air while they 
are made heavy with the weight of earth and water : but the air itself, 
as we remarked before, preserves its purity and spirituality intact, 
and is not more pure or spiritual in the light than in the darkness, 
nor more subtle or more capable of penetrating bodies that are 
inferior to itself in calm than in storm. Therefore the word the 
947C Greek philosophers give it is worthy of it. For aer means spirit, and 
the Physicists frequently describe it as a simple and spiritual body. 
And those who ascend to the summit of Mount Olympus have sure 
evidence that it is so, for no dipi^ or vapour whether earthly or 
aquatic reaches that height. 

But that the lower air should receive vapours to the advantage 
of mortal animals who without air to breathe would not be able to 
live comes about by the decree of the Divine Providence. For if air 
were inhaled into the lungs of mortal bodies in its simple state 
without any admixture of liquid or solid elements, it could by no 
means kindle the fiery nature which is in the heart and therefore the 
947D whole body would grow cold, bereft of the virtue of heat through 
which the vital motion governs the limbs. It was for the very 
purpose that the subtle nature of the air should contain an 
admixture of vapours when it entered the lungs and thus with added 
force ignite the fire in the heart, that the lower part of the air which 
is diffused in the neighbourhood of the earth and water was made to 
receive liquid and solid elements, without, however, any harm or 
detriment or increase or change or transformation of its own most 
simple and serene nature. For this very purpose, I say : for the aery 
948A spirit by itself is not sufficient to kindle the fire in the heart or to 
nourish inanimate bodies without the addition of some solid 
matter; for the combination of the fiery and aerial element does not 
produce sensible motion, because owing to the fact of their excessive 
subtlety they are always at rest and free from all disturbance. But 
when they are mixed with the lower elements of earth and water, by 
exerting their force upon the more solid quality of these, they 
actualise their proper motions whereby sensible bodies are governed. 

BOOK V 

627 

Now, I brought forward this example in order to show clearly 
that in its regenerate state human nature, having nothing left in it of 
an earthly or watery or massive quality, shall be utterly undisturbed, 
once it is totally converted into spirit : but that nevertheless it will, 
without any change in its restored state or any contrary passion, be 
capable of receiving contrary qualities. For just as the air, which we 
took as a figure for human nature, receives ethereal splendours from 
above and vapours distilled from water and earth from below; so 
when our human nature, which is made in the Image of God but has 
miserably fallen through its own irrational impulses into the love of 
sensible things and into corruptible bodies which weigh it down, is 
restored in the day of its regeneration into its former state, it shall in 
those who are deified be illuminated by the Divine Rays shining 
within it and above it; and in those who are deprived of all 
blessedness, shall be subject to the phantasies and memories from 
below and from without of those temporal and transitory things 
which infect them in this life — not that human nature pays the 
penalty in itself, but that those things which against the will of the 
Creator it attracted to itself shall be separated from it and damned 
and utterly destroyed : the sort of things I refer to are : malice, and 
impiety, and every other form of wickedness which made of the 
works of the flesh, that is, of the soul living according to the flesh an 
occasion for original sin. These things, if we look for them in 
isolation, are nothing, for they are not in the number of those which 
derive their substance from the Creator of all things : they have crept 
into rational nature by their likeness to irrational animals, but they 
shall be wholly destroyed in it lest they should do it lasting harm — 
though I do not deny that the recollections of them will remain as 
torments in tTe wills of the wicked. For the utter destruction of all 
evil in all human nature does not mean that the phantasies of evil 
shall not be forever preserved in the consciences of those who in this 
life practised evil, and if forever preserved, then forever punished: 
just as the Return of that same human nature into the state of Grace 
which it lost through sin, that is, into the glory of the Divine Image 
is not the same as the deification of the good conscience of each of 
the Saints, whereby in this life he served his God in all things, above 
every virtue of human nature; or its life of blessedness; or its 
exaltation above all the things that are. For where He is. Whom in 
this life they loved and ever desired to see, there shall they be also. 

These are the five degrees of contemplation of the rational 
creature : The first is its observation of that universal and substantial 

948B 

948C 

The 

conscience of 
the evil is 
punished in 
phantasies 
948D 

949A 

32 

628 

PERIPHYSEON 

The fivefold 
contemplation 
of the 
rational 
creature 

virtue which is common to all whereby all men both good and evil 
participate at one and the same time in their primal state. 

The second is the contemplation of its processions into this 
mortal life through the bodily generation of individual men. 

The third is the contemplation of its general Return through its 
own nature into that angelic state which it abandoned when it fell 
into this world. 

The fourth is in those who participate in it, and who while 
949B living in this mortal flesh and seeking above all things the Creator of 
all things, are worthy through their own good will and by the aid of 
Grace to return into the common integrity of their proper nature, 
and shall then by the gift of God’s Grace be carried up above all 
things, and leaving all else behind, shall be brought to God. 

The fifth contemplation is of those who shall possess the 
universal goods which are innate in our nature and which by their 
universality excel and shall excel all without exception, but shall not 
be able to attain to those highest gifts of the Divine Grace which are 
prepared and reserved for the righteous alone, for in this life they 
were seduced by their love of temporal things from serving God — 
and that love shall be to them in the new life, whether in their souls 
alone or in the bodies which they shall receive back again a 
consuming and inextinguishable fire, for they shall not find there the 
things which they incontinently lusted after here, but shall only 
949C behold vain and foolish phantasies of them, which when they 
attempt to embrace them as though they were real things shall melt 
away like clouds, since they have no substantial basis. For they shall 
be, as the Scriptures say, vanity of vanities and all vanity. These are 
the imaginations about which the Psalmist says in words which we 
have already quoted above : “In that day all their imaginations shall 
perish.” By this he means that all the imaginations which in this life 
those who are given up to fleshly desires take from earthly things 
and fix in their hearts shall perish in that day when the Truth shall 
appear, and those who rise again in the spirit shall find none of 
949D those things on which their hearts were set when they were alive. For 
what shall the infidel Jew or the proud Ishmaelite or the pagan in his 
impious blindness find of that false happiness which his folly 
promises him in the future life? On the other hand, how great will be 
his affliction, how great will be his suffering, and with what a flame 
of unsatisfied wanting he will be tormented when he finds none of 
those earthly and transitory pleasures for which he had vainly 

BOOK V 

629 

hoped, and nothing will be left for him but the vague intangible 
elusive shadow of the things he had hoped to gain ! Ever desiring to 
seize it, and never being able to do so, for it is nothing : that will be 
his eternal punishment. And the same infernal torment shall be the 
lot of those, who, while professing the Catholic Faith, hope in the 
future life for carnal delights and the sensible pleasures of space and 
time. 

Hence it can be seen that nothing that belongs to nature will 
endure punishment, but only the vain imaginings of guilty souls, 
which in themselves are outside all nature because they are not 
among the number of natural substances ; for they are the products 
of evil will and earthly lusts. For just as the blessedness of the 
righteous, as I have often said, shall be raised by the Grace of the 
Creator above all natural virtues : so the affliction of the wicked 
shall be thrust down below every nature by the justice of that same 
Creator. For what is more degraded and what is thrust deeper below 
the lost bounds of nature than the vanity of vanities and the false 
imaginations of things that shall perish forever? Hence arises this 
strange and inexplicable process, attested by true reason and by the 
authority of Holy Scripture, and demonstrable in no other way : the 
righteous are blessed beyond every natural good, while on the other 
hand the wicked on the contrary are punished by being set below 
every natural good ; but that nature which is shared by the righteous 
and the wicked alike has as it were an intermediate position, neither 
enlarged by the beatification of the righteous nor diminished by the 
misery of the wicked, enjoying only its own proper good, containing 
the substances of all things, and controlling all things in all things 
that participate in it. For it is the general form of all things which 
participate in it — it is the individuality of individuals and the 
infinite measure of their plurality — and the sum of their corporeal 
increase in space and time. By time I here mean the interval in which 
the human being arrives at its perfect bodily fulfilment, by space the 
volume occupied by his physical mass. From it proceed the natural 
accidents of souls and bodies. But what more need I say? That 
human nature which is common to all men is set by its Creator as a 
balance between two opposite extremes, the blessedness of the 
Saints and the misery of the wicked, so that in those who are 
righteous it may acquire from above by the ministration of grace a 
certain ineffable beauty beyond its own powers; and in those who 
are wicked it is protected by the Law from being infected by any of 
the turpitude from below. For no man’s turpitude is turpitude in it. 

950A 

950B 

Natural 

goods 

950C 

Nature 
contains 
things which 
are not in her 
naturally 

630 

950D 

33 

951A 

Why all 
things were 
made 

951B 

951C 

PERIPHYSEON 

no malice harms it, no error leads it astray. Its Creator beautifies 
everything which He created in it and punishes nothing; but 
everything which He did not create in it, He tolerates and permits in 
it but does not allow to go unpunished : and this punishment is to be 
understood in a double sense: either the indulgent punishment of 
the sins of those who return to their proper Cause; or the eternal 
torment of those who ever flee away from their Cause. 

But if you ask me how those things which are not made by God 
are found among the things which are made by Him ; or how the 
things which are considered as lying outside human nature can be 
punished within it, I shall first answer you in the simplicity of the 
Catholic Faith : “Who knoweth the intention of the Lord, or who 
hath been his counsellor?” — for “His ways are at all times 
unsearchable.” How should we look for reason in the works and the 
Providence and the justice and the goodness of Him Who transcends 
all reason and all mind and is exalted above everything that can be 
uttered or conceived? If you insist on reason in these matters, ask 
also how all things were made from nothing ; how this world shall be 
brought to an end and returned into its Causes ; how our bodies 
shall be converted not only into spiritual bodies but also, according 
to Gregory, into souls; how we, who in this life are composed of 
three so to speak seeds, body, soul, and mind, shall in the future life 
be fused into the one simple substance of indivisible spirituality, as 
Ambrose teaches; how men, who are by nature mortal (for every¬ 
thing which does not derive its essence from itself is called mortal) 
shall through Grace be changed into immortal God. And finally, 
lest we should seem to be lingering too long over this matter, if you 
ask me how that which is not according to nature and is outside 
nature can be forced into nature and maintained and punished 
there, while nature itself remains unpunished and unimpaired by the 
conflict of the passions : I shall ask you how those things which 
exceed the virtues of nature can be possessed by those who are 
within the confines of nature, — that is, how the Saints without 
stepping beyond the bounds of their proper nature shall receive 
those things which are beyond nature, namely the gifts of Grace. 

But if the reason and mind not only of men but even of angels 
are insufficient to answer these questions, be patient and give way 
before the incomprehensible virtue of God, and honour it with your 
silence : for until that is attained, no reason and no mind is 
adequate. Humbly admit, therefore, that by the dispensation of the 
Divine Providence those things which are outside and contrary to 

BOOK V 

631 

nature can be sustained by the virtue of nature and can be punished 
within her, while she herself remains as she was, free from all harm. 

But you may say, although it is beyond the power of the 
rational and intelligible creature to know these inscrutable miracles 
of the Divine Power, or why or in what manner all things that were 951D 
created were created, they do not in all men so far elude their powers 
of understanding that they arrive at no reason whatsoever as to why 
they were created. Thus, you may argue, the reason why all things 
were created from nothing was that the might and magnitude of the 
divine Goodness might be revealed and glorified through His 
works : is not this the teaching of the Psalmist when inspired by the 
spirit of prophesy he commands that every creature, visible and 
invisible, shall praise the Creator of all things : “Praise the Lord in 952A 
the Heveans,” etc.? And at the end of that Psalm, with a most 
wonderful understanding of theology he gives us most clearly to 
understand that all things shall return into their spiritual nature : for 
the Psalm ends with these words : “Let every spirit praise the Lord.” 

If the Divine Goodness had remained alone silent and inactive in 
Itself, then it would never have provided an occasion for Its 
glorification ; but as it is, pouring Itself out into all things visible and 
invisible, and existing as all things in all things, and thus enabling 
the rational and intelligible creature to know It, and providing the 
rational and intelligible creature with matter for the praise in the 
innumerable beauties of the rest of creation. It created the Universe 
to this very end, that there should be no creature that would not, 
either in itself or through itself or through another, offer praise to 
the Supreme Good. 

There is another reason why all things were created out of 952B 
nothing. The Supreme Good, Which is good by virtue of subsisting 
by Itself and in Itself should not withold Itself from the condition of 
those goods which are good not by themselves nor in themselves, 
but by It and in It. And for this reason It brought forth pristine 
things out of non-existence, that It should not be reproached for 
envy in witholding Itself from the creation of those things which It 
could create. Were that so. It would not be the Lord, nor the 
Creator of all natures, nor the rich and never failing source of all 
natural goods, nor the most righteous Disposer of rewards, nor the 
Providence that governs all things, if It had created nothing. 

As to the ending of the world, and its Return into its Causes, 34 
the following reason might be given : All things which proceed from why the 
the Cause of all things and from the Primordial Causes which are world will go 

632 

952C 
back to its 
causes 

952D 

953A 

35 

953B 

PERIPHYSEON 

established in It by their natural motion seek their principle, and can 
have no rest so long as they are separated from it. 

Another reason : All things which flow from the source of all 
things would become polluted, and indeed would be totally destroyed 
if they could not and did not return to their source. For the 
prevention of the Return of visible things into their invisible Causes 
would be not only contrary to the universal tendency of nature, but 
actually harmful to it. The transmutations of our mortal bodies not 
only into spiritual bodies but also into souls comes about as the 
result of natural necessity, so that, just as the rational soul, which is 
created in the Image of God, shall return into Him of Whom it is the 
image and likeness, so too the body, which is created in the image of 
the soul and is, as it were, an image of an image, shall, laying aside 
the earthly weight of its corporeality, return into its cause, which is 
the soul, and through it as through an intermediary into God 
Himself, Who is the One Cause of all things. 

This process can be most clearly illustrated in many ways : We 
see water change into vapour, and vapour into flame : thereby what 
was water is now changed into flame. Finally, flame is changed into 
the element of fire. Again, according to the Physicists, the sun’s ray 
absorbs into itself nourishment from the sea and from the rivers and 
from all the areas of water and the moisture that is in the earth, and 
thereby transforms the liquid into its own nature. 

As to the fact that we are composite creatures in this life, but 
after the unification shall be a simple entity, the reason is as follows : 
It was necessary that the Image of the One Supreme Trinity, Which 
in Itself is simple and not composed of parts, should be brought 
back into its unity and indivisible simplicity ; for otherwise it would 
fall short of its proper glory, and its beauty would be defaced, a 
thing which the Divine Clemency would not permit. For the First 
Cause does not allow the image of Itself, which was created by It 
after Its own nature, to be forever separated from Itself by any 
deformity or unlikeness or composition which would be incom¬ 
patible with Its own simplicity. And so it is with the Return of 
mortal men, whether they are considered to be mortal because they 
do not subsist by themselves or in themselves or because from the 
mortality which was the penalty of their original sin they are 
absorbed into their God, Who alone is immortal. For it would not 
be in accordance with the goodness of the immortal Creator that 
His Image should be eternally the prisoner of death. And if He 
permitted it to become mortal and to die as a punishment for its 

BOOK V 

633 

perverse will which refused to obey Him, that is an indication rather 
of His mercy than of His vengeance. For He wished to correct it that 
corrected it might be brought back to Him, for if it were not 
corrected it would be banished for ever and separated from Him for 
all eternity. 

If, then, you would explain by such means not how, but why 
these things are done (for whereas how they were done eludes every 
intelligence, I do not deny that theoretical speculation does reveal in 
some measure why they were done) I too will try to adduce reasons 
of my own. Thus it seems to me that He Who created and ordained 
the universal creation allowed the perverse impulses of the human 
and angelic will to be punished within their nature (although the 
nature itself ever remains unimpaired and totally free from the 
conflict of the passions) for this reason : that “by comparison with 
the perverse will of the wicked,” as St. Augustine says, “the rational 
will of the righteous might be raised to the greater glory. For,” says 
he, “the artist introduces black into the colours of his picture so that 
by comparison with its obscurity, the other colours may shine forth 
more brightly.” For that which in some part of nature appears to be 
deformed in itself, considered in nature as a whole is not only 
beautiful and beautifully ordered, but is the efficient cause of the 
beauty of the whole: Wisdom is manifested by comparison with 
foolishness, and knowledge by comparison with ignorance, which is 
the absence and deprivation of it ; life is revealed by comparison 
with death which is the absence of life, and light is glorified by 
contrast with darkness which is the deprivation of light: and, in a 
word, not only is it by contrast with their opposing vices that all 
virtues are glorified, but without that comparison they would be 
without glory. In the same way the blessedness of the righteous 
obtains its glory from the torments of the damned, and the joy of the 
good will from the sorrow of the evil will ; and, as true reason does 
not hesitate to affirm, all things which in parts of the Universe are 
judged by those who cannot contemplate the whole to be evil, 
dishonourable, base, miserable and painful, are when regarded in 
the Universe as a whole, as in the total beauty of a picture, neither 
painful nor miserable nor base nor dishonourable nor evil. For 
whatsoever is ordained by the dispositions of the Divine Providence 
is good and beautiful and just. 

For what is more desirable than that the immeasurable glory 
both of the Universe and its Creator should be manifested by the 
contrast of opposites? What is more just than that those who have 

953C 

Why pain is 
permitted 
within a 
painless 
universe 

953D 

954A 

954B 

634 

PERIPHYSEON 

deserved well should occupy the highest place in nature, and those 
who have deserved will occupy the lowest ? What is more honourable 
than that the Universe of all things should be adorned by the 
properties of the individuals it contains? Therefore no true philo¬ 
sopher believes that there can be any wickedness or wicked man, 
any impiety or impious man, any misery or miserable man, any 
punishment or punished man, any torment or anyone liable to 
torment, any baseness or base man, any dishonour or dishonourable 
man, in the noble harmony of the whole Universe than which 
nothing is more excellent, nothing more holy, nothing more blessed 
and free from punishment, nothing more beautiful, nothing happier 

954C and nothing more honourable : for it is created and ordained by 
Him Who is the highest honour, the highest beauty, the highest 
happiness, the highest peace, the highest bliss, the highest holiness, 
the highest good. 

For what we contemplate in the parts of the Universe appears 
differently when we consider it in relation to the whole. Thus, what 
in the part seems discordant, in the whole is found to be not only not 
discordant, but an addition to its beauty. Hell, which the Greeks call 
"ASrig that is, sorrow, or the deprivation of joy is known by the evil 
to be evil when it is considered by itself : but when it is considered as 
forming a part of the perfect beauty of the Universe it is made for 
the good a good, for not only does it show forth the severity of the 
most Just of all Judges and the irrevocability of His Judgments but it 
also adds to the glory and embellishes the beauty of the blessed state 
of the angels and the Saints. 

954D Why then should that not be permitted within the confines of 
nature which adds to its glory and embellishes its beauty? 

The Latin word infernus, which is given to the various torments 
of the damned, derives from popular superstition, as St. Augustine 
shows in the twelfth book of his Hexemeron. For as the ancients placed 
their hopes in fables, so they placed their souls in sepulchres : they 
believed that as the corpses of their dead were buried in the ground, 
so the souls contained by those bodies were imprisoned in the same 

955A sepulchres. So they called their habitation infernus^ meaning a place 
beneath the earth. So the false opinion spread that the souls were 
locally situated beneath the earth. But the Greeks, displaying as 
usual a greater intelligence and a subtler accuracy called the nether 
regions uASriq that is “suffering.” For in their careful study of the 
visible and invisible nature they failed to discover any place in which 
the torments of the damned could occur except in the disappointment 

BOOK V 635 

and hunger and deprivation of the covetous will of wicked angels 
and evil men for the things which they used to desire so inconti¬ 
nently ; for these afflictions produce in them the suffering whereby 
the irrational lusts of rational souls are tormented, whether in this 
life or the life to come: disappointment because they cannot find 
that which they hoped to find; hunger and deprivation, because 
they are totally deprived of what they had hoped to possess for the 
gratification of their evil and illicit lusts, so that never again will 955B 
they be permitted to abuse it. 

And this is all that is meant by the punishment and torment of 
evil imaginations and irrational desires, namely, the grief and 
sorrow with which the conscience of the wicked is afflicted within Grief and 
itself : and this grief and sorrow cannot be called evil, because they sorrow are 
happen to those they torment in accordance with the most righteous ^ 

dispositions of Divine Providence, and because since in the sum of 
nature evil does not exist it cannot be said to be. Indeed, in those who 
mourn their sins, the suffering is good, as the Lord says in the 
Gospel : “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.” 

Grief is good in those too who find the time slow and weary until 
they enter into the bliss that is promised them. It is under this grief 
that the Apostle was suffering when he cried : “I desire to be 
dissolved and to be with Christ,” to say nothing of the pains of those 955C 
who became the martyrs of Christ. 

But even the grief and suffering of evil desires whether in this 
life or the other are not evil, for they punish the evil desires : for the 
grief that comes from the longing for temporal things, like an 
inextinguishable flame burns the unsatisfied appetite : and the pain, 
which comes from the rotting of the lustful desire when its object is 
taken away, devours like the worm that does not die. 

And there is another reason why the grief and suffering of the 
wicked cannot be evil, for they are as it were the material cause of 
that most rich glory, that eternal joy and salvation which are 
enjoyed by those who return into God. 

Here, then, is the answer to your third question, which you put 955D 
before the other two ; namely, how that which was not created in 
nature either as a substance or as a natural accident and, in short, 
does not come from God at all can be punished in a natural and 
substantial subject which was created by God and which in itself is 
not punished nor suffers with that which in it is punished. And now 
you may rightly understand, what is most worthy of belief : that in 

636 

PERIPHYSEON 

956A 

956B 

956C 
No nature 
can be 
destroyed by 
the Creator 
nor by any 
creature 
greater or 
inferior or 
equal to itself 

no nature which God has created does He punish what He has 
created ; but only what He has not created does He punish. 

A. Yes, here is the answer : and yet all my doubt is not entirely 
removed. For I still do not see clearly and without any misgivings 
how that which is not can be punished or how that which is cannot 
be punished. For I should have thought it easier to punish that 
which is than that which is not. 

N. Here again you seem to have forgotten what has gone 
before, and I am afraid that far from being rescued from your 
present difficulty you have sunk back into it once more. 

A. Your fears are exaggerated. Some of the problems we have 
discussed together are as clear to my mind as ethereal light : others I 
see obscurely like broken clouds cutting across the sky. Therefore I 
have the courage and patience to go over again what is not yet 
perfectly clear to me, in the hope that it may become so. 

N. Very well, then. Is it not true that everything which is was 
brought forth from non-existence into existence by Him Who truly 
is, and is the superessential Cause of all essence? Or is there 
anything in nature which does not receive its substance from Him? 

A. Why do you ask me what every sound philosopher knows 
perfectly well and unhesitatingly declares ? For all things come from 
the One, and there is nothing which does not come from It. 

N. Do you, then, think that anything which comes from Him 
can be destroyed? 

A. I do not. For whatsoever He brought forth into essence He 
did not do so merely that it should be, but that it should always be, 
for it is always in Him as in a cause. But everything which always is 
is eternal ; and everything which is eternal is true ; and everything 
which is true is totally indestructible. Therefore nothing which was 
created by the One Principle of all things is liable to destruction. For 
what could destroy it? For it is neither true nor likely that it would 
be destroyed by the Creator Who created it for the very end that it 
should exist for ever. And it is impossible for it to be destroyed by a 
created nature better than itself, if such there be, for the good 
cannot become a cause of corruption to the good ; and still more 
difficult by a creature lower than itself, for that which is inferior 
cannot corrupt that which is superior to it ; nor can it be destroyed 
by some equal good, for no good seeks to destroy its equal, with 
which it shares the same potency and act and essence. So it remains 

BOOK V 

that no nature destroys another nature, nor wishes to do so nor can 
do so. 

But there is another sure reason why none of those things which 
come from the One God Who is Creator of all things, can undergo 
destruction or be destroyed. For if it should begin to be destroyed, 
there would some time come an end of its destruction. For anything 
which begins to suffer any experience expects one of two ends to its 
passion : either it will be completely destroyed so as no longer to 
exist, and its destruction will cease with it, for destruction must of 
necessity perish with that which it destroys, since there will then be 
nothing for it to destroy : or else the process of corruption will reach 
a point where it is resisted by some indestructible element in that 
which it destroys ; and since it cannot destroy it then necessarily the 
process of destruction must come to an end when it encounters it. 
But neither of these alternatives is compatible with reason. No 
nature can be completely destroyed so as no longer to exist and be 
reduced to nothing, for it was created for the express purpose that it 
should exist for ever. But if it should begin to suffer destruction, and 
the process were continued until it was entirely annihilated, then 
clearly it would be reduced to nothing, which would be utterly 
inconsistent with the virtue of a nature created by the Supreme 
Good. Therefore no nature begins to be destroyed or need fear that 
its destruction will be completed. On the other hand, if one of God’s 
creatures begin to suffer destruction but there remain in it an 
indestructible element wherein the destructive process is arrested, 
clearly it would be this remainder alone which was created by God 
whole and indestructible, into which destruction cannot enter, and 
in which therefore the process of destruction never even begins. 
Therefore none of those things which are created by the Supreme 
Good is or can be destroyed. 

N. I see that you are recovering your reasoning powers, and 
are able to give a clear and sound explanation of what seemed to 
you obscure. So now that you have given a definite opinion about 
the indestructibility of natures created by God, consider this 
question ; Can anything which cannot be destroyed be punished? 

A. I do not see how that could be. For just as I believe that 
every destructible thing can be punished, so it seems to me that no 
indestructible thing can be punished. For surely, corruption itself is 
a kind of punishment, as when our mortal bodies suffer that 
affliction which we describe as the sudden destruction of health, we 
feel we are punished thereby : and as everyone would agree, our 

637 

956D 

957A 

957B 

Can what 
cannot be 
destroyed be 
punished ? 

957C 

638 

PERIPHYSEON 

957D 

958A 

958B 

souls, which while they are imprisoned in our bodies suffer with 
them, are in a way punished also, although our reason teaches us 
that the simple nature of the soul cannot be destroyed or punished 
or infected by the sufferings of the body : however the soul is said to 
suffer with the body because so long as it lives in the body and is 
combined with it, it toils to preserve the body from destruction, for 
it ever seeks to bring the body which is added to it into a unity with 
itself, and to preserve it in that unity lest it should dissolve and be 
destroyed. 

N. So since the soul, which is created in the Image of God, is 
never destroyed in itself, it is therefore never punished? 

A. In the light of our previous arguments it must be so. For no 
spiritual substance can be punished in itself, still less can a substance 
which is made in the Image of God. 

N. What, then, of the body ? If it is destroyed, is it punished ? 

A. It is only punished so long as it can feel punishment, and if 
feeling is a property of the soul alone, as is indicated by the 
condition of dead bodies, the body is destroyed but is not punished. 
For in the case of inanimate bodies, such as wood and stone and the 
seeds of grass, we can say that they are destroyed, but not that they 
are punished. But if the external sense belongs to the body as well as 
to the soul, it would be difficult to deny that the body, as well as 
being mortal and animal and destructible, can also be punished. 

N. So, if mortal bodies are capable of sensation then they can 
be both destroyed and punished ; but if they are without sensation, it 
appears that they could only be destroyed, but not punished? 

A. So I believe. 

N. Not all mortal bodies, then, whether they are capable of 
being destroyed, or of being both destroyed and punished, are 
created by God. For we have already agreed that nothing which was 
created by the Supreme Good can suffer corruption or, for that 
reason, punishment. 

A. Who but a madman would presume to deny that this visible 
world and the sensible bodies which it chiefly comprises was created 
by God? 

N. How then can the bodies which it comprises be either 
destroyed or punished? 

A. I find that destruction can be understood in two ways. 
According to the one, destruction consists of the coming together of 

BOOK V 

639 

the general elements into generation in the visible species, and the 
dissolution of the species again into the general elements from which 
they were formed : according to the other, while we affirm that of no 
creature can the essence, potency and act be impaired, we also 
declare that the wills of the rational and intelligible creation can be 
destroyed by irrational impulses. 

The first seems rather to be a reciprocal transformation of 
sensible bodies in space and time than a destruction, for whatever is 
ordained by the Divine Providence is a source of embellishment to 
the Universe rather than of destruction : for hereby is preserved both 
the natural stability of substances and the mutability of natural 958C 
qualities: and as these are the two components which fulfil the 
sensible creature it is wrong to give the name of destruction to the 
variety of temporal things which is due to their development and the 
dissolution of their development. This is the sense in which the 
apostle should be understood when he says, speaking of the frailty 
of the human body: “This corruptible shall put on incorruption, 
and this mortal immortality,” and again : “The body which is being 
destroyed weighs down the soul, and the earthly habitation keeps 
prisoner the sense in its manifold imaginations.” Here he is not only 
speaking of the dissolution of our present frail and mortal body into 
the simple elements from the coming together of whose qualities it is 
composed, but also of its recall from those elements and its Return 958D 
into its spiritual and indestructible qualities; while by the word 
corruption he means the mutability of the earthly body. For sensible 
and temporal are not despised by those who seek after the spiritual 
and eternal because they are evil, but because they are mutable and 
inconstant, waiting for their mutability to be changed into something 
better: for by comparison with those things that are constant and 
immutable and are not waiting to be changed into something better 
they seem contemptible and abnormal and inferior. 

The second meaning of destruction refers not to the trans- 959A 
formation of mutable creatures within nature, but to those dis¬ 
turbances of their wills which occur outside their nature. For 
destruction in this sense which does not take its origin from God, 
should rather be called the viciousness of the perverse will; just as 
what happens to bodies in this world is not destruction either, but a 
transformation of their natural variety and mutability, and therefore 
it is not punished. For the natural sufferings should not be regarded 
as punishments in the nature which is the subject of those sufferings. 

And if anyone should argue that the transformations through birth 

PERIPHYSEON 

and dissolution of sensible bodies within themselves are the results 
of the sin of human nature, and therefore may rightly be termed 
destructions, let him remember that in the spatial and temporal 
959B changes of nature consist the beauty and the order of the whole 
visible creature, and that mutability and variety have no cause but the 
dispositions of the Divine Providence, and that they rather contri¬ 
bute to the perfecting of human nature and to its recall to its Creator 
than to the punishment of sin. For they are the spiritual medicine by 
which God willed to recall His Image to itself and into Himself that 
wearied by its experience of the tedium of mutable things, it should 
long to contemplate the stability of immutable and eternal things, 
and ardently seek for the everlasting forms of true things, in the 
beauty of which it may find its rest, all variety being done away with. 
Hence it is that often before in this discourse it was definitely agreed 
959C that destruction and punishment could be found in no other place 
but the perverse and illicit impulses of the will of the rational and 
intellectual creature, which do not take their occasions either from 
God or from the nature which He has created : for they have no 
cause, and if they are sought for in themselves they are found to be 
nothing but the deprivation and failure of the lawful and natural 
will. 

N. Therefore it would be contrary to reason that that which 
cannot be destroyed can be punished : but everything which comes 
from the One Cause of all things must of necessity be indestructible : 
therefore it is impossible that anything which comes from the One 
Cause of all things can suffer punishment. Therefore if Holy Writ, 
which neither deceives nor is deceived, bears witness that the 
punishments of the damned shall come to pass, it follows that you 
959D must admit that punishment and torment and destruction occur in 
something created by God — and therefore rightly said to exist and 
reasonably held to be impassible, — and should boldly return to the 
position about which you seemed to doubt, and without hesitation 
declare that only that which does not exist can be punished in that 
which exists ; that is to say, only the perverse will, which is entirely 
960A without substance, can be punished in the phantasies of sensible 
things, phantasies which we must not think of as entirely non¬ 
existent, because they are the impressions upon the memory of 
natural forms. But that which is, while it supports by its potency 
that which is punished and allows it to be punished, in its essence 
cannot be punished. So that what is said about the Divine Justice is 
supremely true : that in no creature that It created does It permit 

BOOK V 

641 

that which It created to be punished, but punishes that which It did 
not create. 

A. You have sufficiently and amply covered this matter. 

N. Sufficiently certainly if you now see clearly without any 
misgivings that things must be so and not otherwise. 

A. I see clearly and every doubt has been removed that 
prevented me from understanding how the totality of the creation 
established by God cannot be punished, and is free from all 
destruction. 

N. Let us go back, then, to our main subject, that is, to the 
Return of the created Universe into its Causes. 

A. I think we should first ask ourselves how those punishments 
can be eternal, if there shall be no more evil, for evil cannot be 
co-eternal with the good ; and no more impiety, for impiety cannot 
be co-eternal with the worship of God ; and no more wrongdoing, 
since wrongdoing cannot forever oppose the Laws of God ; and as 
true reason compels us to believe, when there is no more evil, there 
will be no more any evil man, for the evil man is evil because of his 
evil ; when there is no more impiety, there will be no more any 
impious man, for the impious man is impious because of his 
impiety; and when there is no more wrongdoing how can any 
wrongdoer remain? But no wise man doubts that wickedness and 
impiety and wrongdoing will perish, when he considers that evil 
cannot exist save where there is something for it to harm. But in the 
time to come, when “God shall be all in all,” and every creature 
shall be freed from its bondage, whom will evil find to harm? No 
one. And it can be shown in the same way that impiety must perish. 
For how shall impiety or the impious man exist when the worship of 
false gods shall be totally suppressed, and the One God shall be 
recognised in all by all the Saints and all the damned? How shall 
wrongdoing endure when no one will be able to transgress the Laws 
of God ? The teaching of Holy Scripture is most clear : “Let sinners 
and evil doers perish from the earth that they may no longer be.” 
We must not, however, suppose that it is their nature but their sin 
and their wrongdoing that shall perish. The Blessed Jerome teaches 
the same doctrine in his Commentary on Ezechiel where he quotes 
the prophet Isaiah referring under the allegory of Jerusalem to the 
general purgation of the whole of human nature : “I shall sanctify it 
in the flaming fire and it shall devour matter as hay.” Here the word 
matter can be understood in two ways : it is either the unformed 

36 

960B 

Why when 
their causes 
are removed, 
namely evil 
and impiety, 
their 

punishment 
will be 
perpetual 

960C 

960D 

PERIPHYSEON 

matter which was created out of nothing and from which the 
structure of this sensible world, by the diversity of the forms 
impressed upon it, is composed : this matter he shall burn up like 
hay, when it shall be sanctified, that is, purged, in that nature that 
was made in the Image of God, so that nothing material or 
temporal, or earthly or visible or transitory or mutable shall remain 
in it : for it shall be totally changed into a spiritual stability and 
one-ness. Or the prophet intended by this word all the opportunities 
961A for vicious and wicked deeds, namely, evil, impiety, and wrongdoing. 
Or perhaps he intended it to be interpreted in both ways. How then 
can there be torments when there is nothing left in the world to 
merit them ? 

N. We have dealt sufficiently with the question in what has 
gone before and have, I think, obtained a satisfactory answer. But, 
since you insist, we must make a brief resume of the previous 
discussion. We had settled our differences and come to a complete 
agreement that all evil and every evil man, all impiety and every 
impious man, all wrongdoing and every wrongdoer shall by the 
most just decree of that divine judgment be abolished like stains that 
have to be wiped away and completely removed from the face of 
nature so that they shall not mar the integrity of nature forever : and 
this is confirmed not only by the authority of the holy Fathers and 
of Sacred Scripture, but also by the investigations of sound reason. 
961B But the empty imaginations of men in the phantasies of temporal 
things shall abide forever in the souls of those who, though they 
shall regain the perfection of their nature, shall not be changed into 
glory ; and shall burn with a tardy remorse, as with an inextinguish¬ 
able fire, for the things which in this life they coveted in their unruly 
and incontinent lust. 

Furthermore, I think that those who wish to show that the 
rational nature both shall endure for ever and also shall forever be 
consumed in the flames of its torments fall into ambiguity when 
they use the illustration of the non-inflammable stone which can be 
forever burned and yet eternally endure, so that neither its substance 
nor its quality nor its form is either diminished or destroyed, even 
though the flame which burns it is never extinguished : for this 
961C illustration could be as reasonably employed to show that the 
natural goods of the rational nature shall not only endure forever 
unimpaired, but also, in those who are purged and sanctified and 
receive besides their natural goods the grace of deification, they 
shall blaze forever in the glory of eternal blessedness which is the 

BOOK V 

643 

inextinguishable flame of the grace of God, so that in them, while 
their natural beauty abides forever, the splendour of their deification 
shines out over all. 

I think you can now distinguish between that which shall be 
totally destroyed and that which shall be subject to eternal 
punishment. 

A. I can : for I see that while sin and the occasion for sin shall 
be totally abolished from nature, the phantasies of those temporal 
things by which imperfect souls are seduced while they live in the 
flesh shall remain and be subjected to the everlasting fires of 
punishment, so that in them may be tormented the evil desires of 
evil men. But I have still one more problem which is not inconsider¬ 
able : if there is nothing that is co-eternal with the goodness and the 
blessedness and the other virtues of God, how can we oppose to the 
Truth something that is co-eternal with it, namely falsity and the 
false ? For, it seems to me, if falsehood is opposed to Truth, then so 
is the false to the true. But if every phantasy is false, and therefore 
falsity, it must be that phantasy is the opposite of truth. But if the 
phantasy of temporal things is to be punished eternally, the 
phantasy itself must be eternal, and therefore eternally opposed to 
Truth. 

961D 

Why 

phantasies, if 
false, will be 
co-eternal 
with truth 

962A 

N. Your doubt would be a reasonable one if the clear illumi¬ 
nation of that Truth of which you speak had revealed to you beyond 
doubt that phantasy and the false were, without distinction, one and 
the same thing, so that every phantasy would be false and every false 
thing a phantasy. As it is, however, there is a great difference 
between phantasy and the false, and in fact only that which can 
properly be called false is opposed to Truth, while phantasy is not 
the contrary of Truth. 

A. Please explain to me what that difference is which dis- 962B 
tinguishes phantasy from the false. 

N. They are distinguished by their definitions. The false is that 
which seeks to be what it is not : to appear other than it is : to have 
predicated of it that which it is not. Typical examples are the 
flight of Daedalus, a fable that is neither true nor likely, but a 
completely false account, which deceives only the foolish. Daedalus 
never flew, though it is reported of him that he took ship from Crete 
to Euboia. It is called false because it deceives the judgment of those 
who err in taking the false for the true ; which is the proper nature of 
error. This is the true definition of the false, although frequently in 

PERIPHYSEON 

644 

dialectic affirmative and negative propositions are deemed false : a 
negative proposition such as “every man is not an animal;” or an 
962C affirmative such as “every man is righteous.” 

Phantasy, on the other hand, is a kind of image or apparition 
taken from visible or invisible form and impressed upon the 
memory. For no corporeal or incorporeal thing is in itself appre¬ 
hensible to the senses of our earthly body, but nature allows images 
of sensible objects to be impressed upon the exterior sense, and of 
intelligible things upon the interior sense. And then these impres¬ 
sions, flowing as it were in two streams, one from the sensible and 
one from the intelligible, converge upon the memory, one flowing 
from the lower nature through the corporeal sense, the other from 
the higher nature through that sense which belongs to the soul 
alone. And everything which the memory receives from these two 
962D sources and retains, is rightly called phantasy, or, as we have Just 
said, apparition. For “phantasy” comes etymologically from the 
Greek verb (paivco of which the literal translation is “appear.” 

How, then, can phantasy be opposed to Truth, when it is Truth 
itself which, inapprehensible in its proper nature, comes and reveals 
itself in a mysterious way to those that seek it through these 
963A phantasies, or theophanies as they are called ? And if every phantasy 
is a kind of image of natural objects impressed upon the mind, how 
can that which proceeds from nature be considered contrary to the 
Truth, when no nature is opposed to Truth? And this is supported 
by the firm conviction that no phantasy which is not drawn from 
some source not contained in nature can be impressed upon the 
senses or the memory; for nothing entirely deprived of substance 
and form and quality can be conceived under any image or likeness, 
and therefore by no phantasy. For the phantasies of the false and 
fictitious bodies of unclean spirits which become manifest to the 
senses of the men whom they deceive should rather be called shades 
than phantasies. 

A. Phantasy then must be something good, seeing that it is an 
image of nature. 

N. I cannot deny that that is so. For it must be accepted that 
963B everything which springs from natural causes is good. 

A. Then you must admit that the good can be punished. For 
you said that the phantasies of temporal things are destined for 
eternal punishment. 

BOOK V 

N. Not so. For I did not say that the phantasies themselves 
were to be tormented with punishments, but the irrational impulses 
of the perverted will which are contained in them : for we have 
already agreed that that which is not cannot be punished save in 
some good thing which is. 

A. You remember, no doubt, your foregoing arguments in 
which you firmly convinced yourself that the phantasies of temporal 
things that are implanted in the soul whether in this life or hereafter 
in the life to come are altogether nothing at all, and that it is for that 
reason that the perverted wills are punished in them, for when they 
think they can grasp them in some object, they slip from the clutches 
of those who desire to grasp them, and vanish away. 

N. I do remember : nor do I regret what I have said. For I did 
not say that the phantasies were a substantial good, but I demon¬ 
strated beyond doubt that they inhered in substantial goods and 
derived from them. And whether they are found in the punishments 
of the damned or in the rewards of the righteous, I have no 
hesitation in declaring that they are goods wherever they are found, 
for even the bliss of the Saints, which consists in the contemplation 
of the Truth will be supplied through phantasies, which to distinguish 
them from other kinds of phantasy the theologians call Theophanies. 

For in Himself God, “Who alone possesses immortality and dwells 
in inaccessible Light” is and always shall be invisible. 

But as to whether falsity and the false can perpetually be 
opposed to Truth and the true, and co-eternal therewith there ought 
to be no doubt among the wise. For what man who thinks 963D 
reasonably about the condition of the future life would say that 
falsity would continue to exist when the Truth shall appear in all 
things and the false shall be removed not only from nature but also 
from the judgment of the whole rational and intelligible creature ; 
when no one deceives and no one is deceived, for nature shall have 
returned into her proper Causes in which nothing shall be seen save 
Truth and the true, in so far as the contemplation thereof shall be 964A 
permitted to each one of the Saints in proportion to the measure of 
the Grace that is conferred upon him? For it shall appear to all, 
though not in the same measure but in an infinite number of ascents 
and descents of Theophany both to the righteous and to the 
unrighteous, but it shall appear to all ; and in all the unrighteous it 
will only be their unrighteousness that shall be punished and 
abolished, while their nature, purged and chastened shall abide and 
ascend by those same steps by which it had fallen into sin. And it is 

645 

PERIPHYSEON 

time to discuss what remains to be discussed in connection with this 
Return. 

Whether 
everything 
that is called 
964B 
hell and 
punishments 
exists or not ? 

964C 

964D 

A. It is time. But first I should like to know the answer to a 
question which vexes me very much : if the whole Universe of nature 
is to return into God, how can it suffer any punishment within 
itself? For it is not to be believed that there can be punishment in 
God. 

N. Tell me, does all that is meant by hell and damnation exist 
or not ? 

A. You put me in a dilemma. For if I should say “It exists” you 
will at once ask me why that which is should not, with all the other 
things that are, return into Him from Whom all things take their 
being : but if I should say “It does not” you will then ask me why I 
reckon that which does not exist to be among the things which will 
return into God. And again if I admit that everything that is meant 
by hell is outside the Universe, I shall at once be shown to be 
arguing unreasonably, and I shall unwillingly have to confess that 
there is nothing remarkable in the fact that that which does not exist 
among the things which are in God should not exist in God either : 
and I should be mocked by the reason which incontestably declares 
that outside God and the Universe which He created nothing can 
rightly be imagined or understood to exist. For everything that is 
and everything that is not is bounded by the Creator and His 
creation. On the other hand, if I should say that hell is within the 
Universe, I should have to admit that not only that which is but also 
that which is not is contained within the limits of the divine 
Goodness and justice and Providence. For we believe that not only 
the things that are but also the things that are not, whether because 
by their excellence they transcend all understanding or through 
deprivation of the things that are they fall below the level of the 
things that are understood to be, are under the governance of that 
Divine Power beyond Whose bounds it is impossible for anything 
that is or for anything that is not to stray. For that which is driven 
forth from the rank of the Blessed cannot go outside the Laws of 
God within which all is contained, but that which falls from the 
higher level enters into one of the lower orders, and is there retained. 
For every rank, the highest on top and the lowest at the bottom and 
the intermediaries, is established by God, and maintained within 
Him ; and outside of Him there is nothing, but within Him 
everything that is and everything that is not is in a wonderful and 
inscrutable manner comprehended. Therefore, whether I say that 

BOOK V 

647 

hell exists, as the Scriptures testify, or whether I say that it does not 
exist in nature, in neither case can I deny that it is contained within 
the things which shall return to God, and that it is bounded by Him 965A 
Who bounds all things and outside of Whom nothing can be 
imagined or believed or understood, especially when we consider the 
undoubted facts that darkness is contained within light, silence 
within sound, shadow within body, and all similar things which 
derive their causes from their opposites. For whether they be the 
absences of some entity, or the failures, or the deprivations of it, or 
the opposites or the contraries of it, they cannot be thought to exist 
save through that of which they are the absences or failures or 
deprivations or opposites or contraries. In fact their existence is like 
that not only of substances and natures, but of their contraries. For 
there is no vice which does not take its nature from the virtue to 965B 
which it is opposed. 

N. I am really delighted that by the strength of your own 
mental powers you have broken the trap you had set for yourself, 
and escaped from it. For, unless I am mistaken, you now at last 
understand that not only everything which was created by the One 
God but also everything which was devised and superadded by the 
irrational impulse of the rational and intelligible creature is contained 
within the order of the Divine Providence, both now and in the time 
to come when the universal creature shall return into its Causes and 
be brought back into its God and the full beauty of the created 
Universe shall be perfected. And it is not strange that it should be 
so : for no nature can inflict punishment on another nature, and no 
vice can destroy the virtue in which it is contained; not only that, 
but all these things, since they are ordained within the Laws of God, 
go to make up the perfection and the beauty of the whole of nature, 965C 
and provide the perfect harmony of the whole visible and invisible 
world, in which no discordant note is heard. 

A. You are right. For I deliberately set that trap for myself, 
that is, I deliberately raised those questions, so that I should no 
longer be caught in it, but escaping therefrom should see with a clear 
mind that the unification of the universal nature consists of the 
coming together of many mutually opposed elements, learning from 
the theory of music that there is no melody that delights the mind or 
produces a beautiful effect save that which consists of the propor¬ 
tionate intervals of different voices, which by their relation to one 
another create the sweetness of the song. And here is a strange thing, 
and hard for the mind alone to understand : that it is not the 

648 

PERIPHYSEON 

965D sounds produced, for instance, by the pipes of the organ or 

the strings of the lyre or the stops of the flute, (which, since they are 
perceptible to the senses, may be regarded as having an existence in 
nature) that produce the sweetness of the harmony, but the propor¬ 
tions of the sounds and the proportionalities between them, the 
relation of which is received within the mind alone, and appre¬ 
ciated by the interior sense. And these proportions and proportion¬ 
alities of sensible sounds and voices are rightly said to be, for not 
only is the corporeal sense completely unaffected by them, but it is 

966A only within the highest faculties of the rational mind, far beyond all 
sense, that they are contemplated, as things which transcend nature ; 
and yet, while they are to be reckoned among the things that are not, 
it is they that produce and control that most noble harmony in the 
things that are, whether he who hears understands what causes the 
sweetness and the beauty in them or not : for there is in all an 
interior sense from which harmonious relation and concordant 
unification of things are not hidden. For who can explain the virtue 
of the number six, which is regarded as the basis of all harmony? 
Who can explain the ratios that are contained in it, of three to two, 
of four to three and of double? Or why the Universe of all visible 
and invisible creatures is constituted in it as in a kind of archetype ? 

966B It is not so strange, therefore, that the harmony of the whole of 
creation is composed out of the things which exist as substances and 
natural accidents on the one hand, and, on the other, of the things 
which do not exist, whether through their transcendence, or through 
failure and deprivation, when in all things that are and all things 
that are not, no evil or evil thing shall remain to stand against the 
goodness of all things, nor baseness nor ugliness against the 
loveliness and beauty of all things when it shall return into its 
Causes and its Creator. So it does not disturb me to hear that that 
most beautiful harmony shall be produced by the punishments of 
evil wills and the rewards of good wills : for punishments are good 
provided that they are just ; and rewards are good provided that 
they are freely disposed, rather than measured out according to the 
merits of those who deserve them : for I have the example of 
harmonies composed out of the mingling, in due proportions and 

966C proportionalities, of high, low and intermediate notes. And if 
anyone shall object that the perverted wills of evil men and angels, 
which deserve to be punished, are evil and so, at the restoration and 
Return of nature shall still be evil and still suffer punishment ; and 
that therefore the beauty of nature will not be entirely free from the 

BOOK V 

649 

taint of evil, I shall reply : God has disposed, and right reason 
recognises, first that whether within nature or outside it no evil is to 
be found, as Dionysius the Areopagite shows in his Book on the 
Divine Names by many arguments which it would be tedious and 
unnecessary to reproduce here ; and secondly, that the perverted 
impulses of perverted wills are not evil, but unruly. For how can 
that which proceeds from the free will of the rational creature be 966D 
described as evil? The freedom of the rational nature which was 
created in the Image of God was given by God, for that which is the 
Image of God should not obey His Laws by compulsion. It must be, 
then, that nothing which results from that liberty can rightly be 
described as evil or an evil thing : for otherwise evil and the evil 
thing would be contained in something. And if free will is conferred 
upon the rational and intelligible creature not that through it it 
might sin, but that through it it might serve its Creator in reason and 967A 
beauty, yet becoming as it were a prisoner of its own irrational 
impulse it is drawn into unruliness, the result is not an evil, but 
something which requires correction by the Divine justice, and 
redemption by the Divine Clemency, if the free will becomes 
submitted to that correction and that redemption : but if, puffed up 
with pride, it contumaciously persists in its perverse impulses, its 
lustful energy is checked from grasping that which it illicitly desires. 

And this is all that is meant by the punishment of the perverted free 
will, namely, the prohibition imposed upon its unruly impulses 
which prevents it from satisfying its lust. 

I say this so as not to appear to contradict the most blessed 
Dionysius the Areopagite, who not only denied that evil was to be 
found or allowed by reason to exist in any nature or substance but 
also in the irrational affections of rational nature. For there is no 967B 
vice in the rational creature which is not also a good in some 
irrational creature, and therefore it is impossible to find anything 
which is universally prohibited ; but properly speaking, what is 
prohibited in anything is not an evil but is something which is 
unlawful in that in which it is prohibited. Thus, to illustrate this by a 
few examples, pride, according to Blessed Dionysius and Gregory 
the Theologian is a good in the horse, but an unlawful and 
inappropriate quality in the man. Ferocity is good in the lion, and 
cannot be dissociated from his nature, for a gentle lion is not a lion, 
having lost his essential character; but in the rational nature that 
same ferocity is a vice and a forbidden thing. Filth is proper to pigs 
but alien to man : and there are other similar examples of qualities 

650 

PERIPHYSEON 

which in the beasts are natural goods but in man or angel are vices 
967C contrary to their nature : in no case, however, are they evil. For, as 
we have said, that which is not evil in the whole, cannot be evil in the 
part : although it may be unruly, and require to be purged or 
restrained. 

There remains nothing, then, to reduce or depreciate the 
perfection and beauty of the whole Universe, whether here where 
the sensible world is still pursuing its course, or There, where it shall 
return into its Causes and remain at rest in them. And although now 
it is only to a few truly wise men that this wisdom is revealed, in the 
time to come it will be plain to all, for then the Truth will shine forth 
through all in all, and shall reveal without any obscurity or doubt 
the secrets of all nature. For in the time to come the Truth itself shall 
shine through all things, not only upon those who in this life are 
967D righteous and duly seek after the Truth, but also upon the unright¬ 
eous and the wicked who are corrupted by their evil ways and hate 
the light and flee from it. For all shall see the glory of God. And this 
is not inconsistent with the text : “Let the wicked be taken away lest 
he should see the glory of God.” For here by “see” the Holy 
Scripture means “enjoy”, so that the meaning is : “Let the wicked be 
taken away lest he should enjoy the glory of God.” For when we are 
suffering from a disease of the eyes, we cannot enjoy the light, but 
968A wish to flee from it and seek to hide ourselves in darkness, not 
because we do not know what light is and how useful it is to those 
who can look upon it, but plead the weakness of our eyes as the 
reason for avoiding its radiance. In the same way the impious too 
when they are condemned to punishment attribute their hatred of 
Truth to their impiety, and suffer the unavailing pangs of tardy 
remorse. This is the lesson of the rich man who suffering the 
torments of hell, “lifting up his eyes when he was in the midst of the 
torments, saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.” He 
saw Abraham and Lazarus in the glory of the contemplation of 
God, but he himself is deprived of the delights of that glory and in 
the affliction of his tardy remorse begs Abraham to send to his 
brothers who were still alive and warn them that they should not live 
as he had lived, that thus, being warned, they should escape the 
place of torment. 

N. Do not you be influenced, then, by those most false and 
968B foolish pronouncements and empty opinions that derive from 
mortal imaginations, according to which the goodness and beauty 
and justice of the Universe can be reduced and destroyed by those 

BOOK V 

651 

things which seem to them base and evil : for they do not know that 

in all things which are comprehended within the Universe nothing 

evil or base or unjust is to be found. For the Supreme Goodness and 

Beauty and Justice which wisely disposes all things does not permit 

those things to exist among the things that are and the things that 

are not, nor shall it ever do so. And if any one should ask : Whence Evil and 

come those things which are called evil and dishonourable and punishment 

unjust, and where are they to be found? he should be answered: 

they come from no other source and are to be found nowhere else 

but in the vanity of vanities and in the false reasonings of those who 968C 

blasphemously pretend that that is which is altogether non-existent, 

and regard everything which interferes with their lustful pleasures 

and prohibits or restrains them as evil because it causes them pain. 

Therefore they even go so far as to criticize the disposition of Divine 
Providence, saying that any restraint or hindrance or suppression of 
the force of the free will is an evil, not realising that all such 
restrictive measures are manifestations of the most loving mercy of 
the Divine Goodness. For it is the part of the most excellent and 
undisturbed Creator to watch over the good which He has created, 
lest it should perish and be consumed in its destructive impulses. But 
they accuse the most merciful Creator of all things of punishing 
what He has created, and rail against Him, saying that in the case of 
many men God created them for the express purpose of punishing 
them, in order that He might have an object for His wrath : for they 
do not perceive that God inflicts His punishments on nothing that 968D 
He has created, but only allows to be punished that which He has 
not created. 

Moreover the base and evil things which they have done they 
ascribe to God : for they argue that if these things were offensive to 
the Creator of all things. He would never have permitted them to 
happen in the nature which He has created. But in fact He has 
fore-ordained that dishonourable and base things should exist side 
by side with the beautiful and honourable things, so that He might 
have an opportunity of displaying His justice, rendering in accord- 969A 
ance with His divine Laws rewards to those who live well and 
honourably, and punishments to the evil doers who are polluted 
with the filth of their base and dishonourable deeds; but to each 
according to the unalterable decree of the fate to which He had 
already predestined them. And this teaching they base upon the 
words of the Apostle : “Who is able to stand against His Will ?” And 
thus they make God responsible for the inevitable causes of their 

PERIPHYSEON 

evil lives, saying that He had predestined them from the beginning; 
for in the blindness and folly of their hearts they cannot behold His 
supreme Goodness and Beauty, or, to speak more accurately, that 
He is the inexhaustible and never failing Fountain of all Goodness 
and Beauty and Honour ; but He cannot be the author or pre- 
destinator of evil or the evil man, of baseness or the base man, of 
dishonour or the dishonourable man. For all these are the products 
of irrational desires. For if they had proceeded from the Divine 
969B Predestination, it would follow that they would have a permanent 
place in nature : for who can doubt that whatever is disposed by the 
Divine Predestination must abide eternally ? But these shall perish in 
eternity and shall be annihilated from the whole Universe of Nature. 
Therefore they cannot have proceeded from the eternal causes 
predestined by God. 

They argue in the same blasphemous manner about the equity 
of God. For they say that it is unfair, if not unjust, in His not having 
distributed His goods equally among all men, for, they say. He 
raises up some, and casts down others ; some He leaves poor, upon 
others He multiplies riches; some He blinds with the darkness of 
ignorance, on others He sheds the light of wisdom ; He makes some 
masters and others slaves ; and they cite all the other instances which 
969C reveal the divers and infinite variety exhibited by the human 
condition in this mortal life. For they do not see, first, that the 
temporal and transitory goods of this life are not true goods, 
because they cannot last forever, and deceive rather than benefit 
those who pursue them, for they are shadows without substance, 
and are distributed alike to the good and the wicked because from 
both alike they shall be taken away. But they are distributed to all in 
due order and without confusion : for it is not only the eternal and 
everlasting goods that are conferred according to His unswerving 
Laws, but also the temporal and transitory goods : so that His 
Beauty may appear in time as well as in eternity. Secondly, they do 
not perceive how the most just Creator of all things and their most 
wise disposer imparts the gifts and graces of His boundless Goodness 
969D to each according to the Laws of His Providence, and in nothing is 
He deceived. For the judgment of mortals upon the Divine Provi¬ 
dence and Dispensation must be false when they do not know the 
Principles upon which the state of the Universe of all things visible 
and invisible is governed. Furthermore, in their folly they have 
failed to observe that the most equitable disposer of all good things 
disposes the natural goods upon all equally; for the natural goods 

BOOK V 

653 

are allotted in the same way both to the good and to the evil : true, 
this is not apparent in this sensible and transitory nature, for it is as 
yet concealed in the innermost recesses of nature ; but it will become 970A 
manifest in the restoration of the universal creature, when the Truth 
shall be revealed in all, and all such vain imaginings of mortals 
about the Creator and His creation shall perish, when “God shall be 
all in all,” and nothing evil or base or dishonourable or unjust shall 
be found in the harmony and beauty of the whole of nature, and 
everything which has been invented by the groundless opinions of 
mortals shall be proved void, and so be entirely done away with, for 
it is nothing. 

O how blessed are they who behold or shall behold in their 
mind all things under God in their unity ! Their judgment is 
deceived in nothing, for they contemplate all things in truth. To 
them nothing in the Universe is painful or hostile, for they do not 
judge the part but the whole, and this they can do because they 
themselves are not in any part of the whole nor in the whole itself 
but are raised by the loftiness of their contemplation above the 
whole and every part of it. For if they were contained in any part of 
the whole or in the whole itself, they would not be able to have a 
right judgment of the parts or of the whole, and therefore if any 
would have right judgment of the parts and of the whole he must 
first rise by the strength and purity of his mind above all the parts 
and above the whole of the created Universe. As the Apostle says : 
“The spiritual man judgeth all things, but is judged of none.” But 
whither ascends that spiritual man, who judges all things but is 
judged of none save to Him Who created him ? Is it not to Him Who 
transcends and embraces all things and in Whom they are contained ? 
So he ascends into the God who contemplates the whole created 
Universe at once, and observes it and judges it ; and his judgment is 
not deceived, for it beholds all things in the very Truth which neither 
deceives nor is deceived, because it is that which it is. 

970B 

The spiritual 
man judges 
all things ; he 
himself is 
judged by 
970C 
none 

And it is by virtue of his inner contemplation that the spiritual 
man enters into the Causes of the things which he judges. For it is 
not according to the external appearances of sensible objects that he 
observes all things but according to the inner principles and the 
immutable order of their processions and the archetypes in which 
they are all united and all One. So that the spiritual man judges all 
things there where all things are One, and truly and immutably live 
and subsist, and whither all things which have proceeded from the 
Primordial Causes shall return again, without anything left subject 970D 

654 

PERIPHYSEON 

971A 

971B 
The names of 
hell 

971C 

to the mutability of time or confined by the limitations of space, for 
when this sensible world comes to an end the whole of nature shall 
transcend the dimensions of space and time and return into its 
Causes in which all things are One. And even space and time 
themselves, as well as all things which in this life are ordered and 
moved and limited by them, must return into their eternal Principles, 
which Holy Scripture calls eternity. For how can secular time 
continue when there shall be no more temporal things ? and how can 
there be space when there are no more spatially extended objects? 
And this is why it is impossible that hell should occupy a sensible 
and corporeal place in the Universe, and the opinions of those are 
false who deceived by their imaginations declare that hell is either 
under the earth or in the womb of the earth or in some other earthly 
locality : for they do not realise that the earth itself beneath which or 
within which they say that hell is situated shall totally perish ; and if 
the earth shall perish, then clearly nothing beneath it nor within it to 
which they could give the name of hell, will endure. Therefore 
neither hell, nor the everlasting fire which shall consume the wicked, 
nor the worm which dieth not can have any place within the sensible 
and corporeal creation. All these expressions are employed by Holy 
Scripture in allegory, as St. Ambrose testifies and as is clear from 
the Greek expressions which, as we have said, show more plainly 
what is meant in Scripture by the term “hell.” For they call if' ASpq, 
a word which I have already explained as meaning “without 
delight” or “without pleasures” or “unpleasurableness.” They also 
call it Xu7rr|, which means “sorrow” or “grief’ or “mourning ;” and 
axoq which signifies the burden of despair, which drags down and 
submerges as in a deep whirlpool the evil desires when they are 
afflicted by their need for those temporal things which in this life 
they incontinently desired and engulfs them in the fogs of the 
insubstantial phantasies of sensible things by which they are tor¬ 
mented, perpetually rejected and eternally spurned by the irrevocable 
might of the judgment of God. All these terms used by the Greeks 
clearly show that hell and its torments are not sensible objects 
situated in space or time, whether in one of the four elements which 
are the parts of this world or in the whole of it ; but they are a sad 
and lamentable condition, a dour and inescapable prison full of 
despair, and a lack of all good things, and exist only in phantasies 
and the least substantial of dreams. 

A. About hell and its torments you have said enough. I am 
now completely convinced that they are not substances within the 

BOOK V 

visible and invisible creation, for they are neither body nor spirit, 
but the most just condemnation of the sinful and unruly lust of 
those who abuse their natural good, that is, the Judgment of their 
free will ; and that condemnation is good not only because it is just 
(for everything that is just is good) but also because it is compre¬ 
hended and ordained by the Laws of God, among which there can 
be nothing which is not good and just and honourable. And the 
phantasies in which it is contained are good too : for even the 
shadows cast by bodies, although no one doubts that they are 
insubstantial, clearly always derive their origin from the splendour 
of light, without casting upon the beauty of the light any taint of 
ugliness or dishonour. 

See what glory and praise is acquired by the virtues of perfect 
souls when they control and contain the vices that are within them, 
and tame and dominate them and force them into obedience and 
submit them to the Laws of God so that the evil which assaults the 
soul shall not drown it in the depths ! Often they completely destroy 
those vices, often they convert them into themselves, so that vice 
becomes virtue. This shows that the vices are not absolutely evil, but 
only unruly : for if they were evil they could never be changed into 
virtues, and the same may be said of everything else which, though 
seeming to rise up against nature from the perverse motions of the 
abuse of the free will of rational nature enslaving itself of its own 
will, yet are not permitted to hamper the order of the Universe, but 
rather are compelled by the eternal Laws of the Providence and 
Justice of God to add to its glory. Therefore I see with perfect clarity 
and without any hesitation or doubt both that the created 
Universe shall return in all its perfection into its causes and into 
God Himself, in whom all things subsist; and that the most just 
punishments of irrational desires which have been bestowed upon 
them or permitted and irrevocably determined by the sentence of the 
most righteous Judge shall ever abide within that perfection, for far 
from doing harm to anyone they will provide an ineffable scope for 
its glory and its beauty. 

One might safely say, therefore, that the rewards and punish¬ 
ments are not disposed spatially but qualitatively, so that on the one 
hand they are united since they are the dual foundation on which the 
government of the state of the Universe is based, and on the other 
hand, they are distinct in their effects. For the effects of sin are 
weeping, lamentation, sorrow, tardy repentance, the insatiable fire 
of lust which never finds rest in anything, the abounding corruption 

656 PERIPHYSEON 

and undying worm of vice, and the thick darkness of invincible 
ignorance in which there is no knowledge of true things or the Truth 
itself, that is no joy in partaking of the Truth. For the binding of the 
feet signifies the difficulty in walking in the Laws of God, and the 
binding of the hands the difficulty in performing good deeds in 
conformity with the virtues, and all other such things have an 
allegorical interpretation which it would take too long, and indeed 
972D would be impossible to expound. But the effects of good deeds are 
Definition of happiness, peace, bliss, blessedness, glory, equality with the 
rewards holy angels, and in short theSsis or deification, whereby “God has 
prepared Himself for those who love Him, that which neither the eye 
has seen nor the ear heard and which has not ascended into the heart 
of man.” But if the effects of the Causes are contrary to one another, 
it follows that the Causes also must disagree. 

And if anyone should ask how things so different can be united 
into a single whole, how, that is, virtues and vices can be compre- 
973A within the bounds of nature, let him consider how in a great 

and richly appointed palace the healthy and the feeble, the seeing 
and the blind, the joyful and the sorrowful, the carefree and the 
anxious, the rich and the poor, he who is beaten with rods as a slave 
and he who is exalted with honour as a lord, he who is shut up in a 
prison as a criminal and he who is free from chains as a man proven 
innocent of all crime, and all similar diversities of persons can at the 
same time be contained in one place. And if that is so, and it must be 
clear to almost all men that it is so, why should we hesitate to believe 
or have difficulty in understanding that the one harmony of the 
Universe when it is restored and brought back into its causes 
includes both the future healing of the rational creature through the 
973B Redeemer by Whom it is wholly received, and the future 

suffering of penalties appropriate to its deeds by the feeble instability 
of the perverted will which had attached itself as an alien thing to 
that nature, but must now be disposed according to the Law? That 
it should include, on the one hand, not only the healing but also the 
enlightenment of nature itself, and, on the other hand, the blindness 
of the evil wills in the perpetual darkness of the absence of the 
Redeemer? That it should include, on the one hand, not only the 
healing and enlightenment of that nature which is created in the 
Image of God, but also its Return into Paradise, which the wise 
interpret as meaning the place of spiritual delights, and on the other 
hand the leprosy which had disfigured it because of its sin, and must 
now burn with eternal pain in the total absence of all relief? That, in 

BOOK V 

short, that harmony should include all such opposites : nature and 
guilt ; reward and punishment ; for in a marvellous and inexplicable 
way nature, altogether free, sustains the phantasies in which its guilt 
expiates its sin. 

N. All of what you say is convincing, and supported by sound 
argument. But at this point those who speak of spiritual things in a 
carnal way will object : How will the heathen suffer for their impiety 
in worshipping idols and denying the true God, or the Jews for their 
treachery in refusing to accept that the Incarnate Word of God, Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, is consubstantial and co-eternal with the Father 
and in all respects equal to Him according to His Divinity, or the 
false and superstitious imaginations of the other peoples who reject 
the Truth, if in the future life their nature will be wholly saved, so 
that neither their bodies nor their souls nor any other part of their 
nature will be set aside for the torment of eternal punishment? It is 
extremely difficult, if not impossible, to convince such people, that it 
is not in the nature of the Justice of God, but quite contrary to it, to 
punish in anything that He has created that which He has created ; 
but to punish that which He has not created : for all the effects of 
evil, and all the punishments they merit flow not from nature, but 
from the wicked impulses of the will of each evil man, which sound 
students of nature usually call vices : an appropriate term, for they 
contend with the natural affections. They derive from original sin, in 
which all men, with the exception of the Redeemer of the human 
race, have collectively sinned. But this is attributed to nature and 
called a sin of nature not because that nature which was created in 
the Image of God committed it, but because the irrational misuse of 
the rational good of the free will which was given to it by God and 
the turning towards the love of sensible things concealed its proper 
beauty which belongs to the condition in which it was created in the 
beginning and obscured its proper glory. For to lay the blame upon 
nature is to lay it upon the Creator of nature Himself: if nature is 
the cause of sin, then God, Who is the Cause of nature, must also be 
the cause of nature’s sin ; and nature which is created in the Image of 
God would not completely resemble its Archetype if it contained the 
cause of sin within itself. For as the cause of evil and of sin cannot 
subsist in the Archetype, so neither can it subsist in the nature which 
is created in Its image and likeness. For it would be most ridiculous 
to say that human nature first lost its likeness to and image of its 
Creator and then received into itself the causes of sin. Anyone who 
said so would have to explain by what sin our nature lost that 

657 

973C 

An objection 
of the carnal 

973D 

The source of 

sinning 

974A 

974B 

658 

974C 

974D 

975A 

There is no 
natural cause 
for the illicit 
mis-use (of 
free will) or 
evil 

975B 

PERIPHYSEON 

likeness and image, for it would never have lost it if it had not 
sinned. But if human nature never lost the likeness and image of its 
Creator and since this likeness and image are reckoned among its 
natural goods and acquisitions which are not taken away or reduced 
or increased either in human nature or in any nature which is 
created by Him Who disposes all things and endows them with 
substance, who but a madman would say that the natural goods can 
admit the causes of sin, or that sin arises from them ? For if they do 
so admit, their natural beauty is marred, their dignity is diminished, 
their immutability is shifted and their order is shaken ? Therefore no 
rational nature can contain the causes of guilt, for otherwise it 
would be dissimilar to its Creator. 

But it may reasonably be asked : If the cause of sin is not 
attributed to nature lest it should be attributed through nature to its 
Creator, because nothing which comes from Him can admit the 
causes of sin or sinning, why should one not argue in the same way 
that the cause of sinning should not be attributed to the free will 
either, lest the cause of guilt should be laid upon Him Who endowed 
nature therewith ? For He Who gave us our nature also created in it 
a free will ; and if nature is a good and an indestructible good, then 
so also should the freedom of the will be. From this it must follow 
that just as the causes of guilt are not established in nature, so 
neither are they established in the free will : for the cause of evil 
cannot be established in any good. 

And then, we may ask, if no sin arises from natural causes, 
whence does it arise? And if anyone should give the correct and 
reasonable answer, and the one that is supported by the best 
arguments, that sin derives its origin from no other source but the 
irrational impulses of the rational nature, and by the misuse of the 
freewill, it will immediately seem as though the occasion of the 
irrational impulse is established in the rational nature. Such a 
person will seem to be asserting that the irrational motion pertains 
relatively to the rational nature and takes its occasion from it ; and 
therefore it would have to be confessed that the causes of the 
irrational impulses can be traced back to God. For if every natural 
cause of rational nature is established in God, it must follow that 
whatever is attributed to nature must be attributed to its Cause. But 
if it could be shown by sound reason that the irrational impulse is 
not related to the rational nature, but is diametrically opposed to it, 
as irrational is opposed to rational, we are left with the question, 
whence comes that irrational impulse in which the cause of sin is 

BOOK V 

659 

established? And here no other situation for the cause of the 
irrational impulse seems more likely than the misuse, contrary to the 
Laws of God, of the natural goods, which is the characteristic 
feature of the perverted and unruly desire of the free will, which uses 
the good in the wrong way. Examples of this misuse are so common 
that there can be hardly anyone who could not produce a copious 
supply of them from his own nature. Be it noted, however, that the 975C 
highest goods of our nature cannot be used by anyone in the wrong 
way. For it is beyond any man’s natural power to abuse the essence, 
the potency, and the act ; or wisdom, mind, and reason : for these 
are they which occupy the highest place in our nature. 

But the intermediate goods of our nature, such as the practical 
intelligence and sense-perception of our body and the body itself, 
and the lowest goods, such as those things which lie outside us, and 
are established in sensible nature, it is within our power to use either 
well or ill. Thus, practical intelligence is a natural good bestowed 
upon man by God to enable him to devise and invent worthy and 
useful things : but the perverse will put it to evil purposes, using it 
as an opportunity for doing harm and for the deception and 
destruction of those it wishes to deceive and destroy. The sense of 975D 
the eyes, to say nothing of the other senses, is a natural good 
bestowed by God to enable us to receive the corporeal light so that 
through it and in it the rational soul may be able to apprehend the 
forms and numbers of sensible objects and to learn the truth about 
them so that it may put them to their proper uses : but this too can 
be misused by those who pursue the beauty of visible forms with 
lustful concupiscence, as Our Lord says in the Gospel : “Whoso 
looketh upon a woman to lust after her has already committed 
adultery with her in his heart,’’ where the word “woman’’ is 976A 
employed to signify the beauty of the whole sensible creation in 
general. 

And as to the lowest sensible goods, is it not clearer than day 
that these can be used well by the good and ill by the evil ? The good 
use them to the glory and in the service of the Bestower of all good 
things, but the evil to the gratification of the impulse of their 
perverse desire. 

But if anyone wishes to discover the causes of this unruly 
misuse and this perverse desire let him look for it : for my part, as 
the result of much search, I am quite sure that they cannot be found. 

For Just as evil is uncaused and none can discover whence it comes, 
so the unruly misuse of natural goods arises from no natural cause. 

PERIPHYSEON 

And here I am following the Blessed Dionysius the Areopagite in his 
book On the Divine Names and St. Aurelius Augustinus in his book 
976B On the Free Will. For it is foolish to search for causes of those things 
which are not contained in any genus or form or species or in any 
one of those goods which were created and ordained by the Supreme 
Good and Creator of all things, because everything which was not 
created by Him is entirely without cause or substance. 

And I think it is more appropriate to say that the cause of the 
punishments is the lustful appetite rather than the evil will, for this 
might lead one to suppose that there were two wills in one and the 
same nature, the one good and the other evil, whereas in fact there is 
only one will contained in human nature, though it is sometimes put 
to good purposes and sometimes to evil purposes. Lust, on the other 
hand, is not only entirely excluded from the natural goods, but is 
976C seldom if ever found in Holy Scripture used in a good sense. For it 
was through lust for power and for preeminence above all things 
that the first man in whom all sinned, was seduced and persuaded 
into sin by the Devil saying to him : “On the day on which you eat of 
it” (the forbidden tree), “your eyes will be opened, and you will be 
as gods, possessing the knowledge of good and evil.” O what a lust 
of pride there was in that man who desired by his own power to 
become god ! 

Therefore neither the impiety of the heathen nor the faithless¬ 
ness of the Jews nor the fanciful ravings of the other nations flow 
from natural causes, but from the lustful desires of their vain 
imaginations, and therefore in none of these things shall their nature 
be punished, but their lust. For all the vices which are the contraries 
of the virtues and which seek to destroy our nature are usually 
comprehended under this form. Therefore all that remains to be 
punished with torments is that most gross lust which is common to 

976D the heathen who worship false gods, the faithless Jews who renounce 
the Truth, and those other nations who imagine vain things and 
empty phantasies of what they pretend will be theirs to enjoy in the 
time to come, although they will find in them nothing but intangible 
shadows ; while the Universe of Nature which was created by God 
will endure unscathed, most perfect, and unpunished. 

977A But, as I have frequently said, the general punishment of all the 
wicked will consist in the sorrow and lamentation caused by the 
absence and loss of those things in which in this life they delighted ; 
they shall have the phantasies of them forever, as it were, before 
their eyes, but ardently desiring to grasp them they shall be unable 

BOOK V 

661 

to do so, for they are nothing : and the things to which they look for 
consolation are to them the source of restless despair. Hence arises 
that tardy remorse and that vain plea for consolation which is 
signified by the tongue of the rich man begging for a drop of water 
from the tip of the finger of the poor man Lazarus, for, as he said, “I 
am tormented in this flame.” For the tongue is an allegory of the 
prayer for help in the flame of tardy penitence for sins ; the water an 
allegory of cooling freshness ; the finger, of the distribution of 
rewards by which we believe the Saints in the after life will be able to 
succour those who suffer punishment. For we are here given to 977B 
understand that not only those who are still living in the flesh, but 
also those souls who have abandoned the flesh are able to pray for 
help to the Saints, either that they may be entirely freed from their 
punishment or that their torment may be mitigated ; but prayer is 
useless if in this life they have fallen into the very depths of sin, that 
is, if in this life they have performed no good deed which would 
merit mercy in the life to come. 

But there is another form of punishment common to all the 
damned, which, as the climax of their torments, represents all the 
sins they have committed in this life and in which they have 
persisted without repentance and without the chance of purgation 
after death, in the fierce and hideous shapes of wild beasts, so that 
those things in which here they took such evil delight when they 
were alive, shall impose most just punishment by appearing there 
under terrible aspect. Most Just : for what could be fairer or more 
becoming the Divine dispensation than that those things which the 
unrighteous in this life pursued in a fire of unruly lust, in the life to 
come which it would be more accurate to describe as an eternal 
death they shall, in their torment, flee in a panic of terror; and yet 
shall not be able to escape them? 

But these and all other indescribable and innumerable kinds of 

punishments shall exist only in the phantasies of sensible things. For 
the wide fields of the memory both here and there are spread with 
phantasies, arranged according to a perfect order. These orders 
enter into the city of the soul as though through five gates, the first 
order through sight, the second through hearing, the third through 
smell, the fourth through taste, the fifth through touch. And these 
phantasies are of two kinds : the first comprises the rewards that are 
prepared for those who have lived a good life on earth, but not the 
best ; the second, the punishments meted out to those who live evil 
lives. But the Saints, who even while in the flesh have by the power 

The 

phantasies in 
977D 

which the just 
are given 
rewards, the 
unjust 

punishments 

PERIPHYSEON 

662 

of their works and their wisdom conquered the world and the flesh 
and themselves and by the loftiness of their contemplation have 
ascended into God, receive as the reward of their labours no 
phantasy of sensible things but the theophanies of the Divine 
978A Energies, and in addition the Grace of deification itself. For it is one 
thing to remain within the natural goods ; this is prepared by the 
Divine dispensation for all men generally : it is another thing to 
transcend all nature and its goods, and attain to God Himself; this 
is the gift of the Grace of God. For “where the body” that is, the 
Truth, “is, there the eagles” that is, the minds that contemplate it, 
“shall be gathered together.” And again, those who do not go 
beyond the bounds of the natural goods fall into two categories : for 
we must distinguish between those who as a reward for their good 
conduct and pure innocence not only shall escape all punishment, 
but shall receive worthy rewards known only to God, so that they 
shall possess the natural goods, and in addition partake to a certain 
degree of the superabundant generosity of God, though not to the 
978B extent of deification ; and those in whom only the integrity of their 
nature will be restored, while the lust of the flesh and the incon¬ 
tinence of their life will be condemned to eternal torment : for these 
torments which are ordained by the Laws of God shall never harm 
the nature within whose potency they are comprehended and 
maintained, nor mar her beauty in whole or in part. 

It is in his own conscience, therefore, that each man either 
receives reward or suffers punishment: his nature in either case 
remains unaffected. 

The Return 
of human 
nature 
978C 

But enough of all this. Let us now revert to the Return of the 
creature to its original state, which is the principal topic of our 
discussion. 

A. Let us do so by all means. For we have dwelt overlong on 
this matter, and time is short. Indeed, I am afraid that our readers 
will be beginning to grow weary with hearing the same thing 
repeated so many times in different ways. 

N. When a subject is complicated and has many different 
aspects, it is necessary that the explanation should be complicated 
and repetitive. And perhaps there are not a few who would prefer to 
hear the explanation repeated many times than have a brief and 
cursory summary of matters which often escape the mind’s eye. 
Such a summary would be more likely to pass over the difficulties 
than resolve them, and increase ambiguity instead of removing it. 

BOOK V 

663 

A. Proceed whither and in whatever way you like. But please 
come now, without further digression, to the main question, which 
concerns the Return. For these incidental problems will prevent us 
from ever bringing our discussion to an end. 

N. About the general Return of the whole creature into its 
Causes at the end of the world we have already spoken : it remains 
to deal with the special case of the Return of human nature. The 
Return of the whole of human nature into its first condition shall be 
in Him Who took that whole nature upon Himself, namely, in the 
Incarnate Word of God. We must consider this Return in two ways : 
first, the restoration of the whole of human nature in Christ; and 
then, having dealt with its general aspect, we must consider the 
individual bliss and deification of those who shall ascend into God 
Himself. For it is one thing to return into Paradise, another to eat of 
the Tree of Life. Thus, we read that the first man, when he was 
created in the image and likeness of God, was placed in Paradise, 
but we do not read that he ate of the Tree of Life. For having first 
chosen to taste of the forbidden tree, he was prevented from 
enjoying the taste of the Tree of Life : that would have been his to 
enjoy thereafter, had he obeyed the Divine Precepts. But even before 
tasting of it he could have lived happily had he not sinned the 
moment he was created. From this it follows that while the whole of 
our nature, which is included generally in the man who was made in 
the image and likeness of God, shall return into Paradise, that is, to 
the glory of our original state, it shall only taste of the fruit of the 
Tree of Life in the case of those who are worthy of deification. Now 
the Tree of Life is Christ, and its fruit is the blessed life and eternal 
peace in the contemplation of the Truth ; for that is what is meant by 
deification. “For” says St. Augustine, “the Blessed Life is joy in the 
Truth, Which is Christ.” And perhaps the Apostle means the same 
thing when he says : “For we shall all rise again, but we shall not all 
be changed.” For this is how many, indeed almost all, translate the 
Apostle’s words from the Greek. By this he means : All of us men, 
without exception shall rise again in spiritual bodies and in the 
integrity of our natural goods, and we shall return into the ancient 
state which was ours in the beginning; but not all of us shall be 
changed into the glory of deification, which transcends all nature 
and Paradise itself. Therefore, just as the general resurrection is to 
be distinguished from the special transformation, so the Return into 
Paradise is to be distinguished from the tasting of the Tree of Life. 
For in the one is signified the restoration of nature, in the other, the 
deification of the Saints. 

978D 

979A 

979B 

979C 

PERIPHYSEON 

664 

Now, in saying this I am not unaware that others have 
translated the Apostle’s words differently. Some interpret : “For we 
shall all sleep, but we shall not all be changed’’; others, including 
John Chrysostom, “For we shall all be changed, but we shall not all 
sleep.” But I do not think these interpretations are relevant to our 
present task. 

A. I fail to see why they are not : for if a man discusses the 
Return of the sensible creature, must he not also deal with the 
resurrection of the body ? Of course he must : for the Return and the 

979D resurrection are one and the same thing. What else is the resurrection 
from the dead than the reversion to the natural state ? Please explain 
briefly, then, the meaning of those interpretations which you wished 
to pass by without a word. 

N. Those who adopt the interpretation, “We shall all sleep but 
we shall not all be changed,” seem to me to understand the Apostle 
as saying : We shall all die : for what man alive shall not see death ? 
But we shall not all be changed : for those who from the beginning 
of the world until the Second Coming of the Lord, that is, until the 
end of time, have died, are dying and continue to die, do not expect 
the general resurrection of their bodies to take place immediately 
after death, but that, except for those who rose again with Christ, a 
period of time must first elapse: but those who, while still alive, 
experience the end of the world and the Coming of the Lord shall 
not only sleep but shall also be changed : for in their case there will 
be no interval between their sleeping and their waking, that is, 
between their death and their resurrection : it shall be, as the Apostle 
says, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Therefore death is not 
so much death for them as a transformation, for how can we speak 
of death when there is no interval between the departure from this 
life and the passage to the next? 

980B Those who interpret, “We shall all be changed but we shall not 
all sleep” mean that in the resurrection that is to come all men shall 
be changed from this life to the future life either immediately or 
after a period of bodily death, “when” as the same Apostle says, 
“this corruptible” (the body) “shall put on incorruption, and this 
mortal shall put on immortality, and death shall be swallowed up in 
victory, and death, the last enemy, shall be destroyed but we shall 
not all sleep : that is, not all men shall suffer the death of the flesh 
before they are changed from the temporal life to the life eternal. 
For those who experience the Coming of the Son of Man while they 
are still living in the flesh shall not undergo the dissolution of bodily 

BOOK V 

death nor the separation of the soul from the body, but shall be 
transformed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and therefore 980C 
shall not sleep, for their life will not be interrupted by any period 
of death. This interpretation has the wholehearted support of 
St. Augustine and John Chrysostom, and seems to be consistent 
with Catholic doctrine which firmly teaches that Our Lord Jesus 
Christ when He comes shall judge both the living and the dead, that 
is, both those who while still in the flesh have experienced the 
Coming of the Judge and those who have already suffered the 
dissolution of soul and body. 

A. Not all, then, who return into Paradise, that is into the 
former state of human nature, shall partake of the fruit of the Tree 
of Life ? 

N. Certainly not : only those who have overcome the world 
and the flesh, as it is written in the Apocalypse : “To him that 
overcometh I shall give to eat of the Tree of Life which is the 

980D 

Paradise of my God.” For, as has been said before, by Grace and by 
nature it is given to all men in general to return into Paradise : by 
Grace alone it is given to the deified alone to eat of the Tree of Life. 

A. Why, then, do the Scriptures say that the Tree of Life is in 
the midst of Paradise, if it is not granted to all who shall return to 
Paradise to eat of its fruit? 

N. Note that the Scriptures do not simply say that the Tree of 
Life is in Paradise, but, more precisely, that it is “in the midst of 981A 
Paradise.” By the word Paradise you are to understand the whole of 
human nature, in which all men, good and evil, participate ; but the 
phrase, the midst of Paradise, signifies those innermost and secret 
recesses of that nature in which the image and likeness of God is 
explicit : it is here that is planted the Tree of Life, that is. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, Whom only those whose faith and works are wholly 
purged and whose knowledge is wholly enlightened and whose 
wisdom and understanding of the Divine Mysteries is most perfect 
are permitted to contemplate. This is shown, I think, in the mystical 
building of the Temple of Solomon. For while all men without 
exception, circumcised and uncircumcised, male and female, of 
every nation of the world could enter the outer portico either for 981B 
prayer or for commerce and could carry on their business there, 
only the priests and Levites could enter into the Portico of the 
Priests and the Portico of Solomon. Then the priests, after they had 
purified themselves by washing in the brazen bath which stood in 

665 

PERIPHYSEON 

the Portico of Solomon, would enter into the outer temple where the 
shewbread and the candlesticks were, but no one but the High Priest 
was permitted to pass beyond the veil into the Holy of Holies, where 
were the Ark and the altar of incense and the altar of sacrifice and 
the two Cherubim. By this we are given to understand that all men 
are placed according to their degree within the precincts of the 
natural Paradise as though within a temple ; but only those who are 
98 1C sanctified in Christ, shall enter into its inner parts, and of these 
again only those who are in the Supreme Pontiff, Christ, and are 
made one with Him and in Him, will be brought into the Holy of 
Holies, or innermost part of all, where Christ is. Who is signified by 
the altar because by His strength He supports all things ; and He is 
not only an altar but an altar of incense : for His fragance, that is. 
His praise and glory, fills all things. He is also the Ark which 
contains all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He is also the 
Rod, because He rules and measures all things : and the Manna, 
because He feeds all men. He is the Altar of Sacrifice because He 
ever intercedes for us to His Father offering to Him the universal 
Sacrifice and the world’s Ransom, namely His Humanity, which He 
sacrificed and surrendered for the purification and the redemption of 
the whole human race without any exception. For as there was 
nothing of that nature, save sin, which He did not receive, so there is 
981D nothing of that nature which He shall not redeem, and by redeeming 
shall not save and sanctify. For He is the Redemption and Salvation, 
the Purification and Illumination and Perfection, of the whole 
human nature collectively and individually, and around Him are 
stationed the Cherubim, that is the angelic orders through whom He 
governs and disposes all things visible and invisible. 

And perhaps the reason why the Cherubim about the Ark, that 
982A is, about Christ, are two in number is that the angelic order 
administers both the sensible and the intelligible worlds, but an 
alternative interpretation could reasonably be that one stands for 
the intellectual nature of the angels, the other for the rational nature 
of man : for no wise man doubts that the intelligible and rational 
natures are next to Christ. 

You see then what a high thing it is, transcending our natural 
faculties, to approach this Tree which is planted in the midst of 
Paradise, that is to say, of human nature, and to partake of its fruit. 
It was to this Tree, far removed from all others, and only accessible 
to the deified that Paul was brought when he was rapt into the third 
heaven of our nature, that is to say, having passed every body and 

BOOK V 

every vital spirit, into the Mind itself, in which the Word of God, 
that is, the Tree of Life, dwells in Light inaccessible transcending in 
a mysterious way all essence, all potency and all act, beyond and yet 982B 
at the same time within the nature that was made in the Image of 
God. 

Therefore all men, each according to his degree, shall enter into 
Paradise as into a spacious and secret temple, and He shall dwell 
among them. Who said : “I shall be in the midst of them.” Hence the 
Prophet declares : “I shall pay my vows in the sight of all His people, 
in the halls of the House of God, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.” 

For Jerusalem means “vision of peace,” or “temple of peace,” and 
it is the House of God which is built on the summit of the mount of 
lofty contemplation, to which the Prophet exhorts all men to ascend 
by the degrees of virtue and the heights of contemplation, saying : 
“Come, let us ascend to the Mountain of God and enter the House 
of the God of Jacob.” For God dwells nowhere but in the nature of 
men and angels, to whom alone it is given to contemplate the Truth. 

But we should not think of these two natures as two separate 
Houses : they are one and the same House built out of two 
intelligible materials. It is of this House that the Lord seems to be 
speaking when He says : “In My Father’s House are many man¬ 
sions.” In the halls of this House all men will possess mansions 
when they return into their Causes, whether their time on earth was 
spent well or ill. For no man can spoil its beauty or debase its 
honour or subtract from or add to its spaciousness. For what could 
be excluded from it or what could be unable to enter into it, seeing 
that in it no man’s baseness is base, no malice harms it, no deceit 
deceives it, no wickedness of unclean spirits or irrational impulses of 
evil men contaminate its beauty ; they even embellish it. For there is 982D 
no beauty which is not produced by the contrast of like and unlike, 
of things that are contraries and opposites ; nor would the Good be 
so praiseworthy if it were not set against the condemnation of evil. 
Therefore although in itself evil is condemned, when the Good is 
praised in contrast to it it does not appear altogether damnable. For 
that which contributes to the honour of the Good cannot itself be 
altogether without honour. Would the Creator of good things and 983A 
the Ordainer of evil things have permitted evil in the Universe that 
He created if it conferred no value upon it ? That He would not can 
be very easily inferred from the comparison of sensible qualities or 
human characters. Thus the glory of the fruitful tree is increased by 
comparing it with the barren, and the glory of the continent man by 
comparing him with the lustful. Therefore in the Paradise of human 

667 

PERIPHYSEON 

nature each man shall have his proper place according to his 
conduct in this life, some, as it were, in the outer porticoes, others 
further in, in rooms that are closer to the Beatific Vision, others 
again in the spacious temples of the Divine Mysteries, others finally 
in the innermost Theophanies above every nature shall be with Him 
and in Him Who is above nature and above being. Blessed are they 
who enter into the Shrine of Wisdom, which is Christ; who have 
983B access to the uttermost darkness of that most excellent Light in 
which they behold all things at once in their Causes ; where the 
distance between the good and the evil is not of a spatial or temporal 
order but of merit ; where not the magnitude or beauty of bodies is 
honoured but the glory and grandeur of virtues ; where distinction 
and nobility of morals, not persons, is sought ; where all share the 
same nature but not all share the same Grace ; where all are One, 
and yet not one : One as to substance, not one as to their affections. 
Abraham and the rich man were one in their spiritual substance 
which all human nature takes and in which it abides inseparably : 
but they were not one in their spiritual qualities, for between them 
983C there was a great gulf fixed. Abraham rejoiced in eternal peace, 
while the rich man groaned in inextinguishable fire. That is why the 
rich man saw Abraham as one that was afar off. Who can express 
how great is the distance between joy and sorrow even in this life, let 
alone in that in which no sorrow shall come after the joy of the 
righteous nor any joy after the sorrow of the impious, for the awards 
meted by the Divine Justice according to the merits of each can 
never be changed. This is the great distance and the unbridgeable 
gulf which divides the punishments from the rewards. For from the 
fact that the rich man could speak to Abraham as though he were 
close to him instead of far away you may understand that he was not 
separated from Abraham by his nature but by his guilt. Those who 
983D are divided by difference of awards are still united in essence. Just 
before the Passion of the Lord Judas Iscariot and Simon Peter were 
supping together with Christ in the one room, but one was close to 
Christ and the other far removed. The one who dipped his hand 
with Christ in the dish was the betrayer of Christ, the other of whom 
it was not said that he dipped his hand with Christ in the dish was he 
984A who contemplated the Divinity of Christ. The one in his greed sold 
the Man-God, the other in his divine wisdom knew the Man as God. 
The one by a bodily kiss betrayed the body, the other by a spiritual 
kiss showed his love for the divine Spirit. I tell you this that you may 
know that man draws near to Christ or is separated from Him not in 
a local sense but by merit. Hence it may be seen that while all men 

BOOK V 

669 

participate in one and the same nature which is redeemed in Christ 
and free from that servitude under which in this life it still groaned 
and suffered, so that in it all are made One, the qualities and 
quantities of their deserts, that is, the differences between the good 
actions of men who helped by the Grace of God lived well their life 
on earth, and the evil actions of those who deserted by the justice of 
God lived ill are variously and infinitely large and manifold. But all 
these things are in due order comprehended in that one spacious 
House in which the state of the Universe created in and by God is 
displayed in many divers mansions, that is, in many degrees of merit 
and grace. And that House is Christ, Who comprehends all things 
by His potency, disposes all things by His Providence, governs all 
things by His justice, adorns all things by His Grace, contains all 
things by His eternity, and perfects all things by His deification, for 
“from Him and through Him and in Him and for Him are all 
things.” 

A. Everyone endowed with true faith and a sound under¬ 
standing of nature would agree that your words are reasonable and 
probable. But to those who imagine that nothing exists outside the 
spatial and temporal extension of the physical world they will seem 
like the incredible ravings of a lunatic. For they assert that this 
sensible world shall not return into its Causes, nor perish utterly, 
but that it will remain as it is, only with all its qualities improved : 
comprising the bodies that it had comprised, extended as now in 
space and time, the sum of many parts, enclosed within the 
boundaries that now enclose it. And they teach that the place where 
the bodies and souls of the damned are to be tormented by the heat 
of the eternal fire is in the lower part of it. We have discussed this 
theory in earlier books but I should like to recall it for a moment. 

Some locate the place of torment between the earth and the 
moon : others in the lower parts of this region (which is called aerial) 
which are more opaque, being closer to the earth, and filled with 
clouds : others again in the innermost recesses of the earth, deep 
down in vast caves always darkened by densest fogs, as becomes the 
children of darkness. And they say that these damned shall rise 
again with the same bodies with which they died, having the same 
size, the same sexual distinctions, the same number of limbs, in fact 
identical with what they were when they were alive in all respects 
except that instead of mortal and temporal they shall now be 
immortal and eternal, and instead of being animal they shall now be 
spiritual. But this change they do not attribute to the virtue and 

984B 

37 

984C 

Those who 
understand 
hell in a local 
sense 

984D 

985A 

670 

PERIPHYSEON 

nature of the Grace of Divine Goodness, but to the ruthless and 
irrevocable severity of the powerful Judge ; for they see the gifts of 
Nature and of Grace as the cruelty of vengeance, arguing that the 
bodies of the damned are immortal, spiritual and eternal for no other 
reason than that they should undergo perpetual torment. Moreover, 
they have no hesitation in saying that the fire which shall burn them is 
corporeal and sensible, and they have the same fantastic notion 
about the undying worm and the sulphur lake : they are quite sure 
985B that all these things are spatially extended bodies. They declare that 
women shall rise again in the female sex and men in the male sex, 
and each in his former condition, and that the functions of the limbs 
shall not cease, although they are now of no further use, and a great 
many other things that reason finds it easier to ridicule than to 
examine. 

But the Apostle deals with the matter in a double statement. 
Speaking of the general resurrection of all human bodies he says : 
“It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory : it is sown in weakness, 
it is raised in power.” But if all bodies shall rise again in glory and 
power, with all reproach and weakness removed, what sort of glory 
and what sort of power will that be for those who are condemned to 
eternal torment? My argument is not affected by what he says in 
another place : “Has not the potter power to make one vessel for a 
985C noble use and another for a dishonourable use ?” for there he is not 
discussing the bodily resurrection but confuting those who try to 
blame God for choosing some and rejecting others, for making 
some vessels of His mercy and abandoning others as vessels of His 
wrath. And if anyone should say that he is not speaking of the 
resurrection of all human bodies in general but of the special case of 
the resurrection of the righteous let him consider what the Lord 
Himself said about Himself after He had raised Lazarus : “I am the 
Resurrection.” He did not specially say, I am the Resurrection of the 
righteous, but He spoke generally : “I am the Resurrection.” If, 
then. He is the Resurrection, then it follows that He must bestow 
Himself equally to all whom He raises Just as God the Father 
“maketh His sun to rise on the good and on the evil, and sendeth 
985D His rain on the just and on the unjust.” And perhaps He Himself is 
that Sun which rises on all alike, and that rain which rains on all 
men equally. But while He bestows the Grace of resurrection and 
life on all men generally, in the special case of those who believe in 
Him He brushes away as a cloud not only the death of the body but 

BOOK V 

671 

also that death of the spirit which is ignorance of God and the most 
grievous torment of the damned. But as He granted to all men 
equally that they should be, so He shall grant to all men equally that 
they shall rise again and possess the likeness of the angelic nature. 

But the upper parts of the sensible world, which are called 
etherial, and which extend from the moon upwards to the outer 
limit of the sphere of the fixed stars, they set apart for the bodies of 
the Saints : for they regard it as a reasonable distribution that just as 
the lowest and murkiest parts of the Universe are allotted to those 
who deserve punishment, so the highest and most pellucid should be 
reserved for those who are worthy of reward. And here again they 
do not hesitate to declare that the bodies of the Saints have spatial 
extension, and retain the same stature and the same number of parts 
as was theirs previously, and are distinguished by their male or 
female sex, only admitting that they are changed into spiritual 
qualities and most subtle substances resembling etherial bodies so 
that all that was here earthy and ephemeral shall there be heavenly 
and eternal, and all that was here heavy and perishable shall there be 
free from all weight and all taint of corruption, so that they may 
move wherever they please just like the rays of the eye : but they will 
still be in possession of their limbs and bodily organs, occupying the 
space that they occupied before, the eyes and the instruments of the 
other senses, the head down to the shoulders, the arms, the chest, 
the feet, and all other members disposed as in their previous life. 

When I read of such things in the books of the Holy Fathers, I 
stagger, so to speak, amazed and horror-struck. Then I begin to ask 
myself how these most spiritually minded men who have ascended 
beyond the consideration of all spatial and temporal things and by 
the power of contemplation have risen above the whole sensible 
world, could have approved such teachings in their writings and 
handed them down to posterity, and the only reason I can conceive 
is that they were induced to imagine and set down such things that 
they might encourage at least those who are so devoted to such 
earthly and carnal speculations and have only been nourished on the 
rudiments of the faith to ascend to the contemplation of spiritual 
things. For those who imagine that there is nothing beyond this 
sensible world are more prone to renounce than to embrace the true 
contemplation of nature. If they were to be told that there was to be 
no place, no time, no body, no bodily substances after the end of 
this world, they would at once burst out with the indignant 
objection : “Then in that case there will be nothing at all, if nothing 

986A 

986B 

986C 

672 

PERIPHYSEON 

of this kind is to remain !” and they would turn away in scorn from 
986D those who promise only spiritual things and refuse the things of 
sense. So it was, I think, that bearing these things in mind and 
taking into account the thinking of the simple faithful, these great 
and good men thought it better to teach that earthly and sensible 
bodies would be transformed into heavenly and spiritual bodies 
than that all bodies and all bodily and sensible things would be 
987A totally done away with. For to the carnally minded it is more tolerable 
to believe that the earthly body will be changed into a heavenly body 
than that all corporeality will be totally annihilated. 

I think the Apostle had the same motive in mind when he said 
of the resurrection of the earthly body : “It is sown an animal body, 
it shall be raised a spiritual body.” For this could be interpreted : The 
earthly and animal body, which is sown into the ground when it 
undergoes the dissolution of death and destruction, shall be raised a 
spiritual and heavenly body; that is to say its earthly quality and 
quantity shall be changed into spiritual quality and quantity, and in 
short, as many, if not all, interpret his words, from an earthly thing 
it will become a heavenly thing, and from being a corporeal thing it 
will become a spiritual thing ; but it will still be body. From being a 
heavy body it will be changed into a subtle body ; but it will never 
transcend the condition of etherial bodies, nor will it ever lose its 
987B bodily qualities, although from being earthly those qualities will 
become heavenly, as smoke is changed into flame. But whoever 
studies closely the writings of St. Ambrose or Gregory the Theo¬ 
logian or his commentator Maximus will find it clearly stated that 
the change is not from an earthly into a heavenly body, but a 
complete passing into pure spirit, and not into that spirit which is 
called ether, but into that which is called Mind. Thus Ambrose 
denies to it all composition, so that after the resurrection body, soul 
and Mind shall be one, a simple one, not a one made up of three 
elements but unified into a single ineffable harmony, so what appear 
987C here as three will there be made one Mind. Gregory in like manner 
unhesitatingly declares that at the moment of the resurrection body 
shall be changed into soul, soul into Mind, Mind into God, so that 
God will be all in all things, as air is changed into light. And the 
Apostle himself, if we examine his words more closely, implies the 
same thing : “It is sown,” he says, “an animal body, it shall be raised 
a spiritual body.” That is to say : The body, which is sown an animal 
body, is the same as the spiritual, that is, the changed, body, which 
shall be raised into spirit ; or, to speak more plainly, from body it 

BOOK V 

will become spirit. This he declares openly when he says : “It is sown 
in dishonour, it shall he raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it 
shall be raised in power.” For where is the glory or the power if the 
body is raised in the quality of the stars or in the subtlety of the 
ether, and moves with its speed? My argument is not affected by 
what the Apostle says in another place : “The brightness of the sun 
is one thing, the brightness of the moon another, and the brightness 987D 
of the stars another ; and one star differs from another in brightness. 

So will it be with the resurrection of the dead.” For here he is using 
the analogy of the most excellent and glorious bodies of the sensible 
world to teach the Grace of the resurrection and of the divine 
Theophanies and that each partakes of regeneration in a different 
degree. For this is what is meant by the words, “One star differs 
from another in brightness.” By this beautiful and apt simile of the 
variety of the celestial luminaries this admirable Doctor shows the 
infinite varieties of award meted out by the most righteous judge to 988A 
all men according to their deserts. 

Therefore do not listen to those who say that after the 
resurrection that is to come the bodies of men will shine in the 
etherial sphere in such a way that the degree of brightness of each 
will correspond to the worthiness of his earthly life whether good or 
bad ; and who compare the physical brightness of the righteous to 
that of the sun and the moon and the stars, and the darkness of the 
wicked to that of the lesser luminaries. For they are contradicted by 
reason supported by the Holy Scriptures which clearly state that all 
human bodies shall share the same glory and power in the same 
spiritual and immortal and eternal state. For this comes to all men 
generally without discrimination from nature and from grace. And 
how does it benefit the righteous man that his body should become 988B 
as radiant as the sun? or what disadvantage is it to the wicked man 
that his body should become as dark as the dimmest of the stars? 

The glory of the righteous will consist not in the brightness of his 
body, but in the purity of the contemplation in which he shall see 
God face to face ; and the disgrace of the wicked will be not in the 
ugliness of his physical shape but in the deprivation of the sight of 
God. For it is the presence of the Truth that makes a man blessed, 
and its absence which makes him wretched. For instance, take two 
men who are of the same age and stature, and are equally endowed 
with beauty, bodily health, noble birth, soundness of the senses, 
strength, agility and all other physical advantages, but of whom one 
is wise, honourable in his conduct and endowed with all the virtues 988C 

673 

PERIPHYSEON 

which adorn the soul, while the other is foolish, depraved in his 
conduct, and corrupted by all the vices which warp the soul : how 
does it matter to either the physical advantages which they enjoy to 
an equal degree when the sole interest of the one is to attain the 
Supreme Good for which he is seeking, knowing that his own good 
lies in nothing but in cleaving to the Supreme Good and in finding 
his rest and eternal joy therein ; hoping to complete there the 
blessedness he has begun here ; ever striving to raise his entire self, 
body, soul and mind, above every creature to Him Who is exalted 
over all things : while the other, blinded by the darkness of his 
ignorance does not perceive that already in this life he is preparing 

988D for himself the torments of eternal damnation, not realising while he 
is alive that the pleasures of this life and the sorrows of the next 
spring from one and the same source, for in this present course of 
life they flow together in such a way that the pleasures show a fair 
face to those who pursue them while the sorrow that is to come 
conceals itself within them ; but when the course of this mortal life 
comes to an end, the pleasures come to an end too, and only that 
sorrow, so long hidden that it was thought no longer to exist, shall 
remain to torment him with the inextinguishable fire of his lust for 
the pleasures which he has lost. 

989A From this it is most clear that our sole quest should be joy in 
the Truth, which is Christ ; and our sole dread the deprivation of it, 
for that is the one and only cause of all eternal suffering. Take 
Christ from me, and no good is left for me, nor is there any torment 
left to terrify me. For I hold that the deprivation of Christ and His 
absence are the sole torment for every rational creature, and that 
there is no other. But on this subject much could be said : let us 
return to finish our discussion. 

N. Before we bring this book to its close I think we should say 
a few words against those who oppose our teaching with certain 
Scriptural texts from which they claim to deduce that these sensible 
elements and the whole extent of the world’s mass will endure 

989B forever, and that the positions and movements of human bodies 
after their regeneration shall be ordained by it. They believe that no 
body will ascend beyond this world or be transformed into spirit. 
They argue as follows : If heaven and earth shall pass away so that 
nothing corporeal, nothing possessing size or occupying space, no 
movement in time or space, no spatial extension or disposition, shall 
remain, how do you explain the text : “There will be a new heaven 
and a new earth?’’ For these words not only deny that the heaven 

BOOK V 

675 

and earth will be destroyed, they even suggest that they will be 
restored and renewed. 

Here is my reply to them : It is an extremely common usage in 
Holy Scripture to express the whole by one or more of its parts, or 
to call the whole Universe by the name of its principle division. 
Therefore, since the constitution of the whole sensible world extends 
between two opposite and contrary extremes, namely, heaven and 989C 
earth, the Prophetic Spirit aptly expresses the renovation, that is, the 
transformation into its spiritual substances, of the whole visible 
Universe by the phrase, “a new heaven and a new earth.” By the 
word heaven you are to understand all etherial and heavenly 
bodies, and by the word earth, the lower and intermediate bodies; 
so that the whole sentence refers to the transformation of the whole 
visible Universe into its spiritual Causes. Indeed, it would, I think, 
not be far from the truth to say that the distinction between the new 
heaven and the new earth signifies the distinction between the visible 
and the invisible creature. For it would be quite reasonable to call 
the restoration of the spiritual nature a renovation of heaven and 
that of corporeal things a renovation of earth. For we have the word 
of the Apostle that “all things in heaven and earth are restored in 989D 
Christ.” For not only sensible creatures but also intelligible creatures 
shall in a way that cannot be described, for it is known only to God, 
pass into their Causes, that is into the most pure knowledge of their 
Causes by which they combine with them in such a way that that 
which purely knows and that which is purely known are made One. 

This, I think, is what the Lord means when He says in the Gospel : 990A 
“Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My Word shall not pass 
away.” 

Again, the words, “There shall be a new heaven and a new 
earth” can be understood with special reference to the renovation of 
human nature and its unification with itself. For while it is still in 
this life our nature is composed of two substances, body and soul. 

And since the great dissimilarity between these two substances of 
which we are now composed came about as the result of man’s 
transgression in his primal state, the Apostle teaches that they 
belong to the old man, and that we must put off the old man and put 
on the new, that is, Christ, in Whom our nature, consisting of body, 
soul and mind, is renewed and made one and from being composite 
is made simple. And that which has already been performed in the 
Head of human nature, that is, in Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, 990B 
shall be performed in the whole nature, when the new earth of our 

676 

PERIPHYSEON 

body shall be changed into the new heaven, that is into the new 
condition of soul. And then by a further ascent body and soul 
together shall be changed into spirit, and Spirit into God Himself : 
and this whole shall be performed in Christ and through Christ, 
Who is the End and Consummation of our nature. 

990C 
The prophecy 
that the light 
of the moon 
shall be like 
the light of 
the sun, etc. 

990D 

991A 

And then again, congratulating themselves upon having found 
the strongest and subtlest and most irrefutable arguments to 
convince us, they say : If this earth which is heavy with bodies, and 
which occupies the lower and intermediate parts of creation, shall 
perish, then the moon which is its neighbour and the constellation 
nearest the earth must perish too; and if the lesser light, then also 
the greater light : for if the whole perish, no part will remain. But if 
this is to happen, how do you explain the prophetic promise : “The 
light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the 
sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days?” We are not now 
(they say) referring to the allegorical interpretation which takes the 
moon to be the Church which shall shine forth in Christ, who is the 
Sun of Righteousness, and Christ Himself, in Whom the Seven 
Gifts of the Holy Ghost shall appear most manifest to all who 
contemplate Him, but to the literal magnification of the two greatest 
of the heavenly bodies. Now, if these luminaries, far from perishing 
shall actually have the brilliance of their enduring bodies increased, 
why should we not suppose that what is true of the intermediate 
parts of the world will be true also of the lower parts, especially 
since St. Augustine in the later books of The City of appears to 
teach that it is not the bodies themselves that shall pass away, but 
their qualities shall be changed into something better. In the same 
way neither the shape nor the size nor the sex of the human body 
shall pass away, but shall merely be clothed with spiritual and 
immortal qualities. And in his letter to Dardanus he does not 
hesitate to declare that the Body of the Lord, after His Resurrection, 
is in heaven in a local sense in the same fleshly form and substance 
as it appeared on earth, with the sole addition of the quality of 
immortality. Nature is not taken away from Him, and therefore 
He is not omnipresent as God is, and is not changed into divinity 
beyond all space and time, transcending everything that can be 
uttered or understood. And when He comes to judge the quick and 
the dead. He will descend as a visible body from some spatial 
locality. But this argument is not so difficult to refute as they 
imagine. Our reply is as follows : The moon signifies the whole 
sensible creation. This is reasonable enough, for as the moon is 

BOOK V 

677 

susceptible to increase and decrease, so this whole universe is 
susceptible to the coming into being and passing away of its parts : 
there is in it nothing that is constant or stable, for as everything that 
it contains had a beginning, so it must have an end. On the other 
hand, by the course and brightness of the sun is meant the most fair 
disposition of the spiritual nature, orderly in its stability and its 
movements. The light of the moon, therefore, will be like the light of 
^ the sun when the manifold and mutable variety of bodily objects, 
and their puzzling elusiveness, now appearing to the senses and now 
i escaping from them, now showing a perfect form, now an imperfect 
j form, shall be changed into the most perfect and constant brilliance 
and uniform beauty and glory of spiritual substances : while the 
light of the sun, that is, the perfect beauty of spiritual things, shall be 
increased sevenfold, so as to be like the light of the seven days, that 
is to say, of the Primordial Causes which are established in the 
splendour of the highest Wisdom. The number seven is frequently 
employed as a symbol for them because they were created in the 
Word of God in the first six mystical and intelligible days and on the 
seventh rest in their perfect consummation in Him in Whom they 
were created. This is that intelligible Sabbath which was prefigured 
i and had its beginning in the creation of nature, and shall be 
manifested and perfected in nature’s consummation, when the 
whole sensible creature shall be changed into the Intelligible, and all 
Intelligible into the causes, and the causes into the Cause of all 
causes. Who is God, and shall rejoice in eternal peace, and shine 
with ineffable splendour and keep the endless Sabbath. 

And as to those who confront us with Augustine, as though 
they wish to show that they have a greater respect for his teaching 
than we and that they have made a more constant and careful study 
of his opinions, let them consider what he himself has said in those 
same books of The City of God concerning the passing away and 
destruction of that sensible, and corporeal heaven and all that it 
contains, in which they think the blessed master included also the 
Flesh of Christ after His Resurrection ; and let them read how that 
man of most subtle intellect perceived the corporeal heaven which is 
to be totally destroyed to be entirely different from the flesh of Christ 
wherewith after His Resurrection He was equipped in the same 
mode of spatial limitation in which He lived among men as man 
created out of men. Therefore it is more likely that this great and 
most skilful enquirer into all things human and divine and this most 
copious commentator wrote in a manner suited to the intelligence of 

991B 

99 1C 

Christ’s 
humanity 
after the 
991D 

resurrection 
is everywhere 
as God 

992A 

PERIPHYSEON 

his readers than that he should have been in disagreement with the 
Holy Fathers who preceded him in time, Ambrose and Gregory the 
Theologian, from whose authority he does not elsewhere depart. 
But as for me, without embarking on any controversy, I have no 
hesitation in interpreting Our Lord’s own words, “I and My Father 
are One” as referring not only to His Divinity, but to His whole 
Substance, God and Man, and therefore the whole Christ, the Word 
and the Flesh, is omnipresent, and is not limited in space either in 
respect of His Wholeness or of any Part of Him, whether it be His 
Divinity or His Humanity, of which two parts, as it were. His whole 
992B Substance is constituted. And in support of this we have the opinion 
of St. Hilary, Bishop of Poitiers, who in his third book On the 
Trinity, expounds the Lord’s prayer to His Father (“And now, O 
Father, glorify Me in Thyself with that glory which I had before the 
world was made”) as follows : 

“The Word made Flesh had not ceased to be that which He 
was, but began to be that which He was not. He had not abandoned 
that which is His, but had taken upon Himself that which is ours. 
He asks for that which He has taken upon Himself the glory of that 
which He does not abandon. Therefore the Son Who is the Word, 
and the Word made Flesh, and the God Who is the Word, and Who 
was in the beginning with God, and the Word that was the Son 
before the creation of the world, and Who was now made Flesh, 
prayed that this Flesh might begin to be for the Father what the 
Word was, so that that which was created in time might receive the 
992C glory of that which is without time, so that, transformed into the 
power of God and into the indestructibility of spirit, the destruc- 
tibility of the flesh might be absorbed.” 

38 If then the Flesh of Christ is transformed into the power and 
the indestructibility of the Spirit of God, then that Flesh itself must 
be power and indestructible spirit. And if the power and Spirit of 
God are omnipresent and transcend space and time and everything 
that exists, no one can doubt that that Flesh when it is transformed 
into the power and Spirit is neither limited in space nor changed in 
time, just as the power and spirit of God, which is the Word into 
Whose unity and substance it has been received transcends all space 
and time and every other limiting factor in the Universe. So I need 
992D not quote more than a single passage of St. Augustine on the subject 
of heaven and earth as they now are and as they shall be after the 
Day of Judgment, although there are many others. In the Thirteenth 
Chapter of the Twentieth Book of the City of God he writes : 

BOOK V 679 

“After the Judgment has been completed, then this heaven and 
this earth shall cease to exist, and a new heaven and a new earth 
shall begin to be. For it is not by complete annihilation but by a 
change of matter that this world shall pass away... Therefore the 
Apostle also says : ‘The shape of this world passes away, but I would 993A 
not have you anxious.’ The shape passes away, not the nature.” 

Now, tell me, how is this inconsistent with my words about the 
passing of this world into its Causes, which St. Augustine called its 
nature? He says, this heaven and this earth shall cease to exist, but 
their nature only will remain : we, following in his and others’ 
footsteps, that everything in this world which is sensible and 
extended in space and time, and everything that is susceptible to 993B 
change will perish, that is to say, will pass into its substance or 
nature, but that its nature, which is contained immutably and 
indestructibly after an incorporeal and intelligible mode in its 
Primordial Causes, will endure forever. But if anyone is so far from 
the truth as to say that the nature and substance of this world is 
sensible and corporeal and extended in space and time, and 
susceptible to generation and passing away, he is not worth 
answering, for every intelligent physicist accepts as an axiom that 
the nature and substance of bodies is itself incorporeal. And if he 
should say that from the time of His Resurrection until the Day of 
Judgment the Flesh of Christ shall continue to be bounded by the 
limits of this corporeal heaven, and only after its destruction shall 
ascend above all the heavenly powers, he shows that he does not 
understand what the Catholic Church teaches about the whole 
nature of Christ, namely : “He ascended into heaven and sitteth at 
the right hand of the Father.” And no one but a fool would claim 
that the Flesh of Christ even when transformed into Spirit, that is to 
say, into God Himself, is retained within this world while the 
celestial powers rise above it, when we see that the thickest clouds 993C 
when they are consumed by the rays of the sun are changed into it. 

And suppose he should ask : what is unreasonable in believing 
that the Flesh of Christ on the one hand, whether in motion or at 
rest, must occupy some part of space in the corporeal heaven even if 
it have free choice over the part it occupies, provided that His Soul, 
as also His Divinity is omnipresent and pervades all things? Do we 
not admit that the spirits of the angels transcend every corporeal 
creature and beyond all space are moved in a non-spatial sense, but 
the bodies in which they are wont to appear to men occupy a part of The bodies of 
space and are contained within the bounds of the sensible creature ? 

PERIPHYSEON 

Our reply would be : the bodies of the angels are no more 
enclosed within the walls of the corporeal creature than their spirits 
993D are : for the bodies are contained in the spirits as in their Causes : 
they are not material bodies composed of the qualities of the 
elements of the physical world, but spiritual bodies that have been 
made one with Mind : this is the nature of the bodies in which the 
angels manifest themselves to whom and when and in what manner 
they desire. But these bodies are not phantasies, they are real. There 
can be no doubt that the spiritual bodies are true bodies, proceeding 
from genuine causes. It was in such a body that we believe Christ to 
have appeared to His disciples after His Resurrection — not that 
994A this Body was different from the body that was born of the Virgin, 
crucified and raised again from the dead : it was the same body, but 
from being mortal it had become immortal, from being animal it 
had become spiritual, and from being earthly it had become 
heavenly. And it would have been in such bodies that the plurality 
of human nature would have been propagated out of its secret 
recesses, had that nature not sinned. For each man contains hidden 
within himself the “reason” of his body, into which this mortal and 
earthly body shall be transformed at the resurrection, and in which 
it will become similar to the angelic body, so that men “shall 
become equal with the angels.” 

So there is no reasonable obstacle to our firmly believing and 
understanding that Our Lord Jesus Christ is omnipresent in both 
His natures, which are made One in His indivisible substance, and 
that no part of Him is confined in space or time or any other way in 
994B which the creature is limited. For He is everywhere wholly God ; He 
wholly transcends things that can be said or understood ; He wholly 
is in the Father, and is wholly made One with the Father; He is 
wholly God in the whole man, and wholly man in the whole God, 
without sacrifice to the individuality of either nature. 

Such then is the ineffable and transcendent harmony of our 
Head, a harmony to which all His members when they have been 
made one with one another shall return, and “come together into 
the perfect man in the fulness of the time of Christ,” and He shall be 
and shall appear as One in all, and all shall be and shall appear as 
one in the One. 

For no attention should be paid to those who put a different 
interpretation on these words of the Apostle: “Until all shall come 
together into the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of 
God, into the perfect man, into the measure of the fulness of the 

BOOK V 

681 

time of Christ,” saying that they refer to the perfect stature which 
the fleshly body of Christ had attained in the thirtieth year of His 994C 
age, and attempting to show that it is in this physical stature and age 
that all men will appear after their resurrection, even those who died 
before their time or decrepit or suffering from some bodily defect or 
encumbrance. But the folly of these ravings can be very easily shown 
if we examine the Apostle’s own words, which refer not to the 
growth of the Flesh which Christ had taken upon Him, nor to His 
stature, nor to His age, but to that Body of Christ which is the 
Church : and of this Body which is the Church, the measure and 
perfection and fulness of its spiritual time is identical with Him Who 
is the most perfect and spiritual Head of the Intelligible Body, and 
the End and Consummation of all things. Consider the words the 994D 
Apostle addresses to the Ephesians : “He has put all things under 
His feet and has set Him as Head over all the members of the 
Church, which is His Body, and the fulness of Him Who fills all in 
all things.” And a little later in the same epistle you hear him 
explaining what those members are from which Christ wished to 
construct and did construct a Body for Himself: “Some He gave as 
apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teach- 995A 
ers.” You have seen the members, you have seen the material : 
enquire now of the Apostle for what purpose those members are 
required. He replies : “For the perfecting of the Saints in the work of 
administration and for the building of the body of Christ, until all 
shall come together in the unity of the faith and the knowledge of 
the Son of God.” See the beginning of the building, the unity of the 
faith ; know the perfection of the building, that is the unity of the 
knowledge of the Son of God. Here then shall the growth of the 
stature of Christ begin, and it shall be perfected when Christ shall 
appear as a perfect and single man, with and in the whole of His 
Body, the Head in the members and the members in the Head ; and 
the measure and fulness of the time of Christ shall be most clearly 
seen, not with the eyes of the body, but by the virtue of contempla¬ 
tion that belongs to all the Saints that have been made one with their 
Head ; and the spiritual time which is the fulness of all virtues, and 
which is established in Christ and His Church, shall be accom¬ 
plished, with all else that is understood as pertaining to the eternal 
happiness and perfection of blessedness in the Son of God. 

But as to the resurrection of human bodies, St. Augustine 
unhesitatingly affirms in his books on the City of God that each man 
shall rise again in that size and stature which his body should have 
attained in the flower of his youth, whether it ever reaches it, or 

PERIPHYSEON 

995C 

995D 

996A 

996B 

whether it was prevented from doing so by death, or whether it fell 
away from it in age. On the other hand the Blessed Gregory the 
Theologian, and St. Ambrose and the venerable doctor Maximus 
also, as we have often said, show beyond doubt that the immortal 
and spiritual bodies shall not be defined by the features of their 
corporeal shapes or qualities or quantities, because they have been 
made ineffably one in an indivisible simplicity with the spirits which 
are defined by no limits. 

Now the reason why they erroneously teach that all human 
bodies shall rise in the stature of the Body of the Lord is not far to 
seek. Inadequate understanding of the Greek text, eIc; psipov 
into the measure of the age,” leads them to interpret 
f|LiKla as referring to the fulness of the age of the body, whereas in 
fact it signifies rather the growth of the soul in virtues than the 
spatial expansion of the body in time. This is why the philosophers 
call the soul the daughter of EvbeXtx^ia, that is, the daughter full 
grown in virtues ; for the word is derived from 8v5ov pLiKlaw, that 
is, of inward age. Therefore no well instructed person would 
interpret the Apostle’s words as meaning the full growth of the 
body, but rather the completion of the Church in its Head, which is 
Christ ; and the consummation of Grace and Blessedness and the 
unification which passes man’s understanding. 

And I am surprised that those who contend with us about the 
magnification of the bodies of the luminaries of the world ignore the 
prophecy of the Lord in the Gospel about the passing away of the 
whole sensible world in the passing away of its parts : “But 
immediately after the tribulation of those says,” He says, meaning. 
After the persecution of Antichrist, “the sun shall be darkened, and 
the moon shall not give forth her light, and the stars shall fall from 
heaven.” From this we understand that the sun and moon shall not 
endure after the extinction of their light, nor the stars after the 
passing away of the ether and the sphere in which they are set. And 
this prophecy of Our Lord we regard not as an allegory merely but 
as a reference to the destruction of the whole world and the 
dissolution of bodies. For many to whom the idea of this destruction 
is repugnant, have recourse to the allegorical interpretation only, 
and take the passing away of the sun to mean the shaking of the 
faith even of the most perfect who shall be alive on that day when 
the son of iniquity shall appear. For his persecution shall spread 
such a cloud of error and faithlessness that all the people of heaven 
(that is, the Church) shall either conceal for a while the light of their 

BOOK V 

683 

orthodox faith, or in their terror diminish it, or fall away from it 
altogether ; not only the carnal (signified by the moon), but also the 
more spiritual (signified by the stars) and even those most exalted 
and spiritual doctors of the faith, who are here represented by the 
sun. 

And I do not deny that this interpretation is reasonable : what I 
reject is the violence they do to the literal interpretation, saying that 
there shall never be an extinction of the light of the heavenly bodies 
at the end of the world, but that its radiance will be surpassed by the 
transcendent splendour of the Judge Who is to come and of the 
celestial essences who shall descend with Him when He comes to 
judge the quick and the dead. They support this belief by an 
illustration taken from the rays of the rising sun, whose brilliance 
dims the light of the other stars and blots it out altogether from our 
sight, while their own light is kept vivid and undiminished, for the 
sun from which they receive it is ever present with them. The fact 
that the sun’s rays themselves are sometimes obscured from the 
earth by the interposition of the body of the moon they ignore. 

Now the reason for the error of those who think in this 
misguided way is, I think, the following: they suppose that the 
Judgment will take place in some definite place within the confines 
of this world, and that the Judge and His holy angels will descend 
physically from some place in the upper parts of sensible nature : 
some, for instance, suppose that the seat of Judgment will be on the 
frontier between the aerial and etherial realms, which the physicists 
describe as the sphere of the moon ; others agree with the Jews in 
imagining it to be situated in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, not 
realising the true meaning of this word. For Jehoshaphat is a 
compound of two words, laco and aacpax.’Iaco has many meanings, 
for it can be interpreted “invisible”, or “Lord”, or “glory” or “it 
was, and is, and shall be;” while aacpai means “judgment.” 
Jehoshaphat, therefore, means “the invisible judgment” or “the 
judgment of the Lord” or “the glorious judgment” or that He Who 
judges “was and is and ever shall be.” Therefore Joel, beholding in 
the light of prophecy the spiritual significance of the Divine 
Judgment, and that it was not a visible judgment situated in the 
physical Universe places it in the mystical Valley of Jehoshaphat, 
and taking upon himself the person of the Lord Whose glory shall 
appear in the excellence of His judgment and Who was and is and 
ever shall be, proclaims : “Let the nations arise and ascend into the 
Valley of Jehoshaphat, for I shall sit there and judge all the peoples 

996C 

The errors of 
those who 
assert that 
the judgment 
will be in 
some part of 
the world 

996D 

997A 

684 

PERIPHYSEON 

997B 

997C 

997D 

in turn.” His meaning is : Let all men arise from the dead and ascend 
into the high place of My Judgment, the deep and secret place which 
lies beyond the understanding of all men. Thus are those who 
imagine such things clearly condemned by sound reason. For how 
shall Our Lord Jesus Christ to Whom the Father has given the 
Judgment move through time and space, after He has raised His 
Manhood above all space and all time and above everything that 
can be thought or uttered into the unity of His Godhead, Where He 
sits eternally without change on the right hand of the Father and 
ever shall so sit, from which He rules and judges all things and ever 
shall so rule and judge ? For that which the Catholic Faith professes 
in the Creed of the Church, “from thence He shall come to judge 
both the living and the dead” we should not interpret as meaning 
that He moves through space or emerges in any way from the secret 
recesses of His Nature into this world to appear in visible members 
to the corporeal senses of those who are to be judged ; but that each 
man, good or evil, shall behold His coming in himself, in his own 
conscience, when they shall be set free, and God shall reveal the 
hidden places of the darkness and each man shall be the judge of his 
own deeds and thoughts. 

Therefore Augustine writes in the thirteenth Chapter of the 
cwentieth book of the City of God : 

“By a certain divine power all men shall recall in their memory 
all their deeds, whether good or ill and with wonderful rapidity shall 
judge them in their minds, so that knowledge shall either reprove or 
excuse the conscience, and that is how all and sundry shall be 
judged.” 

And this divine power is appropriately called a book, for in it is 
read whatever of its deeds is preserved, as the Apostle says : 

“For all men shall stand before the judgment throne of the 
Lord, each man bearing what his body performed, whether good or 
ill.” By the judgment throne of the Lord, he means the exaltation of 
His majesty, which shall everywhere appear to all men in all things, 
and at its manifestation “the wicked shall behold Him Whom they 
have pierced, and all the nations of the earth shall weep.” And so 
the Sign of the Son of Man, the honour and glory of His Cross, shall 
shine forth before all. 

And perhaps this will be the flame that shall come at last and 
spread through all the world and consume it, namely the manifesta¬ 
tion of the Word of God in every creature, when in all men, good 

BOOK V 

685 

and evil alike, nothing shall show but the intelligible Light, which 
now pervades all things invisibly but then shall pervade all things 
openly. This is that flame, I think, of which It Itself says : “I am a 
consuming fire.” For it shall consume all things when it shall be all 
in all things, and it alone shall appear in all things. In His Gospel He 998A 
also says : ‘T have come to bring fire upon earth, and what else do I 
desire but that it should burn?” Here the word “earth” means the 
whole sensible creature, and the burning fire is the brightness of His 
manifestation in all things that is to come and the burning of His 
judgment. And this is how it is understood by St. Augustine in his 
commentary on the Fiftieth Psalm : 

“What is a holocaust? A total consumption by fire? It was 
called a holocaust when the whole animal was placed upon the altar 
to be burned. So that fire shall consume the whole of us, and that 
flame shall destroy the whole of us. What is that flame? That from 
whose heat none can hide himself. What is that flame? That of 
which the Apostle says “on fire with the Spirit” Not only shall our 
soul be consumed in the divine fire of His Wisdom, but our body 
shall be consumed in immortality. So the holocaust shall be offered, 
and death shall be swallowed up in victory,” and he continues 
interpreting in too great detail to be reproduced here the allegory 
with which Holy Scripture describes the judgment that is to come. 

A. I agree that it is too long to quote here, but I should like to 
hear in a few words what are those clouds in which the Saints are to 
be snatched up into the air and brought before Christ; and also 
what is meant by the air in which they shall ever be with Christ in 
the clouds themselves. I am thinking of the words of the Apostle 
where he says : “We who are left a remnant,” that is, we who have 
not yet ascended into the glory of deification, “shall be snatched up 
in clouds into the air and brought before Christ, and there shall be 
ever with Him.” 

998B 

The clouds in 
which will be 
taken up the 
saints who go 
to meet 
Christ in the 
air 

N. We have said something before about these clouds, following 

the teaching of Maximus, in earlier books of this discourse. However 

I shall now add to what was then said the exposition of St. Ambrose. 

. 998C 

Maximus says that each one of the Saints shall have his own cloud, 
meaning the special virtue and excellence of his own contemplation. 
According to the degree of knowledge of the Truth to which he 
attains, so will be the extent to which he will be snatched up into the 
air and brought before Christ, that is to say, brought into the height 
and splendour of the most pure Mind, and so in the cloud of his 
contemplation he will see and rejoice in the Theophanies. Ambrose 

686 

PERIPHYSEON 

on the other hand says that the clouds are the Patriarchs, for 
instance Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in whose faith and works and 
wisdom, as in clouds of brightest splendour the heirs of the New 
Testament shall be snatched up into the presence of Christ. In like 
manner Moses and the other prophets, and the apostles also, who 
had direct experience of the virtues and the teachings of the Lord 
998D Himself are clouds ; and those who in this life follow their example 
in faith and works and hope and charity and knowledge and wisdom 
are in those virtues as in clouds caught up like them so as to meet 
Christ, whether they were still alive or loosed from the bonds of the 
flesh. Whither do you suppose Enoch and Elijah were caught up 
whilst still alive if not into the presence of Christ Who they knew in 
spirit was to come into the world? Whither Abraham, of whom the 
Lord Himself says : “Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced” ? Why do 
999A I need to go on ? Whither Job, who said : “I have heard Thee with 
the hearing of mine ear, but now I see Thee with my eye”? 
Whither Moses when he ascended into Mount Sinai? Whither the 
other prophets when they foresaw His coming in the flesh, and ran 
to meet Him in the spirit? Whither was Peter caught up when he 
replied to his Lord’s question with the words, “Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the Living God”? Whither Paul, when he ascended into 
the third heaven ? Are not all these, and all who like them have been 
each in accordance with his proper degree of contemplation, 
snatched up into the presence of Christ, now with Him and in Him 
in the spiritual air of virtues and contemplations? 

Now all these and similar intelligible clouds were symbolised by 
that sensible cloud which received the Lord, at the time of His 
Ascension, out of the sight of His disciples and in which He was 
carried up into heaven. For He needed no vehicle composed of 
999B clouds to carry Him into the aerial and etherial regions, being 
Himself after His Resurrection purer and lighter than every creature, 
visible or invisible, neither admitting nor suffering to remain in His 
spiritual Nature any element of spatial movement. But He wished to 
show to his disciples by a visible sign whither He would after an 
invisible mode ascend in the hearts of those who love and follow 
Him. For He Himself ascends in the contemplations of those who 
ascend to Him ; and without Him no man can ascend to Him. For, 
as He Himself says, “No man ascendeth unto heaven save Him that 
came down from heaven,” nor does He Himself descend from 
heaven when, ascending to Himself He raises them up with Him in 
their holy contemplations. Therefore He continues : “The Son of 

BOOK V 

687 

Man Who is in heaven,” where by heaven he means the Father, 
from Whom He went forth at His Incarnation and to Whom He 
returned after His Resurrection. For wherever in the Gospel we read 
that the Lord raised His eyes to heaven, we should understand that 
His Father is intended. Who alone is greater than He in the sense 
that the Father as cause precedes the Son. 

Now that the saints are with Christ and in Christ in the purity 
of their contemplation is understood in three ways. They may be in 
that condition when they are still confined within the earthly body ; 
or when they are loosed from the earthly body ; or when they have 
received the heavenly body. All these three modes are very clearly 
illustrated by the Transfiguration of the Lord on the Mount, where 
Elijah is an example of those still living in the flesh, Moses of those 
who are loosed from the earthly body. Our Lord Himself of those 
who have risen from the dead. Thus by the Transfiguration of His 
Body He revealed to His disciples the manner of the general 
Resurrection. 

But do not suppose that Elijah, still living in the flesh, came to 
Christ from some localised Paradise, or Moses from some place of 
souls, taking upon him his body again : or that when the Mystery of 
the Transfiguration was completed they returned to the places from 
which they had come. But you must faithfully believe and unhesi¬ 
tatingly understand that they came from no other place but from 
Him with Whom they appeared in the Mount, that is to say, in the 
height of spiritual vision, which at that moment occurred without 
the operation of the bodily senses; and in Whom they were before 
they appeared ; and from Whom they did not depart in order to 
appear; and to Whom, after their sacramental manifestation was 
completed, they returned, and are nowhere but in Him in Whom 
and with Whom they are One. This is clear from the fact that the 
three disciples who were chosen to see the Mystery of the Trans¬ 
figuration, when they lifted their eyes saw no one but Jesus alone. 

But to understand this more clearly you should read what 
St. Ambrose says in his Commentary on Luke : 

“Know that that cloud is not composed of the vapours that 
issue from volcanoes or the black fog of compressed air which 
covers the heaven with the terror of darkness, but it is a cloud of 
light which moistens, not our bodies with rain or showers, but our 
minds with the dew of faith, being sent down upon us by the Word 
of God. And when the Word of God is uttered Jesus is found alone. 

999C 

999D 

1000 A 

688 

PERIPHYSEON 

lOOOB Thus, although there were three, they are now become one. Three 
are seen at first, one is seen at last : for they are all one in the 
perfection of their faith. Finally this is the Lord’s prayer to the 
Father : “That all may be One : not Moses and Elijah only are one in 
Christ, but we also are the one Body of Christ. Therefore they are 
received, as it were, [in one body] into the Body of Christ to show us 
that we too shall be One in Christ Jesus.’’ 

A. We have now spoken enough of the clouds in which the 
Saints are caught up into the Presence of Christ. But it is worth 
while enquiring what is the nature of those heavenly clouds in which 
the Son of Man shall come. Please explain briefly, therefore, of what 
sort they are. 

N. I would say that the clouds of heaven in which the Son of 
Man shall come cannot be other than the heavenly substances 
themselves which are always attendant upon Christ in the virtue of 
lOOOC contemplation. But because they cannot behold the most high and 
holy Trinity in itself, for it is incomprehensible and transcends the 
intelligible vision and all the faculties of mind, and can only 
contemplate It in comprehensible Theophanies which are of like 
nature with themselves, therefore they are called the clouds of 
heaven. From these divine manifestations in which they behold 
God, Our Lord Himself applied the name of clouds to the celestial 
substance with whom and in whom shall be revealed His coming, 
and the fulness of His majesty be most clearly manifested to all men, 
good and bad alike. 

But the principle of their spiritual nature does not allow these 
celestial clouds to move in a local sense. They move, rather, in a 
spiritual sense, and thereby execute in the nature which they govern 
and over which they preside that which in the Cause of all things 
they see has to be done, and themselves without motion through 
lOOOD space or time dispose all time and all space and all things that are 
contained in them. What is meant by their coming is their appearance 
in visible shape to those who are worthy to behold them, and their 
going is their withdrawal from every corporeal sense. 

Do not be disturbed that I should say that spiritual substances 
do not suffer temporal motion whereas St. Augustine declares “that 
only God moves by his own agency without space or time, while the 
spirit created by Him suffers itself to be moved, by Him Who moves 
all things, through time but not through space, and the body both 
lOOlA through time and through space.’’ For I am here following the 

BOOK V 

689 

Greeks, who do not hesitate to assert that everything which moves 
through space must also move in time, while everything that lacks 
motion through space must also be without motion in time. For 
these two, space and time, must either both be present together, or 
both be equally absent, for it is impossible to separate the one from 
the other. 

A. It is not our present business to dispute about the authorities 
of either language. Let each follow which he will, not decrying the 
other. And now that you have spoken about the intelligible clouds, 
though briefly, please come back to the Return, and bring our 
wayward vessel and its weary mariners to harbour. 

N. The Return of all things which shall be brought back into 
their causes when this sensible world shall pass away and the 
intelligible world which is above us shall be fulfilled in Christ, is to 
be understood in two senses. For there is a general Return and a 
special Return. The general Return is the lot of all things which shall 
be brought back to the Principle of their creation : the special 
Return, of those which shall not only be restored to the Primordial 
Causes of their nature, but shall achieve the consummation of their 
Return, beyond every rank in the hierarchy of nature, in the Cause 
of all things, which is God. We can obtain examples and allegories 
of each from the Holy Scriptures. 

Since in the natural order of things the genus is prior to the 
species we must deal first with the general Return. The first example 
of the genus was when the people of God, freed from servitude to 
the intelligible Pharaoh, that is to the devil and his host, under the 
leadership of the spiritual Moses, Who is Christ, crossed the Red 
Sea with dry feet, that is to say, by the firm path of human nature, 
avoiding the seas of irrational impulses, and overcame and overthrew 
the hostile tribes, that is, the armies of the vices, and after the death 
of their bodies, that is to say, of their carnal fancies, in the desert of 
the virtues where everything mortal and corruptible is done away 
with, only in the pure spirit as sons of good works returned into the 
Promised Land. And the fact that two of all those who had set out 
from Egypt reached the Promised Land while still in the flesh 
signifies that our double nature of soul and body shall return to the 
Promised Land, which we had abandoned by sin, in our Saviour, 
whom Jesus the son of Nave, that is of their beauty, prefigured, with 
Caleb, that is, the free will of our heart, accompanying us. For 
Caleb means “heart” or “every heart.” For as the devotion of each 
heart will be helped by the grace of God, so it will follow its Saviour 

lOOlB 

Another 
theory about 
lOOIC 
the waves 

lOOlD 

690 

PERIPHYSEON 

into the land of the living and of those who use well their natural 
goods. 

That the whole of human nature will return to the first 
condition of its nature can be deduced from the recall of the children 
of Israel from the Egyptian captivity because Scripture makes no 
mention of any one of the people of God remaining in Egypt. All 
1002A with one accord fled thence and all without exception were freed 
from the hands of their most cruel masters. And from the fact that 
not one of those who returned out of Egypt was overwhelmed or 
drowned in the waves but all, as the Apostle says, “were under the 
cloud”, that is, under the divine protection, “and all crossed the sea, 
and all were baptised under Moses in the cloud and in the sea” we 
are shown that that baptism shall be universal which shall be 
perfected at the end of the world, when the mystical Moses shall lead 
from death into life His people who are the whole human race, 
redeemed in His blood, and purified from all malice and wickedness, 
when nothing shall be seen in any man save the simplicity of his 
nature, through the merit of Him Who took that whole nature upon 
1002B Him, and purified it, when the intelligible King of Egypt, who is the 
prince of this world, had with his innumerable hosts of evil and all 
the vices by which he had held captive the Image of God created in 
man shall be overwhelmed in the waters of the Red Sea, that is in the 
infinite vastness and depth of the effusion of grace which is poured 
forth upon our human nature in payment for the Blood of Christ. 
For as the Blood of Christ was shed for our redemption and shall 
effect our restoration into the first state of our nature, so it is a 
source of harm to the devil and his angels and shall effect the 
downfall of their empire and the increase of their torments. For as 
the flooding of the Red Sea, which is the shedding of the Lord’s 
blood, rescued human nature from the dephts of everlasting death 
and brought it into the life eternal, so it drowned the wickedness of 
the devil in everlasting damnation. For the pride of the devil can 
1002C suffer no greater penalty or deeper affliction than his envy at man’s 
salvation and the consequent despair: not because he too, had he 
wished, could not have returned to the Creator of his nature, but 
because bound in the toils of his own evil will he will forever hold in 
detestation the sweetness of bliss, and ever grieve in perpetual 
torment that man has escaped from his clutches. 

Nor is the prophet Isaiah silent about the general salvation of 
the human race in Christ, for he lifts up his voice and cries : “The 
land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, the way of the Sea of 

BOOK V 

691 

• Galilee across Jordan. The people of the gentiles which sat in 

\ darkness, have seen a great light, and on those who sat in the valley 

I of the shadow of death the light has arisen.” 

1 What is that people who sat in darkness and in the valley of the 

shadow of death but the multitude of the human race infinite in 
number and known only to God ? For after abandoning the light of 
Paradise, it sat in the darkness of ignorance and in the valley of the 
shadow not only of that death which separates the soul from the 
body by dissolution, but of that which separates God from the soul 
through sin. From this double death the whole human race is set 
free by that Light Which has arisen over all, and Which says of 
Itself : ‘T am the Light of the World.” Even now that light has in 
part destroyed the worship of the idols in those whom it has brought 
to the recognition and service of the true God, and has washed away 
the filth of their wickedness in the waters of baptism and consumed 
it in the fires of penitence : but in the end, when not only the general 
death of the body but also the death of the soul shall be done away 
with, it shall expose the rites and ceremonies of the idolaters and the 
superstitions and iniquities of all the heathen and shall reign 
supreme over the universal creature. For all men, good and evil 
alike, when they stand before the judgment Seat of the Lord, shall 
know that “God is One, and there is no other god but Him.” For 
when there is no more denial of the Truth, then all must confess that 
God is One. For even the blind cannot deny that the light which 
j they cannot see is seen by those who can. 

I But as to the fact that the salvation of our whole nature is 

j already effected in Christ, anyone who wishes can see from the 

; interpretation of the names that are mentioned. Thus Zabulon 

: means “the habitation of virtue.” Therefore that Light which has 

arisen upon those who sit in darkness, is the Virtue and the Wisdom 
I of the Father. And what is its habitation? Is it not our nature in 

j which He desires to take up His habitation at His Incarnation? 

Consider the words of the Evangelist : “And the Word was made 
flesh and dwelt among us.” The Humanity of Christ, then, is the 
spiritual Zabulon, and in it we all are saved, and being saved, take 
up our habitation therein, and shall dwell there forever. For He is 
our virtue and our strength. 

Nephthali means “breadth.” And what is our breadth ? Is it not 
Christ, Whose charity and mercy embrace the whole human race, 
and Who died for sinners “when who would dare lay down his life 
even for the good?”. Who loved all men equally, when for all men 

1002D 

1003A 

1003B 

1003C 

692 

PERIPHYSEON 

He gave Himself up? For this is the fulfilment of the law of nature, 
which He fulfilled in Himself when He endured death for all men. 
The Law of Nature is the universal love of all men, without any 
respect of persons, which in Christ was most perfectly fulfilled, 
when He proceeded from the Father “Who did not spare His only 
Son but gave Him up for the sake of us all.” 

But there is another way in which “breadth” may be understood 
as Christ. Thus breadth is that in which the plane figure is 
manifested, and for that reason is called in Greek epiphania. Christ, 
therefore, is our epiphany, that is, manifestation of our plane figure. 
For of the three substances of the Supreme Good, one of Them 
became manifest to us in the form of the man Christ, that is, the 

1003D Incarnate Word of God, and so made Himself comprehensible to 
our corporeal senses. For no one has ever seen the Father or the 
Holy Spirit united in substance with a creature. 

Moreover Ezechiel in the allegory of the three cities prophesies 
the return of the whole human nature. For he says : “And do thou, 
Jerusalem, also be ashamed, and bear your disgrace, for you have 
made your sisters appear righteous.” And then he adds : 

1004A “You and your daughters shall return into your ancient state, 
and I shall bring them back, restoring them with the Return of 
Sodom and her daughters and with the Return of Samaria and of 
her daughters, and I shall bring back your Return in the midst of 
them.” 

From this it is clear, as St. Jerome says, the Wrath of God is 
not of His nature, but it is our wickedness that provokes the most 
kind and most merciful God to anger. The text continues : 

“And your sister Sodom and her daughters shall return into 
their ancient state, and Samaria and her daughters shall return into 
their ancient state, and you and your daughters shall return into 
your ancient state.” 

The Septuagint reads : 

“And your sisters Sodom and her daughters shall be restored as 
they were in the beginning, and Samaria and her daughters shall be 
restored as they were in the beginning, and you and your daughters 
shall be restored as you were in the beginning.” 

1004B These words of the prophet, or rather, of the Lord speaking 
through the prophet, are expounded by the blessed Jerome as 
follows : 

BOOK V 

693 

“Among other fables and interminable genealogies and fan¬ 
tasies which the Jews invent is this notion about the coming of their 
Christ, whom we know as Antichrist : Sodom is to be restored in a 
thousand years, as a kind of Paradise of God, and Samaria shall 
recover her former felicity, and both shall be brought back from the 
Assyrians into the land of Judea. And Jerusalem also is then to be 
built.” 

A little later he writes : 

“But we, leaving the perfect knowledge of these things to the 
judgment of God, clearly maintain that after the Second Coming of 
the Lord and Saviour there will remain nothing earthly, nothing 
lowly, but only the Kingdom of Heaven, which is first promised in 
the Gospel.” 

What more is said about the matter by this Commentator I 
omit because it is of a moral nature and discusses the Return to the 1004C 
Catholic faith only of the gentiles and heretics and sinful souls. 

Moreover, one may reasonably say that the mystical week of 
the Law, which occurred every fifty years, of which the Hebrew 
name Jobel signifies Liberty, because all men received their liberty 
in it, and each man was released from any sentence he might be 
under, and allowed to return to his former home, clearly symbolises 
the Return of which we are speaking, and which comes after this 
present life has performed its seven revolutions. 

The Return of nature is foretold by David the Prophet-King, 
when he says “Send forth Thy Spirit and they shall be made, and 
Thou shalt renew the face of the earth.” 

Consider again the parables of the Gospels, for instance that of 
the Prodigal Son who wasted in a foreign country the portion which 
he had received from his father, and then driven by want and 1004D 
remembering who he was and induced by penitence, returned to his 
father, who received him most affectionately and forgivingly and 
bestowed upon him not only his former grace but even slew the 
fatted calf in his honour. Who, then, is that son? Is he not man 
created in the Image of God? For the Heavenly Father created two 
natures capable of knowing Him, the angelic and the human, and 1005A 
upon each He bestowed the Grace of Sonship. But man is regarded 
as the younger son, and angel the older, because Scripture records 
first the creation of the angel, then that of man. Therefore that part 
of the angel host which never abandoned its Creator is the elder son, 
and man who wholly fell and strayed away from his Creator is the 

PERIPHYSEON 

younger; who after a while, however, shall return again to his 
Father and receive the best garment, that is, the first condition of his 
nature. In addition he shall receive the girdle of the virtues, which is 
signified by the ring, and the price of the death of Christ, which is 
represented by the sandals that were put upon his feet, and which is 
life eternal which is the price paid to all men generally and was 
1005B earned by the death of the Lord. And then the fatted calf shall be 
brought in and slain. And what is that calf? Is it not the man Christ, 
filled with the sevenfold Grace of the Holy Spirit, and heavy with 
the fatness of the letter and the visible nature ? For in these two, the 
letter and visible nature, the corporeality of Christ is manifest, since 
it is in them and through them that He is perceived, in so far as He 
can be perceived. For Christ is the spirit of the Law “and the 
invisible things of God are made manifest through the things that 
are made, and His power and eternity are everlasting;” or, in the 
words of the blessed Maximus when he is explaining what Gregory 
the Theologian said of the Nativity : “The Word was materialised 

“The Word, Which is simple and incorporeal and Which is the 
spiritual nourishment of all that comes after It, deigned by His 
fleshly presence to take from us and on behalf of us and in 
accordance with our nature, though without sin, material substance 
1005C for the divine powers that are in heaven.” 

As to the fact that that son represents the human race, passing 
over John Chrysostom’s commentary on this parable because of its 
length, we may content ourselves with what the blessed Ambrose 
says in his Commentary on Luke : 

“The species of the human race may be expressed in one man, 
the Prodigal Son. When Adam was, we all were in him. When Adam 
perished, we all perished with him. Therefore man is made again in 
that man who perished, and that man made in the Image and 
likeness of God, is, by the mercy and longsuffering of God, brought 
back into that Image.” 

You see then that this parable teaches allegorically that not a 
part only but the whole of the human race is to be restored in Christ. 

1005D The parable of the lost drachma is to be interpreted in the same 
way. After the whole world, like the house, has been turned upside 
down, it is found by the woman, that is, by the Wisdom of God, 
which made it and possesses it. And it is reckoned as a tenth part 
because not only is human nature made equal with the nine others 
of the angels, but there is no angelic order into which human nature. 

BOOK V 

695 

after its restoration will not enter according to its intelligible 
degrees, so that it will fulfil the perfect denarius of the heavenly city, 
as Dionysius the Areopagite declares in his book on the Celestial 
Hierarchy. And that would have been its lot if it had not sinned. 

And you should think the same of the hundredth sheep, which 
had strayed away from the heavenly fold, and which was sought and 
found by the Good Shepherd, Who is Christ, and when he had 
found it he carried it on his shoulders back to the flock from which 
it had strayed. It is numbered the hundredth because after the Fall 
of human nature the perfection (represented by the number 100) of 
the Heavenly Jerusalem who is our mother is diminished ; and will 
be restored to its full number of 100 when the human race returns to 
it in its Head Which is Christ. 

Now, in this connection there arises a question of no small 
importance : a question which has been raised before, but never so 
far as I know answered : for if it has, I must confess, the answer has 
never come my way. The question is, if the number of men that shall 
return to take their place in the Heavenly City, that is, in the society 
of the company of the blessed under the One God, is equal to the 
number of the transgressing angels who fell therefrom. Clearly, 
either the number to which the human race has increased from the 
first man to the end of the world must be equal to that of the 
apostate angels, so that their heavenly thrones which they relin¬ 
quished in their pride, may be sufficient for the whole human race to 
take on their Return : or, if the number of the fallen angels is less 
than that to which the human race has grown, a superfluous part of 
human nature equal to that by which it exceeds the number of the 
fallen angels will be excluded from the company of the Kingdom of 
Heaven : for they will not be able to ascend there if they can find no 
place in heaven for them. Only that part which equals the number of 
the fallen angels will return. And this would mean that not all men 
were redeemed in Him Whose will it is that all men should be saved 
and come to the recognition of His Truth. And indeed most authors 
of either language do not hesitate to declare that the number of men 
that shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven is not less than the number 
of angels that abandoned heaven. In that case, we must choose one 
of two alternatives : either the number of all mankind is equal to ihe 
number of evil angels, or the number of mankind is greater than the 
number of apostate angels, which would mean that not all partakers 
in human nature will return to the principle of their Creation : but 
this conclusion is wholly unacceptable for reasons already given 

1006 A 

1006B 

1006C 

PERIPHYSEON 

696 

concerning the salvation of the whole of mankind in Christ, and 
which cannot be denied. 

I006D To quote the Holy Fathers on this subject, that is, on the 
comparison between the men who are to be restored and the angels 
who have fallen would take too long : I will content myself with a 
single quotation from St. Augustine : discussing the nature and fall 
of the demons in the first chapter of the twenty-second book on the 
City of God, he writes : 

“A nature which might have enjoyed God proves itself to be 
created good by the very fact of its misery at not enjoying God, Who 
punishes the voluntary fall of the angels with the most just penalty of 
eternal unhappiness, whereas to those who stand firm in the 
1007A Supreme Good He has given as a reward the assurance of eternal 
perseverance so that they can be sure of perseverance to the end. He 
also made man upright, endowed with free will, an earthly animal 
yet worthy of heaven, if he should stay fast by his Creator; but 
should he abandon Him, he would partake of such misery as was 
appropriate to this nature. He foreknew that he would sin in 
breaking the Law of God and desert Him. And yet He did not take 
away from him the power of free will, foreseeing the good use that 
He would make of man’s evil by gathering together through His 
Grace as many of the mortal race which had been justly and 
deservedly condemned as would replenish the part of the angel host 
which had fallen, and so that chosen and heavenly kingdom would 
not suffer loss in the number of its citizens, and indeed might even 
enjoy an increase.” 

This conclusion of the most holy doctor should by itself be 
1007B sufficient to teach us that the number of the human race to return 
into the Kingdom of Heaven will be greater than the number of 
those who fell therefrom. And I think this is what the prophet David 
meant when he said : “I have announced and I have spoken : they 
are multiplied beyond number.” For he was referring to those who 
are purified and redeemed by the sacrifice of the Body of the Lord, 
and whose number exceeds that of the angels who through the pride 
of one renegade were hurled from the glory of blessedness. The next 
verse makes this abundantly clear : “Sacrifice and offering Thou 
wouldest not : but Thou hast made Thy Body a holocaust for me.” 
By this he means : The sacrifice of the Law and the offering for the 
purification and redemption of the human race You did not desire 
to offer, but You made for my sake the Body of Christ a holocaust 
1007C in the fire of His Passion on the altar of the Cross ; and asked no 

BOOK V 

697 

further recompense for our sin. For Grace is more abundant than 
transgression, and the Passion of Christ avails infinitely more in 
bringing us life than the sin of Adam in bringing us death. 

So whether the number of wicked men is equal to that of the 
fallen angels, or whether it is greater, in neither case are we 
prevented from believing that the whole human race is redeemed in 
Christ and shall return into the Heavenly Jerusalem. For if it is 
equal, as many who have studied the matter believe, it redounds to 
the praise of our Redeemer Who in His Providence ordained from 
the beginning that the number of the human race should be exactly 
sufficient to supplant the Prince of this world, from whom He has 
taken away not only the whole realm of human nature but also his 
own inheritance from which he was expelled because of his swollen 
pride ; and this inheritance was bequeathed to us for all eternity, so 
that he might be tormented by a punishment of twofold anguish : 
the loss through the unjust slaying of the Second Man of the 
kingdom he had obtained through seducing the First Man ; and his 
envy at seeing his enemies in possession of his own heavenly 
birthright which he had abandoned. If, on the other hand the 
number is greater, then we should offer Him the greater glory in that 
He not only distributed among us in heaven the possessions of our 
ancient enemy, but has prepared for us in His Heavenly Kingdom 
even more mansions than for those who had fallen. 

And now I think I have given sufficient illustrations of the 
general Return into Paradise. 

A. You certainly have. For to make an exhaustive collection of 
all the allusions to these matters scattered throughout the Scriptures 
would be a long and perhaps a tedious business. But I should like to 
know the significance of the envy of the elder son for the younger 
when he returned to his father and was feasted with the fatted calf. 
For if the two brothers signify the human and angelic natures I find 
it difficult to see what sort of envy the good angels could feel at the 
salvation of the human race and at its Return to its Father, Whose 
substance, the Grace of the Image in the mansion of this mortal life, 
it had wasted in servitude to the devil. For we are told that the Holy 
Angels grieve at man’s destruction, not that they envy him ; for they 
are fellow-citizens of the Kingdom of Heaven and possessors of the 
substance and inheritance of their Father. And the Lord Himself 
bears witness that the heavenly Powers rejoice when the sheep is 
found and brought back on the shoulders of its Shepherd, and by 
this one sinner the whole human race is implied. And if the elder son 

1007D 

1008 A 

1008B 

698 

PERIPHYSEON 

symbolises the general angelic nature why is it said that he came in 
from the fields and demanded angrily that his father substitute a 
kid, and acted in other ways repugnant to the angelic nature? 

N. The question is difficult to solve, but I think there is one 
loose way of doing so, namely on the principle of parabolic transition. 
For parables are of two kinds. One is of a straightforward narrative 
in which the meaning of the characters remains unchanged, and 
there is no transition from one significance to another; while in the 
other kind the elements of the story change from one significance to 
another. It is to this kind that many of the Eloly Fathers, and 
especially the blessed Ambrose, attach this particular parable, and 
we find them expounding it accordingly. The first part of the 
parable, which consists of the division of the Father’s substance, 
and the elder son remaining with his father while the younger 
wanders away and wastes his share of the property he had inherited 
from his father and describes the other misfortunes that followed 
1008D the fall of man, is clearly an allegory of the two natures, the 
intelligible nature of the angels and the rational nature of man. But 
with the return of the prodigal there is a transition of meaning. The 
Return itself is to be interpreted in two ways : in the general sense of 
the Return of the whole human race, on account of the slaying of the 
fatted calf, that is of Christ’s Passion which He suffered for the 
salvation of the whole world ; and in the special sense (and it is here 
1009A that the parable begins to shift its meaning) of the Return of the 
gentiles, who are represented by the younger son, through faith in 
Christ, to their Heavenly Father, whose Image they had tarnished 
by the filth of their idolatries and the vainness of their imaginations 
on account of the envy of the Jews, who are represented by the elder 
son, at the conversion of the gentiles by the preaching of the 
Apostles. For the Jews, although they had very often been corrupted 
and led astray into the worship of demons, yet had never altogether, 
as they thought, denied the God of their fathers — and yet they did 
deny and still deny that Christ is the Son of God, and therefore they 
deny His Father. For he who denies the Son denies the Father also. 
Who if the Son is denied is no longer a Father. In their infidelity 
they demand a kid from the Father of Christ Whom they deny, but 
they will not accept the kid from the Father of Christ : they accept it, 
however, from their own Father, of whom Jesus Christ, Whom they 
1009B deny to be the Son of the Father, is speaking when He says : “You 
are from your Father the Devil,’’ and from the faith of the gentiles 
they turn to him. Therefore they do not ask of the Father that they 

BOOK V 

699 

may eat of the fatted calf, that is the Lord’s Christ, but they demand 
and expect the base and wanton kid that is prone to every lust, 
namely the Antichrist, on whom they vainly hope to feed and in 
whom they vainly hope to reign. And coming from the fields, that is, 
from worldly occupations and from the laborious task of observing 
the law according to the letter, “I heard music and singing,” that is 
to say, on all sides the concordant and combined harmony of the 
people of the gentiles feasting together in Christ and returning to 
their Father, that universal harmony which is the product of perfect 
faith and which is found in the intelligible apprehension of the 
Truth, and joy at their liberty and redemption. And therefore 
moved by envy he becomes angry with him who is his brother after 
the likeness of nature but appears as an enemy because of the 
unlikeness of the infidelity of the Jews to the faith of the Christian 
religion, and complains to his father at his reception of the son who 
had lost the good things of his nature, whereas he himself is more 
wasteful of his natural riches because he denies the only Son of God, 
the Creator and Saviour of all men. For while the unbelieving 
heathen deny the Word of God through ignorance, the Jews deny 
Him through envy; and as the sin of ignorance is more venal than 
the sin of envy, so the gentiles are less wasteful of their natural 
goods than the Jews. Therefore the gentiles, when they have been 
brought forth from the darkness of their ignorance and summoned 
into the light of the Truth, are received, while the faithless Jews who 
deny the Son, are left in the passions of their ignominy and the most 
grievous pangs of envy until at the end of the world, by the ineffable 
generosity of the Divine Goodness, they too shall be received, when 
“they shall be turned towards evening, and shall be hungry like 
dogs, and they shall prowl about the city,” that is, the Christian 
society, wishing to be received into it, and the words spoken by the 
prophet in another place shall be fulfilled : “Let all my enemies be 
confounded and be in awe of me, let them be turned back again and 
let them be confounded very swiftly.” 

This, then, is my exposition of this parable, as far as my little 
wit, following the teachings of the spiritual philosophers, can take it. 
It is now time to deal briefly with the symbols of the special Return 
of human nature. 

A. Time demands that this should be done, and our discourse 
brought to its long expected end. But I have been particularly 
attracted by that division of the Gospel parables into two classes 
which you mentioned. It is not only in parables, but in many other 

1009C 

1009D 

lOlOA 

700 

PERIPHYSEON 

scriptural passages as well that the divine nectar flows forth in forms 
of speech of this kind, and the contemplations of the mystical 
discourses afford an easy way of interpretation to those who study 
them. We can see that the text of the holy prophets has not one but 
many meanings, only from the use of very many transitions — 
through periods and sentences and subdivisions — from various 
senses to various others and from those back again to the same 
lOlOB through hidden and frequent returns. Error or extreme difficulty of 
interpretation are experienced by those who adopt a single species of 
exposition without allowing for transition to various allegories. For 
the text of Holy Scripture is all interrelated, and is a tissue of 
indirect and oblique allusions worthy of Daedalus. But the Holy 
Spirit did not ordain this to spite our understanding — let no man 
think that — but to exercise it and make it worthy of the reward of its 
effort and ingenuity : the reward of those who labour in the study of 
Holy Scripture, which is a pure and perfect understanding. 

A prayer O Lord Jesus, I ask of Thee no other reward, no other 

lOlOC blessedness, no other joy than this : to understand in all purity and 
without being led astray by faulty contemplation Thy Words which 
are inspired by the Holy Spirit. For this is the crown of my 
happiness, this the consummation of perfect contemplation : the 
rational and purified mind shall find nothing beyond this for 
beyond it there is nothing. For as there is no place in which it is 
more proper to seek Thee than in Thy words, so is there no place 
where Thou art more clearly discovered than in Thy words. For 
therein Thou abidest, and thither Thou leadest all who seek and love 
Thee. Therein Thou preparest for Thine elect the spiritual banquet 
of true knowledge, and passing you minister to them. And what is 
the path along which Thou leadest them, O Lord, but an ascent 
through the innumerable steps of Thy contemplation? And ever 
dost Thou open that way in the understandings of those who seek 
and find Thee. Ever art Thou sought by them and ever art Thou 
lOlOD found, — and yet ever art Thou not found : Thou art found in Thy 
Theophanies in which Thou appearest in the minds of those who 
understand Thee after a manifold mode, as in a number of mirrors, 
in the way in which Thou permittest to be known not what Thou 
art, but what Thou art not : not what Thou art, but that Thou art : 
Thou art not found in Thy superessential nature in which Thou 
transcendest and exceedest every understanding that desires to 
comprehend Thee and to ascend unto Thee. Thou grantest unto 
Thine own Thy Presence by a mysterious manifestation of Thyself : 

BOOK V 

701 

Thou eludest them by the infinite and incomprehensible tran- 
scendance of Thine essence. 

A. But let us, I beg, hasten on to the consideration of the 
Special Return and with it put an end to our discourse. And let us no 
longer linger over delay in many repetitions whose purpose is to 
make it more easily understood, lest we should seem to have made 
our discourse more full of words than instruction. 

N. The whole rational creature, of which the created species is 
found in man, and which by nature contains the desire for blessed¬ 
ness and the faculty of knowing the Supreme Good, that is the Most 
High Trinity from Whom flows every good, is likened by Our Lord 
in the Gospel to ten virgins. These ten virgins, carrying their lamps, 
that is, their faculty of apprehending the Eternal Light, went forth 
to meet the bridegroom and the bride, that is, Christ and His 
Church, which is already in heaven, and consists partly of the holy 
angels and partly of the perfectly purified souls of those in whom 
while still in the captivity of this mortal life and corruptible flesh are 
sown the first fruits of human nature so that they have become 
citizens of the Kingdom of Heaven. But why do they go out to meet 
Him ? Because, in the ineffable condescension and knowledge of His 
mercy, moved by love for our salvation, the Redeemer and Bride¬ 
groom of our rational nature is ever coming in spirit, accompanied 
by all the Heavenly Powers and all the Holy Souls, to receive us. 
And that Bridegroom is ever crying in the ear of the heart of all 
mankind, and saying: 

“Come unto Me, all ye that travail and are heavy laden and I 
will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn of Me that I am 
gentle and humble of heart, and you shall find rest for your souls.” 

He comes then to meet us all, and is accompanied by His Bride, 
which is the Heavenly Jerusalem, and He desires to receive us all 
into the society of His City. 

And observe that the whole of humanity is compared to the 
number ten. This is because it possesses the tenth region in the 
territory of the kingdom of Heaven. 

So the ten virgins, that is the total number of mankind, are 
moved by a natural desire to go forth to meet Him who loves them 
and who comes to them, not by a bodily movement but by 
intelligible affection. But although the rational movement towards 
their end, which is Christ, is the same for all, and the desire for the 
eternal Light, which is signified by their lamps, is the same for all. 

lOllA 

lOlIB 

lOllC 

702 

PERIPHYSEON 

they do not all share to the same extent in that Light which lighteth 
101 ID every man that cometh into this world. For as the blessed Dionysius 
the Areopagite says, “that in which all by nature desire to participate 
is the One : but all do not equally participate in the One.” There is 
nothing in nature which is totally deprived of participation in the 
One ; nevertheless all the virgins will not equally go out to meet the 
Bridegroom and the Bride. For those who, as well as the faculty for 
apprehending the True Light, also possess the Light itself, which the 
oil supplies, will come to the Bridegroom Himself, and will enter 
with Him into the spiritual marriage feast, while those who only 
possess the faculty of apprehending the Light, and are not illumi- 
1012A nated by and conformed to the Light itself, although they will go 
forth to meet Christ, that is to say, will ascend not only in the desire 
which is innate in their nature but also in actual experience to those 
things which are their sole natural goods, which subsist in Christ, 
yet they shall not attain to the supernatural Grace and joy of 
deification in Him. 

Now we see the significance of the tenfold division. For it is 
written : “Five of them were foolish,” that is, imprudent, “and five 
prudent.” The foolish brought only their lamps, but not the oil with 
them, whereas the prudent as well as the lamps, carried oil in the 
lamps as well. The vessels of the prudent virgins are the same as 
those of the imprudent, for reason, which is, as it were, the natural 
receptacle of the Divine Light, is equally distributed throughout the 
10I2B integrity, or virginity, of that incorruptible nature which knows 
neither increase nor diminution, but it does not in all cases receive 
the light to an equal degree. And this is not due to any fault of 
grudgingness or insufficiency in the Light itself, for it is present to 
all and shines equally upon all, streaming out over all in inexhaus¬ 
tible profusion : it is due to the fact that the power of the eyes which 
perceive that spiritual light is unequal, so that some enjoy it to a 
greater, some to a less degree, while others again are completely 
closed to it, such as those unclean spirits which refuse to turn 
towards it — not because they are wholly cut off from parti¬ 
cipation in the truly existing Light as far as concerns the 
intelligible substance in which they were created by the Supreme 
1012C Good, (for in that case they would be reduced to absolute non¬ 
existence, for anything that is totally deprived of participation in it 
is completely outside the realm of nature), but because inasmuch as 
they are infected by the irrational impulses of their perverse wills, 
they are prevented from participating in the true Light, for instead 

BOOK V 

703 

of directing their gaze upon it, they turn to themselves, that is, to 
their own wickedness. But if they would look towards their proper 
nature, and towards its creator, they would immediately become 
blessed. And if anyone should ask : “If the faculty of apprehending 
the divine Light is bestowed equally upon the whole rational nature, 
why is not the potency and act of apprehending it also bestowed 
equally either in this life or the life to come?,’’ let him enquire of 
that man who, dazed and bewildered before that inaccessible light, 
cries out : 

“O the depth of the riches of the knowledge and wisdom of 
God ! How inscrutable are His judgments, how unsearchable His 
ways in every age ! For who has known the sense of God? Or who 
has been His counsellor? And who has first given Him anything, 
that he may be paid back again? For from Him and through Him 
and in Him and for Him are all things.’’ 

Let him enquire why the bestower of all good things did not 
distribute the power of contemplating Him equally among the 
angelic orders. For the Seraphim, Cherubim and Thrones have a 
deeper and closer and purer contemplation of Him than the Virtues 
and Powers and Dominions ; and these again a more excellent and 
brighter contemplation of Him than the Principalities, Archangels 
and Angels. But who will answer his enquiry? Only he who 
meditates upon the scripture : “God made all things according to 
measure and number and weight,’’ that is to say, in order. 

But how could the Universe which God created possess beauty 
if God had made all things equal ? For even the pleasure and beauty 
of sensible harmony consists not in like but in unlike sounds, related 
to one another according to rational proportions. 

Again, suppose the following problem should be proposed : If 
the first man had not sinned (thus bringing upon himself the 
punishment of multiplication of the human race into male and 
female) and instead of propagating mankind through male and 
female, either produced all mankind at once out of the secret 
recesses of nature according to its proper species and numbers in the 
same way as all the angels proceeded simultaneously from their 
causes, or brought forth into this world each individual at his 
appointed time without sin and without employing the means of 
propagation of the beasts of the field : would all men enjoy the same 
power and rank, or would men, like the angels, be disposed in 
accordance with the Divine Providence and Wisdom each in his 
proper rank ? 

1012D 

1013A 

1013B 

PERIPHYSEON 

1013C 

1013D 

1014A 

1014B 

Such a man receives his reply, I think, from Him Who promises 
to man that after the resurrection “They shall be as the angels in 
Heaven.” But Angels are disposed according to their proper ranks : 
therefore men too will be disposed according to the different degrees 
of their virtues. And if they shall be so after they have sinned, it 
follows that they would have been so if they had not sinned, that is 
to say, they would not have attained the fruits of contemplation in 
the same way. Further, if, as St. Augustine says, the first man in his 
primal condition, before he had sinned, was neither wise nor unwise 
(for if wise, he would not have abandoned God in order to satisfy 
his wife, nor acted incautiously in imitating the pride of the subtle 
devil : for he was not seduced, but puffed up with pride : if unwise, 
one is forced to believe that God created in His own Image and 
likeness a foolish man, and who could believe such a thing?), it 
follows that he was balanced in a midway position between wisdom 
and unwisdom, destined to become wise if he should observe the 
ordinance of God. For the Scripture does not say; “Let us make 
man Our image and likeness,” but “Let us make him in Our image 
and likeness,” which clearly means : Let us make man to this end, 
that, if he keep My commandment, he may become Our image and 
likeness. Therefore he was not created wise, but capable of wisdom 
if he should desire it. He could have gained wisdom and attained his 
proper condition if he had not consented to scorn the counsel of 
God. But since he did not lift himself up erect and ascend to wisdom 
by keeping the commandment, but by his own will fell headlong 
through his transgression into the lust for temporal and sensible 
things, we must think of him as being, even before his sin, inclined 
rather to unwisdom and imprudence than to wisdom and prudence : 
for the unwisdom and imprudence are prior to the sin. But this 
befell him not as the result of his creation but by the waywardness of 
his own will, which does not derive from natural causes : therefore it 
was he himself who made himself unwise and imprudent before he 
transgressed the commandment. But if he had not disobeyed the 
commandment perhaps he would not have been driven out of 
paradise ; he would have enjoyed only the goods of his nature which 
he had received at his creation, and would have taken some delight 
in them, but he would still be deprived, as a penalty for his folly and 
waywardness, of participation in the highest wisdom and prudence. 
For in the case of many, and indeed almost all, imprudent and 
unwise men, we see that they are happy and content in the nobility 
of their birth, in a numerous kindred, in the health and vigour and 
beauty of their bodies, in the cleverness of their wits, in the 

BOOK V 

705 

eloquence of their speech, in a beautiful and seemly wife, in the 
plentifulness of their offspring, in their affluence of worldly riches, 
not to mention dignities and honours and those other desirable 
things in which this world delights. In all these things they take so 
much pleasure that they would be content to go on living in this way 
forever, without a wish or a thought for the delights of the spirit. 
This was the condition of the first man and woman before their 
transgression, and it is to this condition, namely enjoyment of their 
natural goods alone without the adornment of the virtues that that 
part of the human race which is signified by the five foolish virgins 
shall return ; but we may reasonably suppose that the other part of 
the human race which is represented by the five prudent virgins, is to 
be raised up beyond all natural goods to that height to which man 
would through Grace have ascended had he not sinned, that is to 
say, to participation in the highest wisdom and all the virtues, and 
through that participation attain to deification and the contempla¬ 
tion of the truth ; and thus it will enter in to the spiritual marriage 
feast of its Bridegroom. To this feast none is admitted unless he is 
shining with the light of wisdom and aflame with the fires of Divine 
Love : and of these two qualities, wisdom and love, the nourishment 
is action and contemplation : therefore none is allowed to ascend to 
this feast who is deficient in action and contemplation but is totally 
excluded from it, even though he is endowed in the highest degree 
with natural goods. For it is not nature that raises the human mind 
thither, but Grace, which thus rewards obedience to the command¬ 
ments of God, and the most perfect knowledge of God, in so far as 
that is granted us in this life, through what He has created and what 
He has written in His Scriptures. Consider, then, the central 
meaning of this parable, and how it makes a transition from the 
genus to the species in the same way as the other parable we have 
discussed, that of the two sons who divided their father’s substance 
between them. In that, you will remember, it was first the general 
Return of mankind that was signified, and then the special Return of 
the gentiles : in this, in like manner, the general Return of the total 
number of mankind to the former condition of their nature is 
signified by the ten virgins who go forth to meet the Bridegroom ; 
the Special Return of all the Saints by the five who were prudent. 
For the number of the elect is a species of the human genus. So 
besides the Return to the ancient principle of their nature which is 
common to the generality of mankind, the parable also alludes to 
the ascent beyond nature into God Himself in the special case of the 
ineffable deification. For all, as we have already said, shall return 

1014C 

1014D 

1015A 

PERIPHYSEON 

1015B 

1015C 

1015D 

1016A 

into Paradise, but not all shall enjoy the Tree of Life — or rather, all 
shall receive of the Tree of Life, but not all equally : but that the 
natural goods too, which all share alike, are fruit of the Tree of Life, 
only the fool does not know. For, as we have already mentioned, 
Tudv ^u>iov, or “every tree” is a name for Christ, for He is the fruitful 
Tree of all good things. He is everything that is good and the 
Disposer of all good things. All men therefore by their general 
participation in natural goods shall enjoy His fruit, but His elect 
shall enjoy the special benefit of the exaltation above all nature of 
their deifications. It is these deifications, in which only the righteous 
shall participate, that are signified by the spiritual marriage feast, to 
which the prudent virgins are admitted. Not all shall enjoy these 
supernatural goods but only those who, in the words of Gregory the 
Theologian, “are permitted to transcend matter and flesh, as though 
they passed beyond the clouds and the veils, and through reason and 
contemplation to come into the presence of God, and be received 
into the most pure light, in so far as that is possible for human 
nature.” These are blessed by their ascent from here and their 
deification There. But the use of this word. Deification, is very rare 
in the Latin books. However, we often find it implied, especially in 
the works of Ambrose. I am not sure of the reason for this reticence : 
perhaps it is because the meaning of this word Theosis (the term 
which the Greeks usually employ in the sense of the psychic and 
bodily transformation of the Saints into God so as to become One in 
Him and with Him, when there will remain in them nothing of their 
animal, earthly and mortal nature) seemed too profound for those 
who cannot rise above carnal speculations, and would therefore be 
to them incomprehensible and incredible, and thus the doctrine was 
not to be taught in public, but only to be discussed among the 
learned. For there are many Divine Mysteries that the Holy Fathers 
do not touch upon but pass over in silence for this reason : weak 
eyes cannot bear the brilliance of the light. 

These few examples taken from the divine parables are suffi¬ 
cient, I think, to explain the general and the special Return of the 
human race to its Principle, by which I mean its primordial creation, 
and in the case of those who are worthy to enjoy the purest 
participation in Him, into God Himself, and the reversion of the 
whole sensible nature, which is created in man and for his sake, into 
its Causes, when there shall be not only the general Sabbath in all 
the works of God, but also the special sabbath of sabbaths in the 
holy angels and the saints, and the House of God shall be filled, and 

BOOK V 

707 

each shall have in it his proper place, some below, others above, 
some at the very summit of nature, others beyond every natural 
virtue in the presence of God Himself. And so that great feast will be 
ordered and celebrated, from which the substance of no man shall 
be rejected, for the substance was made by God ; and to which the 
wickedness of no man shall be admitted, for the wickedness was not 
made by God. For our nature shall be purified, the vice shall be 
winnowed away, the grain, which is our substance, shall be stored, 
the stubble, which is sin, shall burn in the flame of the Divine 
Judgment, the places hid in darkness shall be illumined, and God 
shall be seen as all in all. 

A. Yes, the examples you have given are sufficient, I agree. But 
I would like you to explain the rest of this last parable. 

N. To what do you refer? 

A. To the delay of the Bridegroom, to His sleep, to the sleep of 1016B 
all the virgins, and to the other incidents which you have not so far 
touched upon. 

N. The Bridegroom’s delay signifies, I think, the temporal 
interval between the Lord’s first and second Coming ; or better 
perhaps between the beginning and the end of the world. For 
throughout the whole six ages of the world there neither has been 
nor will be any time in which the virginity, that is, the integrity, of 
human nature, which in no man is destroyed although in all men 
save Christ is defiled, does not strive to ascend to meet its 
Bridegroom. In some it is foolish, in some it is prudent, but in all, it 
is desirous of its Creator and its home on high which it has 
abandoned. For the desire for happiness is by nature common to all, 
to the wise and to the unwise, to the good and the evil. In this 
temporal interval during which the world runs its appointed course 1016C 
some sleep while others doze. The sleepers are those who are already 
dead or about to die : the dozers those who shall still be alive in the 
flesh when the end of the world shall come. These are said to doze 
rather than to sleep because they will not die a thorough death, nor 
will they be detained in death for any period of time, but as though 
weighed down by sleep but not overcome by it, they will be 
transformed into the other life without an intervening period of 
death. Here, though, St. Augustine seems to agree with those who 
say that in that most swift passage of those who shall be alive at the 
end of the world there will be a brief moment of death. For in the 
twenty-first chapter of the twentieth book on the City of God he 
writes : 

PERIPHYSEON 

“If we believe that the saints who shall be found living when 
Christ comes and who shall be caught up into His presence shall in 
1016D that instant leave their mortal bodies for a while and return quickly 
into those same bodies in their immortal condition the doubt is 
cleared in the words of the Apostle, both when he says : “The seed 
you sow does not come to life unless it first dies,” and “We shall all 
arise again” or “We shall all sleep.” For they shall not attain 
immortal life unless they shall first have spent a little while in death 
and consequently also shall have a share in the resurrection after 
they have slept for a while, which though short shall not be 
nothing.” 

1017A The middle of the night, in which the outcry is made and the 

Bridegroom comes signifies the end of the world whose coming 
none can foretell and the advent of the Spiritual Bridegroom which 
no knowledge can comprehend. For He Himself has said: “Of that 
day and that hour no man knows, nor the angels of heaven, nor the 
Son of Man, but the Father only.” And at the conclusion of this 
parable He says : “Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the 
hour.” 

The outcry signifies those most certain signs which shall herald 
the destruction of the world and the coming of the Lord, events 
which He Himself foretold to His disciples on the Mount of Olives. 

The rising up of all the virgins signifies the rebirth of the whole 
human race. The prudent virgins furnish their lamps, that is, their 
rational impulses, with the tallow of good works and the brightness 
of a pure knowledge. But these two, good works and knowledge, the 
foolish virgins do not possess. And as to the prudent virgins who 
1017B refuse to give of their oil to the foolish, they can have no more likely 
symbolical meaning, I think, than the prudent souls to whom 
their merits shall appear as base and inadequate things on that 
intelligible day in which each one shall acknowledge the depths of 
his own conscience, and not to be compared with eternal bliss, 
as the Apostle says : “For the passions of this world are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory that is to come and will be 
revealed in us.” And the Lord Himself says : “Blessed are the poor 
in spirit,” blessed, that is, are those who value themselves and their 
deserts as nothing, and consider themselves to be altogether wanting 
in the riches of virtues, “for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.” 
Therefore shall it be said to them that seek help from Him, “lest 
perchance it may not be sufficient for us and for you.” This can be 
1017C understood in two ways: either the “lest” is to be taken in the 

BOOK V 

709 

negative sense, and extended in its effect, or it is taken to express 
doubt and restricted, as in the book of Genesis: “Lest he put 
forward his hand and take of the tree of Life.” And that it was not 
through envy that they refused to share their poverty of merit with 
the foolish virgins by giving them oil is clear from the fact that they 
do give them advice : “Go rather to them that sell, and buy.” That is 
to say : Go to those whose supply of merits is not only sufficient for 
themselves but could also bring assistance to those who were able to 
do them honour in this life, and provide them with merit in the life 
to come. 

But while this tardiness and negligence were being displayed the 
Bridegroom came and took those virgins who were prepared and 
arrayed for His coming and brought them into His marriage feast, 
that is to say, into His Deification, where He glorifies the most 
perfect intelligences with the supernatural Grace of contemplation 
of Himself; while the others He left in the enjoyment of natural 
goods, but excluded from the heights of that ineffable Deification 
“which the eye has not seen nor the ear heard, nor has it ascended 
into the heart of man.” This is the significance of the words, “The 
door was shut”, the entry, that is, into the contemplation of God 
face to face, which shall not be opened to those who lived in this life 
carelessly, neglecting to fill the vessels of their reason with the oil of 
knowledge and good works, even though, induced by a tardy 
penitence they cry out, “Lord, Lord, open unto us.” 

This double repetition of the name of the Lord signifies either 
the excessive longing of human nature for the contemplation of its 
Creator undarkened by the clouds of ignorance exhibited by those 
who in this life lived without the support of righteous conduct; or 
more probably the ignorance of those uninstructed Christians who 
in their inadequate appreciation of the loftiness of the Catholic 
Faith suppose that Our Lord Jesus Christ is composed of two 
substances (whereas He is in fact one substance in two Natures) and 
seek for that which it would not benefit them to receive. And that is 
why they receive the reply : “You ask and you do not receive, for 
your asking is ill.” 

How many are they who are either completely ignorant of the 
Divine Essence in three substances or the three Substances in the 
One Essence, or totally refute it, and whose demand for an entrance 
into the marriage feast of the pure contemplation of God takes the 
form of false thinking and materialist opinions ! How many are they 
who make such a division in the Lord Jesus Christ that they can 

1017D 

10I8A 

I018B 

PERIPHYSEON 

710 

neither believe nor understand that His Divinity is united to His 
Humanity, and His Humanity to His Divinity in one Substance or, 
as the Latins more usually say, in One Person, whereas in fact His 
Humanity and His Divinity are One, and One inseparably, except 
for the special property of each of His two Natures ! Therefore it is 
meet and right that to those who double the substance of Christ and 
cry “Lord, Lord, open unto us” that the reply shall be : “Verily 
verily I say unto you, I know you not,” by which is meant : “I allow 
you to be ignorant of the intimate and secret marriage feast of My 
divinity and My humanity which before the world was made I have 
prepared for those whose intelligence of Me is pure, and to which, 
now that the world is at an end I have brought them in. For while 
you were still living in the flesh you did not prepare yourselves to 
become worthy of the delights of that feast : but I permit you to 
remain within the bounds of the natural goods which I created in 
you.” 

In like manner He says that those who on the Day of Judgment 
shall cry “Lord, Lord, did we not do many good deeds in Thy 
Name?” shall be told : “I know you not ; depart from me,” and in 
another place, “Not everyone that saith unto me. Lord, Lord, shall 
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.” 

So the Word that is made one with the Flesh and the Flesh that 
is made one with the Word receives into the indivisible Unity of the 
single Substance of two natures, human and divine, only those who 
1018D with the single eye of perfect contemplation behold the Unity of His 
Substance so as to recognise both the Man in the Word as truly the 
Son of God and the Word in the Man as truly the Son of Man 
without confusion of the Natures, and that Our Lord Jesus Christ is 
one and the same Son of God and Son of Man. 

And there you have a brief, but I think reasonable, exposition 
of this parable. 

A. Yes. 

N. What is there left to say before we close our work? 

A. Nothing, I think, but some short dvaKecpaXaicoaiq of its 
1019A general matter, namely the Division of Nature. 

39 N. We have divided Nature, which comprises God and His 

. ^ creature, into four parts. The first species consists of and may be 
recapitulation nature which creates and is not created, the second as 

the nature which is created and creates, the third as that which is 

BOOK V 

711 

created but does not itself create, the fourth as that which neither is 
created nor creates. 

The first and fourth natures can be predicated of God alone : 
not that His nature can be divided, for it is simple and more-than- 
simple : but it can be approached by two modes of contemplation : 
when I consider Him as the Principle and Cause of all things, reason 
convinces me that the Divine Essence, or Substance, or Goodness, 
or Virtue, or Wisdom, or whatever else may be predicated of God, 
was created by none, for nothing greater is prior to the Divine 
Nature, but all things, both the things that are and the things that 
are not, are created by It and through It and in It and for It. On the 
other hand when I consider that same Nature as the End of all 
things and the ultimate Consummation to which all things tend and 
in which the limit of their natural motion is set, I find that It is 
neither created nor creating. For just as the Nature Which is from 
Itself can be created of none, so neither does It create anything. 
When all things which have proceeded from It either through 
intelligible or sensible generation shall by a miraculous and ineffable 
rebirth return to It again, when all things have found their rest in It, 
when nothing more shall flow forth from It into generation, it can 
no longer be said of It that It creates anything. For what should it be 
creating when It Itself shall be all in all, and shall manifest Itself in 
nothing save Itself? 

Concerning the two intermediate species enough has been said 
in the preceding books, and by any who study them carefully they 
can be clearly understood. The one is recognised in the Primordial 
Causes, the other in their effects. That which consists in the Causes is, 
on the one hand, created in the Only begotten Son of God, in Whom 
and through Whom all things are made; and, on the other hand, 
creates all things which emanate from it, that is to say, all its effects, 
whether intelligible or sensible. 

But that nature which is constituted in the effects of the causes 
is only created by its own causes, but does not itself create, for there 
is nothing in nature which comes after it. And therefore it is for the 
most part to be found among the sensibles. It is no objection to this 
that angels and men, whether good or evil, are sometimes thought to 
create some new thing unknown in this world before to human 
experience, for in fact they create nothing, but produce something 
out of the material creature which has already been created by God 
in its effects through its Causes ; if good, they do this in accordance 
with the laws and precepts of God, if evil under the deceitful 

1019B 

1019C 

10I9D 

PERIPHYSEON 

1020 A 

1020B 

1020C 

inducement and the crafty plottings of the subtlety of the devil. But 
all things are so ordered by the Divine Providence that no evil exists 
substantially in nature, nor anything which could disturb the City of 
God and its polity. 

And after we had undertaken this fourfold contemplation of 
Nature under these four species, of which two belong to the Divine 
Nature as Beginning and End, and two to the created nature as 
Cause and Effect, we thought good to adjoin some theories concern¬ 
ing the Return of the effects into their Causes, that is, into the 
“reasons” in which they subsist. And we found that the nature of 
this Return was threefold. First, we considered the general Return 
which consists in the transformation of the whole sensible creature 
contained within the confines of this world, of all bodies, that is to 
say, whether perceptible to the senses or too subtle to be perceived, 
so that there is no body contained in corporeal nature, whether 
latently or patently endowed with vital motion only, or enriched in 
addition with corporeal sense of the non-rational soul, which shall 
not return through the mediation of its life process into its hidden 
causes : for among the things which derive their substances from the 
cause of all things there is nothing which shall be reduced to 
nothing. 

The second aspect of the Return concerns the general Return of 
the whole of human nature when it has been saved by Christ into the 
original condition in which it was created, and into the dignity of the 
Divine Image which is as it were a kind of Paradise which was 
obtained for it by the merits of One, whose Blood was poured for all 
mankind in common, so that no man might be deprived of the 
natural goods in which he was created, whether he has passed this 
life well or ill. And the goodness and magnanimity of God, which 
surpasses all speech and understanding shall so pervade the whole of 
human nature that it shall be punished in nothing which emanates 
from the Supreme Good. 

The third aspect of the Return is concerned with those who, 
besides ascending to the highest point of the nature which is created 
in them, shall, through the abundance of the Grace of God, which is 
supplied through Christ and in Christ to His elect, pass beyond all 
the laws and limitations of nature and on that superessential plane 
be transformed into God Himself, and shall be in Him and with 
Him One. The path they traverse can, as it were, be divided into 
seven stages : the first will be the transformation of the earthly body 
into vital motion; the second of vital motion into sensation; the 

BOOK V 

713 

third of sensation into reason; then of reason into mind, wherein 
lies the end of every rational creature ; then this fivefold unification 
of the parts of our nature, in which body, vital motion, sensation, 
reason and mind are no longer five but one, in each case the lower 1020D 
nature becoming absorbed in the higher not so as to lose its 
existence but to become with that higher nature one, shall be 
followed by three more stages of the ascent : first the transformation 
of mind into the knowledge of all things which come after God ; 
secondly, of that knowledge into wisdom, that is into the innermost 
contemplation of the Truth, in so far as that is possible to a 
creature; thirdly, and lastly, the supernatural merging of the 1021A 
perfectly purified souls into God Himself, and their entry into the 
darkness of the incomprehensible and inaccessible Light which 
conceals the Causes of all things. Then shall the night shine as the 
day, that is to say, the most secret Mysteries of God shall in a 
manner which we cannot describe be revealed to the blessed and 
enlightened intelligences : then shall the perfect solidity of the 
supernatural cube, which consists of the number eight be achieved, 
to which reference is made in the title of the Sixth Psalm : “The 
Psalm of David for the Octave.” And it was for this reason that the 
Resurrection of the Lord occurred on the eighth day, that that 
blessed life which shall begin with the end of the world when this life 
shall have run its sevenfold course through its seven ages should be 
mystically signified, when human nature, as we have said, shall 
through the eight stages of its ascent return into its Principle. Five of 
those stages lie within the limits of nature, while three lie beyond 
nature and beyond being in God Himself. Then the fivefold number 1021B 
of the creature shall be united with the threefold number of the 
Creator, so that in nothing shall it be manifested save as God alone, 
in the same way as in the most purified air nothing is manifested 
save the light alone. 

Here, then, we complete the matter of this work, which is 40 
divided into five books. And if any shall find that I have written in it 
anything unacceptable or superfluous, let him blame my rashness 
and carelessness, but in humble contemplation let him pardon with 
a generous heart a human intelligence with is still burdened with the 
bonds of the flesh it still occupies. For while we are still in this 
murky life no part of our studies can be perfect, I think, or entirely 
free from error : not even the righteous, so long as they are alive are 1021c 
called righteous because they are so but because they desire to be so, 
and long for the perfect righteousness that is to be : they take their 
name from their inclinations. For I would not believe that any man 

714 

PERIPHYSEON 

SO long as he is burdened with his mortal limbs and fleshly senses, 
save only Christ, could attain to the perfect condition of virtue or 
the height of contemplation of the Truth, and in this I have the 
support of John the Evangelist. “If we say that we have no sin we 
deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us.” And the Apostle says : 
“Now we see in a glass darkly,” and in another place : “We know in 
part and we prophesy in part.” 

But if there is in this work anything of value and contributive to 
the building of the Catholic Faith, let it be attributed to God alone. 
Who alone unlocks the things that are hid in darkness and brings to 
1021D Hii^self those that seek Him and are not deceived by any error, but 
are cured from all error; and to the Universal Cause of all good 
things, without which we can do nothing let all, with one mind in the 
1022A charity of the spirit, give thanks with us, not tempted by the allure of 
hostile criticism or consumed with the fire of envy, the one vice 
above all others which strives to loosen the bond of love and 
friendship. In peace, however, with all those who receive what we 
have written kindly and have the keenness of intellect to grasp it, or 
spitefully reject it and condemn it without first finding out what it is 
they condemn, I dedicate this book in the first place to God, Who 
has said : “Ask and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye shall find, 
knock and it shall be opened unto you,” and in the second place to 
you, Wulfad, most beloved brother in Christ, and collaborator in 
my studies, entrusting to you the examination and correction of it. 
For it was begun under your encouragement, and was brought to its 
1022B close, such as it is, with the help of your knowledge. But if, taking 
note of those matters which I was compelled to omit from the text of 
this work because of the weight of the material I had to deal with 
and the number of doctrines I had to expound ; and of those matters 
too of which at some time or another I promised to expound, never 
mind how briefly, you shall prove to be a stern collector of your 
dues, when the work has been read and the promises discovered, I 
shall deal with them together rapidly, point by point as far as I can. 
But in the meantime I beseech my readers to be content with what 
they have already, considering that the powers of my poor intellect 
are weak, if they can be said to exist at all, and my capacity for 
enquiring into the things of God is negligible, howbeit devout. 
1022C Support me not less by the strength of your own most subtle mind 
than the labours of my imperfect contemplation, and if not in the 
company of my rivals at least in that of my friends and the searchers 
after truth. This, I think, will not be a great labour for you : for 

BOOK V 

715 

when such things fall into the hands of true philosophers, provided 
that the subjects they treat are of interest to them, they not only 
attend to them gladly but embrace them as their own. If, however, 
they fall into the hands of those who take more delight in attacking 
than in understanding, no great effort should be made to refute 
them. Let every man hold what opinion he will until that Light shall 
come which makes of the light of the false philosophers a darkness 
and converts the darkness of those who truly know into light. 

Thus ends the book irepi (puoecov pepiapou, that is On the 
Division of Nature. 

1022D 

3 

NOTE ON SOURCES IN THE GREEK AND LATIN 
FATHERS IN THE PERIPHYSEON 

For the first three books one must refer to the apparatus criticus of the 
edition of the Periphyseon by I.P. Sheldon-Williams, Dublin Institute for 
Advanced Studies, 1968 (I), 1972 (II) and 1981 (III). 

A survey for the whole of the Periphyseon for both Greek and Latin 
Fathers is available in J. Draseke, Johannes Scotus Erigena und dessen Gewdhrs- 
mdnner in seinem Werke De Divisione Naturae, Leipzig 1902, reprinted by 
Scientia Verlag Aalen 1972. This may be supplemented for the Greek Fathers 
by Lenke Vietorisz, Greek Sources in the Periphyseon of John Scotus, called 
Eriugena, (Dissertation at the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies), 
Toronto 1966. For Maximus the Confessor, see now J.-M. Garrigues et A. Riou, 
Annuaire 1969-70 de la Section (Sciences religieuses) de I’Ecole pratique des 
Hautes Etudes, Paris 1969, p. 312-314. For the Latin Fathers, particularly 
Ambrose, see G. Madec, “Jean Scot et les Peres latins,” Revue des Etudes 
Augustiniennes, 1976, XXII, 1-2, p. 134-142. For Augustine alone see the same 
scholar’s, “Le dossier Augustinien du Periphyseon de Jean Scot (livres I-II),” 
Recherches Augustiniennes, vol. XV, 1980, p. 241-264, (III-V), Recherches 
Augustiniennes, vol. XVIII, p. 183-223, 1983, and “Observations sur le dossier 
augustinien du Periphyseon f Eriugena : Studien zu seinen Quellen, ed. 
W. Beierwaltes, Heidelberg 1980, p. 75-84. 

Appended is an independent list of the references to the Greek Fathers as 
quoted in Periphyseon IV and V. The references are to Migne’s Patrologia 

718 

PERIPHYSEON 

Latina 122 for Eriugena and Migne’s Patrologia Graeca for the Greek Fathers : 
3 (Dionysius) ; 1 1, 14 (Origen) ; 43 (Epiphanius) ; 44 (Gregory of Nyssa) ; 90, 91 
(Maximus). 

Book IV 

P.L 

PG. 

122. 

741Cff. 

43. 

137C-140A 

745A ff. 

43. 

185B-188C 

746B 

43. 

144C-145A 

757C 
cf. 1176B 

3. 

1060C, 1061 D 

758C 
cf. 1176B 

44. 

133C-D 

759C 
cf. 11 73 A 

3. 

1017A-C 

772A 

44. 

156B 

773C 

3. 

273B 

786A 

cf. 3. 

592A 

788A 

cf. 44. 

153D 

788B 

44. 

153C-156B 

789A 

44. 

161C-D 

789C 

44. 

161D-164B 

790B 

44. 

164C 

791C 

44. 

165 A 

792A 

44. 

173D-176B 

792D 

44. 

177B-C 

793C 

44. 

177D-183D 

797D 

44. 

188C-192A 

801A 

44. 

225D-228D 

802C 

44. 

228B 

812A 

44. 

189C 

812B 

44. 

189C-D 

812C 

91. 

1345D-1348B 

813B 

91. 

1156C 

813C 

91. 

1156C-D 

813C 

91. 

1156D-1157A 

818C 

cf. 43. 

112B ff., 128B ff. 

819A 
cf. 83 IB 

44. 

196C-197B 

820A 

831B 
cf. 819A 

44. 

197C-201A 

Book V 

P.L. 

122 

NOTES ON SOURCES 

835A 

91. 

1352B 

835B 

91. 

1356A-B 

842C 

90. 

257C-260A 

857A 

90. 

277C-280B 

870C 

P.G. 

91. 

1258C-1260A 

872B 

44. 

225D-228B 

cf. 801 A 

875A 

44. 

192A-C 

875D 

91. 

1157C-D 

877C 

91. 

1249D 

877D 

91. 

1249D-1252A 

879C, cf. 880C-D 

91. 

1088A-C 

880B 

91. 

1249D 

880B 

91. 

1252 A 

884A 

91. 

1249D 

cf. 877D 

889A 

cf. 91. 

1180B-C 

cf. 48 1C 

895C 

90. 

436A-B 

895D-896A 

90. 

433C-436C 

898A 

3. 

593B-C 

899C 

43. 

172C-173C 

901B 

43. 

184B-C 

903B 

3. 

177C-D 

914C 

3. 

856A-C 

917A 

44. 

201A-204A 

920A 

3. 

1073A-1076A 

920B 

3. 

1065A 

922C 

14. 

925C-926A 

922D 

44. 

185A-D 

925A 

3. 

868B 

925B 

3. 

869A-B 

929A 

11. 

335C-338B 

931B 

3. 

724C-725C 

937C 

91. 

1348D-1349A 

937D 

91. 

1348A-D 

945A 

91. 

1236D-1237C 

1005B 

91. 

1285C 

719 

4 

SHORT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. Bibliography : 

Mary Brennan, A Bibliography of Publications in the Field of Eriugenian Studies 
1800-1975, (Estratto dagli Studi Medievali, 3a Serie, XVIII, 1, 1977) Centro 
Italiano di Studi sull’ Alto Medioevo, Spoleto 1977. 

II. Editions: 

All the works are to be found in Patrologia Latina, 122, edited by H.J. Floss 1853. 

De divina praedestinatione, ed. Goulven Madec, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio 
Mediaevalis L, Tournhout 1978. 

Annotationes in Marcianum, ed. Cora E. Lutz, Cambridge Mass. 1939 (1970). 

Glosce Martiani (Lib. 1), ed. Edouard Jeauneau, Quatre Themes Erigeniens, p. 101-166. 
Montreal-Paris, 1978. 

Periphyseon (de divisione naturae). Books I-III ed. by I.P. Sheldon-Williams (with the 
collaboration of Ludwig Bieler) in the Scriptores Latini Hiberniae, Dublin, 
Vols. VII (1968), IX (1972) and XI 1981). 

Expositiones in lerarchiam coelestem, ed. Jeanne Barbet, Corpus Christianorum 
Continuatio Mediaevalis XXXI, Tournhout 1975. 

Homelie sur le prologue de Jean, introduction, texte critique, traduction et notes, by 
Edouard Jeauneau, Sources Chretiennes 151, Paris 1969. 

Commentaire sur LEvangile de Jean, introduction, texte critique, traduction et notes, 
by Edouard Jeauneau, Sources Chretiennes 180, Paris 1972. 

Carmina, ed. L. Traube, Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Poetae Latini III, Berlin, 
1896, p. 518-56. 

722 

PERIPHYSEON 

III. Concordance: 

Periphyseon, G.-H. Allard, Montreal-Paris 1983. 

IV. General Studies : 

H. Beetj, Johannes Scotus Erigena, Cambridge University Press 1925 (1964). 

M. Cappuyns, /eiZAz Scot Erigene, Louvain-Paris 1933 (1965, 1969). 

A. Gardner, Studies in John the Scot, London 1900. 

J.J. O'Meara, Eriugena Cork \969 \ Eriugena, Oxford University Press 1987. 

I. P. ShELDON-Williams, in The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval 

Philosophy, ed. A.H. Armstrong, Cambridge University Press, 1967, p. 518-33. 

The Mind of Eriugena, ed. J.J. O’Meara and L. Bieler, Dublin 1973. 

Jean Scot Erigene et Lhistoire de la philosophic, ed. R. Roques, Paris 1977. 

Eriugena: Studien zu seinen Quellen, ed. W. Beierwaltes, Heidelberg 1980. 

Jean Scot ecrivain, ed. G.H. Allard, Montreal, Bellarmin, 1986. 

Eriugena Redivivus, ed. W. Beierwaltes, Heidelberg 1987. 

CAHIERS D’ETUDES MEDIEVALES 

Directeur de la collection : Guy-H. Allard 

1. EPOPEES, LEGENDES ET MIRACLES 

En collaboration 

1974, 193 pages 9,00$ 

2. LA SCIENCE DE LA NATURE : THEORIES ET PRATIQUES 
En collaboration 

1974, 199 pages 9,00$ 

3. DEVINETTES FRANQAISES DU MOYEN AGE 
Editees par 

BRUNO ROY 

1977, 217 pages 10,00$ 

4. ABELARD, DU BIEN SUPREME {Theologia Summi Boni) 
Introduction, notes et traduction par 

JEAN JOLIVET 

1978, 135 pages 10,00$ 

5. PREFACE AU SPECULUM MAWS DE VINCENT DE BEAUVAIS : 
REFRACTION ET DIFFRACTION 

par SERGE LUSIGNAN 

1979, 146 pages 10,00$ 

6. DISSIDENCE ET PHILOSOPHIE AU MOYEN AGE 
par ERNEST-L. FORTIN 

1982, 201 pages 12,00$ 

7. LES ARTS MECANIQUES AU MOYEN AGE 
En collaboration 

1982, 174 pages 10,00$ 

8. FETE NOBLE EN BOURGOGNE AU XV" SIECLE 
Le banquet du faisan (1454) : 
aspects politiques, sociaux et culturels 
par AGATHE LAEORTUNE-MARTEL 
1984, 206 pages 

12,00$ 

1. 

2. 

3. 

H 

CAHIERS SPECIAUX 

JEAN SCOT ECRIVAIN 

Actes du Colloque international Jean Scot 
Montreal, 28 aout — 2 septembre 1983 
Ed. Guy-H. Allard 
1986, 360 pages 

LEGENDA AUREA: SEPT SIECLES DE DIFFUSION 
Actes du Colloque international sur la Legenda aurea 
Montreal, ll-12mai 1983 
Ed. Brenda Dunn-Lardeau 

1986, 354 pages 

PERIPHYSEON DE JEAN SCOT 
Traduction anglaise par John O’Meara 

1987, 722 pages 

ocf 15 1** 

25,00$ 

25,00$ 

65,00$ 

r 

L 

UNIVERSITE DE MONTREAL L.S.H. 

2E5 

DDMEfl 

COMPOS^ AUX ATELIERS 
GRAPHITI BARBEAU, TREMBLAY ‘iNC. 
A SAINT-GEORGES-DE-BEAUCE 

Achcv^ Imprimerie 
d’imprimcr Gagn^ Li^ 
au Canada Louiseville 

•V 2 im 159^ 

DATE DE RETOUR 

r 

-rsw 

• 3 JHr» 

4-<L jiu.i^ 

M 1 * lyJr, 1 

1^37 : - 

III 

KM 

G ' c 'V 

The first three books of this translation are a reproduction, with the 
minimum necessary adjustments, of that by Dr. I.P. Sheldon-Williams 
in the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies’ edition of the Periphyseon, 
still in course of completion, for which due gratitude to the Institute is 
hereby expressed. To this has been added the publication of a draft 
translation of the remaining two books of the work, exactly as edited by 
H.J. Floss in Migne’s Patrologia Latina 122, prepared by Sheldon- 
Williams and considerably revised by me — not however, for reasons of 
desirable continuity, to the extent of eliminating unusual elements of 
style and structure that indicate Sheldon-Williams’ close and conscious 
affinity with Eriugena. 

This work takes the form of a catechetical dialogue in which a 
“Nutritor” and “Alumnus”, effectively “Master” and “Disciple” (terms 
used in some later manuscripts and some modern editions), discuss the 
doctrine to be imparted : the Disciple is a mere foil to the Master who 
expounds almost everything.