Numbered Discourses 1.1–10 
The Chapter on What Occupies the Mind 
1 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a man’s mind like the sight of a woman. 
The sight of a woman occupies a man’s mind.” 
2 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a man’s mind like the sound of a woman. 
The sound of a woman occupies a man’s mind.” 
3 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a man’s mind like the smell of a woman. 
The smell of a woman occupies a man’s mind.” 
4 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a man’s mind like the taste of a woman. 
The taste of a woman occupies a man’s mind.” 
5 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a man’s mind like the touch of a woman. 
The touch of a woman occupies a man’s mind.” 
6 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a woman’s mind like the sight of a man. 
The sight of a man occupies a woman’s mind.” 
7 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a woman’s mind like the sound of a man. 
The sound of a man occupies a woman’s mind.” 
8 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a woman’s mind like the smell of a man. 
The smell of a man occupies a woman’s mind.” 
9 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a woman’s mind like the taste of a man. 
The taste of a man occupies a woman’s mind.” 
10 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a woman’s mind like the touch of a man. 
The touch of a man occupies a woman’s mind.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.11–20 
The Chapter on Giving Up the Hindrances 
11 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the feature of beauty. 
When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of beauty, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.” 
12 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the feature of harshness. 
When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of harshness, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.” 
13 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to dullness and drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness. 
When you have a sluggish mind, dullness and drowsiness arise, and once arisen they increase and grow.” 
14 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like an unsettled mind. 
When you have no peace of mind, restlessness and remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow.” 
15 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like irrational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind irrationally, doubt arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.” 
16 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents sensual desire from arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the feature of ugliness. 
When you apply the mind rationally to the feature of ugliness, sensual desire does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it’s given up.” 
17 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents ill will from arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the heart’s release by love. 
When you apply the mind rationally on the heart’s release by love, ill will does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it’s given up.” 
18 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents dullness and drowsiness from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like the elements of initiative, persistence, and vigor. 
When you’re energetic, dullness and drowsiness do not arise, or, if they’ve already arisen, they’re given up.” 
19 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents restlessness and remorse from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like peace of mind. 
When your mind is peaceful, restlessness and remorse do not arise, or, if they’ve already arisen, they’re given up.” 
20 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents doubt from arising, or, when it has arisen, gives it up like rational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind rationally, doubt does not arise, or, if it’s already arisen, it’s given up.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.21–30 
3. Unworkable 
21 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed like this, is as unworkable as the mind. 
An undeveloped mind is unworkable.” 
22 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like this, is as workable as the mind. 
A developed mind is workable.” 
23 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed like this, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An undeveloped mind is very harmful.” 
24 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like this, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A developed mind is very beneficial.” 
25 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed, with such untapped potential, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An undeveloped mind, with untapped potential, is very harmful.” 
26 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed, with its potential realized, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A developed mind, with its potential realized, is very beneficial.” 
27 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed and cultivated, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An undeveloped and uncultivated mind is very harmful.” 
28 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A developed and cultivated mind is very beneficial.” 
29 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not developed and cultivated, brings such suffering as the mind. 
An undeveloped and uncultivated mind brings suffering.” 
30 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind. 
A developed and cultivated mind brings happiness.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.31–40 
4. Wild 
31 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not tamed, is so very harmful as the mind. 
A wild mind is very harmful.” 
32 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A tamed mind is very beneficial.” 
33 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not guarded, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An unguarded mind is very harmful.” 
34 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is guarded, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A guarded mind is very beneficial.” 
35 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not protected, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An unprotected mind is very harmful.” 
36 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is protected, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A protected mind is very beneficial.” 
37 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it’s not restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An unrestrained mind is very harmful.” 
38 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A restrained mind is very beneficial.” 
39 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is not tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. 
An untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained mind is very harmful.” 
40 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. 
A tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained mind is very beneficial.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.41–50 
The Chapter on a Spike 
41 
“Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it is impossible for it to break the skin and produce blood. 
Why is that? 
Because the spike is pointing the wrong way. 
In the same way, it is quite impossible for a mendicant whose mind is pointing the wrong way to break ignorance, produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. 
Why is that? 
Because their mind is pointing the wrong way.” 
42 
“Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it’s possible it may break the skin and produce blood. 
Why is that? 
Because the spike is pointing the right way. 
In the same way, it is quite possible for a mendicant whose mind is pointing the right way to break ignorance, produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. 
Why is that? 
Because the mind is pointing the right way.” 
43 
“Mendicants, when I’ve comprehended the mind of an individual whose mind is corrupted, I understand: 
‘If this individual were to die right now, they would be placed in hell as if delivered there.’ 
Why is that? 
Because their mind is corrupted. 
Corruption of mind is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
44 
“Mendicants, when I’ve comprehended the mind of an individual whose mind is pure, I understand: 
‘If this individual were to die right now, they would be placed in heaven as if delivered there.’ 
Why is that? 
Because their mind is pure. 
Purity of mind is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
45 
“Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was cloudy, murky, and muddy. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would not see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. 
Why is that? 
Because the water is clouded. 
In the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is clouded would know what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones: this is quite impossible. 
Why is that? 
Because their mind is clouded.” 
46 
“Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying still. 
Why is that? 
Because the water is unclouded. 
In the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is not clouded would know what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones: this is quite possible. 
Why is that? 
Because their mind is unclouded.” 
47 
“Just as, mendicants, the boxwood is said to be the best kind of tree in terms of its pliability and workability, 
so too, I do not see a single thing that’s as pliable and workable as the mind, when it is developed and cultivated. 
A mind that is developed and cultivated is pliable and workable.” 
48 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that’s as quick to change as the mind. 
So much so that it’s not easy to give a simile for how quickly the mind changes.” 
49 
“This mind, mendicants, is radiant. 
But it’s corrupted by passing corruptions.” 
50 
“This mind, mendicants, is radiant. 
And it is freed from passing corruptions.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.51–60 
The Chapter on a Finger-Snap 
51 
“This mind, mendicants, is radiant. 
But it is corrupted by passing corruptions. 
An unlearned ordinary person does not truly understand this. 
So I say that the unlearned ordinary person has no development of the mind.” 
52 
“This mind, mendicants, is radiant. 
And it is freed from passing corruptions. 
A learned noble disciple truly understands this. 
So I say that the learned noble disciple has development of the mind.” 
53 
“If, mendicants, a mendicant cultivates a mind of love even as long as a finger-snap, 
they’re called 
a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who follows the Teacher’s instructions, who responds to advice, and who does not eat the country’s alms in vain. 
How much more so those who make much of it!” 
54 
“If, mendicants, a mendicant develops a mind of love even as long as a finger-snap, 
they’re called 
a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who follows the Teacher’s instructions, who responds to advice, and who does not eat the country’s alms in vain. 
How much more so those who make much of it!” 
55 
“If, mendicants, a mendicant focuses on a mind of love even as long as a finger-snap, 
they’re called 
a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who follows the Teacher’s instructions, who responds to advice, and who does not eat the country’s alms in vain. 
How much more so those who make much of it!” 
56 
“Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are unskillful, part of the unskillful, on the side of the unskillful. 
Intention is the first of those phenomena to arise, and unskillful phenomena follow right behind.” 
57 
“Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are skillful, part of the skillful, on the side of the skillful. 
Intention is the first of those phenomena to arise, and skillful phenomena follow right behind.” 
58 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like negligence. 
When you’re negligent, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
59 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like diligence. 
When you’re diligent, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
60 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like laziness. 
When you’re lazy, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.61–70 
The Chapter on Arousing Energy 
61 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like arousing energy. 
When you’re energetic, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
62 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like having many wishes. 
When you have many wishes, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
63 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like having few wishes. 
When you have few wishes, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
64 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of contentment. 
When you lack contentment, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
65 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like contentment. 
When you’re contented, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
66 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like irrational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind irrationally, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
67 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like rational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind rationally, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
68 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of situational awareness. 
When you lack situational awareness, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
69 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like situational awareness. 
When you have situational awareness, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
70 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like bad friends. 
When you have bad friends, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.71–81 
8. Good Friends 
71 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like good friends. 
When you have good friends, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
72 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like pursuing bad habits and not good habits. 
When you pursue bad habits and not good habits, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
73 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like pursuing good habits and not bad habits. 
When you pursue good habits and not bad habits, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
74 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents the awakening factors from arising, or, if they’ve already arisen, prevents them from being fully developed like irrational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind irrationally, the awakening factors don’t arise, or, if they’ve already arisen, they’re not fully developed.” 
75 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the awakening factors, or, if they’ve already arisen, fully develops them like rational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind rationally, the awakening factors arise, or, if they’ve already arisen, they’re fully developed.” 
76 
“Loss of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the worst thing to lose.” 
77 
“Growth of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the best thing to grow. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will grow in wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 
78 
“Loss of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the worst thing to lose.” 
79 
“Growth of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the best thing to grow. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will grow in wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 
80 
“Loss of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the worst thing to lose.” 
81 
“Growth of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. 
Wisdom is the best thing to grow. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will grow in wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.82–97 
9. Negligence 
82 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as negligence. 
Negligence is very harmful.” 
83 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as diligence. 
Diligence is very beneficial.” 
84 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as laziness. 
Laziness is very harmful.” 
85 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as arousing energy. 
Arousing energy is very beneficial.” 
86 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as having many wishes. 
Having many wishes is very harmful.” 
87 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as having few wishes. 
Having few wishes is very beneficial.” 
88 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack of contentment. 
Lack of contentment is very harmful.” 
89 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as contentment. 
Contentment is very beneficial.” 
90 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as irrational application of mind. 
Irrational application of mind is very harmful.” 
91 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as rational application of mind. 
Rational application of mind is very beneficial.” 
92 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack of situational awareness. 
Lack of situational awareness is very harmful.” 
93 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as situational awareness. 
Situational awareness is very beneficial.” 
94 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as bad friends. 
Bad friends are very harmful.” 
95 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as good friends. 
Good friends are very beneficial.” 
96 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as pursuing bad habits and not good habits. 
Pursuing bad habits and not good habits is very harmful.” 
97 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as pursuing good habits and not bad habits. 
Pursuing good habits and not bad habits is very beneficial.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.98–139 
The Chapter on Negligence 
98 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as negligence. 
Negligence is very harmful.” 
99 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as diligence. 
Diligence is very beneficial.” 
100 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as laziness. 
Laziness is very harmful.” 
101 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as arousing energy. 
Arousing energy is very beneficial.” 
102–109 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as having many wishes … having few wishes … lack of contentment … contentment … irrational application of mind … rational application of mind … lack of situational awareness … situational awareness …” 
110 
“Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as bad friends. 
Bad friends are very harmful.” 
111 
“Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as good friends. 
Good friends are very beneficial.” 
112 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very harmful as pursuing bad habits and not good habits. 
Pursuing bad habits and not good habits is very harmful.” 
113 
“Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single one that is so very beneficial as pursuing good habits and not bad habits. 
Pursuing good habits and not bad habits is very beneficial.” 
114 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like negligence. 
Negligence leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” 
115 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like diligence. 
Diligence leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” 
116 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like laziness. 
Laziness leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” 
117 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like arousing energy. 
Arousing energy leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” 
118–128 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching like having many wishes … having few wishes … lack of contentment … contentment … irrational application of mind … rational application of mind … lack of situational awareness … situational awareness … bad friends … good friends … pursuing bad habits and not good habits. 
Pursuing bad habits and not good habits leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.” 
129 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like pursuing good habits and not bad habits. 
Pursuing good habits and not bad habits leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching” 
130 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
They brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 
131 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as not the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
They brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 
132–139 
“Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as found in the monastic law … what is found in the monastic law as not found in the monastic law … what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One … what was practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One … what was not prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One … what was prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One 
are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
They brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.140–149 
The Chapter on Not the Teaching 
140 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as not the teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 
141 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as the teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 
142–149 
“Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as not found in the monastic law … what is found in the monastic law as found in the monastic law … what was not spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One … what was not practiced by the Realized One as not practiced by the Realized One … what was practiced by the Realized One as practiced by the Realized One … what was not prescribed by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One … what was prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One … 
are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.150–169 
The Chapter on Non-offense 
150 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as an offense are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
They brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 
151 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as non-offense are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
Those mendicants brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 
152–159 
“Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a serious offense … a serious offense as a light offense … an offense committed with corrupt intention as an offense not committed with corrupt intention … an offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense committed with corrupt intention … an offense requiring rehabilitation as an offense not requiring rehabilitation … an offense not requiring rehabilitation as an offense requiring rehabilitation … an offense with redress as an offense without redress … an offense without redress as an offense with redress are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
Those mendicants brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear.” 
160 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as non-offense are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 
161 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as an offense are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 
162–169 
“Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a light offense … a serious offense as a serious offense … an offense committed with corrupt intention as an offense committed with corrupt intention … an offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense not committed with corrupt intention … an offense requiring rehabilitation as an offense requiring rehabilitation … an offense not requiring rehabilitation as an offense not requiring rehabilitation … an offense with redress as an offense with redress … an offense without redress as an offense without redress 
are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.170–187 
The Chapter on One Individual 
170 
“One individual, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one individual, mendicants, who arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” 
171 
“The appearance of one individual, mendicants, is rare in the world. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one individual, mendicants, whose appearance is rare in the world.” 
172 
“One individual, mendicants, arises in the world who is an incredible human being. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one individual, mendicants, who arises in the world who is an incredible human being.” 
173 
“The death of one individual, mendicants, is regretted by many people. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one individual, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many people.” 
174 
“One person, mendicants, arises in the world unique, without peer or rival, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the best of men. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one person, mendicants, who arises in the world unique, without peer or rival, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the best of men.” 
175–186 
“With the appearance of one individual, mendicants, there is the appearance of a great eye, a great light, a great radiance, and the six unsurpassable things; the realization of the four kinds of textual analysis; the penetration of many and diverse elements; the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom; the realization of the fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. 
What one individual? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
This is the one individual whose appearance brings the appearance of a great eye, a great light, a great radiance, and the six unsurpassable things; the realization of the four kinds of textual analysis; the penetration of many and diverse elements; the realization of the fruit of knowledge and release; the realization of the fruits of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection.” 
187 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single other individual who rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One like Sāriputta. 
Sāriputta rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the Realized One.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter One 
“The foremost of my monk disciples in long standing is Koṇḍañña Who Understood. 
… with great wisdom is Sāriputta. 
… with psychic power is Mahāmoggallāna. 
… who advocate austerities is Mahākassapa. 
… with clairvoyance is Anuruddha. 
… from eminent families is Bhaddiya son of Kāḷīgodhā. 
… with a charming voice is Bhaddiya the Dwarf. 
… with a lion’s roar is Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer. 
… who speak on the teaching is Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī. 
… who explain in detail the meaning of a brief statement is Mahākaccāna.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Two 
“The foremost of my monk disciples in creating a mind-made body is Cūḷapanthaka. 
… who are skilled in the evolution of consciousness is Cūḷapanthaka. 
… who are skilled in the evolution of perception is Mahāpanthaka. 
… who live without strife is Subhūti. 
… who are worthy of a religious donation is Subhūti. 
… who stay in the wilderness is Revata of the Acacia Wood. 
… who practice absorption is Revata the Doubter. 
… who are energetic is Soṇa Koḷivisa. 
… who enunciate well is Soṇa of the Sharp Ears. 
… who receive many possessions is Sīvali. 
… who are committed to faith is Vakkalī.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Three 
“The foremost of my monk disciples who want to train is Rāhula. 
… who went forth out of faith is Raṭṭhapāla. 
… who are the first to pick up a ballot slip is Kuṇḍadhāna. 
… who are eloquent poets is Vaṅgīsa. 
… who are impressive all around is Upasena son of Vaṅgantā. 
… who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta. 
… who are beloved of the deities is Pilindavaccha. 
… with swift insight is Bāhiya of the Bark Cloth. 
… with brilliant speech is Kassapa the Prince. 
… who have attained the methods of textual analysis is Mahākoṭṭhita.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Four 
“The foremost of my monk disciples who are very learned is Ānanda. 
… with a good memory is Ānanda. 
… with an extensive range is Ānanda. 
… in retention is Ānanda. 
… as a personal attendant is Ānanda. 
… with a large congregation is Kassapa of Uruvelā. 
… who inspire lay families is Kāḷudāyī. 
… with good health is Bakkula. 
… who recollect past lives is Sobhita. 
… who have memorized the monastic law is Upāli. 
… who advise the nuns is Nandaka. 
… who guard the sense doors is Nanda. 
… who advise the monks is Mahākappina. 
… who are skilled in the fire element is Sāgata. 
… who inspire eloquent teachings is Rādha. 
… who wear coarse robes is Mogharāja.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Five 
“The foremost of my nun disciples in long standing is Mahāpajāpati Gotamī. 
… with great wisdom is Khemā. 
… with psychic power is Uppalavaṇṇā. 
… who have memorized the monastic law is Paṭācārā. 
… who speak on the teaching is Dhammadinnā. 
… who practice absorption is Nandā. 
… who are energetic is Soṇā. 
… with clairvoyance is Sakulā. 
… with swift insight is Bhaddā of the Curly Hair. 
… who recollect past lives is Bhaddā daughter of Kapila. 
… who have attained great insight is Bhaddakaccānā. 
… who wear coarse robes is Kisāgotamī. 
… who are committed to faith is Siṅgāla’s Mother.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Six 
“The foremost of my laymen in first going for refuge are the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika. 
… as a donor is the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika. 
… who speak on the teaching is the householder Citta Macchikāsaṇḍika. 
… who attract a congregation by the four ways of being inclusive is Hatthaka of Āḷavī. 
… who donate fine things is Mahānāma Sakka. 
… who donate nice things is the householder Ugga of Vesālī. 
… who attend on the Saṅgha is the householder Uggata of Elephant Village. 
… who have experiential confidence is Sūrambaṭṭha. 
… who have confidence in an individual is Jīvaka Komārabhacca. 
… who are intimate is the householder Nakula’s father.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
Chapter Seven 
“The foremost of my laywomen in first going for refuge is Sujātā the general’s daughter. 
… as a donor is Visākhā, Migāra’s mother. 
… who are very learned is Khujjuttarā. 
… who dwell in love is Sāmāvatī. 
… who practice absorption is Uttarā, Nanda’s mother. 
… who give fine things is Suppavāsā the Koliyan. 
… who care for the sick is the laywoman Suppiyā. 
… who have experiential confidence is Kātiyānī. 
… who are intimate is the householder Nakula’s mother. 
… whose confidence is based on oral transmission is the laywoman Kāḷī of Kuraraghara.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.268–277 
Chapter One 
268 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not possible. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as permanent. That is possible.” 
269 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to take any condition as pleasant. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as pleasant.” 
270 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to take anything as self. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to take something as self.” 
271 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to murder their mother. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder their mother.” 
272 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to murder their father. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder their father.” 
273 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to murder a perfected one. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to murder a perfected one.” 
274 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with malicious intent.” 
275 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to cause a schism in the Saṅgha. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the Saṅgha.” 
276 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an individual accomplished in view to dedicate themselves to another teacher. 
But it is possible for an ordinary person to dedicate themselves to another teacher.” 
277 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same time. 
But it is possible for just one perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, to arise in one solar system.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.278–286 
Chapter Two 
278 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two wheel-turning monarchs to arise in the same solar system at the same time. 
But it is possible for just one wheel-turning monarch to arise in one solar system.” 
279 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. 
But it is possible for a man to be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha.” 
280 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a wheel-turning monarch. 
But it is possible for a man to be a wheel-turning monarch.” 
281–283 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or the Divinity. 
But it is possible for a man to perform the role of Sakka, Māra, or the Divinity.” 
284 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from bad bodily conduct. 
But it is possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from bad bodily conduct.” 
285–286 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from bad verbal … bad mental conduct. 
But it is possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from bad verbal … bad mental conduct.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.287–295 
Chapter Three 
287 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good bodily conduct. 
But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from good bodily conduct.” 
288–289 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good verbal … good mental conduct. 
But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from good verbal … good mental conduct.” 
290 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in bad bodily conduct, could for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
291–292 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in bad verbal … bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad verbal … bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
293 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
But it is possible that someone who has engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
294–295 
“It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has engaged in good verbal … good mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
But it is possible that someone who has engaged in good verbal … good mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, heavenly realm.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.296–305 
Chapter One 
296 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. 
What one thing? 
Recollection of the Buddha. 
This one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.” 
297–305 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. 
What one thing? 
Recollection of the teaching … Recollection of the Saṅgha … Recollection of ethical conduct … Recollection of generosity … Recollection of the deities … Mindfulness of breathing … Mindfulness of death … Mindfulness of the body … Recollection of peace. 
This one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.306–315 
Chapter Two 
306 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like wrong view. 
When you have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise or, when they have arisen, they increase and grow.” 
307 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like right view. 
When you have right view, unarisen skillful qualities arise or, when they have arisen, they increase and grow.” 
308 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like wrong view. 
When you have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline.” 
309 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like right view. 
When you have right view, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline.” 
310 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to wrong view, and once arisen, makes it grow like irrational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind irrationally, wrong view arises, and once arisen it grows.” 
311 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to right view, or, once it has already arisen, makes it grow like rational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind rationally, right view arises, and once arisen it grows.” 
312 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell like wrong view. 
It is because they have wrong view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
313 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a good place, a heavenly realm like right view. 
It is because they have right view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
314 
“Mendicants, when an individual has wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. 
Why is that? 
Because their view is bad. 
Suppose a seed of neem, angled gourd, or bitter gourd was planted in moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water would lead to its bitter, acerbic, and unpleasant taste. 
Why is that? 
Because the seed is bad. 
In the same way, when an individual has wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. 
Why is that? 
Because their view is bad.” 
315 
“Mendicants, when an individual has right view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. 
Why is that? 
Because their view is good. 
Suppose a seed of sugar cane, fine rice, or grape was planted in moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water would lead to its sweet, pleasant, delectable flavor. 
Why is that? 
Because the seed is good. 
In the same way, when an individual has right view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. 
Why is that? 
Because their view is good.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.316–332 
Chapter Three 
316 
“One individual, mendicants, arises in the world for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
What one individual? 
Someone with wrong view, whose perspective is distorted. 
They draw many people away from the true teaching and establish them in false teachings. 
This is one individual who arises in the world for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.” 
317 
“One individual, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
What one individual? 
Someone with right view, whose perspective is undistorted. 
They draw many people away from false teachings and establish them in the true teaching. 
This is one individuals who arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” 
318 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very blameworthy as wrong view. 
Wrong view is the most blameworthy thing of all.” 
319 
“Mendicants, I do not see a single other individual who acts for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans, as that futile man, the bamboo-staffed ascetic. 
Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would bring harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish, 
so too that futile man, the bamboo-staffed ascetic, is a trap for humans, it seems to me. He has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster of many beings.” 
320 
“Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a poorly explained teaching and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices accordingly all brim with much wickedness. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is poorly explained.” 
321 
“Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a well explained teaching and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices accordingly all brim with much merit. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is well explained.” 
322 
“Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training, the donor should know moderation, not the recipient. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is poorly explained.” 
323 
“Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training, the recipient should know moderation, not the donor. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is well explained.” 
324 
“Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training an energetic person lives in suffering. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is poorly explained.” 
325 
“Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training a lazy person lives in suffering. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is well explained.” 
326 
“Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training a lazy person lives happily. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is poorly explained.” 
327 
“Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training an energetic person lives happily. 
Why is that? 
Because the teaching is well explained.” 
328 
“Just as, mendicants, even a little bit of fecal matter still stinks, 
so too I don’t approve of even a little bit of continued existence, not even as long as a finger-snap.” 
329–332 
“Just as even a little bit of urine, or spit, or pus, or blood still stinks, 
so too I don’t approve of even a little bit of continued existence, not even as long as a finger-snap.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.333–377 
Chapter Four 
333 
“Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, 
while the hilly terrain, inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are many; 
so too the sentient beings born on land are few, while those born in water are many. 
334 
… so too the sentient beings reborn as humans are few, 
while those not reborn as humans are many. 
335 
… so too the sentient beings reborn in civilized countries are few, 
while those reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, are many. 
336 
… so too the sentient beings who are wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are few, 
while the sentient beings who are witless, dull, idiotic, and unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are many. 
337 
… so too the sentient beings who have the noble eye of wisdom are few, 
while those who are ignorant and confused are many. 
338 
… so too the sentient beings who get to see a Realized One are few, 
while those who don’t get to see a Realized One are many. 
339 
… so too the sentient beings who get to hear the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One are few, 
while those sentient beings who don’t get to hear the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One are many. 
340 
… so too the sentient beings who remember the teachings they hear are few, 
while those who don’t remember the teachings are many. 
341 
… so too the sentient beings who examine the meaning of the teachings they have memorized are few, 
while those who don’t examine the meaning of the teachings are many. 
342 
… so too the sentient beings who understand the meaning and the teaching and practice in line with the teaching are few, 
while those who understand the meaning and the teaching but don’t practice in line with the teaching are many. 
343 
… so too the sentient beings inspired by inspiring places are few, 
while those who are uninspired are many. 
344 
… so too the sentient beings who, being inspired, strive effectively are few, 
while those who, even though inspired, don’t strive effectively are many. 
345 
… so too the sentient beings who, relying on letting go, gain immersion, gain unification of mind are few, 
while those who don’t gain immersion, don’t gain unification of mind relying on letting go are many. 
346 
… so too the sentient beings who get the best food and flavors are few, 
while those who don’t get the best food and flavors, but get by with scraps in an alms bowl are many. 
347 
… so too the sentient beings who get the essence of the meaning, the essence of the teaching, and the essence of freedom are few, 
while the sentient beings who don’t get the essence of the meaning, the essence of the teaching, and the essence of freedom are many. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will get the essence of the meaning, the essence of the teaching, the essence of freedom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 
348–350 
“Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, 
while the hilly terrain, inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are many; 
so too, those who die as humans and are reborn as humans are few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
351–353 
“… the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as gods are few, 
while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
354–356 
“… the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as gods are few, 
while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
357–359 
“… the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as humans are few, 
while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
360–362 
“… the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as humans are few, 
while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
363–365 
“… the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as gods are few, 
while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
366–368 
“… the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as humans are few, 
while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
369–371 
“… the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as gods are few, 
while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
372–374 
“… the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as humans are few, 
while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 
375–377 
“… the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are few, 
while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm, or the ghost realm are many.” 

Numbered Discourses 1 
The Chapter on Inspiring Qualities 
“Mendicants, this is definitely something worth having, that is, living in the wilderness … 
eating only almsfood … 
wearing rag robes … 
having just three robes … 
teaching Dhamma … 
memorizing the monastic law … 
being very learned … 
being respected … 
being well-presented … 
having a following … 
having a large following … 
coming from a good family … 
being handsome … 
being one who enunciates well … 
having few wishes … 
being healthy.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.394–574 
Another Chapter on a Finger-Snap 
394 
“If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the first absorption, even as long as a finger-snap, they are called 
a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who follows the Teacher’s instructions, who responds to advice, and who does not eat the country’s alms in vain. 
How much more so those who make much of it!” 
395–401 
“If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the second … 
third … 
or fourth absorption … 
or the heart’s release by love … 
or the heart’s release by compassion … 
or the heart’s release by rejoicing … 
or the heart’s release by equanimity, even as long as a finger-snap … 
402–405 
If a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body … 
feelings … 
mind … 
principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
406–409 
If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have not arisen do arise, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
410–413 
If they develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort … 
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort … 
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort … 
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
414–418 
If they develop the faculty of faith … 
the faculty of energy … 
the faculty of mindfulness … 
the faculty of immersion … 
the faculty of wisdom, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
419–423 
If they develop the power of faith … 
the power of energy … 
the power of mindfulness … 
the power of immersion … 
the power of wisdom, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
424–430 
If they develop the awakening factor of mindfulness … 
the awakening factor of investigation of principles … 
the awakening factor of energy … 
the awakening factor of rapture … 
the awakening factor of tranquility … 
the awakening factor of immersion … 
the awakening factor of equanimity, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
431–438 
If they develop right view … 
right thought … 
right speech … 
right action … 
right livelihood … 
right effort … 
right mindfulness … 
right immersion, even for the time of a finger-snap … 
439–446 
Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are blue, with blue color and blue appearance. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are white, with white color and white appearance. 
Mastering them, they are aware that: 
‘I know and see.’ … 
447–454 
Having physical form, they see forms … 
not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally … 
they’re focused only on beauty … 
going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space … 
going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness … 
going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness … 
going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception … 
going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and feeling … 
455–464 
They develop the meditation on universal earth … 
the meditation on universal water … 
the meditation on universal fire … 
the meditation on universal air … 
the meditation on universal blue … 
the meditation on universal yellow … 
the meditation on universal red … 
the meditation on universal white … 
the meditation on universal space … 
the meditation on universal consciousness … 
465–474 
They develop the perception of ugliness … 
the perception of death … 
the perception of the repulsiveness of food … 
the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world … 
the perception of impermanence … 
the perception of suffering in impermanence … 
the perception of not-self in suffering … 
the perception of giving up … 
the perception of fading away … 
the perception of cessation … 
475–484 
They develop the perception of impermanence … 
the perception of not-self … 
the perception of death … 
the perception of the repulsiveness of food … 
the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world … 
the perception of a skeleton … 
the perception of the worm-infested corpse … 
the perception of the livid corpse … 
the perception of the split open corpse … 
the perception of the bloated corpse … 
485–494 
They develop the recollection of the Buddha … 
the recollection of the teaching … 
the recollection of the Saṅgha … 
the recollection of ethical conduct … 
the recollection of generosity … 
the recollection of the deities … 
mindfulness of breathing … 
the recollection of death … 
mindfulness of the body … 
the recollection of peace … 
495–574 
They develop the faculty of faith together with the first absorption … 
the faculty of energy … 
the faculty of mindfulness … 
the faculty of immersion … 
the faculty of wisdom … 
the power of faith … 
the power of energy … 
the power of mindfulness … 
the power of immersion … 
the power of wisdom together with the first absorption … 
Together with the second absorption … 
the third absorption … 
the fourth absorption … 
love … 
compassion … 
rejoicing … 
They develop the faculty of faith together with equanimity … 
They develop the faculty of energy … 
the faculty of mindfulness … 
the faculty of immersion … 
the faculty of wisdom … 
the power of faith … 
the power of energy … 
the power of mindfulness … 
the power of immersion … 
the power of wisdom. 
That mendicant is called 
a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who follows the Teacher’s instructions, who responds to advice, and who does not eat the country’s alms in vain. 
How much more so those who make much of it!” 

Numbered Discourses 1.575–615 
The Chapter on Mindfulness of the Body 
575 
“Mendicants, anyone who brings into their mind the great ocean includes all of the streams that run into it. 
In the same way, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes all of the skillful qualities that play a part in realization.” 
576–582 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to great urgency … great benefit … great sanctuary from the yoke … mindfulness and awareness … gaining knowledge and vision … blissful meditation in this life … the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
This one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to great urgency … great benefit … great sanctuary from the yoke … mindfulness and awareness … gaining knowledge and vision … blissful meditation in this life … the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom.” 
583 
“When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated the body and mind become tranquil, thinking and considering settle down, and all of the qualities that play a part in realization are fully developed. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, the body and mind become tranquil, thinking and considering settle down, and all of the qualities that play a part in realization are fully developed.” 
584 
“When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, unskillful qualities do not arise, and, if they’ve already arisen, they are given up. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, unskillful qualities do not arise, and, if they’ve already arisen, they are given up.” 
585 
“When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, skillful qualities arise, and, once they’ve arisen, they increase and grow. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, skillful qualities arise, and, once they’ve arisen, they increase and grow.” 
586–590 
“When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, ignorance is given up … knowledge arises … the conceit ‘I am’ is given up … the underlying tendencies are uprooted … the fetters are given up. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, ignorance is given up … knowledge arises … the conceit ‘I am’ is given up … the underlying tendencies are uprooted … the fetters are given up.” 
591–592 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to demolition by wisdom … to complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
This one thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to demolition by wisdom … to complete extinguishment with no fuel for grasping.” 
593–595 
“When one thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of many elements … the penetration of diverse elements … the analysis of many elements. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
When this one thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of many elements … the penetration of diverse elements … the analysis of many elements.” 
596–599 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to the realization of the fruit of stream-entry … once-return … non-return … perfection. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
This one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to the realization of the fruit of stream-entry … once-return … non-return … perfection.” 
600–615 
“One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads to the getting of wisdom … the growth of wisdom … the increase of wisdom … to great wisdom … to widespread wisdom … to abundant wisdom … to deep wisdom … to extraordinary wisdom … to vast wisdom … to much wisdom … to fast wisdom … to light wisdom … to laughing wisdom … to swift wisdom … to sharp wisdom … to penetrating wisdom. 
What one thing? 
Mindfulness of the body. 
This one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to the getting of wisdom … the growth of wisdom … the increase of wisdom … to great wisdom … to widespread wisdom … to abundant wisdom … to deep wisdom … to extraordinary wisdom … to vast wisdom … to much wisdom … to fast wisdom … to light wisdom … to laughing wisdom … to swift wisdom … to sharp wisdom … to penetrating wisdom.” 

Numbered Discourses 1.616–627 
The Chapter on Freedom From Death 
616 
“Mendicants, those who don’t enjoy mindfulness of the body don’t enjoy freedom from death. 
Those who enjoy mindfulness of the body enjoy freedom from death.” 
617 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t enjoyed mindfulness of the body haven’t enjoyed freedom from death. 
Those who have enjoyed mindfulness of the body have enjoyed freedom from death.” 
618 
“Mendicants, those who have lost mindfulness of the body have lost freedom from death. 
Those who haven’t lost mindfulness of the body haven’t lost freedom from death.” 
619 
“Mendicants, those who have missed out on mindfulness of the body have missed out on freedom from death. 
Those who have undertaken mindfulness of the body have not missed out on freedom from death.” 
620 
“Mendicants, those who have neglected mindfulness of the body have neglected freedom from death. 
Those who have not neglected mindfulness of the body have not neglected freedom from death.” 
621 
“Mendicants, those who have forgotten mindfulness of the body have forgotten freedom from death. 
Those who haven’t forgotten mindfulness of the body haven’t forgotten freedom from death.” 
622 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t cultivated mindfulness of the body haven’t cultivated freedom from death. 
Those who have cultivated mindfulness of the body have cultivated freedom from death.” 
623 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t developed mindfulness of the body haven’t developed freedom from death. 
Those who have developed mindfulness of the body have developed freedom from death.” 
624 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t made much of mindfulness of the body haven’t made much of the deathless. 
Those who have made much of mindfulness of the body have made much of the deathless.” 
625 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t had insight into mindfulness of the body haven’t had insight into freedom from death. 
Those who have had insight into mindfulness of the body have had insight into freedom from death.” 
626 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t completely understood mindfulness of the body haven’t completely understood freedom from death. 
Those who have completely understood mindfulness of the body have completely understood freedom from death.” 
627 
“Mendicants, those who haven’t realized mindfulness of the body haven’t realized freedom from death. 
Those who have realized mindfulness of the body have realized freedom from death.” 
The thousand discourses of the Ones are completed. 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. 
The Book of the Ones is finished. 

Numbered Discourses 2.1–10 
The Chapter on Punishments 
1. Faults 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“There are, mendicants, these two faults. 
What two? 
The fault apparent in this life, and the fault to do with lives to come. 
What is the fault apparent in this life? 
It’s when someone sees that kings have arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to various punishments—
whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the ‘porridge pot’, the ‘shell-shave’, the ‘Rāhu’s mouth’, the ‘garland of fire’, the ‘burning hand’, the ‘bulrush twist’, the ‘bark dress’, the ‘antelope’, the ‘meat hook’, the ‘coins’, the ‘caustic pickle’, the ‘twisting bar’, the ‘straw mat’; being splashed with hot oil, being fed to the hounds, being impaled alive, and being beheaded. 
It occurs to them: 
‘If I were to commit the kinds of bad deeds for which the kings arrested that bandit, that criminal, 
the rulers would arrest me and subject me to the same punishments. 
Afraid of the fault apparent in this life, they do not steal the belongings of others. 
This is called the fault apparent in this life. 
What is the fault to do with lives to come? 
It’s when someone reflects: 
‘Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in the next life. 
If I conduct myself badly, 
then, when my body breaks up, after death, won’t I be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?’ 
Afraid of the fault to do with lives to come, they give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. 
This is called the fault to do with lives to come. 
These are the two faults. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will fear the fault apparent in this life, and we will fear the fault to do with lives to come. We will fear faults, seeing the danger in faults.’ 
That’s how you should train. 
If you fear faults, seeing the danger in faults, you can expect to be freed from all faults.” 
2. Endeavor 
“These two endeavors are challenging in the world. 
What two? 
The endeavor of laypeople staying in a home to provide robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And the endeavor of those gone forth from the lay life to homelessness to let go of all attachments. 
These are the two endeavors that are challenging in the world. 
The better of these two endeavors is the effort to let go of all attachments. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We shall endeavor to let go of all attachments.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 
3. Mortifying 
“These two things, mendicants, are mortifying. 
What two? 
It’s when someone has done bad things and not done good things, by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Thinking, ‘I’ve done bad things by way of body, speech, and mind’, they’re mortified. Thinking, ‘I haven’t done good things by way of body, speech, and mind’, they’re mortified. 
These are the two things that are mortifying.” 
4. Not Mortifying 
“These two things, mendicants, are not mortifying. 
What two? 
It’s when someone has done good things and not done bad things, by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Thinking, ‘I’ve done good things by way of body, speech, and mind’, they’re not mortified. Thinking, ‘I haven’t done bad things by way of body, speech, and mind’, they’re not mortified. 
These are the two things that are not mortifying.” 
5. Learned for Myself 
“Mendicants, I have learned these two things for myself—
to never be content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying. 
I never stopped trying, thinking: 
‘Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.’ 
It was by diligence that I achieved awakening, and by diligence that I achieved the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. 
If you too never stop trying, thinking: 
‘Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.’ 
You will soon realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live having achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will never stop trying, thinking: 
“Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor.”’ 
That’s how you should train.” 
6. Fetters 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Seeing things that tighten the fetters as gratifying, and seeing things that tighten the fetters as boring. 
When you keep seeing things that tighten the fetters as gratifying, you don’t give up greed, hate, and delusion. 
When these are not given up, you’re not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. 
You’re not freed from suffering, I say. 
When you keep seeing things that tighten the fetters as boring, you give up greed, hate, and delusion. 
When these are given up, you’re freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. 
You’re freed from suffering, I say. 
These are the two things.” 
7. Dark 
“These two things, mendicants, are dark. 
What two? 
Lack of conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things that are dark.” 
8. Bright 
“These two things, mendicants, are bright. 
What two? 
Conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things that are bright.” 
9. Conduct 
“These two bright things, mendicants, protect the world. 
What two? 
Conscience and prudence. 
If these two bright things did not protect the world, there would be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or wives and partners of tutors and respected people. 
The world would become dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and hounds and jackals. 
But because the two bright things protect the world, there is recognition of the status of mother, aunts, and wives and partners of tutors and respected people.” 
10. Entering the Rainy Season 
“There are, mendicants, these two entries to the rainy season. 
What two? 
Earlier and later. 
These are the two entries to the rainy season.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.11–20 
The Chapter on Disciplinary Issues 
11 
“There are, mendicants, these two powers. 
What two? 
The power of reflection and the power of development. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of reflection? 
It’s when someone reflects: 
‘Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the next.’ 
Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. 
This is called the power of reflection. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of development? 
In this context, the power of development is the power of the trainees. 
For when you rely on the power of a trainee, you give up greed, hate, and delusion. 
Then you don’t do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad. 
This is called the power of development. 
These are the two powers.” 
12 
“There are, mendicants, these two powers. 
What two? 
The power of reflection and the power of development. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of reflection? 
It’s when someone reflects: 
‘Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the next.’ 
Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. 
This is called the power of reflection. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of development? 
It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, 
investigation of principles, 
energy, 
rapture, 
tranquility, 
immersion, 
and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. 
This is called the power of development. 
These are the two powers.” 
13 
“There are, mendicants, these two powers. 
What two? 
The power of reflection and the power of development. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of reflection? 
It’s when someone reflects: 
‘Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the next.’ 
Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. 
This is called the power of reflection. 
And what, mendicants, is the power of development? 
It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ 
With the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. 
This is called the power of development. 
These are the two powers.” 
14 
“Mendicants, the Realized One has two ways of teaching the Dhamma. 
What two? 
In brief and in detail. 
These are the Realized One’s two ways of teaching the Dhamma.” 
15 
“Mendicants, in a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant nor the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that issue 
will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants won’t live comfortably. 
But in a disciplinary issue, if both the offending mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully check themselves, you can expect that issue 
won’t lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably. 
And how, mendicants, does an offending mendicant carefully check themselves? 
An offending mendicant reflects: 
‘I have committed a certain unskillful offense with the body. 
That mendicant saw me do this. 
If I hadn’t committed that offense, they wouldn’t have seen me. 
But since I did commit that offense, they did see me. 
When they saw me, they were upset, 
and they voiced their unhappiness to me. 
Then I also got upset, 
so I told others. 
So the mistake is mine alone, like someone who owes customs duty on their goods.’ 
That’s how, mendicants, an offending mendicant carefully checks themselves. 
And how, mendicants, does an accusing mendicant carefully check themselves? 
An accusing mendicant reflects: 
‘This mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense with the body. 
I saw them do that. 
If they hadn’t committed that offense, I wouldn’t have seen them. 
But since they did commit that offense, I did see them. 
When I saw them, I was upset, 
and I voiced my unhappiness to them. 
Then they also got upset, 
so they told others. 
So the mistake is mine alone, like someone who owes customs duty on their goods.’ 
That’s how, mendicants, an accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves. 
In a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant nor the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants won’t live comfortably. 
But in a disciplinary issue, if both the offending mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that issue won’t lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably.” 
16 
Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?” 
“Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
“What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” 
“Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! 
As if he was righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 
17 
Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?” 
“What they’ve done and what they’ve not done. 
That’s why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
“But what is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?” 
“What they’ve done and what they’ve not done. 
That’s why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
“I don’t understand the meaning of what the worthy Gotama has said in brief, without explaining the details. 
Worthy Gotama, please teach me this matter in detail so I can understand the meaning.” 
“Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, worthy sir,” Jānussoṇi replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Firstly, brahmin, someone has done bad things and not done good things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
So what they’ve done and what they’ve not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
Furthermore, brahmin, someone has done good things and not done bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
So what they’ve done and what they’ve not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! … From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 
18 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, 
“Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should not do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind.” 
“But, sir, if someone does these things that should not be done, what drawbacks should they expect?” 
“They should expect these drawbacks. 
They blame themselves. 
After examination, sensible people criticize them. 
They get a bad reputation. 
They feel lost when they die. 
And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
These are the drawbacks they should expect.” 
“Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should do good things by way of body, speech, and mind.” 
“But, sir, if someone does these things that should be done, what benefits should they expect?” 
“They should expect these benefits. 
They don’t blame themselves. 
After examination, sensible people praise them. 
They get a good reputation. 
They don’t feel lost when they die. 
And when the body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
These are the benefits they should expect.” 
19 
“Mendicants, give up the unskillful. 
It is possible to give up the unskillful. 
If it wasn’t possible, I wouldn’t say: 
‘Give up the unskillful.’ 
But it is possible, and so I say: 
‘Give up the unskillful.’ 
And if giving up the unskillful led to harm and suffering, I would not say: 
‘Give up the unskillful.’ 
But giving up the unskillful leads to welfare and happiness, so I say: 
‘Give up the unskillful.’ 
Mendicants, develop the skillful. 
It is possible to develop the skillful. 
If it wasn’t possible, I wouldn’t say: 
‘Develop the skillful.’ 
But it is possible, and so I say: 
‘Develop the skillful.’ 
If developing the skillful led to harm and suffering I wouldn’t say: 
‘Develop the skillful.’ 
But developing the skillful leads to welfare and happiness, so I say: 
‘Develop the skillful.’” 
20 
“These two things, mendicants, lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. 
What two? 
The words and phrases are misplaced, and the meaning is misinterpreted. 
When the words and phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. 
These two things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching. 
These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching. 
What two? 
The words and phrases are well organized, and the meaning is correctly interpreted. 
When the words and phrases are well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. 
These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.21–31 
The Chapter on Fools 
21 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who doesn’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. And one who doesn’t properly accept the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. 
These are the two fools. 
There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who recognizes when they’ve made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone who’s made a mistake. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
22 
“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. 
What two? 
One who is hateful and hides it, and one whose faith is mistaken. 
These two misrepresent the Realized One.” 
23 
“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. 
What two? 
One who explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him. 
These two misrepresent the Realized One. 
These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One. 
What two? 
One who explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him. And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. 
These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One.” 
24 
“Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. 
What two? 
One who explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is explicit as a discourse in need of interpretation. 
These two misrepresent the Realized One.” 
25 
“These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One. 
What two? 
One who explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse in need of interpretation. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is explicit as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. 
These two don’t misrepresent the Realized One.” 
26 
“Mendicants, one who is underhand can expect one of two destinies: 
hell or the animal realm. 
One who is aboveboard can expect one of two destinies: 
as a god or a human.” 
27 
“Mendicants, one who has wrong view can expect one of two destinies: 
hell or the animal realm.” 
28 
“Mendicants, one who has right view can expect one of two destinies: 
as a god or a human.” 
29 
“There are two places waiting to receive an unethical person: 
hell and the animal realm. 
There are two places waiting to receive an ethical person: 
the realms of gods and humans.” 
30 
“Mendicants, I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. 
What two? 
Seeing happiness for oneself in this life, and having sympathy for future generations. 
I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.” 
31 
“These two things play a part in realization. 
What two? 
Serenity and discernment. 
What is the benefit of developing serenity? 
The mind is developed. 
What is the benefit of developing the mind? 
Greed is given up. 
What is the benefit of developing discernment? 
Wisdom is developed. 
What is the benefit of developing wisdom? 
Ignorance is given up. 
The mind corrupted by greed is not free; and wisdom corrupted by ignorance does not grow. 
In this way, freedom of heart comes from the fading away of greed, while freedom by wisdom comes from the fading away of ignorance.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.32–41 
The Chapter on the Peaceful Mind 
32 
“Mendicants, I will teach you the level of the untrue person and the level of the true person. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“What is the level of the untrue person? 
The untrue person is ungrateful and thankless, 
for the wicked only know how to be ungrateful and thankless. 
It is totally the level of an untrue person to be ungrateful and thankless. 
The true person is grateful and thankful, 
for the virtuous only know how to be grateful and thankful. 
It is totally the level of a true person to be grateful and thankful.” 
33 
“Mendicants, I say that these two individuals cannot easily be repaid. 
What two? 
Mother and father. 
You would not have done enough to repay your mother and father even if you were to carry your mother around on one shoulder and your father on the other, and if you lived like this for a hundred years, and if you were to anoint, massage, bathe, and rub them; 
and even if they were to defecate and urinate right there. 
Even if you were to establish your mother and father as supreme monarchs of this great earth, abounding in the seven treasures, you would still not have done enough to repay them. 
Why is that? 
Parents are very helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world. 
But you have done enough, more than enough, to repay them if you encourage, settle, and ground unfaithful parents in faith, unethical parents in ethical conduct, stingy parents in generosity, or ignorant parents in wisdom.” 
34 
Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha, 
“What does the worthy Gotama teach? What does he explain?” 
“Brahmin, I teach action and inaction.” 
“But in what way does the worthy Gotama teach action and inaction?” 
“I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of unskillful things. 
I teach action regarding good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of skillful things. 
This is the kind of action and inaction that I teach.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! … From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 
35 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha, 
“How many in the world are worthy of a religious donation? And where should a gift be given?” 
“Householder, there are two in the world who are worthy of a religious donation: 
the trainee and the adept. 
These two in the world are worthy of a religious donation, and that’s where you should give a gift.” 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: 
“In this world, the trainee and the adept, 
are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. 
They are sincere in body, 
speech, and mind. 
This is the field for sponsors of sacrifice—
what’s given here is very fruitful.” 
36 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery. 
There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: 
“Reverends, mendicants!” 
“Reverend,” they replied. 
Sāriputta said this: 
“I will teach you about an individual fettered internally and one fettered externally. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, reverend,” they replied. 
Sāriputta said this: 
“Who is an individual fettered internally? 
It’s a mendicant who is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in one of the orders of gods. 
When they pass away from there, they’re a returner, who comes back to this place. 
This is called an individual who is fettered internally, a returner, who comes back to this place. 
Who is an individual fettered externally? 
It’s a mendicant who is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They enter and remain in a certain peaceful state of freed mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in one of the orders of gods. 
When they pass away from there, they’re a non-returner, not coming back to this place. 
This is called an individual who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not come back to this place. 
Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical … they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding sensual pleasures. 
They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. 
They practice for the ending of craving. 
They practice for the ending of greed. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in one of the orders of gods. 
When they pass away from there, they are non-returners, not coming back to this place. 
This is called an individual who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not come back to this place.” 
Then several peaceful-minded deities went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to the Buddha, 
“Sir, Venerable Sāriputta is in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is teaching the mendicants about an individual with internal fetters and one with external fetters. 
The assembly is overjoyed! 
Sir, please go to Venerable Sāriputta out of sympathy.” 
The Buddha consented with silence. 
Then the Buddha, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from Jeta’s Grove and reappeared in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, in front of Sāriputta. 
He sat on the seat spread out. 
Sāriputta bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side. 
The Buddha said to him: 
“Just now, Sāriputta, several peaceful-minded deities came up to me, bowed, and stood to one side. Those deities said to me: 
‘Sir, Venerable Sāriputta is in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is teaching the mendicants about an individual with internal fetters and one with external fetters. 
The assembly is overjoyed! 
Sir, please go to Venerable Sāriputta out of sympathy.’ 
Those deities, though they number ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty, can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against each other. 
Sāriputta, you might think: 
‘Surely those deities, since so many of them can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against each other, must have developed their minds in that place.’ 
But you should not see it like this. 
It was right here that those deities developed their minds. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We shall have peaceful faculties and peaceful minds.’ 
That’s how you should train. 
When your faculties and mind are peaceful, your acts of body, speech, and mind will be peaceful, thinking: 
‘We shall present the gift of peace to our spiritual companions.’ 
That’s how you should train. 
Those wanderers of other religions, Sāriputta, who have not heard this exposition of the teaching are lost.” 
37 
So I have heard. 
At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying at Varaṇā, on the bank of the Kaddama Lake. 
Then the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa went up to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Mahākaccāna: 
“What is the cause, worthy Kaccāna, what is the reason why aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders?” 
“It is because of their insistence on sensual desire, their shackles, avarice, and attachment, that aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders.” 
“What is the cause, worthy Kaccāna, what is the reason why ascetics fight with ascetics?” 
“It is because of their insistence on views, their shackles, avarice, and attachment, that ascetics fight with ascetics.” 
“Worthy Kaccāna, is there anyone in the world who has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views?” 
“There is, brahmin.” 
“Who in the world has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views?” 
“In the eastern lands there is a city named Sāvatthī. 
There the Blessed One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
He, brahmin, has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views.” 
When this was said, the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt sentiment three times: 
“Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! 
Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! 
Homage to him, the blessed one, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! 
He who has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views. 
Excellent, worthy Kaccāna! Excellent! 
As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, the worthy Kaccāna has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the worthy Kaccāna remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 
38 
At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying near Madhurā, in the Nut Grass Grove. 
Then the brahmin Kandarāyana went up to Mahākaccāna, and exchanged greetings with him … He sat down to one side and said to Mahākaccāna: 
“I have heard, worthy Kaccāna, that the ascetic Kaccāna doesn’t bow to old brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. 
And this is indeed the case, 
for the ascetic Kaccāna does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. 
This is not appropriate, worthy Kaccāna.” 
“There is the stage of an elder and the stage of youth as explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. 
If an elder, though eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old, still dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more, 
they are reckoned as a child, not a senior. 
If a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life, 
does not dwell in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them, consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly seeking more, 
they are reckoned as astute, a senior.” 
When this was said, the brahmin Kandarāyana got up from his seat, placed his robe over one shoulder, and bowed with his head at the feet of the young mendicants, saying, 
“The good fellows are elders, at the stage of the elder; 
we are youths, at the stage of youth. 
Excellent, worthy Kaccāna! … From this day forth, may the worthy Kaccāna remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 
39 
“At a time when bandits are strong, kings are weak. 
Then the king is not at ease when going out or coming back or when touring the provinces. 
The brahmins and householders, likewise, are not at ease when going out or coming back, or when inspecting their external business activities. 
In the same way, at a time when bad mendicants are strong, good-hearted mendicants are weak. 
Then the good-hearted mendicants continually adhere to silence in the midst of the Saṅgha, or they stay in the borderlands. 
This is for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
At a time when kings are strong, bandits are weak. 
Then the king is at ease when going out or coming back or when inspecting the provinces. 
The brahmins and householders, likewise, are at ease when going out or coming back, or when inspecting their external business activities. 
In the same way, at a time when good-hearted mendicants are strong, bad mendicants are weak. 
Then the bad mendicants continually adhere to silence in the midst of the Saṅgha, or they leave for some place or other. 
This is for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” 
40 
“Mendicants, I don’t praise wrong practice for these two, for laypeople and renunciates. 
Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in completing the system of the skillful teaching. 
I praise right practice for these two, for laypeople and renunciates. 
Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in completing the system of the skillful teaching.” 
41 
“Mendicants, by memorizing the discourses incorrectly, taking only a semblance of the phrasing, some mendicants shut out the meaning and the teaching. They act for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
They brim with much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear. 
But by memorizing the discourses well, not taking only a semblance of the phrasing, some mendicants conform to the meaning and the teaching. They act for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
They brim with much merit and make the true teaching continue.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.42–51 
The Chapter on Assemblies 
42 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
A shallow assembly and a deep assembly. 
And what is a shallow assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants are restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. 
This is called a shallow assembly. 
And what is a deep assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants are not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but have established mindfulness, situational awareness, immersion, unified minds, and restrained faculties. 
This is called a deep assembly. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the deep assembly.” 
43 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
A divided assembly and a harmonious assembly. 
And what is a divided assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants fight, quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words. 
This is called a divided assembly. 
And what is a harmonious assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants live in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. 
This is called a harmonious assembly. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the harmonious assembly.” 
44 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An assembly of the worst and an assembly of the best. 
And what is an assembly of the worst? 
An assembly where the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. 
Those who come after follow their example. 
They too become indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. 
This is called an assembly of the worst. 
And what is an assembly of the best? 
An assembly where the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. 
Those who come after follow their example. 
They too are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. 
This is called an assembly of the best. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the best.” 
45 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An ignoble assembly and a noble assembly. 
And what is an ignoble assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants don’t truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is called an ignoble assembly. 
And what is a noble assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is called a noble assembly. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the noble assembly.” 
46 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An assembly of the dregs and an assembly of the cream. 
And what is an assembly of the dregs? 
An assembly where the mendicants make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
This is called an assembly of the dregs. 
And what is an assembly of the cream? 
An assembly where the mendicants make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
This is called an assembly of the cream. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the cream.” 
47 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning, and an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. 
And what is an assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning? 
It is an assembly where, when discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. 
But when discourses composed by poets—poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by disciples—are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand, and they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when they’ve memorized those teachings they don’t question or examine each other, saying: 
‘Why does it say this? What does that mean?’ 
So they don’t reveal what is hidden or clarify what is unclear, or dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. 
This is called an assembly educated in fancy talk, not in questioning. 
And what is an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk? 
It is an assembly where, when discourses composed by poets—poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by disciples—are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They don’t actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. 
But when discourses spoken by the Realized One—deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness—are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand, and they think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. 
And when they’ve memorized those teachings they question and examine each other, saying: 
‘Why does it say this? What does that mean?’ 
So they reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. 
This is called an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk.” 
48 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching, and an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. 
And what is an assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching? 
It is an assembly where the mendicants praise each other in front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: 
‘The mendicant so-and-so is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.’ 
They thereby acquire material things. 
And when they get these things, they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. 
This is called an assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching. 
And what is an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the flesh? 
It is an assembly where the mendicants don’t praise each other in front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: 
‘The mendicant so-and-so is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.’ 
They thereby acquire material things. 
And when they get these things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. 
This is called an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the flesh.” 
49 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An unjust assembly and a just assembly. 
And what is an unjust assembly? 
An assembly where legal acts against the teaching proceed, while legal acts following the teaching don’t proceed. Legal acts against the training proceed, while legal acts following the training don’t proceed. Legal acts against the teaching are explained, while legal acts following the teaching aren’t explained. Legal acts against the training are explained, while legal acts following the training aren’t explained. 
This is called an unjust assembly. 
And what is a just assembly? 
An assembly where legal acts following the teaching proceed, while legal acts against the teaching don’t proceed. Legal acts following the training proceed, while legal acts against the training don’t proceed. Legal acts following the teaching are explained, while legal acts against the teaching aren’t explained. Legal acts in line with the training are explained, while legal acts following training aren’t explained. 
This is called a just assembly. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the just assembly.” 
50 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An unprincipled assembly and a principled assembly … 
The better of these two assemblies is the principled assembly.” 
51 
“There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. 
What two? 
An assembly with unprincipled speech, and an assembly with principled speech. 
And what is an assembly with unprincipled speech? 
It is an assembly where the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. 
But they don’t persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, nor do they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. 
Unable to persuade or convince each other, they can’t let go of their opinions. They obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue, insisting that: 
‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ 
This is called an assembly with unprincipled speech. 
And what is an assembly with principled speech? 
It is an assembly where the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. 
Then they persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, and they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. 
Since they are able to persuade and convince each other, they let go of their opinions. They don’t obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue or insist that: 
‘This is the only truth, anything else is futile.’ 
This is called an assembly with principled speech. 
These are the two assemblies. 
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly with principled speech.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.52–63 
6. Individuals 
52 
“These two individuals, mendicants, arise in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
What two? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. 
These are the two individuals who arise in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” 
53 
“These two individuals, mendicants, arise in the world who are incredible human beings. 
What two? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. 
These are the two individuals who arise in the world who are incredible human beings.” 
54 
“There are two individuals, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many people. 
What two? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. 
These are the two individuals, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many people.” 
55 
“Mendicants, these two are worthy of a monument. 
What two? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. 
These are the two who are worthy of a monument.” 
56 
“Mendicants, there are two kinds of Buddhas. 
What two? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and an Independent Buddha. 
These are the two kinds of Buddhas.” 
57 
“These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. 
What two? 
A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred elephant. 
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder.” 
58 
“These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. 
What two? 
A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred horse. 
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder.” 
59 
“These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. 
What two? 
A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a lion, king of beasts. 
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder.” 
60 
“Aborigines see two reasons not to use regular speech. 
What two? 
Thinking: ‘May we not lie, and may we not misrepresent others with falsehoods.’ 
Aborigines see these two reasons not to use regular speech.” 
61 
“Mendicants, ladies die without getting enough of two things. 
What two? 
Sexual intercourse and giving birth. 
Females die without getting enough of these two things.” 
62 
“Mendicants, I will teach you about living with bad people and living with good people. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“What is it like living with bad people? How do bad people live together? 
It’s when a senior mendicant thinks: 
‘No mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me; 
and I shouldn’t admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. 
If a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—were to admonish me, they wouldn’t be sympathetic, and I’d bother them by saying “No!” And anyway I wouldn’t deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.’ 
And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 
‘No mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me; 
and I shouldn’t admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. 
If a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—were to admonish me, they wouldn’t be sympathetic, and I’d bother them by saying “No!” And anyway I wouldn’t deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.’ 
That’s what it’s like living with bad people; that’s how bad people live together. 
What is it like living with good people? How do good people live together? 
It’s when a senior mendicant thinks: 
‘Any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me; 
and I should admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. 
If a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—were to admonish me, they’d be sympathetic, so I wouldn’t bother them, but say “Thank you!” And I’d deal with it when I saw what I did wrong.’ 
And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 
‘Any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, may admonish me; 
and I’ll admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. 
If a mendicant—whether senior, middle, or junior—were to admonish me, they’d be sympathetic, so I wouldn’t bother them, but say “Thank you!” And I’d deal with it when I saw what I did wrong.’ 
That’s what it’s like living with good people; that’s how good people live together.” 
63 
“In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk, contempt for each other’s views, resentment, bitterness, and exasperation is not settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue 
will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will not live comfortably. 
In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk, contempt for each other’s views, resentment, bitterness, and exasperation is well settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue 
won’t lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.64–76 
The Chapter on Happiness 
64 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
The happiness of laypeople, and the happiness of renunciates. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of renunciates.” 
65 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Sensual happiness and the happiness of renunciation. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of renunciation.” 
66 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
The happiness of attachments, and the happiness of no attachments. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of no attachments.” 
67 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Defiled happiness and undefiled happiness. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of no defilements.” 
68 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness of the flesh and happiness not of the flesh. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness not of the flesh.” 
69 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Noble happiness and ignoble happiness. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is noble happiness.” 
70 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Physical happiness and mental happiness. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is mental happiness.” 
71 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness with rapture and happiness free of rapture. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness free of rapture.” 
72 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness with pleasure and happiness with equanimity. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness with equanimity.” 
73 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
The happiness of immersion and the happiness without immersion. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of immersion.” 
74 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness that relies on rapture and happiness that relies on freedom from rapture. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on freedom from rapture.” 
75 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness that relies on pleasure and happiness that relies on equanimity. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on equanimity.” 
76 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. 
What two? 
Happiness that relies on form and happiness that relies on the formless. 
These are the two kinds of happiness. 
The better of these two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on the formless.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.77–86 
The Chapter with a Basis 
77 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a basis, not without a basis. 
By giving up that basis, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
78 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a source, not without a source. 
By giving up that source, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
79 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a cause, not without a cause. 
By giving up that cause, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
80 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with conditions, not without conditions. 
By giving up those conditions, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
81 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a reason, not without a reason. 
By giving up that reason, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
82 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with form, not without form. 
By giving up that form, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
83 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with feeling, not without feeling. 
By giving up that feeling, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
84 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with perception, not without perception. 
By giving up that perception, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
85 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with consciousness, not without consciousness. 
By giving up that consciousness, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 
86 
“Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a conditioned basis, not without a conditioned basis. 
By giving up that conditioned basis, those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.87–97 
The Chapter on Two Things 
87 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. 
These are the two things.” 
88 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Exertion, and not being scattered. 
These are the two things.” 
89 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Name and form. 
These are the two things.” 
90 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Knowledge and freedom. 
These are the two things.” 
91 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Views favoring existence and views favoring nonexistence. 
These are the two things.” 
92 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Lack of conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things.” 
93 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things.” 
94 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Being hard to admonish and having bad friends. 
These are the two things.” 
95 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Being easy to admonish and having good friends. 
These are the two things.” 
96 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Skill in the elements and skill in application of mind. 
These are the two things.” 
97 
“There are, mendicants, these two things. 
What two? 
Skill in offenses and skill in resolving offenses. 
These are the two things.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.98–117 
The Chapter on Fools 
98 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who carries the burden of what has not come to pass, and one who doesn’t carry the burden of what has come to pass. 
These are the two fools.” 
99 
“There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who doesn’t carry the burden of what has not come to pass, and one who carries the burden of what has come to pass. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
100 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as unallowable. 
These are the two fools.” 
101 
“There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as allowable. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
102 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who perceives a non-offense as an offense, and one who perceives an offense as a non-offense. 
These are the two fools.” 
103 
“There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who perceives a non-offense as a non-offense, and one who perceives an offense as an offense. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
104 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as not the teaching. 
These are the two fools.” 
105 
“There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who perceives the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching as not the teaching. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
106 
“Mendicants, there are two fools. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the training as not the training. 
These are the two fools.” 
107 
“There are two who are astute. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is the training as the training. 
These are the two who are astute.” 
108 
“For these two, defilements grow. 
What two? 
One who is remorseful over something they shouldn’t be, and one who isn’t remorseful over something they should be. 
These are the two whose defilements grow.” 
109 
“For these two, defilements don’t grow. 
What two? 
One who isn’t remorseful over something they shouldn’t be, and one who is remorseful over something they should be. 
These are the two whose defilements don’t grow.” 
110 
“For these two, defilements grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as unallowable. 
These are the two whose defilements grow.” 
111 
“For these two, defilements don’t grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as allowable. 
These are the two whose defilements don’t grow.” 
112 
“For these two, defilements grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives an offense as a non-offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as an offense. 
These are the two whose defilements grow.” 
113 
“For these two, defilements don’t grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives an offense as an offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as a non-offense. 
These are the two whose defilements don’t grow.” 
114 
“For these two, defilements grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as not the teaching. 
These are the two whose defilements grow.” 
115 
“For these two, defilements don’t grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching as not the teaching. 
These are the two whose defilements don’t grow.” 
116 
“For these two, defilements grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the training as not the training. 
These are the two whose defilements grow.” 
117 
“For these two, defilements don’t grow. 
What two? 
One who perceives what is not the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is the training as the training. 
These are the two whose defilements don’t grow.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.118–129 
The Chapter on Hopes That Are Hard to Give Up 
118 
“These two hopes are hard to give up. 
What two? 
The hope for wealth and the hope for long life. 
These are two hopes that are hard to give up.” 
119 
“These two individuals are rare in the world. 
What two? 
One who takes the initiative, and one who is grateful and thankful. 
These are the two individuals who are rare in the world.” 
120 
“These two individuals are rare in the world. 
What two? 
One who is satisfied, and one who satisfies others. 
These are the two individuals who are rare in the world.” 
121 
“These two individuals are hard to satisfy in the world. 
What two? 
One who continually hoards wealth, and one who continually wastes wealth. 
These are the two individuals who are hard to satisfy in the world.” 
122 
“These two individuals are easy to satisfy in the world. 
What two? 
One who does not continually hoard wealth, and one who does not continually waste wealth. 
These are the two individuals who are easy to satisfy in the world.” 
123 
“There are two conditions for the arising of greed. 
What two? 
The feature of beauty and irrational application of mind. 
These are the two conditions for the arising of greed.” 
124 
“There are two conditions for the arising of hate. 
What two? 
The feature of harshness and irrational application of mind. 
These are the two conditions for the arising of hate.” 
125 
“There are two conditions for the arising of wrong view. 
What two? 
The voice of another and irrational application of mind. 
These are the two conditions for the arising of wrong view.” 
126 
“There are two conditions for the arising of right view. 
What two? 
The voice of another and rational application of mind. 
These are the two conditions for the arising of right view.” 
127 
“There are these two offenses. 
What two? 
A light offense and a serious offense. 
These are the two offenses.” 
128 
“There are these two offenses. 
What two? 
An offense with corrupt intention and an offense without corrupt intention. 
These are the two offenses.” 
129 
“There are these two offenses. 
What two? 
An offense requiring rehabilitation and an offense not requiring rehabilitation. 
These are the two offenses.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.130–140 
The Chapter on Aspiration 
130 
“A faithful monk would rightly aspire: 
‘May I be like Sāriputta and Moggallāna!’ 
These are a standard and a measure for my monk disciples, that is, Sāriputta and Moggallāna.” 
131 
“A faithful nun would rightly aspire: 
‘May I be like the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā!’ 
These are a standard and a measure for my nun disciples, that is, the nuns Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā.” 
132 
“A faithful layman would rightly aspire: 
‘May I be like the householder Citta and Hatthaka of Āḷavī!’ 
These are a standard and a measure for my male lay followers, that is, the householder Citta and Hatthaka of Āḷavī.” 
133 
“A faithful laywoman would rightly aspire: 
‘May I be like the laywomen Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda’s mother!’ 
These are a standard and a measure for my female lay disciples, that is, the laywomen Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda’s mother.” 
134 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What two? 
Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism 
and they criticize those deserving of praise. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person possesses these two qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What two? 
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism 
and they praise those deserving of praise. 
When an astute, competent true person possesses these two qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.” 
135 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What two? 
Without examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are dubious, 
and they don’t arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person possesses these two qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What two? 
After examining or scrutinizing, they don’t arouse faith in things that are dubious, 
and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
When an astute, competent true person possesses these two qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.” 
136 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two individuals they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What two? 
Mother and father. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward these two individuals they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What two? 
Mother and father. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward these two individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit.” 
137 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two individuals they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What two? 
The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized One. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward these people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What two? 
The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized One. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward these two individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit.” 
138 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Cleaning your own mind, and not grasping at anything in the world. 
These are the two things.” 
139 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony. 
These are the two things.” 
140 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Dispelling anger and dispelling acrimony. 
These are the two things.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.141–150 
The Chapter on Giving 
141 
“There are these two gifts. 
What two? 
A gift of things of the flesh and a gift of the teaching. 
These are the two gifts. 
The better of these two gifts is the gift of the teaching.” 
142 
“There are these two offerings. 
What two? 
An offering of things of the flesh and an offering of the teaching. 
These are the two offerings. 
The better of these two offerings is an offering of the teaching.” 
143 
“There are these two acts of generosity. 
What two? 
Generosity with things of the flesh and generosity with the teaching. 
These are the two acts of generosity. 
The better of these two acts of generosity is generosity with the teaching.” 
144 
“There are these two kinds of charity. 
What two? 
Charity in things of the flesh and charity in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of charity. 
The better of these two kinds of charity is a charity in the teaching.” 
145 
“There are these two riches. 
What two? 
Riches in things of the flesh and riches in the teaching. 
These are the two riches. 
The better of these two riches is riches in the teaching.” 
146 
“There are these two kinds of enjoyment. 
What two? 
Enjoyment of things of the flesh and enjoyment of the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of enjoyment. 
The better of these two kinds of enjoyment is the enjoyment of the teaching.” 
147 
“There are these two kinds of sharing. 
What two? 
Sharing things of the flesh and sharing the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of sharing. 
The better of these two kinds of sharing is sharing the teaching.” 
148 
“There are these two kinds of inclusion. 
What two? 
Inclusion in things of the flesh and inclusion in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of inclusion. 
The better of these two kinds of inclusion is inclusion in the teaching.” 
149 
“There are these two kinds of support. 
What two? 
Support in things of the flesh and support in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of support. 
The better of these two kinds of support is support in the teaching.” 
150 
“There are these two kinds of sympathy. 
What two? 
Sympathy in things of the flesh and sympathy in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of sympathy. 
The better of these two kinds of sympathy is sympathy in the teaching.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.151–162 
The Chapter on Welcome 
151 
“There are these two kinds of welcome. 
What two? 
Welcome in things of the flesh and welcome in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of welcome. 
The better of these two kinds of welcome is the welcome in the teaching.” 
152 
“There are these two kinds of hospitality. 
What two? 
Hospitality in things of the flesh and hospitality in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of hospitality. 
The better of these two kinds of hospitality is hospitality in the teaching.” 
153 
“There are these two quests. 
What two? 
The quest for things of the flesh and the quest for the teaching. 
These are the two quests. 
The better of these two quests is the quest for the teaching.” 
154 
“There are these two searches. 
What two? 
The search for things of the flesh and the search for the teaching. 
These are the two searches. 
The better of these two searches is the search for the teaching.” 
155 
“There are these two kinds of seeking. 
What two? 
Seeking for things of the flesh and seeking for the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of seeking. 
The better of these two kinds of seeking is seeking for the teaching.” 
156 
“There are these two kinds of worship. 
What two? 
Worship of things of the flesh and worship of the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of worship. 
The better of these two kinds of worship is worship of the teaching.” 
157 
“There are these two ways of serving guests. 
What two? 
Serving guests with things of the flesh and serving guests with the teaching. 
These are the two ways of serving guests. 
The better of these two ways of serving guests is to serve them with the teaching.” 
158 
“There are, mendicants, these two successes. 
What two? 
Success in things of the flesh and success in the teaching. 
These are the two successes. 
The better of these two successes is success in the teaching.” 
159 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of growth. 
What two? 
Growth in things of the flesh and growth in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of growth. 
The better of these two kinds of growth is growth in the teaching.” 
160 
“There are these two treasures. 
What two? 
The treasure of things of the flesh and the treasure of the teaching. 
These are the two treasures. 
The better of these two treasures is the treasure of the teaching.” 
161 
“There are these two kinds of accumulation. 
What two? 
Accumulation of things of the flesh and accumulation of the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of accumulation. 
The better of these two kinds of accumulation is the accumulation of the teaching.” 
162 
“There are, mendicants, these two kinds of increase. 
What two? 
Increase in things of the flesh and increase in the teaching. 
These are the two kinds of increase. 
The better of these two kinds of increase is increase in the teaching.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.163–179 
The Chapter on Attainment 
163 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Skill in meditative attainments and skill in emerging from those attainments. 
These are the two things.” 
164 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Integrity and tenderness. 
These are the two things.” 
165 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Patience and gentleness. 
These are the two things.” 
166 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Camaraderie and hospitality. 
These are the two things.” 
167 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Harmlessness and purity. 
These are the two things.” 
168 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Not guarding the sense doors and eating too much. 
These are the two things.” 
169 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Guarding the sense doors and moderation in eating. 
These are the two things.” 
170 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
The power of reflection and the power of development. 
These are the two things.” 
171 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
The power of mindfulness and the power of immersion. 
These are the two things.” 
172 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Serenity and discernment. 
These are the two things.” 
173 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Failure in ethical conduct and failure in view. 
These are the two things.” 
174 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Accomplishment in ethical conduct and accomplishment in view. 
These are the two things.” 
175 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Purification of ethics and purification of view. 
These are the two things.” 
176 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Purification of view and making an effort in line with that view. 
These are the two things.” 
177 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
To never be content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying. 
These are the two things.” 
178 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Lack of mindfulness and lack of situational awareness. 
These are the two things.” 
179 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Mindfulness and situational awareness. 
These are the two things.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.180–229 
The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Anger 
180–184 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony … disdain and contempt … jealousy and stinginess … deceit and deviousness … lack of conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things.” 
185–189 
“There are these two things. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things.” 
190–194 
“Anyone who has two things lives in suffering. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony … disdain and contempt … jealousy and stinginess … deceit and deviousness … lack of conscience and prudence. 
Anyone who has these two things lives in suffering.” 
195–199 
“Anyone who has these two things lives happily. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
Anyone who has these two things lives happily.” 
200–204 
“These two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony … disdain and contempt … jealousy and stinginess … deceit and deviousness … lack of conscience and prudence. 
These two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.” 
205–209 
“These two things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
These two things don’t lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.” 
210–214 
“Anyone who has two things is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony … disdain and contempt … jealousy and stinginess … deceit and deviousness … lack of conscience and prudence. 
Anyone who has these two things is placed in hell as if delivered there.” 
215–219 
“Anyone who has two things is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
Anyone who has these two things is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 
220–224 
“When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
What two? 
Anger and acrimony … disdain and contempt … jealousy and stinginess … deceit and deviousness … lack of conscience and prudence. 
When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 
225–229 
“When they have two things, some people—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
When they have these two things, some people—when their body breaks up, after death—are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” 

Numbered Discourses 2 
The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With the Unskillful 
“These two things are unskillful … are skillful … are blameworthy … are blameless … have suffering as outcome … have happiness as outcome … result in suffering … result in happiness … are hurtful … are not hurtful. 
What two? 
Freedom from anger and acrimony … freedom from disdain and contempt … freedom from jealousy and stinginess … freedom from deceit and deviousness … conscience and prudence. 
These are the two things that are not hurtful.” 

Numbered Discourses 2.280–309 
The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Monastic Law 
280 
“For two reasons the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples. 
What two? 
For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha … For keeping difficult individuals in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants … For restraining defilements that affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come … For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to lives to come … For restraining faults that affect this life and protecting against faults that affect lives to come … For restraining hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect lives to come … For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to come … Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of mendicants with corrupt wishes … For inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it … For the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. 
These are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down training rules for his disciples.” 
281–309 
“For two reasons the Realized One laid down for his disciples the monastic code … the recitation of the monastic code … the suspension of the recitation of the monastic code … the invitation to admonish … the setting aside of the invitation to admonish … the disciplinary act of condemnation … placing under dependence … banishment … reconciliation … debarment … probation … being sent back to the beginning … penance … reinstatement … restoration … removal … ordination … an act with a motion … an act with a motion and one announcement … an act with a motion and three announcements … laying down what was not previously laid down … amending what was laid down … the settling of a disciplinary matter by the following methods: face-to-face … through recollection … because of past insanity … acting according to what has been admitted … majority decision … further penalty… covering over as if with grass. 
What two? 
For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha … For keeping difficult individuals in check and for the comfort of good-hearted mendicants … For restraining defilements that affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come … For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to lives to come … For restraining faults that affect this life and protecting against faults that affect lives to come … For restraining hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect lives to come … For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to come … Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of mendicants with corrupt wishes … For inspiring confidence in those without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it … For the continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. 
These are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down the settlement of a disciplinary matter by covering over with grass for his disciples.” 

Numbered Discourses 2 
The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed 
310–319 
“For insight into greed, two things should be developed. 
What two? 
Serenity and discernment. 
For insight into greed, these two things should be developed.” 
“For the complete understanding … finishing … giving up … ending … vanishing … fading away … cessation … giving away … letting go of greed, two things should be developed.” 
320–479 
“Of hate … delusion … anger … acrimony … disdain … contempt … jealousy … stinginess … deceit … deviousness … obstinacy … aggression … conceit … arrogance … vanity … negligence … for insight … complete understanding … finishing … giving up … ending … vanishing … fading away … cessation … giving away … letting go … two things should be developed. 
What two? 
Serenity and discernment. 
For the letting go of negligence, these two things should be developed.” 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. 
The Book of the Twos is finished. 

Numbered Discourses 3.1 
1. Fools 
Perils 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
It’s like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. 
In the same way, whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not from the astute. 
So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe. 
The fool is perilous, but the astute person is not. 
The fool is hazardous, but the astute person is not. 
There’s no danger, peril, or hazard that comes from the astute. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will shun the three things by which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by which an astute person is known.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.2 
1. Fools 
Characteristics 
“A fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds, for wisdom shines in its traces. 
A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three things by which a fool is known. 
An astute person is known by three things. 
What three? 
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three things by which an astute person is known. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will shun the three things by which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by which an astute person is known.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.3 
1. Fools 
Thinking 
“There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a fool. 
What three? 
A fool thinks poorly, speaks poorly, and acts poorly. 
If a fool didn’t think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then how would the astute know of them: 
‘This worthy one is a fool, an untrue person’? 
But since a fool does think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then the astute do know of them: 
‘This worthy one is a fool, an untrue person’. 
These are the three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a fool. 
There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an astute person. 
What three? 
An astute person thinks well, speaks well, and acts well. 
If an astute person didn’t think well, speak well, and act well, then how would the astute know of them: 
‘This worthy one is astute, a true person’? 
But since an astute person does think well, speak well, and act well, then the astute do know of them: 
‘This worthy one is astute, a true person’. 
These are the three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an astute person. 
So you should train …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.4 
1. Fools 
Mistakes 
“A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
They don’t recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don’t deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they don’t accept it properly. 
These are the three things by which a fool is known. 
An astute person is known by three things. 
What three? 
They recognize when they’ve made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept it properly. 
These are the three things by which an astute person is known. 
So you should train …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.5 
1. Fools 
Irrational 
“A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
They ask a question irrationally. They answer a question irrationally. And when someone else answers a question rationally—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they disagree with it. 
These are the three things by which a fool is known. 
An astute person is known by three things. 
What three? 
They ask a question rationally. They answer a question rationally. And when someone else answers a question rationally—with well-rounded, coherent, and relevant words and phrases—they agree with it. 
These are the three things by which an astute person is known. 
So you should train …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.6 
1. Fools 
Unskillful 
“A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three things by which a fool is known. 
An astute person is known by three things. 
What three? 
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three things by which an astute person is known. 
So you should train …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.7 
1. Fools 
Blameworthy 
“A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … An astute person is known by blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.8 
1. Fools 
Hurtful 
“A fool is known by three things. 
What three? 
Hurtful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … An astute person is known by kind deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three things by which an astute person is known. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will shun the three qualities by which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three qualities by which an astute person is known.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.9 
1. Fools 
Broken 
“When a foolish, incompetent, untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What three? 
Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person possesses these three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What three? 
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When an astute, competent true person possesses these three qualities they keep themselves healthy and whole. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.10 
1. Fools 
Stains 
“Anyone who has three qualities, and has not given up three stains, is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What three? 
They’re unethical, and haven’t given up the stain of immorality. 
They’re jealous, and haven’t given up the stain of jealousy. 
They’re stingy, and haven’t given up the stain of stinginess. 
Anyone who possesses these three qualities, and has not given up these three stains, is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Anyone who has three qualities, and has given up three stains, is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What three? 
They’re ethical, and have given up the stain of immorality. 
They’re not jealous, and have given up the stain of jealousy. 
They’re not stingy, and have given up the stain of stinginess. 
Anyone who possesses these three qualities, and has given up these three stains, is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.11 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
Well-known 
“Mendicants, a well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
What three? 
They encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that aren’t in line with good qualities. 
A well-known mendicant who possesses these three qualities is acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. 
A well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. 
What three? 
They encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that are in line with good qualities. 
A well-known mendicant who possesses these three qualities is acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.12 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
Commemoration 
“An anointed aristocratic king should commemorate three places as long as he lives. 
What three? 
The place he was born. 
This is the first place. 
The place he was anointed as king. 
This is the second place. 
The place where he won victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in battle. 
This is the third place. 
These are the three places an anointed king should commemorate as long as he lives. 
In the same way, a mendicant should commemorate three places as long as they live. 
What three? 
The place where the mendicant shaved off their hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness. 
This is the first place. 
The place where the mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is the second place. 
The place where the mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This is the third place. 
These are the three places a mendicant should commemorate as long as they live.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.13 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
Hopes 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The hopeless, the hopeful, and the one who has done away with hope. 
And what, mendicants, is a hopeless individual? 
It’s when an individual is reborn in a low family—a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters, chariot-makers, or scavengers—poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. 
And they’re ugly, unsightly, deformed, sickly—one-eyed, crippled, lame, or half-paralyzed. They don’t get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrances, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting. 
They hear this: 
‘They say the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat named so-and-so as king.’ 
It never occurs to them: 
‘Oh, when will the aristocrats anoint me too as king?’ 
This is called a hopeless individual. 
And what, mendicants, is a hopeful individual? 
It’s when someone is the eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has not yet been anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the succession. 
He hears this: 
‘They say that the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat named so-and-so as king.’ 
It occurs to him: 
‘Oh, when will the aristocrats anoint me too as king?’ 
This is called a hopeful individual. 
And what, mendicants, is an individual who has done away with hope? 
It’s when a king has been anointed. 
He hears this: 
‘They say that the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat named so-and-so as king.’ 
It never occurs to him: 
‘Oh, when will the aristocrats anoint me too as king?’ 
Why is that? 
Because the former hope he had to be anointed has now died down. 
This is called an individual who has done away with hope. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
In the same way, these three individuals are found among the mendicants. 
What three? 
The hopeless, the hopeful, and the one who has done away with hope. 
And what, mendicants, is a hopeless individual? 
It’s when an individual is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner—though claiming to be one—rotten inside, festering, and depraved. 
They hear this: 
‘They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
It never occurs to them: 
‘Oh, when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
This is called a hopeless individual. 
And what, mendicants, is a hopeful individual? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, of good character. 
They hear this: 
‘They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
It occurs to them: 
‘Oh, when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
This is called a hopeful individual. 
And what, mendicants, is an individual who has done away with hope? 
It’s when a mendicant is a perfected one, who has ended all defilements. 
They hear this: 
‘They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
It never occurs to them: 
‘Oh, when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
Why is that? 
Because the former hope they had to be freed has now died down. 
This is called an individual who has done away with hope. 
These are the three individuals found among the mendicants.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.14 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
The Wheel-Turning Monarch 
“Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king, does not wield power without having their own king.” 
When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha: 
“But who is the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and principled king?” 
“It is principle, monk,” said the Buddha. 
“Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for his court, relying only on principle—honoring, respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and authority. 
He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals, troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics and brahmins, beasts and birds. 
When he has done this, he wields power only in a principled manner. 
And this power cannot be undermined by any human enemy. 
In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and security regarding bodily actions, relying only on principle—honoring, respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and authority. 
‘This kind of bodily action should be cultivated. This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated.’ 
Furthermore, a Realized One … provides just protection and security regarding verbal actions, saying: 
‘This kind of verbal action should be cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be cultivated.’ … And regarding mental actions: 
‘This kind of mental action should be cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be cultivated.’ 
And when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has provided just protection and security regarding actions of body, speech, and mind, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. 
And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.15 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
About Pacetana 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Once upon a time there was a king named Pacetana. 
Then King Pacetana addressed his chariot-maker, 
‘In six months’ time, my good chariot-maker, there will be a battle. 
Are you able to make me a new pair of wheels?’ 
‘I can, Your Majesty,’ replied the chariot-maker. 
Then, when it was six days less than six months later, the chariot-maker had finished one wheel. 
Then King Pacetana addressed his chariot-maker, 
‘In six days’ time there will be a battle. Is my new pair of wheels finished?’ 
‘Now that it is six days less than six months, Your Majesty, I have finished one wheel.’ 
‘Are you able to finish the second wheel in these six days?’ 
Saying, ‘I can, Your Majesty,’ the chariot-maker finished the second wheel in six days. Taking the pair of wheels he went up to King Pacetana, and said this to the king, 
‘Your Majesty, these are your two new wheels, finished.’ 
‘But, my good chariot-maker, what is the difference between the wheel that was finished in six days less than six months, and the wheel finished in just six days? 
Because I can’t see any difference between them.’ 
‘But, Your Majesty, there is a difference. 
See now what it is.’ 
Then the chariot-maker rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in six days. 
It rolled as far as the original impetus took it, then wobbled and fell down. 
Then he rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in six days less than six months. 
It rolled as far as the original impetus took it, then stood still as if fixed to an axle. 
‘But what is the cause, my good chariot-maker, what is the reason why the wheel that was finished in six days wobbled and fell, 
while the one that was finished in six days less than six months stood still as if fixed to an axle?’ 
‘The wheel that was finished in six days, Your Majesty, is crooked, flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub. 
That’s why it wobbled and fell. 
The wheel that was finished in six days less than six months, Your Majesty, is not crooked, flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub. 
That’s why it stood still as if fixed to an axle.’ 
Now, mendicants, you might think: 
‘Surely that chariot-maker must have been someone else at that time?’ 
But you should not see it like that. 
I myself was the chariot-maker at that time. 
Then I was skilled in the crooks, flaws, and defects of wood. 
Now that I am a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, I am skilled in the crooks, flaws, and defects of actions by body, speech, and mind. 
Whatever monk or nun has not given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of body, speech, and mind has fallen from the teaching and training, just like the wheel that was finished in six days. 
Whatever monk or nun has given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of body, speech, and mind is established in the teaching and training, just like the wheel that was finished in six days less than six months. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will give up the crooks, flaws, and defects of body, speech, and mind.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.16 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
Sure Bet 
“Mendicants, when a mendicant has three things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. 
And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? 
When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. 
When they hear a sound with their ears … 
When they smell an odor with their nose … 
When they taste a flavor with their tongue … 
When they feel a touch with their body … 
When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. 
That’s how a mendicant guards the sense doors. 
And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? 
It’s when a mendicant reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 
‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ 
That’s how a mendicant eats in moderation. 
And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? 
It’s when a mendicant practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle watch, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. 
This is how a mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness. 
When a mendicant possesses these three things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.17 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
Hurting Yourself 
“These three things, mendicants, lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both. 
What three? 
Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are three things that lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, and hurting both. 
These three things, mendicants, don’t lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, or hurting both. 
What three? 
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are three things that don’t lead to hurting yourself, hurting others, or hurting both.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.18 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
The Realm of the Gods 
“Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you: 
‘Reverend, do you lead the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama so that you can be reborn in the realm of the gods?’ 
Being questioned like this, wouldn’t you be horrified, repelled, and disgusted?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“So it seems that you are horrified, repelled, and disgusted by heavenly lifespan, beauty, happiness, glory, and sovereignty. 
How much more then should you be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted by bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.19 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
A Shopkeeper (1st) 
“Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
What three? 
It’s when a shopkeeper doesn’t carefully focus on their work in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. 
A shopkeeper who has these three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is unable to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t carefully focus on a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. 
A mendicant who possesses these three qualities is unable to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. 
A shopkeeper who has three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
What three? 
It’s when a shopkeeper carefully focuses on their work in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. 
A shopkeeper who has these three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is able to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant carefully focuses on a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. 
A mendicant who possesses these three qualities is able to acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they’ve already acquired.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.20 
2. The Chariot-Maker 
A Shopkeeper (2nd) 
“Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors soon acquires great and abundant wealth. 
What three? 
It’s when a shopkeeper sees clearly, is indefatigable, and has supporters. 
And how does a shopkeeper see clearly? 
It’s when a shopkeeper knows of a product: 
‘This product is bought at this price and is selling at this price. With this much investment, it’ll bring this much profit.’ 
That’s how a shopkeeper sees clearly. 
And how is a shopkeeper indefatigable? 
It’s when a shopkeeper is skilled in buying and selling products. 
That’s how a shopkeeper is indefatigable. 
And how does a shopkeeper have supporters? 
It’s when rich, affluent, and wealthy householders or householders’ children know of him: 
‘This good shopkeeper sees clearly and is indefatigable. They are capable of providing for their wives and children, and paying us back from time to time.’ 
They deposit money with the shopkeeper, saying: 
‘With this, my good shopkeeper, earn money to provide for your wives and children, and pay us back from time to time.’ 
That’s how a shopkeeper has supporters. 
A shopkeeper who has these three factors soon acquires great and abundant wealth. 
In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities soon acquires great and abundant skillful qualities. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant sees clearly, is indefatigable, and has supporters. 
And how does a mendicant see clearly? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
That’s how a mendicant sees clearly. 
And how is a mendicant indefatigable? 
It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. 
That’s how a mendicant is indefatigable. 
And how does a mendicant have supporters? 
It’s when from time to time a mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned—inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines—and asks them questions: 
‘Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?’ 
Those venerables reveal what is hidden, clarify what is unclear, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. 
That’s how a mendicant has supporters. 
A mendicant who possesses these three qualities soon acquires great and abundant skillful qualities.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.21 
3. Individuals 
With Saviṭṭha 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Then Venerable Saviṭṭha and Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side and Venerable Sāriputta said to Venerable Saviṭṭha, 
“Reverend Saviṭṭha, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, who do you believe to be the finest?” 
“Reverend Sāriputta, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, I believe the individual freed by faith to be finest. 
Why is that? 
Because this individual’s faculty of faith is extraordinary.” 
Then Sāriputta said to Mahākoṭṭhita, 
“Reverend Koṭṭhika, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, who do you believe to be the finest?” 
“Reverend Sāriputta, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, I believe the direct witness to be finest. 
Why is that? 
Because this individuals’s faculty of immersion is extraordinary.” 
Then Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta, 
“Reverend Sāriputta, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, who do you believe to be the finest?” 
“Reverend Koṭṭhika, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed by faith. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Of these three individuals, I believe the individual attained to view to be finest. 
Why is that? 
Because this individual’s faculty of wisdom is extraordinary.” 
Then Sāriputta said to Saviṭṭha and Mahākoṭṭhita, 
“Each of us has spoken from the heart. 
Come, reverends, let’s go to the Buddha, and tell him about this. 
As he answers, so we’ll remember it.” 
“Yes, reverend,” they replied. 
Then Sāriputta, Saviṭṭha, and Mahākoṭṭhita went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. 
Then Sāriputta told the Buddha of all they had discussed. 
“In this matter, Sāriputta, it’s not easy to categorically declare that 
one of these three individuals is finest. 
In some cases, an individual freed by faith is practicing for perfection, while the direct witness and the one attained to view are once-returners or non-returners. 
In this matter, it’s not easy to categorically declare that 
one of these three individuals is finest. 
In some cases, a direct witness is practicing for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the one attained to view are once-returners or non-returners. 
In this matter, it’s not easy to categorically declare that 
one of these three individuals is finest. 
In some cases, one attained to view is practicing for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the direct witness are once-returners or non-returners. 
In this matter, it’s not easy to categorically declare that 
one of these three individuals is finest.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.22 
3. Individuals 
Patients 
“These three patients are found in the world. 
What three? 
In some cases a patient won’t recover from an illness, regardless of whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer. 
In some cases a patient will recover from an illness, regardless of whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer. 
In some cases a patient can recover from an illness, but only if they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer, and not if they don’t get these things. 
Now, it’s for the sake of the last patient—who will recover only if they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer—that food, medicines, and a carer are prescribed. 
But also, for the sake of this patient, the other patients should be looked after. 
These are the three kinds of patients found in the world. 
In the same way, these three individuals similar to patients are found in the world. 
What three? 
Some people don’t step into the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, regardless of whether or not they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims. 
Some people do step into the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, regardless of whether or not they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims. 
Some people can step into the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims, and not when they don’t get those things. 
Now, it’s for the sake of this last individual that teaching the Dhamma is prescribed, that is, the one who can step into the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims. 
But also, for the sake of this individual, the other people should be taught Dhamma. 
These are the three individuals similar to patients found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.23 
3. Individuals 
Choices 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
Firstly, a certain individual makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Having made these choices, they’re reborn in a hurtful world, 
where hurtful contacts strike them. 
Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively painful—like the beings in hell. 
Furthermore, another individual makes pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Having made these choices, they are reborn in a pleasing world, 
where pleasing contacts strike them. 
Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing feelings of perfect happiness—like the gods of universal beauty. 
Furthermore, another individual makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world that is both hurtful and pleasing, 
where hurtful and pleasing contacts strike them. 
Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of pleasure and pain—like humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.24 
3. Individuals 
Very Helpful 
“Mendicants, these three individuals are very helpful to another. 
What three? 
The individual who has enabled you to go for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. 
This individual is very helpful to another. 
Furthermore, the individual who has enabled you to truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This individual is very helpful to another. 
Furthermore, the individual who has enabled you to realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with your own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This individual is very helpful to another. 
These are the three individuals who are very helpful to another individual. 
And I say that there is no-one more helpful to another than these three individuals. 
And I also say that it’s not easy to repay these three individuals by bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.25 
3. Individuals 
Like Diamond 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
An individual with a mind like an open sore, an individual with a mind like lightning, and an individual with a mind like diamond. 
And who has a mind like an open sore? 
It’s an individual who is irritable and bad-tempered. 
Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. 
They’re like a festering sore, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. 
In the same way, an individual is irritable and bad-tempered. 
Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. 
This is called an individual with a mind like an open sore. 
And who has a mind like lightning? 
It’s an individual who truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
They’re like a person with keen eyes in the dark of the night, who sees by a flash of lightning. 
In the same way, an individual truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is called an individual with a mind like lightning. 
And who has a mind like diamond? 
It’s an individual who realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
It’s like a diamond, which can’t be cut by anything at all, not even a gem or a stone. 
In the same way, an individual realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. … 
This is called an individual with a mind like diamond. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.26 
3. Individuals 
Associates 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
There is an individual you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend. 
There is an individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend. 
There is an individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and respect. 
Who is the individual you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend? 
It’s an individual who is inferior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
You shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend such an individual, except out of kindness and sympathy. 
Who is the individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend? 
It’s an individual who is similar in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
You should associate with, accompany, and attend such an individual. 
Why is that? 
Thinking, ‘Since our ethical conduct is similar, we can discuss ethics, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease. 
Since our immersion is similar, we can discuss immersion, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease. 
Since our wisdom is similar, we can discuss wisdom, the conversation will flow, and we’ll both be at ease.’ 
That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such an individual. 
Who is the individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and respect? 
It’s an individual who is superior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
You should associate with, accompany, and attend such an individual with honor and respect. 
Why is that? 
Thinking, ‘I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of ethical conduct I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the ethical conduct I’ve already fulfilled. 
I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the immersion I’ve already fulfilled. 
I’ll fulfill the entire spectrum of wisdom I haven’t yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the wisdom I’ve already fulfilled.’ 
That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend this individual with honor and respect. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill, 
but associating with an equal, you’ll never decline; 
following the best, you’ll quickly rise up, 
so you should keep company <j>with people better than you.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.27 
3. Individuals 
You Should be Disgusted 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
There is an individual you should be disgusted by, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
There is an individual you should regard with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
There is an individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend. 
Who is the individual you should be disgusted by, and not associate with, accompany, or attend? 
It’s an individual who is unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner—though claiming to be one—rotten inside, festering, and depraved. 
You should be disgusted by such an individual, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
Why is that? 
Even if you don’t follow the example of such an individual, you still get a bad reputation: 
‘That individual has bad friends, companions, and associates.’ 
They’re like a snake that’s been living in a pile of dung. Even if it doesn’t bite, it’ll still rub off on you. 
In the same way, even if you don’t follow the example of such an individual, you still get a bad reputation: 
‘That individual has bad friends, companions, and associates.’ 
That’s why you should be disgusted by such an individual, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
Who is the individual you should regard with equanimity, and not associate with, accompany, or attend? 
It’s an individual who is irritable and bad-tempered. 
Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. 
They’re like a festering sore, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. 
In the same way, someone is irritable and bad-tempered. 
They’re like a firebrand of pale-moon ebony, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, sizzles and crackles even more. 
In the same way, someone is irritable and bad-tempered. 
They’re like a sewer, which, when you stir it with a stick or a stone, stinks even more. 
In the same way, an individual is irritable and bad-tempered. 
Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. 
You should regard such an individual with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
Why is that? 
Thinking, ‘They might abuse or insult me, or do me harm.’ 
That’s why you should regard such an individual with equanimity, and you shouldn’t associate with, accompany, or attend them. 
Who is the individual you should associate with, accompany, and attend? 
It’s an individual who is ethical, of good character. 
You should associate with, accompany, and attend such an individual. 
Why is that? 
Even if you don’t follow the example of such an individual, you still get a good reputation: 
‘That individual has good friends, companions, and associates.’ 
That’s why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such an individual. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill, 
but associating with an equal, you’ll never decline; 
following the best, you’ll quickly rise up, 
so you should keep company <j>with people better than you.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.28 
3. Individuals 
Speech like Dung 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
One with speech like dung, one with speech like flowers, and one with speech like honey. 
And who has speech like dung? 
It’s an individual who is summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. 
This is called an individual with speech like dung. 
And who has speech like flowers? 
It’s an individual who is summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: ‘Please, my friend, say what you know.’ Not knowing, they say ‘I don’t know.’ Knowing, they say ‘I know.’ Not seeing, they say ‘I don’t see.’ And seeing, they say ‘I see.’ So they don’t deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason. 
This is called an individual with speech like flowers. 
And who has speech like honey? 
It’s an individual who gives up harsh speech. 
They speak in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. 
This is called an individual with speech like honey. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.29 
3. Individuals 
Blind 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
The blind, the one-eyed, and the two-eyed. 
Who is the blind individual? 
It’s someone who doesn’t have the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
Nor do they have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. 
This is called a blind individual. 
Who is the individual with one eye? 
It’s someone who has the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
But they don’t have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright. 
This is called a one-eyed individual. 
Who is the individual with two eyes? 
It’s someone who has the kind of vision that’s needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they’ve already acquired. 
And they have the kind of vision that’s needed to know the difference between skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, or qualities on the side of dark and bright. 

This is called a two-eyed individual. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
Neither suitable wealth, 
nor merit do they make. 
They hold a losing hand on both counts, 
those who are blind, with ruined eyes. 
And now the one-eyed 
individual is explained. 
By methods good and bad, 
that devious person seeks wealth. 
Both by fraudulent, thieving deeds, 
and also by lies, 
the young man’s skilled at piling up money, 
and enjoying sensual pleasures. 
From here they go to hell—
the one-eyed person is ruined. 
And now the two-eyed is explained, 
the best individual. 
Their wealth is earned legitimately, 
money acquired by their own hard work. 
They give with best of intentions, 
that peaceful-hearted man. 
They go to a good place, 
where there is no sorrow. 
The blind and the one-eyed, 
you should avoid from afar. 
But you should keep the two-eyed close, 
the best individual.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.30 
3. Individuals 
Upside-down 
“These three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
One with upside-down wisdom, one with wisdom on their lap, and one with widespread wisdom. 
And who is the individual with upside-down wisdom? 
It’s an individual who often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
But even while sitting there, that person doesn’t apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
And when they get up from their seat, they don’t apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
It’s like when a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn’t stay. 
In the same way, an individual often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
But even while sitting there, that person doesn’t apply the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, or end. 
And when they get up from their seat, they don’t apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
This is called an individual with upside-down wisdom. 
And who is the individual with wisdom on their lap? 
It’s an individual who often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. 
But when they get up from their seat, they don’t apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
It’s like a person who has different kinds of food crammed on their lap—
such as sesame, rice, sweets, or jujube—
so that if they get up from the seat without mindfulness, everything gets scattered. 
In the same way, an individual often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. 
But when they get up from their seat, they don’t apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
This is called an individual with wisdom on their lap. 
And who is the individual with widespread wisdom? 
It’s an individual who often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
While sitting there, they apply the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. 
And when they get up from their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
It’s like when a pot full of water is set straight, so the water stays and doesn’t drain out. 
In the same way, an individual often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. 
The mendicants teach them Dhamma that’s good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
While sitting there, they apply the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. 
And when they get up from their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. 
This is called an individual with widespread wisdom. 
These are the three individuals found in the world. 
A person with upside-down wisdom, 
is a simpleton and cannot see, 
and even if they frequently 
go into the mendicants’ presence, 
such a person can’t learn 
the beginning, middle, or end 
of the discussion, 
for their wisdom is lacking. 
the individual with wisdom on their lap 
is better than that, it’s said; 
but even if they frequently 
go into the mendicants’ presence, 
such a person can only learn 
the beginning, middle, and end 
while sitting in that seat; 
but they’ve only grasped the phrasing, 
for when they get up their understanding fails, 
and what they’ve learned is lost. 
The person with widespread wisdom 
is better than that, it’s said; 
and if they, too, frequently 
go into the mendicants’ presence, 
one such can learn 
the beginning, middle, and end 
while sitting in that seat; 
and when they’ve grasped the phrasing, 
they remember it with the best of intentions. 
That peaceful-hearted man, 
practicing in line with the teaching, 
would make an end of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.31 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
With Divinity 
“Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with divinity. 
A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors. 
A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. 
‘Divinity’ is a term for your parents. 
‘First tutors’ is a term for your parents. 
‘Worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods’ is a term for your parents. 
Why is that? 
Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world. 
Parents are said to be ‘divinity’ 
and ‘first tutors’, it’s said. 
They’re worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods <j>from their children, 
for they love their offspring. 
Therefore an astute person 
would revere them and honor them 
with food and drink, 
clothes and bedding, 
anointing and bathing, 
and by washing their feet. 
Because they look after 
their parents like this, 
in this life they’re praised by the astute, 
and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.32 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
With Ānanda 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: 
“Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such that there’s no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for externally for all signs; 
and that they’d live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no more?” 
“It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant gains a state of immersion such that they have no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for externally for all signs; 
and that they’d live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no more.” 
“But how could this be, sir?” 

“Ānanda, it’s when a mendicant thinks: 
‘This is peaceful; this is sublime—that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.’ 
That’s how, Ānanda, a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such that there’s no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for externally for all signs; 
and that they’d live having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no more. 
And Ānanda, this is what I was referring to in ‘The Way to the Far Shore’, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’ when I said: 
‘Having appraised the world high and low, 
there is nothing in the world that disturbs them. 
Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, <j>with no need for hope—
they’ve crossed over rebirth and old age, I declare.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.33 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
With Sāriputta 
Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, 
“Maybe I’ll teach Dhamma in brief, 
maybe in detail, 
maybe both in brief and in detail. 
But it’s hard to find anyone who understands.” 
“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! 
Let the Buddha teach Dhamma in brief, in detail, and both in brief and in detail. 
There will be those who understand the teaching!” 
“So, Sāriputta, you should train like this: 
‘There’ll be no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit externally for all signs; and we’ll live having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no more.’ 
That’s how you should train. 
When a mendicant has no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit externally for all signs; and they live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no more—
they’re called 
a mendicant who has cut off craving, cast off the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering. 
And Sāriputta, this is what I was referring to in ‘The Way to the Far Shore’, in ‘The Questions of Udaya’ when I said: 
‘The giving up of both 
sensual desires and displeasures, 
the casting aside of dullness, 
and the prevention of remorse; 
pure equanimity and mindfulness, 
preceded by investigation of principles—
this, I declare, is liberation by enlightenment, 
the smashing of ignorance.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.34 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
Sources 
“Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds. 
Any deed that emerges from greed—born, sourced, and originated from greed—ripens where that new incarnation is born. 
And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. 
Any deed that emerges from hate—born, sourced, and originated from hate—ripens where that new incarnation is born. 
And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. 
Any deed that emerges from delusion—born, sourced, and originated from delusion—ripens where that new incarnation is born. 
And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. 
Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. They’re sown in a well-prepared, productive field, 
and the heavens provide plenty of rain. 
Then those seeds would grow, increase, and mature. 
In the same way, any deed that emerges from greed—born, sourced, and originated from greed—ripens where that new incarnation is born. 
And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. 
Any deed that emerges from hate … 
Any deed that emerges from delusion—born, sourced, and originated from delusion—ripens where that new incarnation is born. 
And wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced—either in the present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. 
These are three sources that give rise to deeds. 
Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to deeds. 
Any deed that emerges from contentment—born, sourced, and originated from contentment—is given up when greed is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
Any deed that emerges from love—born, sourced, and originated from love—is abandoned when hate is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
Any deed that emerges from understanding—born, sourced, and originated from understanding—is abandoned when delusion is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and sun, fertile, and well-kept. 
But someone would burn them with fire, 
reduce them to ashes, 
and whisk away the ashes in a strong wind, or glide them down a swift stream. 
Then those seeds would be cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
In the same way, any deed that emerges from contentment—born, sourced, and originated from contentment—is abandoned when greed is done away with. It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
Any deed that emerges from love … 
Any deed that emerges from understanding—born, sourced, and originated from understanding—is abandoned when delusion is done away with. 
It’s cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
These are three sources that give rise to deeds. 
When an ignorant person acts 
out of greed, hate, or delusion, 
any deeds they have done, 
a little or a lot, 
are to be experienced right here, 
not in any other place. 
So a wise person, 
a mendicant arousing knowledge 
of the outcome of greed, hate, and delusion, 
would abandon all bad destinies.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.35 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
With Hatthaka 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Āḷavī, on a mat of leaves by a cow-path in a grove of Indian Rosewood. 
Then as Hatthaka of Āḷavī was going for a walk he saw the Buddha sitting on that mat of leaves. 
He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said, 
“Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?” 
“Yes, prince, I slept well. 
I am one of those who sleep at ease in the world.” 
“The winter nights are cold, sir, and it’s the week of mid-winter, when the snow falls. Rough is the ground trampled under the cows’ hooves, and thin is the mat of leaves. The leaves are sparse on the trees, the ocher robes are cold, and cold blows the north wind. 
And yet the Buddha says, 
‘Yes, prince, I slept well. 
I am one of those who sleep at ease in the world.’” 
“Well then, prince, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. 
What do you think? Take the case of a householder or his son, who lives in a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with door fastened and window shuttered. 
His couch is spread with woolen covers—shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers—and spread with a fine deer hide. It has a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. 
An oil lamp is burning there, 
while his four wives attend to him in all manner of agreeable ways. 
What do you think, prince, would he sleep at ease, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“He would sleep at ease, sir. 
Of those who sleep at ease in the world, he would be one.” 
“What do you think, prince? 
Is it not possible that a fever born of greed—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“The greed that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
That’s why I sleep at ease. 
What do you think, prince? 
Is it not possible that a fever born of hate … 
or a fever born of delusion—physical or mental—might arise in that householder or householder’s son, burning him so he sleeps badly?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“The delusion that burns that householder or householder’s son, making them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
That’s why I sleep at ease. 
A brahmin who is fully quenched 
always sleeps at ease. 
Sensual pleasures slip off them, 
they’re cooled, free of attachments. 
Since they’ve cut off all clinging, 
and removed the stress from the heart, 
the peaceful sleep at ease, 
having found peace of mind.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.36 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
Messengers of the Gods 
“There are, mendicants, these three messengers of the gods. 
What three? 
Firstly, someone does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
The wardens of hell take them by the arms and present them to King Yama, saying: 
‘Your Majesty, this person did not pay due respect to their mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, or honor the elders in the family. 
May Your Majesty punish them!’ 
Then King Yama pursues, presses, and grills them about the first messenger of the gods: 
‘My friend, did you not see the first messenger of the gods that appeared among human beings?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw nothing, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did you not see among human beings an elderly woman or a man—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old—bent double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing, past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin wrinkled, and limbs blotchy?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw that, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did it not occur to you—being sensible and mature—
“I, too, am liable to grow old. I’m not exempt from old age. I’d better do good by way of body, speech, and mind”?’ 
They say, 
‘I couldn’t, sir. I was negligent.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, because you were negligent, you didn’t do good by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Indeed, they’ll definitely punish you to fit your negligence. 
That bad deed wasn’t done by your mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn’t done by friends and colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and brahmins. 
That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will experience the result.’ 
Then King Yama grills them about the second messenger of the gods: 
‘My friend, did you not see the second messenger of the gods that appeared among human beings?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw nothing, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did you not see among human beings a woman or a man, sick, suffering, gravely ill, collapsed in their own urine and feces, being picked up by some and put down by others?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw that, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did it not occur to you—being sensible and mature—
“I, too, am liable to become sick. I’m not exempt from sickness. I’d better do good by way of body, speech, and mind”?’ 
They say, 
‘I couldn’t, sir. I was negligent.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, because you were negligent, you didn’t do good by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Well, they’ll definitely punish you to fit your negligence. 
That bad deed wasn’t done by your mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn’t done by friends and colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and brahmins. 
That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will experience the result.’ 
Then King Yama grills them about the third messenger of the gods: 
‘My friend, did you not see the third messenger of the gods that appeared among human beings?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw nothing, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did you not see among human beings a woman or a man, dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and festering?’ 
They say, 
‘I saw that, sir.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, did it not occur to you—being sensible and mature—
“I, too, am liable to die. I’m not exempt from death. I’d better do good by way of body, speech, and mind”?’ 
They say, 
‘I couldn’t, sir. I was negligent.’ 
King Yama says to them, 
‘My friend, because you were negligent, you didn’t do good by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Well, they’ll definitely punish you to fit your negligence. 
That bad deed wasn’t done by your mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn’t done by friends and colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and brahmins. 
That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will experience the result.’ 
After grilling them about the third messenger of the gods, King Yama falls silent. 
The wardens of hell punish them with the five-fold crucifixion. 
They drive red-hot stakes through the hands and feet, and another in the middle of the chest. 
And there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings—but they don’t die until that bad deed is eliminated. 
The wardens of hell throw them down and hack them with axes. … 

They hang them upside-down and hack them with hatchets. … 
They harness them to a chariot, and drive them back and forth across burning ground, blazing and glowing. … 
They make them climb up and down a huge mountain of burning coals, blazing and glowing. … 
The wardens of hell turn them upside down and throw them in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing. 
There they’re seared in boiling scum, and they’re swept up and down and round and round. 
And there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings—but they don’t die until that bad deed is eliminated. 
The wardens of hell toss them into the Great Hell. 
Now, about that Great Hell: 
‘Four are its corners, four its doors, 
neatly divided section by section. 
Surrounded by an iron wall, 
of iron is its roof. 
The ground is even made of iron, 
it burns with fierce fire. 
The heat forever radiates 
a hundred leagues around.’ 
Once upon a time, King Yama thought, 
‘Those who do such bad deeds in the world receive these many different punishments. 
Oh, I hope I may be reborn as a human being! And that a Realized One—a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha—arises in the world! And that I may pay homage to the Buddha! 
Then the Buddha can teach me Dhamma, so that I may understand his teaching.’ 
Now, I don’t say this because I’ve heard it from some other ascetic or brahmin. I only say it because I’ve known, seen, and realized it for myself. 
When warned by the gods’ messengers, 
those sons of Manu who are negligent 
sorrow for a long time 
when they go to that wretched place. 
When warned by the gods’ messengers, 
the good and true persons here, 
never neglect 
the teaching of the Noble One. 
Seeing the peril in grasping, 
the origin of birth and death, 
the unattached are freed 
with the ending of birth and death. 
Happy, they’ve come to a safe place, 
quenched in this very life. 
They’ve gone beyond all threats and perils, 
and risen above all suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.37 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
The Four Great Kings (1st) 
“On the eighth day of the fortnight, mendicants, the ministers and councillors of the four great kings wander about the world, thinking: 
‘Hopefully most humans are paying due respect to their parents, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in their families, observing and keeping vigil on the sabbath, and making merit.’ 
And on the fourteenth day of the fortnight, the sons of the four great kings wander about the world, thinking: 
‘Hopefully most humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit.’ 
And on the fifteenth day sabbath, the four great kings themselves wander about the world, thinking: 
‘Hopefully most humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit.’ 
If only a few humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit, 
the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three, seated together in the Hall of Clear Right: 
‘Only a few humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit.’ 
Then the gods of the thirty-three are disappointed, thinking, 
‘The heavenly hosts will dwindle, while the titan hosts will swell!’ 
But if many humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit, 
the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three, seated together in the Hall of Clear Right: 
‘Many humans are paying due respect to their parents … and making merit.’ 
Then the gods of the thirty-three are pleased, thinking, 
‘The heavenly hosts will swell, while the titan hosts will dwindle!’ 
Once upon a time, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the thirty-three, spoke this verse: 
‘Whoever wants to be like me 
would observe the sabbath 
complete in all eight factors, 
on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days, 
and the eighth day of the fortnight, 
as well as on the fortnightly special displays.’ 
But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung; poorly spoken, not well spoken. 
Why is that? 
Sakka, lord of gods, is not free of greed, hate, and delusion. 
But for a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—it is appropriate to say: 
‘Whoever wants to be like me 
would observe the sabbath, 
complete in all eight factors, 
on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days, 
and the eighth day of the fortnight, 
as well as on the fortnightly special displays.’ 
Why is that? 
Because that mendicant is free of greed, hate, and delusion.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.38 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
The Four Great Kings (2nd) 
“Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the thirty-three, spoke this verse: 
‘Whoever wants to be like me 
would observe the sabbath 
complete in all eight factors, 
on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days, 
and the eighth day of the fortnight, 
as well as on the fortnightly special displays.’ 
But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung; poorly spoken, not well spoken. 
Why is that? 
Because Sakka, lord of gods, is not exempt from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is not exempt from suffering, I say. 
But for a mendicant who is perfected—with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their heart’s goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment—it is appropriate to say: 
‘Whoever wants to be like me 
would observe the sabbath, 
complete in all eight factors, 
on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days, 
and the eighth day of the fortnight, 
as well as on the fortnightly special displays.’ 
Why is that? 
Because that mendicant is exempt from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is exempt from suffering, I say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.39 
4. Messengers of the Gods 
A Delicate Lifestyle 
“My lifestyle was delicate, mendicants, most delicate, extremely delicate. 
In my father’s home, lotus ponds were made just for me. 
In some, blue water lilies blossomed, while in others, there were pink or white lotuses, just for my benefit. 
I only used sandalwood from Kāsi, and my turbans, jackets, sarongs, and upper robes also came from Kāsi. 
And a white parasol was held over me night and day, with the thought: 
‘Don’t let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother him.’ 
I had three stilt longhouses—one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season. 
I stayed in a stilt longhouse without coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where I was entertained by musicians—none of them men. 
While the bondservants, workers, and staff in other houses are given rough gruel with false black pepper to eat, in my father’s home they are given fine rice with meat. 
Amid such prosperity and such a delicate lifestyle, I thought: 
‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to grow old, not being exempt from old age—sees someone else who is old, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. 
But since I, too, am liable to grow old, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is old.’ 
Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of youth. 
‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to get sick, not being exempt from sickness—sees someone else who is sick, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. 
But since I, too, am liable to get sick, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is sick.’ 
Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of health. 
‘When an unlearned ordinary person—who is liable to die, not being exempt from death—sees someone else who is dead, they’re horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are in the same situation. 
But since I, too, am liable to die, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when I see someone else who is dead.’ 
Reflecting like this, I entirely gave up the vanity of life. 
There are these three vanities. 
What three? 
The vanity of youth, of health, and of life. 
Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, an unlearned ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
Intoxicated with the vanity of health … 
Intoxicated with the vanity of life, an unlearned ordinary person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, health, or life, a mendicant disavows the training and returns to a lesser life. 

For others, sickness is natural, 
and so are old age and death. 
Though this is how their nature is, 
ordinary people feel disgusted. 
If I were to be disgusted 
with creatures whose nature is such, 
it would not be appropriate for me, 
since my life is just the same. 
Living in such a way, 
I understood the truth without attachments. 
I mastered all vanities—
of health, of youth, 
and even of life—
seeing renunciation as sanctuary. 
Zeal sprang up in me 
as I looked to extinguishment. 
Now I’m unable 
to indulge in sensual pleasures; 
there’s no turning back, 
I’m committed to the spiritual life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.40 
4. Messengers from the Gods 
In Charge 
“There are, mendicants, these three things to put in charge. 
What three? 
Putting oneself, the world, or the teaching in charge. 
And what, mendicants, is putting oneself in charge? 
It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this: 
‘I didn’t go forth from the lay life to homelessness for the sake of a robe, 
almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that state. 
But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. 
And I thought, “Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.” 
But it would not be appropriate for me to seek sensual pleasures like those I abandoned when I went forth, or even worse.’ 
Then they reflect: 
‘My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in samādhi.’ 
Putting themselves in charge, they give up the unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. 
This is called putting oneself in charge. 
And what, mendicants, is putting the world in charge? 
It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this: 
‘I didn’t go forth from the lay life to homelessness for the sake of a robe, 
almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that state. 
But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. 
And I thought, “Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.” 
And now, since I’ve now gone forth, I might have sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. But the population of the world is large, 
and there are ascetics and brahmins who have psychic power—they’re clairvoyant, and can read the minds of others. 
They see far without being seen, even by those close; and they understand the minds of others. 
They would know me: 
“Look at this gentleman; he’s gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, but he’s living mixed up with bad, unskillful qualities.” 
And there are deities, too, who have psychic power—they’re clairvoyant, and can read the minds of others. 
They see far without being seen, even by those close; and they understand the minds of others. 
They would know me: 
“Look at this gentleman; he’s gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, but he’s living mixed up with bad, unskillful qualities.”’ 
Then they reflect: 
‘My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in samādhi.’ 
Putting the world in charge, they give up the unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. 
This is called putting the world in charge. 
And what, mendicants, is putting the teaching in charge? 
It’s when a mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and reflects like this: 
‘I didn’t go forth from the lay life to homelessness for the sake of a robe, 
almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that state. 
But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. 
And I thought, “Hopefully I can make an end to this entire mass of suffering.” 
The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
I have spiritual companions who live knowing and seeing. 
Now that I’ve gone forth in this well explained teaching and training, it would not be appropriate for me to live lazy and heedless.’ 
Then they reflect: 
‘My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in samādhi.’ 
Putting the teaching in charge, they give up the unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. 
This is called putting the teaching in charge. 
These are the three things to put in charge. 
There’s no privacy in the world, 
for someone who does bad deeds. 
You’ll know for yourself, 
whether you’ve lied or told the truth. 
When you witness your good self, 
you despise it; 
while you disguise 
your bad self inside yourself. 
The gods and the Realized One see 
the fool who lives unjustly in the world. 
So with yourself in charge, live mindfully; 
with the world in charge, <j>be alert and practice absorption; 
with the teaching in charge, <j>live in line with that teaching: 
a sage who tries for the truth doesn’t deteriorate. 
Māra’s conquered; the terminator’s overcome: 
one who strives reaches the end of rebirth. 
Unaffected, intelligent, knowing the world—
that sage is determined by nothing at all.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.41 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Present 
“Mendicants, when three things are present, a faithful gentleman brims with much merit. 
What three? 
When faith is present, 
when a gift to give is present, 
and when those worthy of a religious donation are present. 
When these three things are present, a faithful gentleman brims with much merit.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.42 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Three Grounds 
“There are three grounds, mendicants, by which a person with faith and confidence can be known. 
What three? 
They like to see ethical people. They like to hear the true teaching. And they live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. 
These are the three grounds by which a person with faith and confidence can be known. 
They like to see ethical people; 
they want to hear the true teaching; 
they’ve driven out the stain of stinginess: 
that’s who’s called an individual of faith.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.43 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Good Reasons 
“Mendicants, taking three reasons into consideration provides quite enough motivation to teach Dhamma to another. 
What three? 
When the teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. 
When the audience understands the meaning and the teaching. 
When both the teacher and the audience understand the meaning and the teaching. 
Taking these three reasons into consideration provides quite enough motivation to teach Dhamma to another.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.44 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
When Conversation Flows 
“In three situations, mendicants, conversation flows. 
What three? 
When the teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. 
When the audience understands the meaning and the teaching. 
When both the teacher and the audience understand the meaning and the teaching. 
These are the three situations in which conversation flows.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.45 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Recommended by the Astute 
“Mendicants, these three things are recommended by astute true persons. 
What three? 
Giving, 
going forth, 
and taking care of your mother and father. 
These are the three things recommended by astute true persons. 
The virtuous recommend giving, 
harmlessness, restraint, and self-control; 
caring for mother and father, 
and peaceful spiritual practitioners. 
These are the things recommended by the good, 
which the astute should cultivate. 
A noble one, having vision, 
will enjoy a world of grace.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.46 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Ethical 
“Mendicants, when ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, 
the people there brim with much merit in three ways. 
What three? 
By way of body, speech, and mind. 
When ethical renunciates are supported by a town or village, 
the people there brim with much merit in these three ways.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.47 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Characteristics of the Conditioned 
“Mendicants, the conditioned has these three characteristics. 
What three? 
Arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is evident. 
These are the three characteristics of the conditioned.” 

Characteristics of the Unconditioned 
“The unconditioned has these three characteristics. 
What three? 
No arising is evident, no vanishing is evident, and no change while persisting is evident. 
These are the three characteristics of the unconditioned.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.48 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
The King of Mountains 
“Mendicants, great sal trees grow in three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. 
What three? 
The branches, leaves, and foliage; the bark and shoots; and the softwood and heartwood. 
Great sal trees grow in these three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of mountains. 
In the same way, a family grows in three ways supported by a family head with faith. 
What three? 
Faith, ethics, and wisdom. 
A family grows in these three ways supported by a family head with faith. 
Supported by the rocky mountain 
in the wilds, the formidable forest, 
the tree grows 
to become lord of the forest. 
So too, when the family head 
is ethical and faithful, 
supported by them, they grow: 
children, partners, and kin, 
colleagues, relatives, 
and those dependent for their livelihood. 
Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous, 
the generosity and good deeds, 
those who see clearly 
do likewise. 
Having practiced the teaching here, 
the path that goes to a good place, 
they delight in the heavenly realm, 
enjoying all the pleasures they desire.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.49 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
Keen 
“In three situations, mendicants, you should be keen. 
What three? 
You should be keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. You should be keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And you should be keen to endure physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, life-threatening. 
In these three situations, you should be keen. 
It’s a mendicant who is keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. They’re keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And they’re keen to endure physical pain—sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, life-threatening. 
This is called a mendicant who is keen, alert, and mindful so as to rightly make an end of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.50 
5. The Lesser Chapter 
A Master Thief 
“Mendicants, a master thief with three factors breaks into houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery. 
What three? 
A master thief relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on the powerful. 
And how does a master thief rely on uneven ground? 
It’s when a master thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged mountains. 
That’s how a master thief relies on uneven ground. 
And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? 
It’s when a master thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a blind spot, or a large forest grove. 
That’s how a master thief relies on thick cover. 
And how does a master thief rely on the powerful? 
It’s when a master thief relies on rulers or their chief ministers. 
They think: 
‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers will speak in my defense in the case.’ 
And that’s exactly what happens. 
That’s how a master thief relies on the powerful. 
A master thief with these three factors breaks into houses, plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery. 
In the same way, when a bad mendicant has three factors, they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What three? 
A bad mendicant relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on the powerful. 
And how does a bad mendicant rely on uneven ground? 
It’s when a bad mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
That’s how a bad mendicant relies on uneven ground. 
And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? 
It’s when a bad mendicant has wrong view, he’s attached to an extremist view. 
That’s how a bad mendicant relies on thick cover. 
And how does a bad mendicant rely on the powerful? 
It’s when a bad mendicant relies on rulers or their chief ministers. 
They think: 
‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers will speak in my defense in the case.’ 
And that’s exactly what happens. 
That’s how a bad mendicant relies on the powerful. 
When a bad mendicant possesses these three qualities, they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.51 
6. Brahmins 
Two Brahmins (1st) 
Then two old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life, a hundred and twenty years old—went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: 
“We brahmins, worthy Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we’re advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; we’re a hundred and twenty years old. 
And we haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have we made a shelter from fear. 
Advise us, worthy Gotama, instruct us! It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness.” 
“Indeed, brahmins, you’re old, elderly and senior. 
And you haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. 
This world is led onward by old age, sickness, and death. 
But restraint here by way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, asylum, island, refuge, and final haven for the departed. 
This life, so very short, is led onward. 
One led on to old age has no shelter. 
Seeing this peril in death, 
do good deeds that bring you joy. 
The restraint practiced here—
of body, speech, and mind—
leads the departed to happiness, 
as the good deeds done while living.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.52 
6. Brahmins 
Two Brahmins (2nd) 
Then two old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life, being a hundred and twenty years old—went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: 
“We brahmins, worthy Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we’re advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; we’re a hundred and twenty years old. 
And we haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have we made a shelter from fear. 
Advise us, worthy Gotama, instruct us! It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness.” 
“Indeed, brahmins, you’re old, elderly and senior. 
And you haven’t done what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. 
This world is burning with old age, sickness, and death. 
But restraint here by way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, asylum, island, refuge, and final haven for the departed. 
When your house is on fire, 
you rescue the pot 
that’s useful, 
not the one that’s burnt. 
And as the world is on fire 
with old age and death, 
you should rescue by giving, 
for what’s given is rescued. 
The restraint practiced here—
of body, speech, and mind—
leads the departed to happiness, 
as the good deeds done while living.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.53 
6. Brahmins 
A Certain Brahmin 
Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching apparent in the present life’. 
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” 
“A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 

This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When hate has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! 
As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.54 
6. Brahmins 
A Wanderer 
Then a brahmin wanderer went up to the Buddha … Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, they speak of ‘a teaching apparent in the present life’. 
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” 
“A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
A greedy person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
When greed has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
A hateful person … 
A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
A deluded person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
When delusion has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.55 
6. Brahmins 
Quenched 
Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, they say that ‘extinguishment is apparent in the present life’. 
In what way is extinguishment apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves?” 
“A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
This is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life. 
A hateful person … 
A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
This, too, is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life. 
When you experience the ending of greed, hate, and delusion without anything left over, 
that’s how extinguishment is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.56 
6. Brahmins 
Breaking Apart 
Then a well-to-do Brahmin went up to the Buddha, and seated to one side he said to him: 
“Worthy Gotama, I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 
‘In the old days this world was so full of humans you’d think they were squashed together. The villages, towns and capital cities were no more than a chicken’s flight apart.’ 
What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled, a decline in population is evident, and whole villages, towns, cities, and countries have disappeared?” 
“These days, brahmin, humans just love illicit desire. They’re overcome by immoral greed, and mired in wrong custom. 
Taking up sharp knives, they murder each other. And so many people perish. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. 
Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … 
the heavens don’t provide enough rain, 
so there’s famine, a bad harvest, with crops blighted and turned to straw. 
And so many people perish. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled. 
Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire … 
native spirits let vicious monsters loose. And so many humans perish. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.57 
6. Brahmins 
With Vacchagotta 
Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“I have heard, worthy Gotama, that the ascetic Gotama says this: 
‘Gifts should only be given to me, not to others. 
Gifts should only be given to my disciples, not to the disciples of others. 
Only what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others. 
Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of others.’ 

I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism? 
For we don’t want to misrepresent the worthy Gotama.” 
“Vaccha, those who say this 

do not repeat what I have said. They misrepresent me with what is false and untrue. 
Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a roadblock for three individuals. 
What three? 
The giver is obstructed from making merit. The receiver is obstructed from getting what is offered. And they’ve already broken and damaged themselves. 
Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a roadblock for these three individuals. 
Vaccha, this is what I say: 
‘You even make merit by tipping out dish-washing water in a cesspool or a sump with living creatures in it, thinking, 
“May any creatures here be nourished!”’ 
How much more then for human beings! 
However, I also say that a gift to an ethical person is more fruitful than one to an unethical person. They’ve given up five factors, and possess five factors. 
What are the five factors they’ve given up? 
Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. 
These are the five factors they’ve given up. 
What are the five factors they possess? 
The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom. 
These are the five factors they possess. 
I say that a gift to anyone who has given up these five factors and possesses these five factors is very fruitful. 
Cows may be black or white, 
red or tawny, 
mottled or uniform, 
or pigeon-colored. 
But when one is born among them, 
the bull that’s tamed—
a behemoth, powerful, 
well-paced in pulling forward—
they yoke the load just to him, 
regardless of his color. 
So it is for humans, 
wherever they may be born—
among aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, 
menials, or corpse-workers and scavengers—
one is born among them, 
tamed, true to their vows. 
Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct, 
truthful, conscientious, 
they’ve given up birth and death. 
Complete in the spiritual journey, 
with burden put down, detached, 
they’ve completed the task <j>and are free of defilements. 
Gone beyond all things, 
they’re quenched by not grasping. 
In that flawless field, 
a religious donation is abundant. 
Fools who don’t understand—
unlearned simpletons—
give their gifts to those outside, 
and don’t attend the peaceful ones. 
But those who do attend the peaceful ones—
wise, esteemed as attentive—
and whose faith in the Holy One 
has roots planted deep, 
they go to the realm of the gods, 
or are born here in a good family. 
Gradually those astute ones 
reach extinguishment.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.58 
6. Brahmins 
With Tikaṇṇa 
Then Tikaṇṇa the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
Seated to one side, in front of the Buddha, Tikaṇṇa praised the brahmins who were proficient in the three Vedas, 
“Such are the brahmins, masters of the three Vedic knowledges! Thus are the brahmins, masters of the three Vedic knowledges!” 
“But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of the three Vedic knowledges?” 
“Worthy Gotama, it’s when a brahmin is well born on both his mother’s and father’s side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word, and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. 
That’s how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of the three Vedic knowledges.” 
“Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.” 
“But worthy Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One? 
Worthy Gotama, please teach me this.” 
“Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, worthy sir,” Tikaṇṇa replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Brahmin, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ 
With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. 
They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. They remember: ‘There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.’ And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details. 
This is the first knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. 
With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: ‘These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. 
This is the second knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. 
They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. 
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. 
When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. 
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ 
This is the third knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished, and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
For someone whose ethical conduct doesn’t waver, 
who is alert, practicing absorption; 
whose mind is mastered, 
unified, serene. 
That attentive one dispels the darkness, 
master of the three knowledges, conqueror of death. 
For the welfare of gods and humans, 
he has given up everything, they say. 
Accomplished in the three knowledges, 
living without confusion, 
bearing the final body, 
they revere the awakened Gotama. 
One who knows their past lives, 
sees heaven and places of loss, 
and has attained the ending of rebirth, 
a sage of perfect insight— 
it’s because of these three knowledges 
that a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges. 
That’s who I call a three-knowledge master, 
and not the other <j>who repeats what they are told. 
This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.” 
“Worthy Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One. 
And, worthy Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One. 
Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.59 
6. Brahmins 
With Jānussoṇi 
Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, whoever has a sacrifice, an offering of food for ancestors, a dish of milk-rice prepared for an auspicious ceremony, or a gift to give, should give it to the brahmins who have mastered the three Vedic knowledges.” 
“But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient in the three Vedic knowledges?” 
“Worthy Gotama, it’s when a brahmin is well born on both his mother’s and father’s side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word, and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a great man. 
That’s how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient in the three Vedic knowledges.” 
“Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.” 
“But worthy Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One? 
Worthy Gotama, please teach me this.” 
“Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, worthy sir,” Jānussoṇi replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Brahmin, it’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures … 
enters and remains in the fourth absorption. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward recollection of past lives. 
They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details. 
This is the first knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. 
With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds. 
This is the second knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like this—purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable—they extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. 
They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
They truly understand: ‘These are defilements’ … ‘This is the origin of defilements’ … ‘This is the cessation of defilements’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements’. 
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. 
When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. 
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ 
This is the third knowledge that they attain. 
Ignorance is banished and knowledge has arisen; darkness is banished and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute. 
One who is perfect in precepts and observances, 
resolute and serene, 
whose mind is mastered, 
unified, serene; 
who knows their past lives, 
sees heaven and places of loss, 
and has attained the end of rebirth, 
such a sage has perfect insight. 
Because of these three knowledges 
a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges. 
That’s who I call a three-knowledge master, 
and not the other <j>who repeats what they are told. 
This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.” 
“Worthy Gotama, the master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One. 
And, worthy Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One. 
Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! … 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.60 
6. Brahmins 
With Saṅgārava 
Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, we who are called brahmins 
make sacrifices and encourage others to make sacrifices. 
Now, worthy Gotama, both of these people—the one who sacrifices and the one who encourages others to sacrifice—are doing good for many people on account of that sacrifice. 
But, worthy Gotama, when someone has gone forth from the lay life to homelessness, they tame, calm, and extinguish themselves alone. That being so, they are doing good for just one person on account of that going forth.” 
“Well then, brahmin, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. 
What do you think, brahmin? 
A Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. 
He says, 
‘Come, this is the path, this is the practice. Practicing like this, I realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual life with my own insight, and I make it known. 
Please, all of you, practice like this, and you too will realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual life, and will live having realized it with your own insight.’ 
So the teacher teaches Dhamma, and others practice accordingly, in their hundreds and thousands, and hundreds of thousands. 
What do you think, brahmin? 
This being so, are they doing good for just one person or for many people on account of going forth?” 
“This being so, worthy Gotama, they are doing good for many people on account of going forth.” 
When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, 
“Brahmin, which of these two practices do you believe has fewer obligations and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?” 
Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, 
“Those such as the worthies Gotama and Ānanda 
are honored and praised by me!” 
For a second time, Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, 
“Brahmin, I didn’t ask you 
who you honor and praise. 
I asked you 
which of these two practices do you believe has fewer obligations and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?” 
For a second time Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, 
“Those such as the worthies Gotama and Ānanda 
are honored and praised by me!” 
For a third time, Ānanda said to Saṅgārava, 
“Brahmin, I didn’t ask you 
who you honor and praise. 
I asked you 
which of these two practices do you believe has fewer obligations and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?” 
For a third time Saṅgārava said to Ānanda, 
“Those such as the worthies Gotama and Ānanda 
are honored and praised by me!” 
Then it occurred to the Buddha, 
“Though Ānanda asked him a sensible question three times, Saṅgārava falters without answering. 
Why don’t I give him a way out?” 
So the Buddha said to Saṅgārava, 
“Brahmin, what came up in the conversation among the king’s retinue today, sitting together in the royal compound?” 
“Worthy Gotama, this came up: 
‘Formerly, it seems, there were fewer mendicants, but more of them displayed superhuman demonstrations of psychic power; 
while these days, there are more mendicants, but fewer display superhuman demonstrations of psychic power.’ 
This is what came up in the conversation among the king’s retinue today, while sitting together in the royal compound.” 
“Brahmin, there are three kinds of demonstration. 
What three? 
A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a demonstration of instruction. 
And what is the demonstration of psychic power? 
It’s when someone wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity. 
This is called the demonstration of psychic power. 
And what is the demonstration of revealing? 
In one case, someone reveals by means of a sign: 
‘This is what you’re thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.’ 
And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. 
In another case, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or non-humans or deities: 
‘This is what you’re thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.’ 
And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. 
In another case, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought spreading as someone thinks and considers: 
‘This is what you’re thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.’ 
And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. 
In another case, someone comprehends the mind of one who has attained the immersion that’s free of placing the mind and keeping it connected. They understand: 
‘Judging by the way this worthy’s intentions are directed, immediately after this mind state, they’ll think this thought.’ 
And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. 
This is called the demonstration of revealing. 
And what is a demonstration of instruction? 
It’s when someone instructs others like this: 
‘Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.’ 
This is called a demonstration of instruction. 
These are the three kinds of demonstration. 
Of these three kinds of demonstration, which do you consider to be the finest?” 
“Regarding this, worthy Gotama, a demonstration of psychic power 

is experienced only by the one who performs it, occurring only to them. 
This seems to me like an illusion. 
And the demonstration where someone reveals something by means of a sign, 

or after hearing it from humans, non-humans, or deities, 
or by hearing the sound of thought spreading as someone thinks and considers, 
or by comprehending the mind of another, 

is also experienced only by the one who performs it, occurring only to them. 
This also seems to me like an illusion. 
But as to the demonstration where someone instructs others: 
‘Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.’ 
I prefer this demonstration, worthy Gotama. It’s the finest of the three kinds of demonstration. 
It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing, 
how well this was said by the worthy Gotama. We regard the worthy Gotama as someone who possesses these three kinds of demonstration. 
For the worthy Gotama wields the many kinds of psychic power … controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. 
And Mister Gotama comprehends the mind of another who has attained the immersion that is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected. He understands: 
‘Judging by the way this worthy’s intentions are directed, immediately after this mind state they’ll think this thought.’ 
And the worthy Gotama instructs others like this: 
‘Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.’” 
“Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. 
Nevertheless, I will answer you. 
For I do wield the many kinds of psychic power … controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. 
And I do comprehend the mind of another individual who has attained the immersion that is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected. I understand: 
‘Judging by the way this worthy’s intentions are directed, immediately after this mind state they’ll think this thought.’ 
And I do instruct others like this: 
‘Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.’” 
“But worthy Gotama, is there even one other mendicant who possesses these three kinds of demonstration, apart from the worthy Gotama?” 
“There’s not just one hundred mendicants, brahmin, who possess these three kinds of demonstration, nor two, three, four, or five hundred, but many more than that.” 
“But where are these mendicants now staying?” 
“Right here, brahmin, in this Saṅgha of mendicants.” 
“Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! 
As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.61 
7. The Great Chapter 
Sectarian Tenets 
“Mendicants, these three sectarian tenets—as pursued, pressed, and grilled by the astute—when taken to their conclusion, end with inaction. 
What three? 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 
‘Everything this individual person experiences—pleasurable, painful, or neutral—is because of past deeds.’ 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 
‘Everything this individual person experiences—pleasurable, painful, or neutral—is because of God Almighty’s creation.’ 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 
‘Everything this individual person experiences—pleasurable, painful, or neutral—has no cause or reason.’ 
Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that 
everything an individual person experiences is because of past deeds, and I said to them: 
‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’ 

And they answered, ‘Yes’. 
I said to them: 
‘In that case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because of past deeds.’ 
Those who believe that past deeds are the most important thing have no enthusiasm or effort, no idea that there are things that should and should not be done. 
Not finding as a genuine fact that there are things that should and should not be done, they’re unmindful and careless, and can’t rightly be called ascetics. 
This is my first legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view. 
Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that 
everything that an individual person experiences is because of God Almighty’s creation, and I said to them: 
‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’ 

And they answered, ‘Yes’. 
I said to them: 
‘In that case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because of God Almighty’s creation.’ 
Those who believe that God Almighty’s creative power is the most important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are things that should and should not be done. 
Not finding as a genuine fact that there are things that should and should not be done, they’re unmindful and careless, and can’t rightly be called ascetics. 
This is my second legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view. 
Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that 
everything that an individual person experiences has no cause or reason, and I said to them: 
‘Is it really true that this is the venerables’ view?’ 

And they answered, ‘Yes’. 
I said to them: 
‘In that case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all without cause or reason.’ 
Those who believe that the absence of cause or reason is the most important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are things that should and should not be done. 
Not finding as a genuine fact that there are things that should and should not be done, they’re unmindful and careless, and can’t rightly be called ascetics. 
This is my third legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view. 
These are the three sectarian tenets—as pursued, pressed, and grilled by the astute—which, when taken to their conclusion, end with inaction. 
But the Dhamma that I’ve taught is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins. 
What is the Dhamma that I’ve taught? 
‘These are the six elements’: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught … 
‘These are the six fields of contact’: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught … 
‘These are the eighteen mental preoccupations’: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught … 
‘These are the four noble truths’: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught that is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins. 
‘“These are the six elements”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, 
but why did I say it? 
There are these six elements: 
the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. 
‘“These are the six elements”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
‘“These are the six fields of contact”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, 
but why did I say it? 
There are these six fields of contact: 
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind contact. 
‘“These are the six fields of contact”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
‘“These are the eighteen mental preoccupations”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
This is what I said, 
but why did I say it? 
Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. 
Hearing a sound with the ear … 
Smelling an odor with the nose … 
Tasting a flavor with the tongue … 
Feeling a touch with the body … 
Becoming conscious of an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that’s a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity. 
‘“These are the eighteen mental preoccupations”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
‘“These are the four noble truths”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught …’ 
That’s what I said, 
but why did I say it? 
Supported by the six elements, an embryo is conceived. 
When it is conceived, there are name and form. Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are requirements for contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. 
It’s for one who feels that I declare: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
And what is the noble truth of suffering? 
Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; being coupled with the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. 
This is called the noble truth of suffering. 
And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? 
Ignorance is a requirement for choices. 
Choices are a requirement for consciousness. 
Consciousness is a requirement for name and form. 
Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields. 
The six sense fields are requirements for contact. 
Contact is a requirement for feeling. 
Feeling is a requirement for craving. 
Craving is a requirement for grasping. 
Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. 
Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. 
Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. 
That is how this entire mass of suffering originates. 
This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering. 
And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? 
When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. 
When choices cease, consciousness ceases. 
When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. 
When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. 
When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. 
When contact ceases, feeling ceases. 
When feeling ceases, craving ceases. 
When craving ceases, grasping ceases. 
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. 
When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. 
When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. 
That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. 
This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering. 
And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? 
It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: 
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 
This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. 
‘“These are the four noble truths”: this is the Dhamma I’ve taught that is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins.’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.62 
7. The Great Chapter 
Perils 
“Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that tear mothers and children apart. 
What three? 
There comes a time when a great fire flares up, 
and it burns villages, towns, and cities. 
When this happens, a mother can’t find her child, and a child can’t find their mother. 
This is the first peril that tears mothers and children apart. 
Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, 
and it unleashes a mighty flood 
that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities. 
When this happens, a mother can’t find her child, and a child can’t find their mother. 
This is the second peril that tears mothers and children apart. 
Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. 
When this happens, a mother can’t find her child, and a child can’t find their mother. 
This is the third peril that tears mothers and children apart. 
These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that tear mothers and children apart. 
Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that don’t tear mothers and children apart. 
What three? 
There comes a time when a great fire flares up, 
and it burns villages, towns, and cities. 
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find their mother. 
This is the first peril that doesn’t tear mothers and children apart. 
Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, 
and it unleashes a mighty flood 
that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities. 
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find their mother. 
This is the second peril that doesn’t tear mothers and children apart. 
Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. 
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find their mother. 
This is the third peril that doesn’t tear mothers and children apart. 
These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that don’t tear mothers and children apart. 
There are three perils that tear mothers and children apart. 
What three? 
The perils of old age, sickness, and death. 
When a child is growing old, a mother doesn’t get her wish: 
‘Let me grow old, may my child not grow old!’ 
When a mother is growing old, a child doesn’t get their wish: 
‘Let me grow old, may my mother not grow old!’ 
When a child is sick, a mother doesn’t get her wish: 
‘Let me be sick, may my child not be sick!’ 
When a mother is sick, a child doesn’t get their wish: 
‘Let me be sick, may my mother not be sick!’ 
When a child is dying, a mother doesn’t get her wish: 
‘Let me die, may my child not die!’ 
When a mother is dying, a child doesn’t get their wish: 
‘Let me die, may my mother not die!’ 
These are the three perils that tear mothers and children apart. 
There is a path and a practice that leads to giving up and going beyond the three perils that don’t tear mothers and children apart, and the three perils that do tear mothers and children apart. 
What is that path and practice? 
It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: 
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 
This is the path, this is the practice that leads to giving up and going beyond the three perils that don’t tear mothers and children apart, and the three perils that do tear mothers and children apart.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.63 
7. The Great Chapter 
At Venāgapura 
At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named Venāgapura. 
The brahmins and householders of Venāgapura heard: 
“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Venāgapura. 
He has this good reputation: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
He has realized with his own insight this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—and he makes it known to others. 
He proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. 
It’s good to see such perfected ones.” 
Then the brahmins and householders of Venāgapura went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Then the brahmin Vacchagotta of Venāgapura said to the Buddha: 
“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing, 
how your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. 
It’s like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, 

or a palm fruit freshly plucked from the stalk, 

or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug where it shines and glows and radiates. 
In the same way, your faculties are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. 
Surely the worthy Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty, various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: 
sofas, couches, woolen covers—shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double-or single-fringed—and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woven carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope hide rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends.” 
“Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding 

are hard for renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they’re not allowed. 
There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. 
What three? 
The heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and the noble high and luxurious bed. 
These are the three high and luxurious beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” 
“But what, worthy Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?” 
“Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. 
After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. 
I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in my presence. 
Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
And with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.’ 
With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is heavenly. 
This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” 
“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! 
Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? 
But what, worthy Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?” 
“Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. 
After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. 
I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in my presence. 
I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
I meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
I meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is divine. 
… my standing is divine. 
… my sitting is divine. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is divine. 
This is the divine high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” 
“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! 
Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a divine high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? 
“But what, worthy Gotama, is the noble high and luxurious bed?” 
“Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for alms. 
After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a forest. 
I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in his presence. 
I know this: 
‘I’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they’re unable to arise in the future.’ 

When I’m practicing like this, if I walk, at that time my walking is noble. 
… my standing is noble. 
… my sitting is noble. 
When I’m practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is noble. 
This is the noble high and luxurious bed that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty.” 
“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! 
Who but the worthy Gotama could get such a noble high and luxurious bed when he wants, without trouble or difficulty? 
Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! 
As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
We go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.64 
7. The Great Chapter 
With Sarabha 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. 
Now at that time a wanderer named Sarabha had recently left this teaching and training. 
He was telling a crowd in Rājagaha, 
“I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, 
then I left their teaching and training.” 
Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Rājagaha for alms. 
They heard what Sarabha was saying. 

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, 
“The wanderer named Sarabha has recently left this teaching and training. 
He was telling a crowd in Rājagaha: 
‘I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, 
then I left their teaching and training.’ 
Worthy sir, please go to the wanderers’ monastery on the banks of the Serpentine river to see Sarabha the wanderer out of sympathy.” 
The Buddha consented with silence. 
Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the wanderers’ monastery on the banks of the Serpentine river to visit Sarabha the wanderer. He sat on the seat spread out, and said to the wanderer Sarabha, 
“Is it really true, Sarabha, that you’ve been saying: 
‘I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, 
then I left their teaching and training.’” 
When he said this, Sarabha kept silent. 
For a second time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, 
“Tell me, Sarabha, what exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? 
If you’ve not learned it fully, I’ll fill you in. 
But if you have learned it fully, I’ll agree.” 
For a second time, Sarabha kept silent. 
For a third time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, 
“Sarabha, the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan are clear to me. What exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? 
If you’ve not learned it fully, I’ll fill you in. 
But if you have learned it fully, I’ll agree.” 
For a third time, Sarabha kept silent. 
Then those wanderers said to Sarabha, 
“The ascetic Gotama has offered to tell you anything you ask for. 
Speak, reverend Sarabha, what exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? 
If you’ve not learned it fully, he’ll fill you in. 
But if you have learned it fully, he’ll agree.” 
When this was said, Sarabha sat silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. 
Knowing this, the Buddha said to the wanderers: 
“Wanderers, someone might say to me: 
‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don’t understand these things.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. 
When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha. 
Wanderers, someone might say to me: 
‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. 
When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha. 
Wanderers, someone might say to me: 
‘Your teaching does not lead someone who practices it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which it is taught.’ Then I’d carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that point. 
When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They’d dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points. They’d display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they’d sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha.” 
Then the Buddha, having roared his lion’s roar three times in the wanderers’ monastery on the bank of the Serpentine river, rose into the air and flew away. 
Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers beset Sarabha on all sides with sneering and jeering. 
“Reverend Sarabha, you’re just like an old jackal in the formidable wilderness who thinks, ‘I’ll roar a lion’s roar!’ but they still only manage to squeal and yelp like a jackal. 
In the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here you said ‘I’ll roar a lion’s roar!’ but you only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal. 
You’re just like a marsh hen who thinks, ‘I’ll cry like a cuckoo!’ but they still only manage to cry like a marsh hen. 
In the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here you said ‘I’ll cry like a cuckoo!’ but you still only managed to cry like a marsh hen. 
You’re just like a bull that thinks to bellow only when the cowstall is empty. 
In the same way, you only thought to bellow when the ascetic Gotama wasn’t here.” 
That’s how those wanderers beset Sarabha on all sides with sneering and jeering. 

Numbered Discourses 3.65 
7. The Great Chapter 
With the Kālāmas of Kesamutta 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kālāmas named Kesamutta. 
The Kālāmas of Kesamutta heard: 
“It seems the ascetic Gotama—a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan family—has arrived at Kesamutta. 
He has this good reputation: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha …’ 
It’s good to see such perfected ones.” 
Then the Kālāmas went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one side the Kālāmas said to the Buddha: 
“There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who come to Kesamutta. 
They explain and promote only their own doctrine, while they attack, badmouth, disparage, and smear the doctrines of others. 
Then some other ascetics and brahmins come to Kesamutta. 
They too explain and promote only their own doctrine, while they attack, badmouth, disparage, and smear the doctrines of others. 
So, sir, we’re doubting and uncertain: 
‘I wonder who of these respected ascetics and brahmins speaks the truth, and who speaks falsehood?’” 
“It is enough, Kālāmas, for you to be doubting and uncertain. 
Doubt has come up in you about an uncertain matter. 
Please, Kālāmas, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think ‘The ascetic is our respected teacher.’ 
But when you know for yourselves: 
‘These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering’, then you should give them up. 
What do you think, Kālāmas? 
Does greed come up in a person for their welfare or harm?” 
“Harm, sir.” 
“A greedy individual, overcome by greed, kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Kālāmas? 
Does hate come up in a person for their welfare or harm?” 
“Harm, sir.” 
“A hateful individual, overcome by hate, kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Kālāmas? 
Does delusion come up in a person for their welfare or harm?” 
“Harm, sir.” 
“A deluded individual, overcome by delusion, kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Kālāmas, are these things skillful or unskillful?” 
“Unskillful, sir.” 
“Blameworthy or blameless?” 
“Blameworthy, sir.” 
“Criticized or praised by sensible people?” 
“Criticized by sensible people, sir.” 
“When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. 
That’s how we see it.” 
“So, Kālāmas, when I said: 
‘Please, 
don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think “The ascetic is our respected teacher.” 
But when you know for yourselves: 
“These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering”, then you should give them up.’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
Please, Kālāmas, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think ‘The ascetic is our respected teacher.’ 
But when you know for yourselves: 
‘These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness’, then you should acquire them and keep them. 
What do you think, Kālāmas? 
Does contentment come up in a person for their welfare or harm?” 
“Welfare, sir.” 
“An individual who is content, not overcome by greed, doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Kālāmas? 
Does love come up in a person for their welfare or harm? … 
Does understanding come up in a person for their welfare or harm? … 
Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Kālāmas, are these things skillful or unskillful?” 
“Skillful, sir.” 
“Blameworthy or blameless?” 
“Blameless, sir.” 
“Criticized or praised by sensible people?” 
“Praised by sensible people, sir.” 
“When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. 
That’s how we see it.” 
“So, Kālāmas, when I said: 
‘Please, 
don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think “The ascetic is our respected teacher.” 
But when you know for yourselves: 
“These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness”, then you should acquire them and keep them.’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused, aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
When that noble disciple has a mind that’s free of enmity and ill will, uncorrupted and purified, 
they’ve won four consolations in this very life. 
‘If it turns out there is another world, and good and bad deeds have a result, then—when the body breaks up, after death—I’ll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.’ This is the first consolation they’ve won. 
‘If it turns out there is no other world, and good and bad deeds don’t have a result, then in this very life I’ll keep myself free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy.’ This is the second consolation they’ve won. 
‘If it turns out that bad things happen to people who do bad things, then since I have no bad intentions, 
and since I’m not doing anything bad, how can suffering touch me?’ This is the third consolation they’ve won. 
‘If it turns out that bad things don’t happen to people who do bad things, then I still see myself pure on both sides.’ This is the fourth consolation they’ve won. 
When that noble disciple has a mind that’s free of enmity and ill will, undefiled and purified, 
they’ve won these four consolations in this very life.” 
“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! 
When that noble disciple has a mind that’s free of enmity and ill will, undefiled and purified, 
they’ve won these four consolations in this very life. … 

Excellent, sir! Excellent! … 
We go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may the Buddha remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.66 
7. The Great Chapter 
With Sāḷha and His Friend 
So I have heard. 
Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery. 
Then Sāḷha, Migāra’s grandson, and Rohaṇa, Pekhuṇiya’s grandson went up to Venerable Nandaka, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Venerable Nandaka said to Sāḷha: 
“Please, Sāḷha and friend, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think ‘The ascetic is our respected teacher.’ 
But when you know for yourselves: ‘These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering’, then you should give them up. 
What do you think, Sāḷha? 
Is greed real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Covetousness’ is what I mean by this. 
A person who is greedy and covetous kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Sāḷha? 
Is hate real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Malice’ is what I mean by this. 
A hateful and malicious person kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Sāḷha? 
Is delusion real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Ignorance’ is what I mean by this. 
A person who is deluded and ignorant kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Sāḷha, are these things skillful or unskillful?” 
“Unskillful, sir.” 
“Blameworthy or blameless?” 
“Blameworthy, sir.” 
“Criticized or praised by sensible people?” 
“Criticized by sensible people, sir.” 
“When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. 
That’s how we see it.” 
“So, Sāḷha and friend, when I said: 
‘Please, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think “The ascetic is our respected teacher.” 
But when you know for yourselves: 
“These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering”, then you should give them up.’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
Please, Sāḷha and friend, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think ‘The ascetic is our respected teacher.’ 
But when you know for yourselves: 
‘These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness’, then you should acquire them and keep them. 
What do you think? Is contentment real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Satisfaction’ is what I mean by this. 
A person who is content and satisfied doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
What do you think? Is love real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Kindness’ is what I mean by this. 
A loving and kind-hearted person doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Sāḷha? 
Is understanding real?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“‘Knowledge’ is what I mean by this. 
A person who understands and knows doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“What do you think, Sāḷha, are these things skillful or unskillful?” 
“Skillful, sir.” 
“Blameworthy or blameless?” 
“Blameless, sir.” 
“Criticized or praised by sensible people?” 
“Praised by sensible people, sir.” 
“When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. 
That’s how we see it.” 
“So, Sāḷha and friend, when I said: 
‘Please, don’t go by oral transmission, don’t go by lineage, don’t go by testament, don’t go by canonical authority, don’t rely on logic, don’t rely on inference, don’t go by reasoned train of thought, don’t go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don’t go by the appearance of competence, and don’t think “The ascetic is our respected teacher.” 
But when you know for yourselves: 
“These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness”, then you should acquire them and keep them.’ 
That’s what I said, and this is why I said it. 
Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused, aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love … 
compassion … 
rejoicing … 
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole world—abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. 
They understand: 
‘There is this, there is what is worse than this, there is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of perception.’ 
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. 
When they’re freed, they know they’re freed. 
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’ 
They understand: 
‘Formerly there was greed, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that’s skillful. 
Formerly there was hate, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that’s skillful. 
Formerly there was delusion, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that’s skillful.’ 
So they live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with self become divine.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.67 
7. The Great Chapter 
Topics of Discussion 
“There are, mendicants, these three topics of discussion. 
What three? 
You might discuss the past: 
‘That is how it was in the past.’ 
You might discuss the future: 
‘That is how it will be in the future.’ 
Or you might discuss the present: 
‘This is how it is at present.’ 
You can know whether or not an individual is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if it needs to be answered categorically and they don’t answer it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer without analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer without a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they don’t set it aside, then that individual is not competent to hold a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if it needs to be answered categorically and they answer it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer after analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer with a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they set it aside, then that individual is competent to hold a discussion. 
You can know whether or not an individual is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they’re not consistent about what their position is and what it isn’t; about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that individual is not competent to hold a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they are consistent about what their position is and what it isn’t; about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that individual is competent to hold a discussion. 
You can know whether or not an individual is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they dodge the issue; distract the discussion with irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that individual is not competent to hold a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they don’t dodge the issue; distract the discussion with irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that individual is competent to hold a discussion. 
You can know whether or not an individual is competent to hold a discussion by seeing how they take part in a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes, then that individual is not competent to hold a discussion. 
When an individual is asked a question, if they don’t intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes, then that individual is competent to hold a discussion. 
You can know whether or not an individual has what’s required by seeing how they take part in a discussion. 
If they actively listen they have what’s required; if they don’t actively listen they don’t have what’s required. 
Someone who has what’s required directly knows one thing, completely understands one thing, gives up one thing, and realizes one thing—
and then they experience complete freedom. 
This is the purpose of discussion, 
consultation, 
sitting close, 
and listening well, that is, the liberation of the mind by not grasping. 
Those who converse with hostility, 
too sure of themselves, arrogant, 
ignoble, attacking virtues, 
they look for flaws in each other. 
They rejoice together when their opponent 
speaks poorly and makes a mistake, 
becoming confused and defeated—
but the noble ones don’t discuss like this. 
If an astute person wants to hold a discussion 
connected with the teaching and its meaning—
the kind of discussion that noble ones hold—
then that wise one should start the discussion, 
knowing when the time is right, 
neither hostile nor arrogant. 
Not over-excited, 
contemptuous, or aggressive, 
or with a mind full of jealousy, 
they’d speak from what they rightly know. 
They agree with what was well spoken, 
without criticizing what was poorly said. 
They’d not persist in finding faults, 
nor seize on trivial mistakes, 
neither intimidating nor crushing the other, 
nor would they speak suggestively. 
Good people consult 
for the sake of knowledge and clarity. 
That’s how the noble ones consult, 
this is a noble consultation. 
Knowing this, an intelligent person 
would consult without arrogance.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.68 
7. The Great Chapter 
Followers of Other Religions 
“Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 
‘There are these three things. 
What three? 
Greed, hate, and delusion. 
These are the three things. 
What’s the difference between them?’ 
How would you answer them?” 
“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge. Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” 
“Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 
‘There are these three things. 
What three? 
Greed, hate, and delusion. 
These are the three things. 
What’s the difference between them?’ 
You should answer them: 
‘Greed, reverends, is mildly blameworthy, but slow to fade away. Hate is very blameworthy, but quick to fade away. Delusion is very blameworthy, and slow to fade away.’ 
And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ 
You should say: ‘The beautiful feature of things. 
When you apply the mind irrationally to the beautiful feature of things, greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why greed arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ 
And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ 
You should say: ‘The feature of harshness. 
When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of harshness, hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ 
And if they ask: ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?’ 
You should say: ‘Irrational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind irrationally, delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.’ 
And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ 
You should say: ‘The ugly feature of things. 
When you apply the mind rationally on the ugly feature of things, greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why greed doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’ 
And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ 
You should say: ‘The heart’s release by love.’ 
When you apply the mind rationally on the heart’s release by love, hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why hate doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’ 
And if they ask, ‘What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up?’ 
You should say: ‘Rational application of mind. 
When you apply the mind rationally, delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why delusion doesn’t arise, or if it’s already arisen it’s given up.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.69 
7. The Great Chapter 
Unskillful Roots 
“Mendicants, there are these three unskillful roots. 
What three? 
Greed, hate, and delusion. 
Greed is a root of the unskillful. 
When a greedy person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. 
When a greedy person, overcome by greed, causes another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is unskillful. 
And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by greed. 
Hate is a root of the unskillful. 
When a hateful person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. 
When a hateful person, overcome by hate, causes another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is unskillful. 
And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by hate. 
Delusion is a root of the unskillful. 
When a deluded person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. 
When a deluded person, overcome by delusion, causes another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is unskillful. 
And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by delusion. 
Such an individual is said to have speech that’s ill-timed, false, meaningless, not in line with the teaching and training. 
Why is this? 
This individual causes another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’. 
So when someone makes a valid criticism, they’re scornful and admit nothing. 
When someone makes a baseless criticism, they make no effort to explain, ‘This is why that’s untrue, this is why that’s false.’ 
That’s why such an individual is said to have speech that’s ill-timed, false, meaningless, not in line with the teaching and training. 
Such an individual—overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion—suffers in this very life, with distress, anguish, and fever. 
And when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect to be reborn in a bad place. 

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by three camel’s foot creepers. It would fall to ruin and disaster. 
In the same way, such an individual—overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion—suffers in this very life, with distress, anguish, and fever. 
And when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect to be reborn in a bad place. 

These are the three unskillful roots. 
There are these three skillful roots. 
What three? 
Contentment, love, and understanding. 
Contentment is a root of the skillful. 
When a contented person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. 
When a contented person, not overcome by greed, doesn’t cause another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is skillful. 
And so these many skillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by contentment. 
Love is a root of the skillful. 
When a loving person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. 
When a loving person, not overcome by hate, doesn’t cause another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is skillful. 
And so these many skillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by love. 
Understanding is a root of the skillful. 
When an understanding person chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. 
When an understanding person, not overcome by delusion, doesn’t cause another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’, that too is skillful. 
And so these many skillful things are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by understanding. 
Such an individual is said to have speech that’s well-timed, true, meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. 
Why is this? 
This individual doesn’t cause another to suffer under a false pretext—by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation or banishment—thinking ‘I’m powerful, I want power’. 
So when someone makes a valid criticism, they admit it and aren’t scornful. 
When someone makes a baseless criticism, they make an effort to explain, 
‘This is why that’s untrue, this is why that’s false.’ 
That’s why such an individual is said to have speech that’s well-timed, true, meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. 
For such an individual, bad unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
In this very life they’re happy, free of distress, anguish, and fever, 
and they’re also extinguished in this very life. 

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by three camel’s foot creepers. 
Then along comes a person with a spade and basket. 
They’d cut the creeper out by the roots, dig them up, and pull them out, down to the fibers and stems. 
Then they’d split the creeper apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They’d dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to ashes. Then they’d whisk away the ashes in a strong wind, or glide them down a swift stream. 
So those camel’s foot creepers would be cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, and obliterated, unable to arise in the future. 
In the same way, for such an individual, bad unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. 
In this very life they’re happy, free of distress, anguish, and fever, 
and they’re also extinguished in this very life. 

These are the three skillful roots.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.70 
7. The Great Chapter 
Sabbath 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother in the Eastern Monastery. 
Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her, 
“So, Visākhā, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?” 
“Today, sir, I’m observing the sabbath.” 
“There are, Visākhā, these three sabbaths. 
What three? 
The sabbath of the cowherds, the sabbath of the Jains, and the sabbath of the noble ones. 
And what is the sabbath of the cowherds? 
It’s just like a cowherd who, in the late afternoon, takes the cows back to their owners. They reflect: 
‘Today the cows grazed in this spot and that, and they drank in this spot and that. 
Tomorrow the cows will graze in this spot and that, and drink in this spot and that.’ 
In the same way, someone keeping the sabbath reflects: 
‘Today I ate this and that, and had a meal of this and that. 
Tomorrow I’ll eat this and that, and have a meal of this and that.’ 
And so they spend their day with a mind full of covetousness. 
That’s the sabbath of the cowherds. 
When the cowherd’s sabbath is observed like this it’s not very fruitful or beneficial or dazzling or bountiful. 
And what is the sabbath of the Jains? 
There’s a kind of ascetic belonging to a group called the Jains. 
They encourage their disciples: 
‘Please, good people, don’t hurt any living creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the east. 
Don’t hurt any living creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the west. 
Don’t hurt any living creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the north. 
Don’t hurt any living creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the south.’ 
So they encourage kindness and sympathy for some creatures and not others. 
On the sabbath, they encourage their disciples: 
‘Please, good people, take off all your clothes and say: 
“I don’t belong to anyone anywhere! And nothing belongs to me anywhere!”’ 
But their mother and father still know, 
‘This is our child.’ 
And they know, 
‘This is my mother and father.’ 
Partner and child still know, 
‘This is our supporter.’ 
And they know, 
‘This is my partner and child.’ 
Bondservants, workers, and staff still know: 
‘This is our master.’ 
And they know, 
‘These are my bondservants, workers, and staff.’ 
So, at a time when they should be encouraged to speak the truth, the Jains encourage them to lie. 
This, I say, is lying. 
When the night has passed they use their possessions once more, though they’ve not been given back to them. 
This, I say, is stealing. 
That’s the sabbath of the Jains. 
When the Jain’s sabbath is observed like this it’s not very fruitful or beneficial or dazzling or bountiful. 
And what is the sabbath of the noble ones? 
A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
As they recollect the Realized One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. It’s just like cleaning a dirty head by applying effort. 
And how is a dirty head cleaned by applying effort? 
With cleansing paste, clay, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. 
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
As they recollect the Realized One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. 
This is called: 
‘A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of the divinity, living together with the divinity. And because they think of the divinity their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.’ 
That’s how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 
‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ 
As they recollect the teaching, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. It’s just like cleaning a dirty body by applying effort. 
And how is a dirty body cleaned by applying effort? 
With cleanser and powder, water, and by applying the appropriate effort. 
That’s how a dirty body is cleaned by applying effort. 
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 
‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ 
As they recollect the teaching, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. 
This is called: ‘A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of Dhamma, living together with Dhamma. And because they think of the Dhamma their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.’ 
That’s how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 
‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ 
As they recollect the Saṅgha, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. It’s just like cleaning a dirty cloth by applying effort. 
And how is a dirty cloth cleaned by applying effort? 
With salt, lye, cow dung, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. 
That’s how a dirty cloth is cleaned by applying effort. 
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 
‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration with joined palms. It is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ 
As they recollect the Saṅgha, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. 
This is called: ‘A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of the Saṅgha, living together with the Saṅgha. And because they think of the Saṅgha their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.’ 
That’s how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. 
As they recollect their ethical conduct, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. It’s just like cleaning a dirty mirror by applying effort. 
And how is a dirty mirror cleaned by applying effort? 
With oil, ash, a rolled-up cloth, and by applying the appropriate effort. 
That’s how a dirty mirror is cleaned by applying effort. 
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. 
As they recollect their ethical conduct, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. 
This is called: ‘A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of ethical conduct, living together with ethics. And because they think of their ethical conduct their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.’ 
That’s how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the deities: 
‘There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to create, the gods who control what is created by others, the gods of the Divinity’s host, and gods even higher than these. 
When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.’ 

As they recollect the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. It’s just like cleansing corrupt native gold by applying effort. 
And how is corrupt native gold cleansed by applying effort? 
With a furnace, flux, a blowpipe, and tongs, and by applying the appropriate effort. 
That’s how corrupt native gold is cleansed by applying effort. 
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? 
It’s when a noble disciple recollects the deities: 
‘There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity’s host, and gods even higher than these. 
When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.’ 
As they recollect the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. 
This is called: ‘A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of the deities, living together with the deities. And because they think of the deities their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.’ 
That’s how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. 
Then that noble disciple reflects: 
‘As long as they live, the perfected ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I’ll be scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up stealing. I’ll take only what’s given, and expect only what’s given. I’ll keep myself clean by not thieving. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are chaste, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up unchastity. I will be chaste, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They’re honest and dependable, and don’t trick the world with their words. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up lying. I’ll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I’ll be honest and dependable, and won’t trick the world with my words. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones give up beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. 
I, too, for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music; and attiring and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. 
I, too, for this day and night will refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music ; and attiring and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect. 
As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious beds. They sleep in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. 
I, too, for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I’ll sleep in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. 
I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.’ 
That’s the sabbath of the noble ones. 
When the sabbath of the noble ones is observed like this it’s very fruitful and beneficial and dazzling and bountiful. 
How much so? 
Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these sixteen great countries—Aṅga, Magadha, Kāsi, Kosala, Vajji, Malla, Cetī, Vaccha, Kuru, Pañcāla, Maccha, Sūrasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhāra, and Kamboja—full of the seven treasures. 
This wouldn’t be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight factors. 
Why is that? 
Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods. 
Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the four great kings. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The lifespan of the gods of the four great kings is five hundred of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the gods of the four great kings. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the thirty-three. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The lifespan of the gods of the thirty-three is a thousand of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the gods of the thirty-three. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
Two hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of Yama. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The lifespan of the gods of Yama is two thousand of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
Four hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the joyful gods. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The lifespan of the joyful gods is four thousand of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the joyful gods. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
Eight hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods who love to create. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The life span of the gods who love to create is eight thousand of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the gods who love to create. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods who control what is created by others. 
Thirty such days make up a month. 
Twelve such months make up a year. 
The life span of the gods who control what is created by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly years. 
It’s possible that some woman or man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will—when their body breaks up, after death—be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is created by others. 
This is what I was referring to when I said: 
‘Human kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.’ 
You shouldn’t kill living creatures, or steal, 
or lie, or drink liquor. 
Be chaste, refraining from sex, 
and don’t eat at night, the wrong time. 
Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance, 
you should sleep on a low bed, <j>or a mat on the ground. 
This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say, 
explained by the Buddha, <j>who has gone to suffering’s end. 
The moon and sun are both fair to see, 
radiating as far as they revolve. 
Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair, 
shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters. 
All of the wealth that’s found in this realm—
pearls, gems, fine beryl too, 
mountain gold or lustrous gold, 
or the native gold called ‘coruscant’—
they’re not worth a sixteenth part 
of the sabbath with its eight factors, 
as starlight cannot rival the moon. 
So an ethical woman or man, 
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath, 
having made merit whose outcome is happiness, 
blameless, they go to a heavenly place.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.71 
8. Ānanda 
With Channa 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Then the wanderer Channa went up to Venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda: 
“Reverend Ānanda, do you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?” 
“We do, reverend.” 
“But what drawbacks have you seen, Reverend Ānanda, that you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?” 
“A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When greed has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
A greedy person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
When greed has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
Greed is a destroyer of sight, vision, and knowledge. It blocks wisdom, it’s on the side of distress, and it doesn’t lead to extinguishment. 
A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. … 
A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t intend to hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don’t experience mental pain and sadness. 
A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When delusion has been given up, they don’t do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
A deluded person doesn’t truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
When delusion has been given up, they truly understand what’s for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. 
Delusion is a destroyer of sight, vision, and knowledge; it blocks wisdom, it’s on the side of distress, and it doesn’t lead to extinguishment. 
This is the drawback we’ve seen in greed, hate, and delusion, and this is why we advocate giving them up.” 

“But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion?” 
“There is, reverend, a path and a practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion.” 
“Well, what is it?” 
“It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: 
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 
This is the path, this is the practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion.” 
“This is a fine path, a fine practice, for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion. 
Just this much is enough for diligence.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.72 
8. Ānanda 
A Disciple of the Ājīvakas 
At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery. 
Then a householder who was a disciple of the Ājīvaka ascetics went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to Ānanda: 
“Honorable Ānanda, whose teaching is well explained? 
Who in the world is practicing well? 
Who in the world has done well?” 
“Well then, householder, I’ll ask you about this in return, and you can answer as you like. 
What do you think, householder? 
Is the teaching of those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion well explained or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“The teaching of those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion is well explained. 
That’s how I see it.” 
“What do you think, householder? 
Are those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion practicing well or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion are practicing well. 
That’s how I see it.” 
“What do you think, householder? 
Have those who’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion—so they’re cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future—done well in the world, or not? 
Or how do you see this?” 
“Those who’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion have done well in the world. 
That’s how I see it.” 
“So, householder, you’ve declared: 
‘The teaching of those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion is well explained.’ 
And you’ve declared: 
‘Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion are practicing well.’ 
And you’ve declared: 
‘Those who’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion have done well in the world.’” 
“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! 
There’s no acclaiming your own teaching or disrespecting someone else’s, 
just teaching what’s relevant in that context. The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved. 
You, sir, teach Dhamma for giving up greed, hate, and delusion. 
Your teaching is well explained. 
You, sir, practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion. 
You in the world are practicing well. 
You’ve given up greed, hate, and delusion. 
You in the world have done well. 
Excellent, sir! Excellent! 
As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what’s there, Master Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many ways. 
I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. 
From this day forth, may Master Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.73 
8. Ānanda 
With Mahānāma the Sakyan 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. 
Now at that time the Buddha had recently recovered from an illness. 
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“For a long time, sir, I have understood your teaching like this: 
‘Knowledge is for those with immersion, not those without immersion.’ 
But, sir, does immersion come first, then knowledge? 
Or does knowledge come first, then immersion?” 
Then Venerable Ānanda thought, 
“The Buddha has recently recovered from an illness, 
and this Mahānāma asks him a question that’s too deep. 
Why don’t I take him off to one side and teach him the Dhamma?” 
Then Ānanda took Mahānāma by the arm, led him off to one side, and said to him, 
“Mahānāma, the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of a trainee; and the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of an adept. 
What is the ethics of a trainee? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
This is called the ethics of a trainee. 
And what is the immersion of a trainee? 
It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. 
This is called the immersion of a trainee. 
And what is the wisdom of a trainee? 
They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is called the wisdom of a trainee. 
Then a noble disciple—accomplished in ethics, immersion, and wisdom—realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
In this way the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of both a trainee and an adept.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.74 
8. Ānanda 
Jains 
At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. 
Then the Licchavis Abhaya and Paṇḍitakumāra went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus: 
‘Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.’ 
He advocates the elimination of past deeds by fervent mortification, and breaking the bridge by not doing any new deeds. 
So with the ending of deeds, suffering ends; with the ending of suffering, feeling ends; and with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have been worn away. 
This is how to go beyond suffering by means of this purification by wearing away in the present life. 
What, sir, does the Buddha say about this?” 
“Abhaya, these three kinds of purification by wearing away have been rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment. 
What three? 
It’s when, Abhaya, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. 
This wearing away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
Then a mendicant accomplished in ethics, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. 
They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. 
This wearing away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
Then a mendicant accomplished in immersion realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
They don’t perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. 
This wearing away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves. 
These are the three kinds of purification by wearing away that have been rightly explained by the Buddha … in order to realize extinguishment.” 
When he said this, Paṇḍitakumāra said to Abhaya, 
“Dear Abhaya, is there anything in what Ānanda has said so well that you would disagree with?” 
“How could I not agree with what was said so well by Ānanda? 
If anyone didn’t agree with him, their head would explode!” 

Numbered Discourses 3.75 
8. Ānanda 
Support 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Ānanda, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in three things. 
What three? 
Experiential confidence in the Buddha: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
Experiential confidence in the teaching: 
‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ 
Experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 
‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ 
There might be change in the four principal states—
earth, water, air, and fire—but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the Buddha would never change. 
In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible. 
There might be change in the four principal states—
earth, water, air, and fire—but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the teaching … 
or the Saṅgha would never change. 
In this context, ‘change’ means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible. 
Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to—friends and colleagues, relatives and family—should be encouraged, supported, and established in these three things.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.76 
8. Ānanda 
Continued Existence (1st) 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘continued existence’. 
How is continued existence defined?” 
“If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The consciousness of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a lower realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The consciousness of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a middle realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued existence in the formless realm still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The consciousness of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a higher realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
That’s how continued existence is defined.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.77 
8. Ānanda 
Continued Existence (2nd) 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, they speak of this thing called ‘continued existence’. 
How is continued existence defined?” 
“If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The intention and aim of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a lower realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The intention and aim of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a middle realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued existence in the formless realm still come about?” 
“No, sir.” 
“So, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the moisture. 
The intention and aim of sentient beings—shrouded by ignorance and fettered by craving—is established in a higher realm. That’s how there is regeneration into a new state of existence in the future. 
That’s how continued existence is defined.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.78 
8. Ānanda 
Precepts and Observances 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Ānanda, are all precepts and observances, lifestyles, and spiritual paths fruitful when taken as the essence?” 
“This matter is not categorical, sir.” 
“Well then, Ānanda, break it down.” 
“Take the case of someone who cultivates precepts and observances, a lifestyle, and a spiritual path, taking this as the essence. If unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline, that’s not fruitful. 
However, if unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities grow, that is fruitful.” 
That’s what Ānanda said, 
and the teacher approved. 
Then Ānanda, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. 
Then, not long after Ānanda had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: 
“Mendicants, Ānanda is a trainee, 
but it’s not easy to find his equal in wisdom.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.79 
8. Ānanda 
Fragrances 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, there are these three kinds of fragrance that spread only with the wind, not against it. 
What three? 
The fragrance of roots, heartwood, and flowers. 
These are the three kinds of fragrance that spread only with the wind, not against it. 
Is there a kind of fragrance that spreads with the wind, and against it, and both ways?” 
“There is, Ānanda, such a kind of fragrance.” 
“So what, sir, is that kind of fragrance?” 
“It’s when, Ānanda, in some village or town, a woman or man has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. 
They don’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They’re ethical, of good character. 
They live at home with a heart rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. 
Ascetics and brahmins everywhere praise them for these good qualities; 

even the deities praise them. 

This is the kind of fragrance that spreads with the wind, and against it, and both. 
The fragrance of flowers <j>doesn’t spread against the wind, 
nor sandalwood, pinwheel flowers, or jasmine; 
but the fragrance of the good <j>spreads against the wind; 
a true person’s virtue spreads in every direction.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.80 
8. Ānanda 
Lesser 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 
‘Ānanda, the Buddha Sikhī had a disciple called Abhibhū. Standing in the realm of divinity, he could make his voice heard throughout the thousandfold galaxy.’ 
I wonder how far a Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha can make their voice heard?” 
“He was a disciple, Ānanda. Realized Ones are immeasurable.” 
For a second time … 

For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha: 

“… I wonder how far a Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha can make their voice heard?” 
“Ānanda, have you heard of a thousandfold lesser world system, a galaxy?” 
“Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! 
Let the Buddha speak. The mendicants will listen and remember it.” 
“Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” Ānanda replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Ānanda, a galaxy extends a thousand times as far as the moon and sun revolve and the shining ones light up the quarters. 
In that galaxy there are a thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of mountains, a thousand Black Plum Tree Lands, a thousand lands west of Godāvarī, a thousand lands north of Kuru, a thousand lands east of Videha, four thousand oceans, four thousand great kings, a thousand realms of the gods of the four great kings, a thousand realms of the gods of the thirty-three, of the gods of Yama, of the joyful gods, of the gods who love to create, of the gods who control what is created by others, and a thousand realms of divinity. 
This is called a thousandfold lesser world system, a ‘galaxy’. 
A world system that extends for a thousand galaxies 
is called a millionfold middling world system, a ‘galactic cluster’. 
A world system that extends for a thousand galactic clusters 
is called a billionfold great world system, a ‘galactic supercluster’. 
If he wished, Ānanda, a Realized One could make his voice heard throughout a galactic supercluster, or as far as he wants.” 
“But how would the Buddha make his voice heard so far?” 
“First, Ānanda, a Realized One would fill the galactic supercluster with light. 
When sentient beings saw the light, the Realized One would project his call so that they’d hear the sound. 
That’s how a Realized One could make his voice heard throughout a galactic supercluster, or as far as he wants.” 
When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said, 
“I’m so fortunate, so very fortunate, 
to have a teacher with such power and might!” 
When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to Venerable Ānanda, 
“What is it to you, Reverend Ānanda, if your teacher has such power and might?” 
When he said this, the Buddha said to Venerable Udāyī, 
“Not so, Udāyī, not so! 
If Ānanda were to die while still not free of greed, he would rule as king of the gods for seven lifetimes, or as king of the Black Plum Tree Land for seven lifetimes, because of the confidence of his heart. 
However, Ānanda will be fully extinguished in this very life.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.81 
9. Ascetics 
Ascetics 
“Mendicants, there are three duties of an ascetic. 
What three? 
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three duties of an ascetic. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will have keen enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.82 
9. Ascetics 
The Donkey 
“Suppose, mendicants, a donkey followed behind a herd of cattle, thinking: 
‘I can moo too! I can moo too!’ 
But it doesn’t look like a cow, or sound like a cow, or leave a footprint like a cow. 
Still it follows behind a herd of cattle, thinking: 
‘I can moo too! I can moo too!’ 
In the same way, some mendicant follows behind the mendicant Saṅgha, thinking: 
‘I’m a monk too! I’m a monk too!’ 
But they don’t have the same enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom as the other mendicants. 
Still they follow behind the mendicant Saṇgha, thinking: 
‘I’m a monk too! I’m a monk too!’ 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will have keen enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.83 
9. Ascetics 
Fields 
“Mendicants, a farmer has three primary duties. 
What three? 
A farmer first of all makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. 
Next they plant seeds in season. 
When the time is right, they irrigate the field and then drain it. 
These are the three primary duties of a farmer. 
In the same way, a mendicant has three primary duties. 
What three? 
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three primary duties of a mendicant. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will have keen enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.84 
9. Ascetics 
The Vajji 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. 
Then a certain Vajji monk went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules are recited. 
I’m not able to train in them.” 
“But monk, are you able to train in three trainings: 
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom?” 
“I am, sir.” 

“So, monk, you should train in these three trainings: 
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
As you train in these, you will give up greed, hate, and delusion. 
Then you won’t do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad.” 
After some time that monk trained in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
He gave up greed, hate, and delusion. 
Then he didn’t do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad. 

Numbered Discourses 3.85 
9. Ascetics 
A Trainee 
Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, they speak of the one called ‘a trainee’. 
How is a trainee defined?” 
“They train, mendicant, that’s why they’re called ‘a trainee’. 
What is their training? 
They train in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
They train, that’s why they’re called ‘a trainee’. 
As a trainee trains, 
following the straight road, 
first they know about ending; 
enlightenment follows in the same lifetime. 
Then the knowledge comes 
such a one, freed through enlightenment, 
with the end of the fetters of continued existence: 
‘My freedom is unshakable.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.86 
9. Ascetics 
Training (1st) 
“Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation, in which gentlemen who desire self-knowledge train. 
These are all included in the three trainings. 
What three? 
The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three trainings that include them all. 
Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has limited immersion and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
With the ending of three fetters they’re a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, destined for awakening. 
Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has limited immersion and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
With the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they’re a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. 
Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and immersion, but has limited wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re reborn spontaneously. They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you practice fully you succeed fully. 
But in any case, these training rules are not a waste, I say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.87 
9. Ascetics 
Training (2nd) 
“Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation, in which gentlemen who desire self-knowledge train. 
These are all included in the three trainings. 
What three? 
The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three trainings that include them all. 
Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has limited immersion and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual life. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
With the ending of three fetters they have at most seven rebirths. 
They will transmigrate at most seven times among gods and humans and then make an end of suffering. 
With the ending of three fetters, they go from family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families and then make an end of suffering. 
With the ending of three fetters, they’re a one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then make an end of suffering. 
With the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they’re a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. 
Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and immersion, but has limited wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. 
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. 
Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you practice fully you succeed fully. But in any case, these training rules are not a waste, I say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.88 
9. Ascetics 
Training (3rd) 
“Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation, in which gentlemen who desire self-knowledge train. 
These are all included in the three trainings. 
What three? 
The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three trainings that include them all. 
Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are restored. 
Why is that? 
Because I don’t say they’re incapable of that. 
But they’re constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they’re a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they’re a one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then make an end of suffering. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they go from family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families and then make an end of suffering. 
If they don’t penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they have at most seven rebirths. They will transmigrate at most seven times among gods and humans and then make an end of suffering. 
So, mendicants, if you practice fully you succeed fully. If you practice partially you succeed partially. 
But in any case, these training rules are not a waste, I say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.89 
9. Ascetics 
Three Trainings (1st) 
“Mendicants, these are the three trainings. 
What three? 
The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
And what is the training in the higher ethics? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
This is called the training in the higher ethics. 
And what is the training in the higher mind? 
It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. 
This is called the training in the higher mind. 
And what is the training in the higher wisdom? 
They truly understand: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is called the training in the higher wisdom. 
These are the three trainings.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.90 
9. Ascetics 
Three Trainings (2nd) 
“Mendicants, these are the three trainings. 
What three? 
The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
And what is the training in the higher ethics? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
This is called the training in the higher ethics. 
And what is the training in the higher mind? 
It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. 
This is called the training in the higher mind. 
And what is the training in the higher wisdom? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This is called the training in the higher wisdom. 
These are the three trainings. 
The higher ethics, the higher mind, 
and the higher wisdom should be practiced 
by those energetic, steadfast, and resolute, 
practicing absorption, mindful, with guarded senses. 
As before, so behind; 
as behind, so before. 
As below, so above; 
as above, so below. 
As by day, so by night; 
as by night, so by day. 
Having mastered every direction 
with limitless immersion, 
they call them a ‘trainee on the path’, 
and ‘one living a pure life’. 
But a wise one who has gone to the end of the path 
they call a ‘Buddha’ in the world. 
With the cessation of consciousness, 
freed by the ending of craving, 
the liberation of their heart 
is like a lamp going out.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.91 
9. Ascetics 
At Paṅkadhā 
At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. He arrived at a town of the Kosalans named Paṅkadhā, 
and stayed there. 
Now, at that time a monk named Kassapagotta was resident at Paṅkadhā. 
There the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the mendicants with a Dhamma talk about the training rules. 
Kassapagotta became quite impatient and bitter, thinking, 
“This ascetic is much too strict.” 
When the Buddha had stayed in Paṅkadhā as long as he pleased, he set out for Rājagaha. 
Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Rājagaha, 
and stayed there. 
Soon after the Buddha left, Kassapagotta became quite remorseful and regretful, thinking, 
“It’s my loss, my misfortune, 
that when the Buddha was talking about the training rules I became quite impatient and bitter, thinking 
he was much too strict. 
Why don’t I go to the Buddha and confess my mistake to him?” 
Then Kassapagotta set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set out for Rājagaha. 
Eventually he came to Rājagaha and the Vulture’s Peak. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened, saying: 

“I made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to become impatient and bitter when the Buddha was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk about the training rules, and to think, 
‘This ascetic is much too strict.’ 
Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future.” 
“Indeed, Kassapa, you made a mistake. 

But since you have recognized your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it. 
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future. 
Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who doesn’t want to train and doesn’t praise taking up the training. They don’t encourage other mendicants who don’t want to train to take up the training. And they don’t truthfully and correctly praise at the right time those mendicants who do want to train. I don’t praise that kind of senior mendicant. 
Why is that? 
Because, hearing that I praised that mendicant, other mendicants might want to keep company with them. Then they might follow their example, which would be for their lasting harm and suffering. 
That’s why I don’t praise that kind of senior mendicant. 
Take the case of a middle mendicant who doesn’t want to train … 
Take the case of a junior mendicant who doesn’t want to train … 

That’s why I don’t praise that kind of junior mendicant. 
Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who does want to train and praises taking up the training. They encourage other mendicants who don’t want to train to take up the training. And they truthfully and correctly praise at the right time those mendicants who do want to train. I praise that kind of senior mendicant. 
Why is that? 
Because, hearing that I praised that mendicant, other mendicants might want to keep company with them. Then they might follow their example, which would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. 
That’s why I praise that kind of senior mendicant. 
Take the case of a middle mendicant who wants to train … 
Take the case of a junior mendicant who wants to train … 

That’s why I praise that kind of junior mendicant.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.92 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Urgent 
“Mendicants, a farmer has three urgent duties. 
What three? 
A farmer swiftly makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. 
Next they swiftly plant seeds in season. 
When the time is right, they swiftly irrigate or drain the field. 
These are the three urgent duties of a farmer. 
That farmer has no special power or ability to say: 
‘Let the crops germinate today! Let them flower tomorrow! Let them ripen the day after!’ 
But there comes a time when that farmer’s crops germinate, flower, and ripen as the seasons change. 
In the same way, a mendicant has three urgent duties. 
What three? 
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom. 
These are the three urgent duties of a mendicant. 
That mendicant has no special power or ability to say: 
‘Let my mind be freed from defilements by not grasping today! Or tomorrow! Or the day after!’ 
But there comes a time—as that mendicant trains in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom—that their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will have keen enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.93 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Seclusion 
“Mendicants, wanderers of other religions advocate three kinds of seclusion. 
What three? 
Seclusion in robes, almsfood, and lodgings. 
Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in robes. They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings. 
This is what wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in robes. 
Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in almsfood. 
They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. 
This is what the wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in almsfood. 
Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in lodgings. They stay in a wilderness, at the root of a tree, in a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw, or a threshing-hut. 
This is what wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in lodgings. 
These are the three kinds of seclusion that wanderers of other religions advocate. 
In this teaching and training, there are three kinds of seclusion for a mendicant. 
What three? 
Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, giving up unethical conduct, being secluded from it. 
They have right view, giving up wrong view, being secluded from it. 
They’ve ended defilements, giving up defilements, being secluded from them. 
When a mendicant has these three kinds of seclusion, 

they’re called a mendicant who has reached the peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core. 
When a farmer’s rice field is ripe, 
they’d have the rice cut swiftly, 
gathered swiftly, 
transported swiftly, 
made into heaps swiftly, 
threshed swiftly, 
the straw removed swiftly, 

winnowed swiftly, 
brought over swiftly, 
pounded swiftly, 
and have the husks removed swiftly. 
In this way that farmer’s crop would reach the peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core. 
In the same way, when a mendicant is ethical, giving up unethical conduct, being secluded from it; 
when they have right view, giving up wrong view, being secluded from it; 
when they’ve ended defilements, giving up defilements, being secluded from them: 
they’re called a mendicant who has reached the peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.94 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Autumn 
“In the autumn, the heavens are sunny and cloudless. And as the sun is rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it shines and glows and radiates. 
In the same way, when the stainless, immaculate vision of the teaching arises in a noble disciple, three fetters are given up: 
substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances. 
Afterwards they get rid of two things: covetousness and ill will. 
Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. 
If that noble disciple passed away at that time, they’re bound by no fetter that might return them to this world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.95 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Assemblies 
“Mendicants, these are the three assemblies. 
What three? 
An assembly of the best, a divided assembly, and a harmonious assembly. 
And what is an assembly of the best? 
An assembly where the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. And those who come afterwards follow their example. 
They too are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. 
This is called an assembly of the best. 
And what is a divided assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants fight, quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words. This is called a divided assembly. 
And what is a harmonious assembly? 
An assembly where the mendicants live in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is called a harmonious assembly. 
When the mendicants live in harmony like this, they brim with much merit. 
At that time the mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the heart’s release by rejoicing. 
When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. 
It’s like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. 
In the same way, when the mendicants are in harmony, appreciating each other, without dispute, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes, they create much merit. 
At that time the mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the heart’s release by rejoicing. 
When they’re joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they’re blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. 
These are the three assemblies.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.96 
10. A Lump of Salt 
The Thoroughbred (1st) 
“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. 
What three? 
It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a king. … 
In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
And how is a mendicant beautiful? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
That’s how a mendicant is beautiful. 
And how is a mendicant strong? 
It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. 
That’s how a mendicant is strong. 
And how is a mendicant fast? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … 
‘This is the origin of suffering’ … 
‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … 
‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
That’s how a mendicant is fast. 
A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.97 
10. A Lump of Salt 
The Thoroughbred (2nd) 
“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. 
What three? 
It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a king, … 
In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
And how is a mendicant beautiful? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
That’s how a mendicant is beautiful. 
And how is a mendicant strong? 
It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. 
That’s how a mendicant is strong. 
And how is a mendicant fast? 
It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
That’s how a mendicant is fast. 
A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.98 
10. A Lump of Salt 
The Thoroughbred (3rd) 
“Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. 
What three? 
It’s when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a king. … 
In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. 
What three? 
It’s when a mendicant is beautiful, strong, and fast. 
And how is a mendicant beautiful? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
That’s how a mendicant is beautiful. 
And how is a mendicant strong? 
It’s when a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. 
That’s how a mendicant is strong. 
And how is a mendicant fast? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
That’s how a mendicant is fast. 
A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.99 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Jute 
“Jute canvas is ugly, unpleasant to touch, and worthless whether it’s new, worn in, or worn out. 

They use worn out jute canvas for scrubbing cauldrons, or else they just throw it away on the rubbish heap. 
In the same way, if a junior mendicant is unethical, of bad character, 
this is how they’re ugly, I say. 
That individual is just as ugly as jute canvas. 
If you associate with, accompany, and attend to them, following their example, it’ll be for your lasting harm and suffering. 
This is how they’re unpleasant to touch, I say. 
That individual is just as unpleasant to touch as jute canvas. 
Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are not very fruitful or beneficial for the donor. 
This is how they’re worthless, I say. 
That individual is just as worthless as jute canvas. 
If a middle mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how they’re ugly, I say. … 
If a senior mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how they’re ugly, I say. … 

If you associate with, accompany, and attend to them, following their example, it’ll be for your lasting harm and suffering. … 

If such a senior mendicant speaks among the Saṅgha, 
the mendicants say: 
‘What’s an incompetent fool like you got to say? 
How on earth could you imagine you’ve got something worth saying!’ 
They become angry and upset, and blurt out things that make the Saṅgha throw them out, as if they were throwing jute canvas away on the rubbish heap. 
Cloth from Kāsi is beautiful, pleasant to touch, and valuable whether it’s new, worn in, or worn out. 
They use worn out cloth from Kāsi for wrapping, or else they place it in a fragrant casket. 
In the same way, if a junior mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
That individual is just as beautiful as cloth from Kāsi. 
If you associate with, accompany, and attend to such an individual, following their example, it will be for your lasting welfare and happiness. 
This is how they’re pleasant to touch, I say. 
That individual is just as pleasant to touch as cloth from Kāsi. 
Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are very fruitful and beneficial for the donor. 
This is how they’re valuable, I say. 
That individual is just as valuable as cloth from Kāsi. 
If a middle mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they’re beautiful, I say. … 
If a senior mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they’re beautiful, I say. … 
If such a senior mendicant speaks in the midst of the Saṅgha, 
the mendicants say: 
‘Venerables, be quiet! The senior mendicant is speaking on the teaching and training.’ 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will be like cloth from Kāsi, not like jute canvas.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.100 
10. A Lump of Salt 
A Lump of Salt 
“Mendicants, suppose you say: 
‘No matter how this person performs a deed, they experience it the same way.’ This being so, the spiritual life could not be lived, and there’d be no chance of making a complete end of suffering. 
Suppose you say: 
‘No matter how this person performs a deed, they experience the result as it should be experienced.’ This being so, the spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete end of suffering. 
Take the case of the individual who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell. 
Meanwhile, another individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot. 
What kind of individual does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell? 
An individual who hasn’t developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, or wisdom. They’re small-minded and mean-spirited, living in suffering. 
That kind of individual does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell. 
What kind of individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot? 
An individual who has developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They’re not small-minded, but are big-hearted, meditating on the immeasurables. 
That kind of individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot. 
Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into a mug of water. 
What do you think, mendicants? 
Would that mug of water become salty and undrinkable?” 
“Yes, sir. 
Why is that? 
Because there is only a little water in the bowl.” 
“Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into the Ganges river. 
What do you think, mendicants? 
Would the Ganges river become salty and undrinkable?” 
“No, sir. 
Why is that? 
Because the Ganges river is a vast mass of water.” 
“This is how it is in the case of an individual who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell. 
Meanwhile, another individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot. … 

Take the case of someone who is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. 
While someone else isn’t thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. 
What sort of person is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars? 
Someone who is poor, with few possessions and little wealth. 
That kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. 
What sort of person isn’t thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars? 
Someone who is rich, affluent, and wealthy. 
That kind of person isn’t thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. 
This is how it is in the case of an individual who does a trivial bad deed, but they go to hell. 

Meanwhile, another individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot. … 

It’s like a sheep dealer or butcher. They can execute, jail, fine, or otherwise punish one person who steals from them, but not another. 
What sort of person can they punish? 
Someone who is poor, with few possessions and little wealth. 
That’s the kind of person they can punish. 
What sort of person can’t they punish? 
A ruler or their chief minister who is rich, affluent, and wealthy. 
That’s the kind of person they can’t punish. 
In fact, all they can do is raise their joined palms and ask: 
‘Please, good fellow, give me my sheep or pay me for it.’ 
This is how it is in the case of an individual who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell. 
Meanwhile, another individual does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, so that not even a little remains, let alone a lot. … 

Mendicants, suppose you say: 
‘No matter how this person performs a deed, they experience it the same way.’ This being so, the spiritual life could not be lived, and there’d be no chance of making a complete end of suffering. 
Suppose you say: 
‘No matter how this person performs a deed, they experience the result as it should be experienced.’ This being so, the spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete end of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.101 
10. A Lump of Salt 
A Panner 
“Native gold has coarse corruptions: sand, soil, and gravel. 
A panner or their apprentice pours it into a pan, where they wash, rinse, and clean it. 
When that’s been eliminated, there are medium corruptions in the native gold: fine grit and coarse sand. 
The panner washes it again. 
When that’s been eliminated, there are fine corruptions in the native gold: fine sand and black grime. 
The panner washes it again. 
When that’s been eliminated, only golden flecks remain. 
A goldsmith or their apprentice places the native gold in a crucible where they blow, melt, and smelt it. 
Still the native gold is not settled and the dross is not totally gone. It’s not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. 
But the goldsmith keeps on blowing, melting, and smelting it. 
The native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. 
Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland. 
In the same way, a mendicant who is committed to the higher mind has coarse corruptions: bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. 
When they’ve been given up and eliminated, there are middling corruptions: sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. 
When they’ve been given up and eliminated, there are fine corruptions: thoughts of family, country, and status. A sincere, capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them. 
When they’ve been given up and eliminated, only thoughts about the teaching are left. 
That immersion is not peaceful or sublime or tranquil or unified, but is held in place by forceful suppression. 
But there comes a time when that mind is stilled internally; it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. 
That immersion is peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not held in place by forceful suppression. 
They extend the mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying myself and becoming one again; materializing and dematerializing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling my body as far as the realm of divinity.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having encompassed them with my mind. 
May I understand mind with greed as “mind with greed”, 
and mind without greed as “mind without greed”; 
mind with hate as “mind with hate”, 
and mind without hate as “mind without hate”; 
mind with delusion as “mind with delusion”, 
and mind without delusion as “mind without delusion”; 
constricted mind as “constricted mind”, 
and scattered mind as “scattered mind”; 
expansive mind as “expansive mind”, 
and unexpansive mind as “unexpansive mind”; 
mind that is not supreme as “mind that is not supreme”, 
and mind that is supreme as “mind that is supreme”; 
mind immersed in samādhi as “mind immersed in samādhi”, 
and mind not immersed in samādhi as “mind not immersed in samādhi”; 
freed mind as “freed mind”, 
and unfreed mind as “unfreed mind”.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and expanding. May I remember: “There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.” May I recollect my many past lives, with features and details.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place—and understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds: “These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.” And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn—inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient beings pass on according to their deeds.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.102 
10. A Lump of Salt 
Basis 
“Mendicants, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on three bases from time to time: 
the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of equanimity. 
If a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses solely on the basis of immersion, it’s likely their mind will incline to laziness. 
If they focus solely on the basis of exertion, it’s likely their mind will incline to restlessness. 
If they focus solely on the basis of equanimity, it’s likely their mind won’t properly become immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. 
But when a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to time on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. 
It’s like when a goldsmith or a goldsmith’s apprentice prepares a forge, fires the crucible, picks up some native gold with tongs and puts it in the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. 
If they solely fanned it, the native gold would likely be scorched. 
If they solely sprinkled water on it, the native gold would likely cool down. 
If they solely watched over it, the native gold would likely not be properly processed. 
But when that goldsmith fans it from time to time, sprinkles water on it from time to time, and watches over it from time to time, that native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and is ready to be worked. 
Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland. 
In the same way, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on three bases from time to time: 
the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of equanimity. … 

When a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to time on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending of defilements. 
They extend the mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is within range. 
If they wish: ‘May I wield the many kinds of psychic power’ … 
‘With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and divine, whether near or far.’ … 
‘May I recollect many kinds of past lives.’ … 
‘With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn.’ … 
‘May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.’ 
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.103 
11. Awakening 
Before Awakening 
“Mendicants, before my awakening—when I was still unawakened but intent on awakening—I thought: 
‘What’s the gratification in the world? What’s the drawback? What’s the escape?’ 
Then it occurred to me: 
‘The pleasure and happiness that arise from the world: this is its gratification. 
That the world is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. 
Removing and giving up desire and greed for the world: this is its escape.’ 
As long as I didn’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. 
But when I did truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. 
Knowledge and vision arose in me: 
‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.104 
11. Awakening 
Gratification (1st) 
“Mendicants, I went in search of the world’s gratification, and I found it. 
I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in the world. 
I went in search of the world’s drawbacks, and I found them. 
I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawbacks in the world. 
I went in search of escape from the world, and I found it. 
I’ve seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the world. 
As long as I didn’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. 
But when I did truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. 
Knowledge and vision arose in me: 
‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there’ll be no more future lives.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.105 
11. Awakening 
Gratification (2nd) 
“Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the world, sentient beings wouldn’t be aroused by it. 
But because there is gratification in the world, sentient beings are aroused by it. 
If the world had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn’t grow disillusioned with it. 
But since the world has a drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. 
If there were no escape from the world, sentient beings wouldn’t escape from it. 
But since there is an escape from the world, sentient beings do escape from it. 
As long as sentient beings don’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven’t escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they don’t live detached, liberated, with mind free of boundaries. 
But when sentient beings truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they’ve escaped from this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—and they live detached, liberated, with mind free of boundaries.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.106 
11. Awakening 
Ascetics and Brahmins 
“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. 
I don’t deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight. 
There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the world’s gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. 
I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.107 
11. Awakening 
Wailing 
“Singing is regarded as wailing in the training of the Noble One. 
Dancing is regarded as madness. 
Too much laughter, showing the teeth, is regarded as childish. 
So break off singing and dancing; and when you’re appropriately pleased, it’s enough to simply smile.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.108 
11. Awakening 
Satisfaction 
“Mendicants, there are three indulgences that never satisfy. 
What three? 
Sleep, 
drinking beer and wine, 
and sexual intercourse. 
These are the three indulgences that never satisfy.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.109 
11. Awakening 
Unprotected 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Householder, when the mind is unprotected, deeds of body, speech, and mind are unprotected. 
When deeds are unprotected, they fester. 
When deeds fester, they become rotten. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are rotten will not have a good death. 
It’s like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls are unprotected. 
They fester, 
and become rotten. 
In the same way, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are unprotected. … 

Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are rotten will not have a good death. 
When the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are protected. 
When deeds are protected, they don’t fester. 
When deeds don’t fester, they don’t become rotten. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind aren’t rotten will have a good death. 
It’s like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls are protected. 
They don’t get soaked, 
and they don’t become rotten. 
In the same way, when the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are protected. … 

Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind aren’t rotten will have a good death.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.110 
11. Awakening 
Fallen 
Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika: 
“Householder, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death. 
It’s like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls fall in. 
In the same way, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death. 
When the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a good death. 
It’s like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls are not fallen in. 
In the same way, when the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen. 
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a good death.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.111 
11. Awakening 
Sources (1st) 
“Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds. 
Any deed that emerges from greed, hate, or delusion—born, sourced, and originated from greed, hate, or delusion—is unskillful, blameworthy, results in suffering, and leads to the creation of more deeds, not their cessation. 

These are three sources that give rise to deeds. 
There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to deeds. 
Any deed that emerges from contentment, love, or understanding—born, sourced, and originated from contentment, love, or understanding—is skillful, blameless, results in happiness, and leads to the cessation of more deeds, not their creation. 

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.112 
11. Awakening 
Sources (2nd) 
“Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Desire comes up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 

And how does desire come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? 
In your heart you think about and consider things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 
When you do this, desire comes up, 
and you get attached to those things. 
This lust in the heart is what I call a fetter. 
That’s how desire comes up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 

These are three sources that give rise to deeds. 
There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. 
What three? 
Desire doesn’t come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 

And how does desire not come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? 
You understand the future result of things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 
When you know this, you grow disillusioned, 
your heart becomes dispassionate, and you see it with penetrating wisdom. 
That’s how desire doesn’t come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present. 

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.113 
12. Bound for Loss 
Bound for Loss 
“Mendicants, these three are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell, if they don’t give up this fault. 
What three? 
Someone who is unchaste, but claims to be chaste; 
someone who makes a groundless accusation of unchastity against a person whose chastity is pure; 
and someone who has the view, ‘There is nothing wrong with sensual pleasures,’ so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures. 
These are the three who are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell, if they don’t give up this fault.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.114 
12. Bound for Loss 
Rare 
“Mendicants, the appearance of three individuals is rare in the world. 
What three? 
A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. An individual who is grateful and thankful. 
The appearance of these three individuals is rare in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.115 
12. Bound for Loss 
Immeasurable 
“Mendicants, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
Someone easy to measure, someone hard to measure, and someone who is immeasurable. 
And who is the individual easy to measure? 
It’s an individual who is restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties. 
This is called ‘an individual easy to measure’. 
And who is the individual hard to measure? 
It’s an individual who is not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued. They have established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with unified mind and restrained faculties. 
This is called ‘an individual hard to measure’. 
And who is the immeasurable individual? 
It’s a mendicant who is perfected, and has ended defilements. 
This is called ‘an immeasurable individual’. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.116 
12. Bound for Loss 
Imperturbable 
“Mendicants, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
First, an individual, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. 
They enjoy it and like it and find it rewarding. If they’re set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they die they’re reborn in the company of the gods of the dimension of infinite space. 
The lifespan of the gods of infinite space is twenty thousand eons. 
An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. 
But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they’re extinguished in that very life. 
This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth. 
Furthermore, an individual, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite’, enters and remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. 
They enjoy it and like it and find it rewarding. If they’re set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they die they’re reborn in the company of the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness. 
The lifespan of the gods of infinite consciousness is forty thousand eons. 
An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. 
But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they’re extinguished in that very life. 
This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth. 
Furthermore, an individual, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing at all’, enters and remains in the dimension of nothingness. 
They enjoy it and like it and find it rewarding. If they’re set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they die they’re reborn in the company of the gods of the dimension of nothingness. 
The lifespan of the gods of nothingness is sixty thousand eons. 
An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. 
But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they’re extinguished in that very life. 
This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.117 
12. Bound for Loss 
Failures and Accomplishments 
“Mendicants, there are three failures. 
What three? 
Failure in ethics, mind, and view. 
And what is failure in ethics? 
It’s when someone kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘failure in ethics’. 
And what is failure in mind? 
It’s when someone is covetous and malicious. 
This is called ‘failure in mind’. 
And what is failure in view? 
It’s when someone has wrong view, a distorted perspective, such as: 
‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called ‘failure in view’. 
Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, 
mind, 
or view. 
These are the three failures. 
There are three accomplishments. 
What three? 
Accomplishment in ethics, mind, and view. 
And what is accomplishment in ethics? 
It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called accomplishment in ethics. 
And what is accomplishment in mind? 
It’s when someone is content and kind-hearted. 
This is called accomplishment in mind. 
And what is accomplishment in view? 
It’s when someone has right view, an undistorted perspective, such as: 
‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called accomplishment in view. 
Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics, 
mind, 
or view. 
These are the three accomplishments.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.118 
12. Bound for Loss 
Sure-bet Dice 
“Mendicants, there are three failures. 
What three? 
Failure in ethics, mind, and view. 
And what is failure in ethics? 
It’s when someone kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘failure in ethics’. 
And what is failure in mind? 
It’s when someone is covetous and malicious. 
This is called ‘failure in mind’. 
And what is failure in view? 
It’s when someone has wrong view, a distorted perspective, such as: 
‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called ‘failure in view’. 
Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. 
It’s like throwing sure-bet dice: they always fall the right side up. 
In the same way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. 
These are the three failures. 
There are three accomplishments. 
What three? 
Accomplishment in ethics, mind, and view. 
And what is accomplishment in ethics? 
It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called accomplishment in ethics. 
And what is accomplishment in mind? 
It’s when someone is content and kind-hearted. 
This is called accomplishment in mind. 
And what is accomplishment in view? 
It’s when someone has right view, an undistorted perspective, such as: 
‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called accomplishment in view. 
Some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. 
It’s like throwing sure-bet dice: they always fall the right side up. 
In the same way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. 
These are the three accomplishments.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.119 
12. Bound for Loss 
Action 
“Mendicants, there are three failures. 
What three? 
Failure in action, livelihood, and view. 
And what is failure in action? 
It’s when someone kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘failure in action’. 
And what is failure in livelihood? 
It’s when a noble disciple has wrong livelihood and earns a living by wrong livelihood. 
This is called ‘failure in livelihood’. 
And what is failure in view? 
It’s when someone has wrong view, a distorted perspective, such as: 
‘There’s no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There’s no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There’s no afterlife. There’s no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there’s no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called ‘failure in view’. 
These are the three failures. 
There are three accomplishments. 
What three? 
Accomplishment in action, livelihood, and view. 
And what is accomplishment in action? 
It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘accomplishment in action’. 
And what is accomplishment in livelihood? 
It’s when a noble disciple has right livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. 
This is called ‘accomplishment in livelihood’. 
And what is accomplishment in view? 
It’s when someone has right view, an undistorted perspective, such as: 
‘There is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.’ 
This is called ‘accomplishment in view’. 
These are the three accomplishments.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.120 
12. Bound for Loss 
Purity (1st) 
“Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. 
What three? 
Purity of body, speech, and mind. 
And what is purity of body? 
It’s when someone doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. 
This is called ‘purity of body’. 
And what is purity of speech? 
It’s when someone doesn’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘purity of speech’. 
And what is purity of mind? 
It’s when someone is content, kind-hearted, and has right view. 
This is called ‘purity of mind’. 
These are the three kinds of purity.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.121 
12. Bound for Loss 
Purity (2nd) 
“Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. 
What three? 
Purity of body, speech, and mind. 
And what is purity of body? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or have sex. 
This is called ‘purity of body’. 
And what is purity of speech? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘purity of speech’. 
And what is purity of mind? 
It’s when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands ‘I have sensual desire in me.’ When they don’t have sensual desire in them, they understand ‘I don’t have sensual desire in me.’ They understand how sensual desire arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future. 
When they have ill will in them they understand ‘I have ill will in me’; and when they don’t have ill will in them they understand ‘I don’t have ill will in me’. They understand how ill will arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future. 
When they have dullness and drowsiness in them they understand ‘I have dullness and drowsiness in me’; and when they don’t have dullness and drowsiness in them they understand ‘I don’t have dullness and drowsiness in me’. They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future. 
When they have restlessness and remorse in them they understand ‘I have restlessness and remorse in me’; and when they don’t have restlessness and remorse in them they understand ‘I don’t have restlessness and remorse in me’. They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how, when they’ve already arisen, they’re given up; and how, once they’re given up, they don’t arise again in the future. 
When they have doubt in them they understand ‘I have doubt in me’; and when they don’t have doubt in them they understand ‘I don’t have doubt in me’. They understand how doubt arises; how, when it’s already arisen, it’s given up; and how, once it’s given up, it doesn’t arise again in the future. 
This is called ‘purity of mind’. 
These are the three kinds of purity. 
Purity of body, purity of speech, 
and undefiled purity of heart. 
A pure one, blessed with purity, 
has washed off all bad things, they say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.122 
12. Bound for Loss 
Sagacity 
“Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. 
What three? 
Sagacity of body, speech, and mind. 
And what is sagacity of body? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or have sex. 
This is called ‘sagacity of body’. 
And what is sagacity of speech? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
This is called ‘sagacity of speech’. 
And what is sagacity of mind? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This is called ‘sagacity of mind’. 
These are the three kinds of sagacity. 
A sage in body, a sage in speech, 
a sage undefiled in heart; 
a sage, blessed with sagacity, 
has given up everything, they say.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.123 
13. Kusinārā 
At Kusinārā 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Kusinārā, in the Forest of Offerings. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village. 
A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next day’s meal. 
The mendicant accepts if they want. 
When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and approach that householder’s home, where they sit on the seat spread out. 
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. 
The mendicant thinks: 
‘It’s so good that this householder serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods.’ 
Then they think: 
‘I really hope this householder serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the future, too.’ 
They eat that food tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. 
They think about it with sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. 
A gift to such a mendicant is not very fruitful, I say. 
Why is that? 
Because that mendicant is negligent. 
Take another case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village. 
A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next day’s meal. 
The mendicant accepts if they want. 
When the night has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and approach that householder’s home, where they sit on the seat spread out. 
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. 
It never occurs to them: 
‘It’s so good that the householder or their child serves and satisfies me with their own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.’ 
They don’t think: 
‘I really hope this householder serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the future, too.’ 
They eat that almsfood untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and understanding the escape. 
They think about it with thoughts of renunciation, good will, or harmlessness. 
A gift to such a mendicant is very fruitful, I say. 
Why is that? 
Because that mendicant is diligent.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.124 
13. At Kusinārā 
Arguments 
“Mendicants, I’m not even comfortable thinking about a place where mendicants fight—quarreling and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words—let alone going there. 
I come to a conclusion about them: 
‘Clearly those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.’ 
What three things have they given up? 
Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. 

What three things have they cultivated? 
Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. … 

I come to a conclusion about them: 
‘Clearly those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.’ 
I feel comfortable going to a place where the mendicants live in harmony—appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes—let alone thinking about it. 
I come to a conclusion about them: 
‘Clearly those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.’ 
What three things have they given up? 
Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. 

What three things have they cultivated? 
Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. … 

I come to a conclusion about them: 
‘Clearly those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.125 
13. At Kusinārā 
The Gotamaka Shrine 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Gotamaka Shrine. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, I teach based on direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. 
I teach with reasons, not without them. 
I teach with a demonstrable basis, not without it. 
Since this is so, you should follow my advice and instruction. 
This is enough for you to feel joyful, delighted, and happy: 
‘The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha! The teaching is well explained! The Saṅgha is practicing well!’” 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. 
And while this discourse was being spoken, the thousandfold galaxy shook. 

Numbered Discourses 3.126 
13. Kusinārā 
Bharaṇḍu Kālāma 
At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans when he arrived at Kapilavatthu. 
Mahānāma the Sakyan heard that he had arrived. 
He went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The Buddha said to him, 
“Go into Kapilavatthu, Mahānāma, and check if there’s a suitable guest house where I can spend the night.” 
“Yes, sir,” replied Mahānāma. He returned to Kapilavatthu and searched all over the city, but he couldn’t see a suitable guest house for the Buddha to spend the night. 
Then Mahānāma went up to the Buddha, and said to him, 
“Sir, there’s no suitable guest house in Kapilavatthu for you to spend the night. 
But there is this Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma, who used to be the Buddha’s spiritual companion. 
Why don’t you spend the night at his hermitage?” 
“Go, Mahānāma, and set out a mat.” 
“Yes, sir,” replied Mahānāma. He went to Bharaṇḍu’s hermitage, where he set out a mat, and got foot-washing water ready. Then he went back to the Buddha and said to him, 
“The mat and foot-washing water are set out. 
Please, sir, go at your convenience.” 
Then the Buddha went to Bharaṇḍu’s hermitage, sat down on the seat spread out, 
and washed his feet. 
Then it occurred to Mahānāma, 
“It’s too late to pay homage to the Buddha today. 
He’s tired. 
Tomorrow I’ll pay homage to the Buddha.” He bowed to the Buddha and respectfully circled him, keeping him on his right, then he left. 
Then, when the night had passed, Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Mahānāma, there are these three teachers found in the world. 
What three? 
One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual pleasures, 
but not of forms or feelings. 
One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual pleasures and forms, 
but not of feelings. 
One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual pleasures, forms, and feelings. 
These are the three teachers found in the world. 
Do these three teachers have the same goal or different goals?” 
When he said this, Bharaṇḍu said to Mahānāma, 
“Say they’re the same, Mahānāma!” 
The Buddha said, 
“Say they’re different, Mahānāma!” 
For a second time, Bharaṇḍu said, 
“Say they’re the same, Mahānāma!” 
The Buddha said, 
“Say they’re different, Mahānāma!” 
For a third time, Bharaṇḍu said, 
“Say they’re the same, Mahānāma!” 
The Buddha said, 
“Say they’re different, Mahānāma!” 
Then it occurred to Bharaṇḍu, 
“The Buddha has rebuked me three times in front of this illustrious Mahānāma. 
Why don’t I leave Kapilavatthu?” 
Then Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma left Kapilavatthu, 
never to return. 

Numbered Discourses 3.127 
13. Kusinārā 
With Hatthaka 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Then, late at night, the glorious godling Hatthaka, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha. Thinking, 
“I will stand before the Buddha,” he sank and melted down, and wasn’t able to stay still. 
It’s like when ghee or oil is poured on sand, it sinks and melts down, and can’t remain stable. 

Then the Buddha said to Hatthaka, 
“Hatthaka, manifest a solid incarnation.” 
“Yes, sir,” replied Hatthaka. He manifested a solid incarnation, bowed to the Buddha, and stood to one side. 
The Buddha said to him, 
“Hatthaka, I wonder whether you still promulgate now the teachings that you promulgated when you were a human being?” 
“I still promulgate the teachings that I promulgated as a human being. 
And I also promulgate teachings that I didn’t promulgate as a human being. 
Just as the Buddha these days lives crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and monastics of other religions and their disciples, 
so I live crowded by the godlings. 
The godlings come from far away, thinking, ‘We’ll hear the teaching in the presence of Hatthaka.’ 
Sir, I passed away without getting enough of three things. 
What three? 
Seeing the Buddha; 
hearing the true teaching; 
and serving the Saṅgha. 
I passed away without getting enough of these three things. 
I could never get enough 
of seeing the Buddha, 
serving the Saṅgha, 
or hearing the teaching. 
Training in the higher ethics, 
loving to hear the true teaching, 
Hatthaka has gone to the Aviha realm 
without getting enough of these three things.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.128 
13. Kusinārā 
Bitter 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana. 
Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Varanasi for alms. 
While the Buddha was walking for alms near the cow-hitching place at the wavy leaf fig, he saw a disgruntled monk who was looking for pleasure in external things, unmindful, without situational awareness or immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties. 
The Buddha said to him, 
“Monk, don’t be bitter. 
If you’re bitter, festering with putrefaction, flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you.” 
Hearing this advice of the Buddha, that monk was struck with a sense of urgency. 
Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, the Buddha told the mendicants what had happened. … 

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha: 
“Sir, what is this ‘bitterness’? 
What is ‘putrefaction’? 
And what are the ‘flies’?” 
“Desire is bitterness; 
ill will is the putrefaction; 
and bad, unskillful thoughts are the flies. 
If you’re bitter, festering with putrefaction, flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you. 
When your eyes and ears are unguarded, 
and you’re not restrained in your sense faculties, 
flies—those lustful thoughts—
will plague you. 
A mendicant who’s bitter, 
festering with putrefaction, 
is far from being extinguished, 
distress is their lot. 
Whether in village or wilderness, 
if they don’t find serenity in themselves, 
the fool, the simpleton departs, 
honored only by flies. 
But those who have ethics, 
lovers of wisdom and peace, 
they, being peaceful, sleep at ease, 
since they’ve got rid of the flies.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.129 
13. Kusinārā 
With Anuruddha (1st) 
Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sometimes, sir, with my clairvoyance that’s purified and superhuman, I see that ladies—when their body breaks up, after death—are mostly reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
How many qualities do ladies have so that they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?” 
“When ladies have three qualities, when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
What three? 
A lady lives at home with a heart full of the stain of stinginess in the morning, jealousy at midday, and sexual desire in the evening. 
When ladies possess these three qualities, when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.130 
13. Kusinārā 
With Anuruddha (2nd) 
Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him: 
“Here’s the thing, Reverend Sāriputta. With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold galaxy. 
My energy is roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness is established and lucid, my body is tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind is immersed in samādhi and unified. 
But my mind is not freed from the defilements by not grasping.” 
“Well, Reverend Anuruddha, when you say: 
‘With clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold galaxy,’ that’s your conceit. 
And when you say: 
‘My energy is roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness is established and lucid, my body is tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind is immersed in samādhi,’ that’s your restlessness. 
And when you say: 
‘But my mind is not freed from the defilements by not grasping,’ that’s your remorse. 
It would be good to give up these three things. Ignore them and apply your mind to freedom from death.” 
After some time Anuruddha gave up these three things. Ignoring them, he applied his mind to freedom from death. 
Then Anuruddha, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness. 
He understood: “Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further for this place.” 
And Venerable Anuruddha became one of the perfected. 

Numbered Discourses 3.131 
13. Kusinārā 
Under Cover 
“Mendicants, three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open. 
What three? 
Females are married with a veil, not unveiled. 
Brahmin hymns are conveyed under cover, not openly. 
Wrong view is conveyed under cover, not in the open. 
These three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open. 
Three things shine in the open, not under cover. 
What three? 
The moon shines in the open, not under cover. 
The sun shines in the open, not under cover. 
The teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One shine in the open, not under cover. 
These three things shine in the open, not under cover.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.132 
13. Kusinārā 
Etchings 
“Mendicants, these three individuals are found in the world. 
What three? 
An individual like a line drawn in stone, an individual like a line drawn in sand, and an individual like a line drawn in water. 
And who is the individual like a line drawn in stone? 
It’s an individual who is often angry, 
and their anger lingers for a long time. 
It’s like a line drawn in stone, which isn’t quickly worn away by wind and water, but lasts for a long time. 
In the same way, an individual is often angry, 
and their anger lingers for a long time. 
This is called an individual like a line drawn in stone. 
And who is the individual like a line drawn in sand? 
It’s an individual who is often angry, 
but their anger doesn’t linger long. 
It’s like a line drawn in sand, which is quickly worn away by wind and water, and doesn’t last long. 
In the same way, an individual is often angry, 
but their anger doesn’t linger long. 
This is called an individual like a line drawn in sand. 
And who is the individual like a line drawn in water? 
It’s an individual who, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. 
It’s like a line drawn in water, which vanishes right away, and doesn’t last long. 
In the same way, an individual, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. 
This is called an individual like a line drawn in water. 
These are the three individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.133 
14. A Warrior 
A Warrior 
“Mendicants, a warrior with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship. 
What three? 
He’s a long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who shatters large objects. 
A warrior with these three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship. 
In the same way, a mendicant with three factors is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. 
What three? 
They’re a long-distance shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects. 
And how is a mendicant a long-distance shooter? 
It’s when a mendicant truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ 
They truly see any kind of feeling at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> feeling—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ 
They truly see any kind of perception at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> perception—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ 
They truly see any kind of choices at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> choices—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ 
They truly see any kind of consciousness at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, <em>all</em> consciousness—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’ 
That’s how a mendicant is a long-distance shooter. 
And how is a mendicant a marksman? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
That’s how a mendicant is a marksman. 
And how does a mendicant shatter large objects? 
It’s when a mendicant shatters the great mass of ignorance. 
That’s how a mendicant shatters large objects. 
A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.134 
14. A Warrior 
Assemblies 
“Mendicants, there are these three assemblies. 
What three? 
An assembly educated in fancy talk, an assembly educated in questioning, and an assembly educated to the fullest extent. 
These are the three assemblies.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.135 
14. A Warrior 
A Friend 
“Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has three factors. 
What three? 
They give what is hard to give, they do what is hard to do, and they bear what is hard to bear. 
You should associate with a friend who has these three factors.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.136 
14. A Warrior 
Arising 
“Mendicants, whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this regularity of natural principles, this surety of natural principles: 
all conditions are impermanent. 
A Realized One awakens to this and comprehends it, 
then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 
‘All conditions are impermanent.’ 
Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this regularity of natural principles, this surety of natural principles: 
all conditions are suffering. 
A Realized One awakens to this and comprehends it, 
then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 
‘All conditions are suffering.’ 
Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this regularity of natural principles, this surety of natural principles: 
all things are not-self. 
A Realized One awakens to this and comprehends it, 
then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 
‘All things are not-self.’” 

Numbered Discourses 3.137 
14. A Warrior 
A Hair Blanket 
“Mendicants, a hair blanket is said to be the worst kind of woven cloth. 
It’s cold in the cold, hot in the heat, ugly, smelly, and unpleasant to touch. 
In the same way, the teaching of the bamboo-staffed ascetic is said to be the worst of all the doctrines of the various ascetics and brahmins. 
The bamboo-staffed ascetic, that futile man, has this doctrine and view: 
‘There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.’ 
Those who were perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas in the past also taught the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. 
But the bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 
‘There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.’ 
Those who will be perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas in the future will also teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. 
But the bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 
‘There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.’ 
I too, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha in the present, teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. 
But the bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes me by saying: 
‘There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.’ 
It’s like a trap set at the mouth of a river, which would bring harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish. 
In the same way that futile man the bamboo-staffed ascetic is a trap for humans, it seems to me. He has come into the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster of many beings.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.138 
14. A Warrior 
Accomplishment 
“Mendicants, there are three accomplishments. 
What three? 
Accomplishment in faith, ethics, and wisdom. 
These are the three accomplishments.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.139 
14. A Warrior 
Growth 
“Mendicants, there are three kinds of growth. 
What three? 
Growth in faith, ethics, and wisdom. 
These are the three kinds of growth.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.140 
14. A Warrior 
A Wild Colt 
“Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild people. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“What are the three wild colts? 
One wild colt is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
Another wild colt is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
While another wild colt is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three wild colts. 
And what are the three wild people? 
One wild person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
Another wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
While another wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter without answering. 
This is how they’re not beautiful, I say. 
And they don’t receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. 
This is how a wild person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. 
This is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
But they don’t receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. 
This is how a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant truly understands: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. 
This is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. 
This is how a wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three wild people.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.141 
14. A Warrior 
Excellent Horses 
“Mendicants, I will teach you the three excellent horses and the three excellent people. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“What are the three excellent horses? 
One excellent horse is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
Another excellent horse is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
While another excellent horse is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three excellent horses. 
“What are the three excellent people? 
One excellent person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
Another excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
While another excellent person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
And how is an excellent person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter without answering. 
This is how they’re not beautiful, I say. 
And they don’t receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person is fast, 
but not beautiful or well proportioned. 
And how is an excellent person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. 
This is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
But they don’t receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re not well proportioned, I say. 
This is how an excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned. 
And how is an excellent person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. 
This is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. 
This is how an excellent person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three excellent people.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.142 
14. A Warrior 
The Thoroughbred 
“Mendicants, I will teach you the three fine thoroughbred horses, and the three fine thoroughbred people. 
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.” 
“Yes, sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“What are the three fine thoroughbred horses? 
One fine thoroughbred horse … 
is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three fine thoroughbred horses. 
And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? 
One fine thoroughbred person … 
is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
And how is a fine thoroughbred person … 
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This is how they’re fast, I say. 
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering. 
This is how they’re beautiful, I say. 
They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
This is how they’re well proportioned, I say. 
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. 
These are the three fine thoroughbred people.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.143 
14. A Warrior 
At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground (1st) 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, at the monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks’ feeding ground. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, a mendicant with three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. 
What three? 
The entire spectrum of an adept’s ethics, immersion, and wisdom. 
A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.144 
14. A Warrior 
At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground (2nd) 
“Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. 
What three? 
A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a demonstration of instruction. 
A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.145 
14. A Warrior 
At the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground (3rd) 
“Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. 
What three? 
Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom. 
A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.146 
15. Good Fortune 
Unskillful 
“Someone with three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What three? 
Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What three? 
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.147 
15. Good Fortune 
Blameworthy 
“Someone with three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What three? 
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What three? 
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.148 
15. Good Fortune 
Unethical 
“Someone with three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. … 
Unethical deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 

Someone with three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. … 
Ethical deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.149 
15. Good Fortune 
Impure 
“Someone with three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. … 
Impure deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 

Someone with three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. … 
Pure deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.150 
15. Good Fortune 
Broken (1st) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and reproved by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What three? 
Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What three? 
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.151 
15. Good Fortune 
Broken (2nd) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. … 
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 
When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. … 
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.152 
15. Good Fortune 
Broken (3rd) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. … 
Unethical deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 
When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. … 
Ethical deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.153 
15. Good Fortune 
Broken (4th) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. … 
Impure deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. … 
When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. … 
Pure deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. …” 

Numbered Discourses 3.154 
15. Good Fortune 
Homage 
“Mendicants, there are three kinds of homage. 
What three? 
By way of body, speech, and mind. 
These are the three kinds of homage.” 

Numbered Discourses 3.155 
15. Good Fortune 
Morning 
“Mendicants, those sentient beings who do good things in the morning by way of body, speech, and mind have a good morning. 
Those sentient beings who do good things at midday by way of body, speech, and mind have a good midday. 
Those sentient beings who do good things in the evening by way of body, speech, and mind have a good evening. 
A good star, a good fortune, 
a good dawn, a good rising, 
a good moment, a good hour: 
these come with good gifts to spiritual practitioners. 
Auspicious deeds of body, 
verbal auspicious deeds, 
auspicious deeds of mind, 
auspicious resolutions: 
when your deeds have been auspicious, 
you get auspicious benefits. 
Those happy with these benefits 
flourish in the Buddha’s teaching. 
May you and all your relatives 
be healthy and happy!” 

Numbered Discourses 3 
The Chapter on Practices 
Untitled Discourses on Three Practices 
“Mendicants, there are three practices. 
What three? 
The addicted practice, the scorching practice, and the middle practice. 
And what’s the addicted practice? 
It’s when someone has this doctrine and view: 
‘There’s nothing wrong with sensual pleasures’; 
so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures. 
This is called the addicted practice. 
And what’s the scorching practice? 
It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when called. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an invitation for a meal. 
They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where there’s a hound waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. 
They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. 
They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. 
They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set intervals. 
They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. 
They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings. 
They tear out their hair and beard, committed to this practice. 
They constantly stand, turning down seats. 
They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. 
They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. 
They’re devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including at dusk. 
And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body. 
This is called the scorching practice. 
And what’s the middle practice? 
It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. 
They meditate observing an aspect of feelings … 
They meditate observing an aspect of the mind … 
They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. 
This is called the middle practice. 
These are the three practices. 
Mendicants, there are three practices. 
What three? 
The addicted practice, the scorching practice, the middle practice. 
And what’s the addicted practice? … 
This is called the addicted practice. 
And what is the scorching practice? … 
This is called the scorching practice. 
And what’s the middle practice? 
It’s when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. … 
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. 
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. 
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. 
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. … 
They develop the faculty of faith … 
energy … 
mindfulness … 
immersion … 
wisdom … 
They develop the power of faith … 
energy … 
mindfulness … 
immersion … 
wisdom … 
They develop the awakening factor of mindfulness … 
investigation of principles … 
energy … 
rapture … 
tranquility … 
immersion … 
equanimity … 
They develop right view … 
right thought … 
right speech … 
right action … 
right livelihood … 
right effort … 
right mindfulness … 
right immersion … 
This is called the middle practice. 
These are the three practices.” 

Numbered Discourses 3 
The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds 
Untitled Discourses on Three Qualities 
“Someone with three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What three? 
They themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to kill living creatures. And they approve of killing living creatures. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What three? 
They don’t themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to not kill living creatures. And they approve of not killing living creatures. … 
They themselves steal. They encourage others to steal. And they approve of stealing. … 
They don’t themselves steal. They encourage others to not steal. And they approve of not stealing. … 
They themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of committing sexual misconduct. … 
They don’t themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to not commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of not committing sexual misconduct. … 
They themselves lie. They encourage others to lie. And they approve of lying. … 
They don’t themselves lie. They encourage others to not lie. And they approve of not lying. … 
They themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to speak divisively. And they approve of speaking divisively. … 
They don’t themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to not speak divisively. And they approve of not speaking divisively. … 
They themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to speak harshly. And they approve of speaking harshly. … 
They don’t themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to not speak harshly. And they approve of not speaking harshly. … 
They themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to talk nonsense. And they approve of talking nonsense. … 
They don’t themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to not talk nonsense. And they approve of not talking nonsense. … 
They themselves are covetous. They encourage others to be covetous. And they approve of covetousness. … 
They themselves are content. They encourage others to be contented. And they approve of being contented. … 
They themselves have ill will. They encourage others to have ill will. And they approve of having ill will. … 
They themselves are kind-hearted. They encourage others to be kind-hearted. And they approve of kind-heartedness. … 
They themselves have wrong view. They encourage others to have wrong view. And they approve of wrong view. … 
They themselves have right view. They encourage others to have right view. And they approve of right view. 
Someone with these three qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 3 
The Chapter on Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed 
Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc. 
“For insight into greed, three things should be developed. 
What three? 
Emptiness immersion; signless immersion; and undirected immersion. 
For insight into greed, these three things should be developed. 
For the complete understanding of greed … 
complete ending … 
giving up … 
ending … 
vanishing … 
fading away … 
cessation … 
giving away … 
letting go … 
hate … 
delusion … 
anger … 
acrimony … 
disdain … 
contempt … 
jealousy … 
stinginess … 
deceitfulness … 
deviousness … 
obstinacy … 
aggression … 
conceit … 
arrogance … 
vanity … 
negligence … 
insight … 
complete understanding … 
complete ending … 
giving up … 
ending … 
vanishing … 
fading away … 
cessation … 
giving away … 
For the letting go of negligence, these three things should be developed.” 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said. 

The Book of the Threes is finished. 

Numbered Discourses 4.1 
1. At Wares Village 
Understood 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at Wares Village. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four things, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long time. 
What four? 
Noble ethics, 
immersion, 
wisdom, 
and freedom. 
These noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the leash to existence is ended; now there’ll be no more future lives.” 
That is what the Buddha said. 
Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say: 
“Ethics, immersion, and wisdom, 
and the supreme freedom: 
these things have been understood 
by Gotama the renowned. 
And so the Buddha, having insight, 
explained this teaching to the mendicants. 
The teacher made an end of suffering, 
seeing clearly, he is fully quenched.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.2 
1. At Wares Village 
Fallen 
“Someone without four things is said to have ‘fallen from this teaching and training’. 
What four? 
Noble ethics, 
immersion, 
wisdom, 
and freedom. 
Someone without these four things is said to have ‘fallen from this teaching and training’. 
Someone with four things is said to be ‘secure in this teaching and training’. 
What four? 
Noble ethics, 
immersion, 
wisdom, 
and freedom. 
Someone with these four things is said to be ‘secure in this teaching and training’. 
They fall, collapsed and fallen; 
greedy, they return. 
The work is done, the joyful is enjoyed, 
happiness is found through happiness.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.3 
1. At Wares Village 
Broken (1st) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What four? 
Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism, 
and they criticize those deserving of praise. 
They arouse faith in things that are dubious, 
and they don’t arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person possesses these four qualities they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What four? 
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism, 
and they praise those deserving of praise. 
They don’t arouse faith in things that are dubious, 
and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
When an astute, competent true person possesses these four qualities they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
When you praise someone worthy of criticism, 
or criticize someone worthy of praise, 
you choose a losing hand with your own mouth: 
you’ll never find happiness that way. 
A losing hand at dice is a trivial thing, 
if all you lose is your money 
and all you own, even yourself. 
What’s a really terrible hand 
is to hate the holy ones. 
For a hundred thousand times a hundred million, 
times five hundred and thirty-six times <j>a thousand times ten million years 
a slanderer of noble ones goes to hell, 
having aimed bad words and thoughts at them.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.4 
1. At Wares Village 
Broken (2nd) 
“When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward four individuals they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
What four? 
Mother … 
father … a Realized One … and a disciple of a Realized One. 
When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward these four individuals they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much wickedness. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward four individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
What four? 
Mother … 
father … a Realized One … and a disciple of a Realized One. 
When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward these four individuals they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don’t deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they brim with much merit. 
A person who does wrong 
by their mother or father, 
or a Realized One, a Buddha, 
or one of their disciples, 
brims with much wickedness. 

Because of their unprincipled conduct 
toward their parents, 
they’re criticized in this life by the astute, 
and they depart to be reborn in a place of loss. 
A person who does right 
by their mother and father, 
or a Realized One, a Buddha, 
or one of their disciples, 
brims with much merit. 

Because of their principled conduct 
toward their parents, 
they’re praised in this life by the astute, 
and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.5 
1. At Wares Village 
With the Stream 
“These four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
An individual who goes with the stream; an individual who goes against the stream; a steadfast individual; and a brahmin who has crossed over, gone to the far shore, and stands on solid ground. 
And who is the individual who goes with the stream? 
It’s an individual who indulges in sensual pleasures and does bad deeds. 
This is called an individual who goes with the stream. 
And who is the individual who goes against the stream? 
It’s an individual who doesn’t indulge in sensual pleasures or do bad deeds. They live the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness, weeping, with tearful faces. 
This is called an individual who goes against the stream. 
And who is the steadfast individual? 
It’s an individual who, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
This is called a steadfast individual. 
And who is a brahmin who has crossed over, gone to the far shore, and stands on solid ground? 
It’s an individual who realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
This is called a brahmin who has crossed over, gone to the far shore, and stands on solid ground. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
All those people with unbridled sensuality, 
not free of lust, enjoying sensual pleasures in this life: 
again and again, they return to birth and old age; 
those who go with the stream are sunk in craving. 
So the attentive in this life, <j>with mindfulness established, 
don’t take part in sensual pleasures and bad deeds. 
In pain they’d give up sensual pleasures: 
they call that individual ‘one who goes against the stream’. 
Someone who’s given up five corruptions, 
a perfect trainee, not liable to decline, 
who’s mastered their mind, <j>with faculties immersed in samādhi, 
that man is called ‘steadfast’. 
The sage who has comprehended all things, <j>high and low, 
cleared them and ended them, so they are no more; 
they’ve completed the spiritual journey, <j>and gone to the end of the world, 
they’re called ‘one who has gone beyond’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.6 
1. At Wares Village 
A Little Learning 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? They may have: 
Little learning and not get the point of learning. 
Little learning but get the point of learning. 
Much learning but not get the point of learning. 
Much learning and get the point of learning. 
And how has an individual learned little and not got the point of learning? 
It’s when an individual has learned little of the 
statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. 
And with the little they’ve learned, they understand neither the meaning nor the teaching, nor do they practice in line with the teaching. 
That’s how an individual has learned little and not got the point of learning. 
And how has an individual learned little but has got the point of learning? 
It’s when an individual has learned little of the 
statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. 
But with the little they’ve learned, they understand the meaning and the teaching, and they practice in line with the teaching. 
That’s how an individual has learned little but has got the point of learning. 
And how has an individual learned much but hasn't got the point of learning? 
It’s when an individual has learned much of the 
statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. 
But even though they’ve learned much, they understand neither the meaning nor the teaching, nor do they practice in line with the teaching. 
That’s how an individual has learned much but hasn't got the point of learning. 
And how has an individual learned much and has got the point of learning? 
It’s when an individual has learned much of the 
statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. 
And with the large amount they’ve learned, they understand the meaning and the teaching, and they practice in line with the teaching. 
That’s how an individual has learned much and has got the point of learning. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
If you don’t learn much, 
and aren’t steady in ethics, 
they’ll criticize you on both counts, 
for your ethics and your learning. 
If you don’t learn much, 
and you are steady in ethics, 
they’ll praise your ethical conduct, 
since your learning has succeeded. 
If you learn much, 
but aren’t steady in ethics, 
they’ll criticize your ethical conduct, 
for your learning hasn’t succeeded. 
If you learn much, 
and you are steady in ethics, 
they’ll praise you on both counts, 
for your ethics and your learning. 
A wise disciple of the Buddha 
who is learned and has memorized the teachings; 
like a pendant of Black Plum River gold, 
who is worthy to criticize them? 
Even the gods praise them, 
and by the Divinity, too, they’re praised.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.7 
1. At Wares Village 
Grace 
“Mendicants, these four who are competent, educated, assured, and learned, who have memorized the teachings and practice in line with the teaching, grace the Saṅgha. 
What four? 
A monk, 
a nun, 
a layman, 
and a laywoman. 
These four who are competent, educated, assured, and learned, who have memorized the teachings and practice in line with the teaching, grace the Saṅgha. 
Whoever is competent and assured, 
learned, a memorizer of the teachings, 
who lives in line with the teaching—
such a one is said to grace the Saṅgha. 
A monk accomplished in ethics, 
and a learned nun, 
a faithful layman, 
and a faithful laywoman, too: 
these grace the Saṅgha, 
they are the graces of the Saṅgha.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.8 
1. At Wares Village 
Self-assured 
“Mendicants, a Realized One has four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. 
What four? 
I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to be a fully awakened Buddha, but you don’t understand these things.’ 
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. 
I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘You claim to have ended all defilements, but you still have these defilements.’ 
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. 
I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘The acts that you say are obstructions are not really obstructions for the one who performs them.’ 
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. 
I see no reason for anyone—whether ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or the Divinity, or anyone else in the world—to legitimately scold me, saying: ‘Though you teach that this teaching leads to the goal of the complete ending of suffering, it doesn’t lead there for one who practices it.’ 
Since I see no such reason, I live secure, fearless, and assured. 
A Realized One possesses these four kinds of self-assurance. With these he claims the bull’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. 
The various grounds for criticism 
that ascetics and brahmins rely on 
vanish on reaching a Realized One, 
assured, gone beyond grounds for criticism. 
He rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma <j>as a consummate one, 
complete, sympathetic for all living creatures. 
Sentient beings revere him, <j>first among gods and humans, 
who has gone beyond rebirth.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.9 
1. At Wares Village 
The Arising of Craving 
“Mendicants, there are four things that give rise to craving in a mendicant. 
What four? 
For the sake of robes, 
almsfood, 
lodgings, 
or rebirth in this or that state. 
These are the four things that give rise to craving in a mendicant. 
Craving is a person’s partner 
as they transmigrate on this long journey. 
They go from this state to another, 
but don’t escape transmigration. 
Knowing this drawback—
that craving is the cause of suffering—
rid of craving, free of grasping, 
a mendicant would wander mindful.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.10 
1. At Wares Village 
Yokes 
“Mendicants, there are these four yokes. 
What four? 
The yokes of sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. 
And what is the yoke of sensual pleasures? 
It’s when you don’t truly understand sensual pleasures’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures linger on inside. 
This is called the yoke of sensual pleasures. 
Such is the yoke of sensual pleasures. 
And what is the yoke of future lives? 
It’s when you don’t truly understand future lives’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for continued existence linger on inside. 
This is called the yoke of future lives. 
Such are the yokes of sensual pleasures and future lives. 
And what is the yoke of views? 
It’s when you don’t truly understand views’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for views linger on inside. 
This is called the yoke of views. 
Such are the yokes of sensual pleasures, future lives, and views. 
And what is the yoke of ignorance? 
It’s when you don’t truly understand the six fields of contact’s origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape, 
so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact linger on inside. 
This is called the yoke of ignorance. 
Such are the yokes of sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. 
These are bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. That’s why someone yoked to them is called: ‘one who has not found sanctuary from the yoke’. 
These are the four yokes. 
There are these four kinds of unyoking. 
What four? 
Unyoking from sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. 
And what is unyoking from sensual pleasures? 
It’s when you truly understand sensual pleasures’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for sensual pleasures don’t linger on inside. 
This is called unyoking from sensual pleasures. 
Such is unyoking from sensual pleasures. 
And what is unyoking from future lives? 
It’s when you truly understand future lives’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for continued existence don’t linger on inside. 
This is called unyoking from future lives. 
Such is unyoking from sensual pleasures and future lives. 
And what is unyoking from views? 
It’s when you truly understand views’ origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape. 
So greed, relishing, affection, infatuation, thirst, passion, attachment, and craving for views don’t linger on inside. 
This is called unyoking from views. 
Such is unyoking from sensual pleasures, future lives, and views. 
And what is unyoking from ignorance? 
It’s when you truly understand the six fields of contact’s origin, disappearance, gratification, drawback, and escape, 
so ignorance and unknowing of the six fields of contact don’t linger on inside. 
This is called unyoking from ignorance. 
Such is unyoking from sensual pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. 
These are bad, unskillful qualities that are corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. That’s why someone unyoked from them is called: ‘one who has found sanctuary from the yoke’. 
These are the four kinds of unyoking. 
Yoked to both sensual pleasures 
and the desire to be reborn in a future life; 
yoked also to views, 
and governed by ignorance, 
sentient beings continue to transmigrate, 
with ongoing birth and death. 
But those who fully understand sensual pleasures, 
and the yoke to all future lives; 
with the yoke of views eradicated, 
and ignorance dispelled, 
unyoked from all yokes, 
truly those sages have slipped their yoke.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.11 
2. Walking 
Walking 
“Mendicants, suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking. 
They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. 
Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when walking. 
Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing … 

sitting … 

or when lying down while awake. 
They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. 
Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when lying down while awake. 
Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking. 
They don’t tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. 
Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking. 
Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing … 

sitting … 

or when lying down while awake. 
They don’t tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. 
Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake.” 
Whether walking or standing, 
sitting or lying down, 
if you think a bad thought 
to do with the domestic life, 
you’re on the wrong path, 
lost among things that delude. 
Such a mendicant is incapable 
of experiencing the highest awakening. 
But one who, whether standing or walking, 
sitting or lying down, 
has calmed their thoughts, 
loving peace of mind; 
such a mendicant is capable 
of experiencing the highest awakening.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.12 
2. Walking 
Ethics 
“Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken. 
When you’ve done this, what more is there to do? 
Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking. 
Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing … 
sitting … 
and when lying down while awake, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi and unified. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake. 
Carefully walking, carefully standing, 
carefully sitting, carefully lying; 
a mendicant carefully bends their limbs, 
and carefully extends them. 
Above, below, all round, 
as far as the planet extends; 
they scrutinize the rise and fall 
of phenomena such as the aggregates. 
Training in what leads to serenity of heart, 
always staying mindful; 
they call such a mendicant 
‘always determined’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.13 
2. Walking 
Effort 
“Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. 
What four? 
A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. 
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. 
These are the four right efforts. 
By rightly striving, <j>they’ve crushed Māra’s sovereignty; 
unattached, they’ve gone beyond <j>the peril of birth and death. 
Contented and unstirred, they’ve vanquished Māra with his legions; 
now they’ve gone beyond all Namuci’s forces, <j>they’re happy.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.14 
2. Walking 
Restraint 
“Mendicants, there are these four efforts. 
What four? 
The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to preserve. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to restrain? 
When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. 
When they hear a sound with their ears … 
When they smell an odor with their nose … 
When they taste a flavor with their tongue … 
When they feel a touch with their body … 
When they know an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. 
This is called the effort to restrain. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to give up? 
It’s when a mendicant doesn’t tolerate a sensual, 
malicious, 
or cruel thought that’s arisen, but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. 
They don’t tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. 
This is called the effort to give up. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to develop? 
It’s when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, 
investigation of principles, 
energy, 
rapture, 
tranquility, 
immersion, 
and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. 
This is called the effort to develop. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to preserve? 
It’s when a mendicant preserves a meditation subject that’s a fine basis of immersion: the perception of a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse, or a bloated corpse. 
This is called the effort to preserve. 
These are the four efforts. 
Restraint and giving up, 
development and preservation: 
these are the four efforts 
taught by the Kinsman of the Sun. 
Any mendicant who keenly applies these 
may attain the ending of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.15 
2. Walking 
Regarded as Foremost 
“Mendicants, these four are regarded as foremost. 
What four? 
The foremost in size of incarnation is 
Rāhu, lord of titans. 
The foremost pleasure seeker is 
King Mandhātā. 
The foremost in sovereignty is 
Māra the Wicked. 
In this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is said to be the best. 
These are the four regarded as foremost. 
Rāhu is foremost in size of incarnation, 
Mandhātā in enjoying sensual pleasures, 
Māra in sovereignty, 
shining with power and glory. 
Above, below, all round, 
as far as the planet extends; 
in all the world with its gods, 
the Buddha is declared foremost.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.16 
2. Walking 
Subtlety 
“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of subtlety. 
What four? 
A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of form. 
They don’t see any other subtlety of form that’s better or finer than that, 
nor do they aim for it. 
A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of feeling. 
They don’t see any other subtlety of feeling that’s better or finer than that, 
nor do they aim for it. 
A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of perception. 
They don’t see any other subtlety of perception that’s better or finer than that, 
nor do they aim for it. 
A mendicant has ultimate subtlety of choices. 
They don’t see any other subtlety of choices that’s better or finer than that, 
nor do they aim for it. 
These are the four kinds of subtlety. 
Knowing the subtlety of form, 
the cause of feelings, 
where perception comes from, 
and where it ends; 
and knowing choices as alien, 
as suffering and as not-self, 
that mendicant sees rightly, 
peaceful, in love with the state of peace. 
They bear their final body, 
having vanquished Māra with his legions.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.17 
2. Walking 
Prejudice (1st) 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of making prejudiced decisions. 
What four? 
Making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
These are the four ways of making prejudiced decisions. 
If you act against the teaching 
out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity, 
your fame fades away, 
like the moon in the waning fortnight.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.18 
2. Walking 
Prejudice (2nd) 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. 
What four? 
Making decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
These are the four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. 
If you don’t act against the teaching 
out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity, 
your fame swells, 
like the moon in the waxing fortnight.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.19 
2. Walking 
Prejudice (3rd) 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of making prejudiced decisions. 
What four? 
Making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
These are the four ways of making prejudiced decisions. 
There are these four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. 
What four? 
Making decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
These are the four ways of making unprejudiced decisions. 
If you act against the teaching 
out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity, 
your fame fades away, 
like the moon in the waning fortnight. 
If you don’t act against the teaching 
out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity, 
your fame swells, 
like the moon in the waxing fortnight.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.20 
2. Walking 
A Meal Assigner 
“Mendicants, a meal assigner who has four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
A meal assigner who has these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
A meal designator who has four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. 
A meal assigner who has these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
All those people with unbridled sensuality, 
unprincipled, with no respect for principle, 
led astray <j>by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice, 
are called ‘an assembly of the dregs’: 
that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows. 
And so those praiseworthy true persons, 
standing on principle, doing nothing wrong, 
not led astray <j>by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice, 
are called ‘an assembly of the cream’: 
that’s what was said by the ascetic who knows.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.21 
3. At Uruvelā 
At Uruvelā (1st) 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. 
As I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: 
‘One without respect and reverence lives in suffering. 
What ascetic or brahmin should I honor and respect and rely on?’ 
Then it occurred to me: 
‘I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the entire spectrum of ethics, if it were incomplete. 
But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—who is more accomplished than myself in ethics, who I should honor and respect and rely on. 
I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the entire spectrum of immersion, if it were incomplete. 
But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin … who is more accomplished than myself in immersion … 
I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the entrie spectrum of wisdom, if it were incomplete. 
But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world … who is more accomplished than myself in wisdom … 
I would honor and respect and rely on another ascetic or brahmin so as to complete the entire spectrum of freedom, if it were incomplete. 
But I don’t see any other ascetic or brahmin in this world … who is more accomplished than myself in freedom …’ 
Then it occurred to me: 
‘Why don’t I honor and respect and rely on the same teaching to which I was awakened?’ 
And then the divinity Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, vanished from the realm of divinity and appeared in front of me, as easily as a strong man would extend or contract his arm. 
He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward me, and said: 
‘That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One! 
All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived in the past honored and respected and relied on this same teaching. 
All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who will live in the future will honor and respect and rely on this same teaching. 
May the Blessed One, who is the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at present, also honor and respect and rely on this same teaching.’ 
That’s what the divinity Sahampati said. 
Then he went on to say: 
‘All Buddhas, whether in the past, 
the Buddhas of the future, 
and the Buddha at present—
destroyer of the sorrows of many—
respecting the true teaching 
they did live, they do live, 
and they also will live. 
This is the nature of the Buddhas. 
Therefore someone who desires self-knowledge, 
and aspires to greatness themselves, 
should respect the true teaching, 
remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.’ 
That’s what the divinity Sahampati said. 
Then he bowed and respectfully circled me, keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there. 
Then, knowing the request of the Divinity and what was suitable for myself, I honored and respected and relied on the same teaching to which I was awakened. 
And since the Saṅgha has also achieved greatness, I also respect the Saṅgha.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.22 
3. At Uruvelā 
At Uruvelā (2nd) 
“Mendicants, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River. 
Then several old brahmins—elderly and senior, who were advanced in years and had reached the final stage of life—came up to me, and exchanged greetings with me. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to me: 
‘Worthy Gotama, , we have heard this: 
“The ascetic Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat.” 
And this is indeed the case, 
for the worthy Gotama does not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. 
This is not appropriate, worthy Gotama.’ 
Then it occurred to me, 
‘These venerables don’t know what a senior is, or what qualities make you a senior.’ 
Mendicants, suppose you’re eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old. 
But your speech is untimely, false, meaningless, and against the teaching or training. You say things at the wrong time which are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial. 
Then you’ll be reckoned a ‘childish senior’. 
Now suppose you’re a youth, young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. 
But your speech is timely, true, meaningful, and in line with the teaching and training. You say things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. 
Then you’ll be reckoned an ‘astute senior’. 
There are these four qualities that make a senior. 
What four? 
A mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
They’re very learned, remembering and keeping what they’ve learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that’s entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and penetrating them theoretically. 
They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. 
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
These are the four qualities that make a senior. 
The creature with a restless mind 
speaks a lot of nonsense. 
Their thoughts are unsettled, 
and they don’t like the true teaching. 
They’re far from seniority, with their bad views 
and their lack of regard for others. 
But one accomplished in ethics, 
learned and eloquent, that wise one 
is restrained when experiencing phenomena, 
discerning the meaning with wisdom. 
Gone beyond all things, 
kind, eloquent, 
they’ve given up birth and death, 
and have completed the spiritual journey. 
That’s who I call a senior, 
who has no defilements. 
With the ending of defilements, a mendicant 
is declared a ‘senior’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.23 
3. At Uruvelā 
The World 
“Mendicants, the world has been understood by the Realized One; 
and he is detached from the world. 
The origin of the world has been understood by the Realized One; 
and he has given up the origin of the world. 
The cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; 
and he has realized the cessation of the world. 
The practice that leads to the cessation of the world has been understood by the Realized One; 
and he has developed the practice that leads to the cessation of the world. 
In this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind, all that has been understood by the Realized One. 
That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. 
From the night when the Realized One awakens to the supreme perfect awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished—in the element of extinguishment with no residue—everything he speaks, says, and expresses is real, not otherwise. 
That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. 
The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. 
Since this is so, 
that’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. 
In this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans—the Realized One is the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power. 
That’s why he’s called the ‘Realized One’. 
Directly knowing the whole world as it is, 
and everything in it, 
he is detached from the whole world, 
uninvolved with the whole world. 
That attentive one is the champion 
who is released from all ties. 
He has reached ultimate peace: 
extinguishment, fearing nothing from any quarter. 
He is the Buddha, with defilements ended, 
untroubled, with doubts cut off. 
He has attained the end of all deeds, 
freed with the end of attachments. 
That Blessed One is the Buddha, 
he is the supreme lion, 
in all the world with its gods, 
he turns the divine wheel. 
And so those gods and humans, 
who have gone to the Buddha for refuge, 
come together and revere him, 
great of heart and intrepid: 
‘Tamed, he is the best of tamers, 
peaceful, he is the seer among the peaceful, 
liberated, he is the foremost of liberators, 
crossed over, he is the most excellent of guides across.’ 
And so they revere him, 
great of heart and intrepid. 
In the world with its gods, 
he has no rival.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.24 
3. At Uruvelā 
At Kāḷaka’s Monastery 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in Kāḷaka’s monastery. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“In this world—with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind: that I know. 
In this world—with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans—whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind: that I have insight into. 
That has been known by a Realized One, but a Realized One is not subject to it. 
If I were to say that ‘I do not know … the world with its gods’, I would be lying. 
If I were to say that ‘I both know and do not know … the world with its gods’, that would be just the same. 
If I were to say that ‘I neither know nor do not know … the world with its gods’, that would be my fault. 
So a Realized One sees what is to be seen, but does not conceive what is seen, does not conceive what is unseen, does not conceive what is to be seen, and does not conceive a seer. 
He hears what is to be heard, but does not conceive what is heard, does not conceive what is unheard, does not conceive what is to be heard, and does not conceive a hearer. 
He thinks what is to be thought, but does not conceive what is thought, does not conceive what is not thought, does not conceive what is to be thought, and does not conceive a thinker. 
He knows what is to be known, but does not conceive what is known, does not conceive what is unknown, does not conceive what is to be known, and does not conceive a knower. 
Since a Realized One is unaffected in the midst of things that ought be seen, heard, thought, and known, he is the unaffected one. 
And I say that there is no better or finer poise than this. 
Such a one does not take anything 
seen, heard, or thought to be ultimately true or false. 
But others get attached, thinking it’s the truth, 
limited by their preconceptions. 
Since they’ve seen this dart 
to which people are attached and cling, 
saying, ‘I know, I see, that’s how it is’, 
the Realized Ones have no attachments.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.25 
3. At Uruvelā 
The Spiritual Life 
“Mendicants, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of fawning or flattering people, nor for the benefit of possessions, honor, or popularity, nor for the benefit of winning debates, nor thinking, ‘So let people know about me!’ 
This spiritual life is lived for the sake of restraint, giving up, fading away, and cessation. 
The Buddha taught the spiritual life 
not because of tradition, 
but for the sake of restraint and giving up, 
and because it culminates in extinguishment. 
This is the path followed by the big-hearted, 
the great seers. 
Those who practice it 
as it was taught by the Buddha, 
doing the teacher’s bidding, 
make an end of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.26 
3. At Uruvelā 
Deceivers 
“Mendicants, those mendicants who are deceivers and flatterers, pompous and fake, insolent, and scattered: those mendicants are no followers of mine. 
They’ve left this teaching and training, and they don’t achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. 
But those mendicants who are genuine, not flatterers, attentive, amenable, and serene: those mendicants are followers of mine. 
They haven’t left this teaching and training, and they achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. 
Those who are deceivers and flatterers, <j>pompous and fake, 
insolent and scattered: 
these don’t grow in the teaching 
that was taught by the perfected Buddha. 
But those who are genuine, not flatterers, attentive, 
amenable, and serene: 
these do grow in the teaching 
that was taught by the perfected Buddha.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.27 
3. At Uruvelā 
Contentment 
“Mendicants, these four trifles are easy to find and are blameless. 
What four? 
Rag-robes … 
A lump of almsfood … 
Lodgings at the root of a tree … 
Rancid urine as medicine … 
These four trifles are easy to find and are blameless. 
When a mendicant is content with trifles that are easy to find, they have one of the factors of the ascetic life, I say. 
When you’re content with what’s blameless, 
trifling, and easy to find, 
you don’t get upset 
about lodgings, robes, 
food, and drink, 
and you’re not obstructed anywhere. 
These qualities are said to be 
integral to the ascetic life. 
They’re mastered by one who trains, 
content and diligent.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.28 
3. At Uruvelā 
The Noble Traditions 
“Mendicants, these four noble traditions are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now, nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
What four? 
Firstly, a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, and praises such contentment. They don’t employ improper solicitation for the sake of a robe. They don’t worry if they don’t get a robe. And if they do get a robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawback, and understanding the escape. 
But they don’t glorify themselves or put others down on account of their contentment. 
A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble tradition. 
Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of almsfood … 

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings … 

Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys meditation and loves to meditate. They enjoy giving up and love to give up. 
But they don’t glorify themselves or put down others on account of their love for meditation and giving up. 
A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble tradition. 
These four noble traditions are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
When a mendicant possesses these four noble traditions, if they live in the east they prevail over discontent, and discontent doesn’t prevail over them. 
If they live in the west … 
the north … 
the south, they prevail over discontent, and discontent doesn’t prevail over them. 
Why is that? 
Because the attentive prevail over desire and discontent. 
Discontent cannot prevail over the attentive; 
the attentive are not prevailed over by discontent. 
The attentive can prevail over discontent, 
for the attentive are those who prevail over discontent. 
Who can hold back the dispeller, 
who’s cast aside all deeds? 
Like a pendant of Black Plum River gold, 
who is worthy to criticize them? 
Even the gods praise them, 
and by the Divinity, too, they’re praised.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.29 
3. At Uruvelā 
Footprints of the Dhamma 
“Mendicants, these four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
What four? 
Contentment, good will, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 

These four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
You should live with contentment, 
and a heart of good will, 
mindful, with unified mind, 
serene within.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.30 
3. At Uruvelā 
Wanderers 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain. 
Now at that time several very well-known wanderers were residing in the monastery of the wanderers on the bank of the Serpentine river. They included Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers. 
Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the wanderer’s monastery on the banks of the Serpentine river, He sat down on the seat spread out, and said to the wanderers: 
“Wanderers, these four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
What four? 
Contentment … 
Good will … Right mindfulness … Right immersion … 
These four footprints of the Dhamma are primordial, long-standing, traditional, and ancient. They are uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They’re not being corrupted now nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins don’t look down on them. 
Wanderers, if someone should say: 
‘I’ll deny this Dhamma footprint of contentment, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who covets sensual pleasures with acute lust.’ Then I’d say to them: 
‘Let them come, speak, and discuss. We’ll see how powerful they are.’ 
It is quite impossible to deny this Dhamma footprint of contentment, and point out a true ascetic or brahmin who covets sensual pleasures with acute lust. 
If someone should say: 
‘I’ll deny this Dhamma footprint of good will, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who has ill will and malicious intent.’ Then I’d say to them: 
‘Let them come, speak, and discuss. We’ll see how powerful they are.’ 
It is quite impossible to deny this Dhamma footprint of good will, and point out a true ascetic or brahmin who has ill will and malicious intent. 
If someone should say: 
‘I’ll deny this Dhamma footprint of right mindfulness, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who is unmindful, with no situational awareness.’ Then I’d say to them: 
‘Let them come, speak, and discuss. We’ll see how powerful they are.’ 
It is quite impossible to deny this Dhamma footprint of right mindfulness, and point out a true ascetic or brahmin who is unmindful, with no situational awareness. 
If someone should say: 
‘I’ll deny this Dhamma footprint of right immersion, and describe a true ascetic or brahmin who is scattered, with straying mind.’ Then I’d say to them: 
‘Let them come, speak, and discuss. We’ll see how powerful they are.’ 
It is quite impossible to deny this Dhamma footprint of right immersion, and point out a true ascetic or brahmin who is scattered, with straying mind. 
If anyone imagines they can criticize and reject these four footprints of the Dhamma, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on four legitimate grounds in this very life. 
What four? 
If you reject the Dhamma footprint of contentment, then you must honor and praise those ascetics and brahmins who covet sensual pleasures with acute lust. 
If you reject the Dhamma footprint of good will, you must honor and praise those ascetics and brahmins who have ill will and malicious intent. 
If you reject the Dhamma footprint of right mindfulness, then you must honor and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are unmindful, with no situational awareness. 
If you reject the Dhamma footprint of right immersion, you must honor and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are scattered, with straying minds. 
If anyone imagines they can criticize and reject these four footprints of the Dhamma, they deserve rebuttal and criticism on four legitimate grounds in this very life. 
Even those those who were loud and bold advocates of the doctrines of no-cause, inaction, and nihilism didn’t imagine that these four footprints of the Dhamma should be criticized or rejected. 
Why is that? 
For fear of being blamed, provoked, and faulted. 
One who has good will, ever mindful, 
serene within, 
training to remove desire, 
is called ‘a diligent one’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.31 
4. Situations 
Situations 
“Mendicants, there are these four situations. When these situations come about, any god or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire great and abundant wealth. 
What four? 
Living in a suitable region, relying on true persons, being rightly resolved in oneself, and past merit. 
These are the four situations. When these situations come about, any god or human who takes advantage of them will soon acquire great and abundant wealth. 
When a man lives in a suitable region, 
making friends with noble ones, 
possessing right resolve, 
and having merit from the past, 
grain, riches, fame, reputation, 
and happiness come to them.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.32 
4. Situations 
Inclusion 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of being inclusive. 
What four? 
Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. 
These are the four ways of being inclusive. 
Giving and kindly words, 
taking care here, 
and treating equally in worldly conditions, 
as they deserve in each case. 
These ways of being inclusive in the world 
are like a moving chariot’s linchpin. 
If there were no such ways of being inclusive, 
neither mother nor father 
would be respected and honored 
for what they’ve done for their children. 
But since these ways of being inclusive do exist, 
the astute do regard them well, 
so they achieve greatness 
and are praised.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.33 
4. Situations 
The Lion 
“Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his den, 
yawns, 
surveys the four quarters, 
and roars his lion’s roar three times. 
Then he sets out on the hunt. 
And the animals who hear the roar of the lion, king of beasts, are typically filled with fear, awe, and terror. 
They return to their lairs, be they in a hole, the water, or a wood; and the birds take to the air. 
Even the royal elephants, bound with strong harnesses in the villages, towns, and capital cities, break apart their bonds, and urinate and defecate in terror as they flee here and there. 
That’s how powerful is the lion, king of beasts, over animals, how illustrious and mighty. 
In the same way, when a Realized One arises in the world—perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed—he teaches the Dhamma: 
‘Such is substantial reality, such is the origin of substantial reality, such is the cessation of substantial reality, such is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.’ 
Now, there are gods who are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy, lasting long in their divine palaces. When they hear this teaching by the Realized One, they’re typically filled with fear, awe, and terror. 
‘Oh no! It turns out we’re impermanent, though we thought we were permanent! 
It turns out we don’t last, though we thought we were everlasting! 
It turns out we’re transient, though we thought we were eternal! 
It turns out that we’re impermanent, not lasting, transient, and included within substantial reality.’ 
That’s how powerful is the Realized One in the world with its gods, how illustrious and mighty. 
The Buddha, the unrivaled teacher 
in all the world with its gods, 
rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma 
from his own insight: 
substantial reality, its cessation, 
the origin of substantial reality, 
and the noble eightfold path 
that leads to the stilling of suffering. 
And then the long-lived gods, 
so beautiful and famous, 
are afraid and full of terror, 
like the other beasts when they hear a lion. 
‘We haven’t passed beyond substantial reality! 
It turns out we’re impermanent!’ 
So they say when they hear the word 
of the perfected one, free and unaffected.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.34 
4. Situations 
The Best Kinds of Confidence 
“Mendicants, these four kinds of confidence are the best. 
What four? 
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings—be they footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless; with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor non-perception. 
Those who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence in the best. 
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. 
The noble eightfold path is said to be the best of all conditioned things. 
Those who have confidence in the noble eightfold path have confidence in the best. 
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. 
Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst, the abolishing of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. 
Those who have confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best. 
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. 
The Saṅgha of the Realized One’s disciples is said to be the best of all communities and groups. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. 
Those who have confidence in the Saṅgha have confidence in the best. 
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best. 
These are the four best kinds of confidence. 
For those who, knowing the best teaching, 
base their confidence on the best—
confident in the best Awakened One, 
supremely worthy of a religious donation; 
confident in the best teaching, 
the bliss of fading and stilling; 
confident in the best Saṅgha, 
the supreme field of merit—
giving gifts to the best, 
the best of merit grows: 
the best lifespan, beauty, 
fame, reputation, happiness, and strength. 
An intelligent person gives to the best, 
settled on the best teaching. 
When they become a god or human, 
they rejoice at reaching the best.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.35 
4. Situations 
With Vassakāra 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground. 
Then Vassakāra the brahmin, a chief minister of Magadha, went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“Worthy Gotama, when someone has four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. 
What four? 
They are very learned in diverse fields of learning. 
They understand the meaning of diverse statements, saying: ‘This is what that statement means; that is what this statement means.’ 
They are mindful, able to remember and recollect what was said and done long ago. 
They are deft and tireless in household duties, understanding how to go about things in order to complete and organize the work. 
When someone possesses these four qualities we describe him as a great man with great wisdom. 
If the worthy Gotama agrees with me, please say so. 
If he disagrees, please say so.” 
“Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, 
but when someone has four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom. 
What four? 
It’s when someone practices for the welfare and happiness of the people. 
They’ve established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles of goodness and skillfulness. 
They think what they want to think, and don’t think what they don’t want to think. 
They consider what they want to consider, and don’t consider what they don’t want to consider. 
Thus they have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. 
They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. 
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
Brahmin, I neither agree nor disagree with you, 
but when someone possesses these four qualities I describe him as a great man with great wisdom.” 
“It’s incredible, worthy Gotama, it’s amazing! 
How well said this was by the worthy Gotama! 
And we will remember the worthy Gotama as someone who possesses these four qualities. 
For the worthy Gotama practices for the welfare and happiness of the people … 

The worthy Gotama has achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. 
The worthy Gotama gets the four absorptions … when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. 
The worthy Gotama has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. He lives having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.” 
“Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. 
Nevertheless, I will answer you. 
For I do practice for the welfare and happiness of the people … 

I have achieved mental mastery of the paths of thought. 
I do get the four absorptions … when I want, without trouble or difficulty. 
I have realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. I live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
He discovered release from the snare of death 
for all beings, 
and explained the system of the teaching 
for the welfare of gods and humans. 
When they see him or hear him, 
many people become confident. 
He is skilled in what is the path <j>and what is not the path, 
he has completed the task <j>and is free of defilements. 
The Buddha, bearing his final body, 
is called ‘a great man, of great wisdom’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.36 
4. Situations 
Doṇa 
At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Ukkaṭṭhā and Setavyā, 
as was the brahmin Doṇa. 
Doṇa saw that the Buddha’s footprints had thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and hubs, complete in every detail. 
It occurred to him, 
“Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! 
Surely these couldn’t be the footprints of a human being?” 
The Buddha had left the road and sat at the root of a tree cross-legged, setting his body straight, and establishing mindfulness in his presence. 
Then Doṇa, following the Buddha’s footprints, saw him sitting at the tree root—impressive and inspiring, with peaceful faculties and heart, attained to the highest self-control and serenity, like an elephant with tamed, guarded, and controlled faculties. 
He went up to the Buddha and said to him: 
“Sir, might you be a god?” 
“I will not be a god, brahmin.” 
“Might you be a centaur?” 
“I will not be a centaur.” 
“Might you be a spirit?” 
“I will not be a spirit.” 
“Might you be a human?” 
“I will not be a human.” 
“When asked whether you might be a god, centaur, spirit, or human, 
you answer that you will not be any of these. 

So what then might you be?” 
“Brahmin, if I had not given up defilements I might have become a god … a centaur … a spirit … or a human. But I have given up those defilements, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so they are unable to arise in the future. 

Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to it. 
In the same way, though I was born and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, unsullied by the world. 
Remember me, brahmin, as a Buddha. 
I could have been reborn as a god, 
or as a centaur flying through the sky. 
I could have become a spirit, 
or returned as a human. 
But I’ve ended those defilements, 
they’re blown away and mown down. 
Like a graceful lotus, 
to which water does not cling, 
the world doesn’t cling to me, 
and so, brahmin, I am a Buddha.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.37 
4. Situations 
Non-decline 
“Mendicants, a mendicant who has four qualities can’t decline, and has drawn near to extinguishment. 
What four? 
A mendicant is accomplished in ethics, guards the sense doors, eats in moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness. 
And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they’ve undertaken. 
That’s how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics. 
And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? 
When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. 
Hearing a sound with their ears … 
Smelling an odor with their nose … 
Tasting a flavor with their tongue … 
Feeling a touch with their body … 
Knowing an idea with their mind, they don’t get caught up in the features and details. 
If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. 
That’s how a mendicant guards the sense doors. 
And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? 
It’s when a mendicant reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 
‘Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.’ 
That’s how a mendicant eats in moderation. 
And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? 
It’s when a mendicant practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind from obstacles. 
In the first watch of the night, they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. 
In the middle watch, they lie down in the lion’s posture—on the right side, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up. 
In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. 
This is how a mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness. 
A mendicant who possesses these four qualities can’t decline, and has drawn near to extinguishment. 
Established in ethics, 
restrained in the sense faculties, 
eating in moderation, 
and dedicated to wakefulness; 
a mendicant lives like this, with keen energy, 
tireless all night and day, 
developing skillful qualities, 
for the sake of sanctuary from the yoke. 
A mendicant who loves diligence, 
seeing fear in negligence, 
can’t decline, 
and has drawn near to extinguishment.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.38 
4. Situations 
Withdrawn 
“Mendicants, a mendicant has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical process, and is said to be ‘withdrawn’. 
And how has a mendicant cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth? 
Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. For example: 
the cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are one and the same, or the soul is one thing, the body another; after death, a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. 
A mendicant has cast out, cast aside, thrown out, discarded, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these. 
That’s how a mendicant has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth. 
And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? 
It’s when they’ve given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual path. 
That’s how a mendicant has totally given up searching. 
And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? 
It’s when, with the giving up of pleasure and pain and the disappearance of former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. 
That’s how a mendicant has stilled the physical process. 
And how is a mendicant withdrawn? 
It’s when they’ve given up the conceit ‘I am’, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it’s unable to arise in the future. 
That’s how a mendicant is withdrawn. 
A mendicant has cast aside idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has stilled the physical process, and is said to be ‘withdrawn’. 
The search for sensual pleasures, for a good rebirth, 
and the search for a spiritual path; 
the holding tight to the thought, ‘this is the truth’, 
and the mass of grounds for views—
for one detached from all lusts, 
freed by the ending of craving, 
that searching has been relinquished, 
and those grounds for views eradicated. 
That mendicant is peaceful and mindful, 
a tranquil champion. 
And when they’re awakened <j>by comprehending conceit, 
they’re called ‘withdrawn’.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.39 
4. Situations 
With Ujjaya 
Then Ujjaya the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. 
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha: 
“Does the worthy Gotama praise sacrifice?” 
“Brahmin, I don’t praise all sacrifices. 
Nor do I criticize all sacrifices. 
Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. 
I criticize that kind of violent sacrifice. 
Why is that? 
Because neither perfected ones nor those who are on the path to perfection will attend such a violent sacrifice. 
But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. 
I praise that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an propitious sacrifice. 
Why is that? 
Because perfected ones and those who are on the path to perfection will attend such a non-violent sacrifice. 
Horse sacrifice, human sacrifice, 
the sacrifices of the ‘casting of the yoke-pin’, 
the ‘royal soma drinking’, and the ‘unbarred’—
these huge violent sacrifices yield no great fruit. 
The great sages of right comportment 
don’t attend sacrifices 
where goats, sheep, and cattle, 
and various creatures are killed. 
But the great sages of right comportment 
do attend those sacrifices 
that are non-violent and propitious, 
where goats, sheep, and cattle, 
and various creatures are not killed. 

An intelligent person should sacrifice like this, 
for this sacrifice is very fruitful. 
For a sponsor of sacrifices like this, 
things get better, not worse. 
Such a sacrifice is truly abundant, 
and even the deities are pleased.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.40 
4. Situations 
With Udāyī 
Then Udāyī the brahmin went up to the Buddha, … and asked him, 
“Does the worthy Gotama praise sacrifice?” 
“Brahmin, I don’t praise all sacrifices. 
Nor do I criticize all sacrifices. … 
Take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of animals are slaughtered. 
I don’t praise that kind of violent sacrifice. 

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of animals are not slaughtered. 
I do praise that kind of non-violent sacrifice; for example, a regular gift as an propitious sacrifice. 

The kind of sacrifice that’s allowable and timely, 
well prepared and non-violent, 
is attended by 
disciplined spiritual practitioners. 
The Buddhas—<j>who have drawn back the veil from the world, 
passing beyond time and rebirth—
praise this sacrifice, 
as they are expert in sacrifice. 
When you’ve prepared a suitable offering, 
whether as sacrifice or for ancestors, 
sacrifice it with confident heart, 
in the fertile field of spiritual practitioners. 
When it’s well-gotten, well-offered, <j>and well-sacrificed, 
to those worthy of a religious donation, 
a sacrifice is truly abundant, 
and even the deities are pleased. 
When an intelligent, faithful person, 
sacrifices like this, with a mind of letting go, 
that astute one is reborn 
in a happy, pleasing world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.41 
5. With Rohitassa 
Ways of Developing Immersion Further 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of developing immersion further. 
What four? 
There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in this life. 
There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision. 
There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. 
There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements. 
And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in this life? 
It’s when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption … second absorption … third absorption … fourth absorption. 
This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in this life. 
And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision? 
It’s when a mendicant applies their mind to the perception of light, focusing on the perception of day: 
as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. 
And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that’s full of radiance. 
This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision. 
And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness? 
It’s when a mendicant knows feelings as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. 
They know perceptions as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. 
This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. 
And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements? 
It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 
‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. 
Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. 
Such is perception, such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. 
Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. 
Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ 
This is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements. 
These are the four ways of developing immersion further. 
And it was in this connection that I said in ‘The Way to the Far Shore’, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’: 
‘Having appraised the world high and low, 
there is nothing in the world that disturbs them. 
Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled, <j>with no need for hope, 
they’ve crossed over rebirth and old age, I declare.’” 

Numbered Discourses 4.42 
5. With Rohitassa 
Ways of Answering Questions 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of answering questions. 
What four? 
There is a question that should be answered categorically. 
There is a question that should be answered analytically. 
There is a question that should be answered with a counter-question. 
There is a question that should be set aside. 
These are the four ways of answering questions. 
One is stated categorically, 
another analytically, 
a third with a counter-question, 
while a fourth is set aside. 
That sort of mendicant, <j>who knows each of these, 
in line with good principles, 
is said to be skilled 
in the four kinds of questions. 
They’re intimidating, hard to defeat, 
deep, and hard to crush. 
They’re expert in both 
what the meaning is and what it isn’t. 
Shunning what is not the meaning, 
an astute person grasps the meaning. 
An attentive one, comprehending the meaning, 
is said to be astute.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.43 
5. With Rohitassa 
Valuing Anger 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
People who value anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor rather than the true teaching. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
These four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
People who value the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
Mendicants who value anger and denigration, 
possessions and honor, 
don’t grow in the teaching 
that was taught by the perfected Buddha. 
But those who value the true teaching, 
who have lived it, and are living it now, 
these do grow in the teaching 
that was taught by the perfected Buddha.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.44 
5. With Rohitassa 
Valuing Anger (2nd) 
“Mendicants, these four things oppose the true teaching. 
What four? 
Valuing anger, denigration, material things, and honor rather than the true teaching. 
These are the four things that oppose the true teaching. 
These four things are the true teaching. 
What four? 
Valuing the true teaching rather than anger, denigration, material things, and honor. 
These are the four things that are the true teaching. 
A mendicant who values anger and denigration, 
possessions and honor, 
doesn’t grow in the true teaching, 
like a rotten seed in a good field. 
But those who value the true teaching, 
who have lived it, and are living it now, 
these do grow in the teaching, 
like well-watered herbs.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.45 
5. With Rohitassa 
With Rohitassa 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Then, late at night, the glorious godling Rohitassa, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, is it possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn?” 
“Reverend, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn.” 
“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, 
how well said this was by the Buddha. 

Once upon a time, I was a seer called Rohitassa, son of the benefactors. I was a sky-walker with psychic powers. 
I was as fast as a light arrow easily shot across the shadow of a palm tree by a well-trained expert archer with a strong bow. 
My stride was such that it could span from the eastern ocean to the western ocean. 
Having such speed and stride, this wish came to me: 
‘I will reach the end of the world by traveling.’ 
I traveled for my whole lifespan of a hundred years—pausing only to eat and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness—and I passed away along the way, never reaching the end of the world. 
It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing, 
how well said this was by the Buddha.” 

“Reverend, I say it’s not possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn. 
But I also say there’s no making an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world. 
For it is in this fathom-long carcass with its perception and mind that I describe the world, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. 
The end of the world can never 
be reached by traveling. 
But without reaching the end of the world, 
there’s no release from suffering. 
So an intelligent person, understanding the world, 
has completed the spiritual journey, <j>and gone to the end of the world. 
Assuaged, knowing the end of the world, 
they do not hope for this world or the next.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.46 
5. With Rohitassa 
With Rohitassa (2nd) 
Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants: 
“Tonight, the glorious godling Rohitassa, lighting up the entire Jeta’s Grove, came to me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 
‘Sir, is it possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by traveling to a place where there’s no being born, growing old, dying, passing away, or being reborn?’ … 
<em>(The rest is the same as the previous discourse, AN 4.45.)</em> 

Numbered Discourses 4.47 
5. With Rohitassa 
Very Far Apart 
“Mendicants, these four things are very far apart. 
What four? 
The firmament and the earth. … 

The near and the far shore of the ocean. … 

Where the sun rises and where it sets. … 

The teaching of the virtuous and the teaching of the wicked. … 

These are the four things very far apart. 
The firmament is far from the earth; 
they say the other shore of the ocean is far; 
and where the sun rises is far 
from where that beacon sets. 
But even further apart than that, they say, 
is the teaching of the virtuous from the wicked. 
The company of the virtuous is reliable; 
as long as it remains, it stays the same. 
But the company of the wicked is fickle, 
and so the teaching of the virtuous <j>is far from the wicked.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.48 
5. With Rohitassa 
With Visākha, Pañcāli’s Son 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Now at that time Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son, was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk. His words were polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent. 
Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, 
and addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants, who was educating, encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk?” 
“Sir, it was Venerable Visākha, Pañcāli’s son.” 
Then the Buddha said to Visākha, 
“Good, good, Visākha! 
It’s good that you educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with words that are polished, clear, articulate, expressing the meaning, comprehensive, and independent. 
Though an astute person is mixed up with fools, 
they don’t know unless he speaks. 
But when he speaks they know, 
he’s teaching the state free of death. 
He should speak and illustrate the teaching, 
holding up the banner of the seers. 
Words well spoken are the seers’ banner, 
for the teaching is the banner of the seers.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.49 
5. With Rohitassa 
Perversions 
“Mendicants, there are these four perversions of perception, thought, and view. 
What four? 
Taking impermanence as permanence. 
Taking suffering as happiness. 
Taking not-self as self. 
Taking ugliness as beauty. 
These are the four perversions of perception, thought, and view. 
There are these four corrections of perception, thought, and view. 
What four? 
Taking impermanence as impermanence. 
Taking suffering as suffering. 
Taking not-self as not-self. 
Taking ugliness as ugliness. 
These are the four corrections of perception, thought, and view. 
Perceiving impermanence as permanence, 
suffering as happiness, 
not-self as self, 
and ugliness as beauty—
sentient beings are ruined by wrong view, 
deranged, out of their minds. 
Yoked by Māra’s yoke, these people 
find no sanctuary from the yoke. 
Sentient beings continue to transmigrate, 
with ongoing birth and death. 
But when the Buddhas arise 
in the world, those beacons 
reveal this teaching, 
that leads to the stilling of suffering. 
When a wise person hears them, 
they get their mind back. 
Seeing impermanence as impermanence, 
suffering as suffering, 
not-self as not-self, 
and ugliness as ugliness—
taking up right view, 
they’ve risen above all suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.50 
5. With Rohitassa 
Corruptions 
“Mendicants, these four corruptions obscure the sun and moon, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. 
What four? 
Stormclouds … 
Fog … 
Smoke … 
An eclipse of Rāhu, lord of titans … 
These are four corruptions that obscure the sun and moon, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. 
In the same way, these four things corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. 
What four? 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who drink beer and wine, not refraining from drinking beer and wine. 
This is the first thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have sex, not refraining from sex. 
This is the second thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who accept gold and currency, not refraining from receiving gold and currency. 
This is the third thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … 
There are some ascetics and brahmins who make a living the wrong way, not refraining from wrong livelihood. 
This is the fourth thing that corrupts ascetics and brahmins … 
These are four things that corrupt ascetics and brahmins, so they don’t shine and glow and radiate. 
Some ascetics and brahmins 
are plagued by greed and hate; 
men shrouded by ignorance, 
enjoying things that seem pleasant. 
Drinking beer and wine, 
having sex, 
accepting currency and gold: 
they’re ignorant. 
Some ascetics and brahmins 
make a living the wrong way. 
These corruptions were spoken of 
by the Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun. 
When corrupted by these, 
some ascetics and brahmins 
don’t shine or glow. 
Impure, dirty creatures, 
shrouded in darkness, 
bondservants of craving, full of attachments, 
swell the horrors of the charnel ground, 
taking up future lives.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.51 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Overflowing Merit 
At Sāvatthī. 
“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. 
What four? 
When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart while using a robe, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … 
When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart while eating almsfood, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … 
When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart while using lodgings, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … 
When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion of heart while using medicines and supplies for the sick, the overflowing of merit for the donor is limitless … 
These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. 
When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and goodness, it’s not easy to grasp how much merit they have by saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit … that leads to happiness. It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit. 
It’s like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It’s not easy to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of gallons there are. It’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water. 
In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit it’s simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit. 
Hosts of people use the rivers, 
and though the rivers are many, 
all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean, 
the cruel sea that’s home to precious gems. 
In the same way, when a person gives <j>food, drink, and clothes; 
and they’re a giver of beds, seats, and mats—
the streams of merit reach that astute person, 
as the rivers bring their waters to the sea.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.52 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Overflowing Merit (2nd) 
“Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. 
What four? 
It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
This is the first kind of overflowing merit … 
Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the teaching: 
‘The teaching is well explained by the Buddha—apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for themselves.’ 
This is the second kind of overflowing merit … 
Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 
‘The Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples is practicing the way that’s good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight individual persons. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha’s disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.’ 
This is the third kind of overflowing merit … 
Furthermore, a noble disciple’s ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. 
This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit … 
These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. 
Whoever has faith in the Realized One, 
unwavering and well grounded; 
whose ethical conduct is good, 
praised and loved by the noble ones; 
who has confidence in the Saṅgha, 
and correct view: 
they’re said to be prosperous, 
their life is not in vain. 
So let the wise devote themselves 
to faith, ethical behavior, 
confidence, and insight into the teaching, 
remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.53 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Living Together (1st) 
At one time the Buddha was traveling along the road between Madhurā and Verañjā, 
as were several householders, both women and men. 
The Buddha left the road and sat at the root of a tree, 
where the householders saw him. 
They went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them: 
“Householders, there are four ways of living together. 
What four? 
A male zombie living with a female zombie; 
a male zombie living with a goddess; 
a god living with a female zombie; 
a god living with a goddess. 
And how does a male zombie live with a female zombie? 
It’s when the husband kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies, and consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. He’s unethical, of bad character, living at home with his heart full of the stain of stinginess, abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. 
And the wife is also … unethical, of bad character … 
That’s how a male zombie lives with a female zombie. 
And how does a male zombie live with a goddess? 
It’s when the husband … is unethical, of bad character … 
But the wife doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. She’s ethical, of good character, living at home with her heart rid of the stain of stinginess, not abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. 
That’s how a male zombie lives with a goddess. 
And how does a god live with a female zombie? 
It’s when the husband … is ethical, of good character … 
But the wife … is unethical, of bad character … 
That’s how a god lives with a female zombie. 
And how does a god live with a goddess? 
It’s when the husband … is ethical, of good character … 
And the wife is also … ethical, of good character … 
That’s how a god lives with a goddess. 
These are the four ways of living together. 
When both are unethical, 
miserly and abusive, 
then wife and husband 
live together as zombies. 
When the husband is unethical, 
miserly and abusive, 
but the wife is ethical, 
bountiful, rid of stinginess, 
she’s a goddess living 
with a zombie for a husband. 
When the husband is ethical, 
bountiful, rid of stinginess, 
but the wife is unethical, 
miserly and abusive, 
she’s a zombie living 
with a god for a husband. 
When both are faithful and bountiful, 
disciplined, living righteously, 
then wife and husband 
say nice things to each other. 
Their needs are amply satisfied, 
so they live at ease. 
Their enemies are downhearted, 
when both are equal in ethics. 
Having practiced the teaching here, 
both equal in precepts and observances, 
they delight in the heavenly realm, 
enjoying all the pleasures they desire.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.54 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Living Together (2nd) 
“Mendicants, there are four ways of living together. 
What four? 
A male zombie living with a female zombie; 
a male zombie living with a goddess; 
a god living with a female zombie; 
a god living with a goddess. 
And how does a male zombie live with a female zombie? 
It’s when the husband kills living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct; he uses speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; and he’s covetous, malicious, and has wrong view. He’s unethical, of bad character, living at home with his heart full of the stain of stinginess, abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. 
And the wife is also … unethical, of bad character … 
That’s how a male zombie lives with a female zombie. 
And how does a male zombie live with a goddess? 
It’s when the husband … is unethical, of bad character … 
But the wife doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. She doesn’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And she’s contented, kind-hearted, with right view. She’s ethical, of good character, living at home with her heart rid of the stain of stinginess, not abusing and insulting ascetics and brahmins. 
That’s how a male zombie lives with a goddess. 
And how does a god live with a female zombie? 
It’s when the husband … is ethical, of good character … 
But the wife … is unethical, of bad character … 
That’s how a god lives with a female zombie. 
And how does a god live with a goddess? 
It’s when the husband … is ethical, of good character … 
And the wife is also … ethical, of good character … 
That’s how a god lives with a goddess. 
These are the four ways of living together.” … 

Numbered Discourses 4.55 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Equality (1st) 
So I have heard. 
At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile’s Bellow, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā’s Wood. 
Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the householder Nakula’s father, where he sat on the seat spread out. 
Then the householder Nakula’s father and the housewife Nakula’s mother went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Nakula’s father said to the Buddha, 
“Sir, ever since we were both young, and Nakula’s mother was given to me in marriage, I can’t recall betraying her even in thought, still less in deed. 
We want to see each other in both this life and the next.” 
Then Nakula’s mother said to the Buddha, 
“Sir, ever since we were both young, and I was given in marriage to Nakula’s father, I can’t recall betraying him even in thought, still less in deed. 
We want to see each other in both this life and the next.” 
“Householders, if wife and husband want to see each other in both this life and the next, they should be equals in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. 
When both are faithful and bountiful, 
disciplined, living righteously, 
then wife and husband 
say nice things to each other. 
Their needs are amply satisfied, 
so they live at ease. 
Their enemies are downhearted, 
when both are equal in ethics. 
Having practiced the teaching here, 
both equal in precepts and observances, 
they delight in the heavenly realm, 
enjoying all the pleasures they desire.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.56 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Equality (2nd) 
“Mendicants, if wife and husband want to see each other in both this life and the next, they should be equals in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. …” 

Numbered Discourses 4.57 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Suppavāsā 
At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where they have a town named Pajjanika. 
Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of Suppavāsā the Koliyan, where he sat on the seat spread out. 
Then Suppavāsā served and satisfied the Buddha with her own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods. 
When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she sat down to one side. 
The Buddha said to her: 
“Suppavāsā, when a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients four things. 
What four? 
Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. 
Giving long life, she has long life as a god or human. 
Giving beauty, she has beauty as a god or human. 
Giving happiness, she has happiness as a god or human. 
Giving strength, she has strength as a god or human. 
When a noble disciple gives food, she gives the recipients these four things. 
When she gives well-prepared food, 
pure, fine, and full of flavor, 
that offering—given to the sincere, 
who have good conduct, and are big-hearted—
joins merit to merit. It’s very fruitful, 
and is praised by those who know the world. 
Those who recall such sacrifices, 
live in the world full of inspiration. 
They’ve driven out the stain of stinginess, <j>root and all, 
blameless, they go to a heavenly place.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.58 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Sudatta 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Householder, when a noble disciple gives food, they give the recipients four things. 
What four? 
Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. 
Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human. … 
Giving beauty … happiness … strength … 
When a noble disciple gives food, they give the recipients these four things. 
Carefully giving food at the right time, 
to those who are disciplined, <j>eating only what others give, 
you provide them with four things: 
long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. 
A person who gives long life, beauty, 
happiness, and strength, 
has long life and fame 
wherever they’re reborn.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.59 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Food 
“Mendicants, when a donor gives food, they give the recipients four things. 
What four? 
Long life, beauty, happiness, and strength. …” 

Numbered Discourses 4.60 
6. Overflowing Merit 
Lay Practice 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Householder, when a noble disciple does four things they are practicing appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven. 
What four? 
It’s when a noble disciple serves the mendicant Saṅgha with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. 
When a noble disciple does these four things they are practicing appropriately for a layperson, which brings fame and leads to heaven. 
Those who are astute practice the way 
that’s appropriate for laypeople. 
They provide those who are ethical 
and rightly comported with robes, 
almsfood, lodgings, 
and supplies for the sick. 
Their merit always grows 
by day and by night. 
They pass on to a place in heaven, 
having done excellent deeds.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.61 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Fitting Deeds 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Householder, these four things, which are likable, desirable, and agreeable are hard to get in the world. 
What four? 
The first thing is the wish: ‘May wealth come to me by legitimate means!’ 
The second thing, having got wealth by legitimate means, is the wish: ‘May fame come to me, together with my family and teachers.’ 
The third thing, having got wealth and fame, is the wish: ‘May I live long, keeping alive for a long time!’ 
The fourth thing, having got wealth, fame, and long life, is the wish: ‘When my body breaks up, after death, may I be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm!’ 
These are the four things, which are likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world. 
These next four things lead to the getting of those four things. 
What four? 
Accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. 
And what is accomplishment in faith? 
It’s when a noble disciple has faith in the Realized One’s awakening: 
‘That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those fit for training, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.’ 
This is called accomplishment in faith. 
And what is accomplishment in ethics? 
It’s when a noble disciple doesn’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. 
This is called accomplishment in ethics. 
And what is accomplishment in generosity? 
It’s when a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. 
This is called accomplishment in generosity. 
And what is accomplishment in wisdom? 
When your heart is mastered by covetousness and immoral greed, you do what you shouldn’t, and fail to do what you should. 
Your fame and happiness fall to dust. 
When your heart is mastered by ill will … 

dullness and drowsiness … 

restlessness and remorse … 

doubt, you do what you shouldn’t, and fail to do what you should. 
Your fame and happiness fall to dust. 
Knowing that ‘covetousness and immoral greed are corruptions of the mind’, that noble disciple gives them up. 
Knowing that ‘ill will …’ … 
‘dullness and drowsiness …’ … 
‘restlessness and remorse …’ … 
‘doubt is a corruption of the mind’, that noble disciple gives it up. 
When a noble disciple has given up these things, 

they’re called ‘a noble disciple of great wisdom, of widespread wisdom, who sees what matters, and is accomplished in wisdom’. 
This is called accomplishment in wisdom. 
These are the four things that lead to the getting of the four things, which are likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world. 
There are four fitting deeds that a noble disciple does with the legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. 
What four? 
To start with, with his legitimate wealth he makes himself happy and pleased, keeping himself properly happy. 
He makes his mother and father happy … 
He makes his children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff happy … 
He makes his friends and colleagues happy … 
This is his first expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he defends himself against threats from such things as fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved heirs. 
He keeps himself safe. 
This is his second expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings: 
to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. 
This is his third expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins—those who refrain from intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and gentleness, and who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves—that’s conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. 
This is his fourth expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
’these are the four fitting deeds that a noble disciple does with the legitimate wealth he has earned by his efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. 
Whatever wealth is spent on something other than these four fitting deeds is said to not be expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
But whatever wealth is spent on these four fitting deeds is said to be expenditure in an appropriate sphere on a deserved and fitting cause. 
‘I’ve enjoyed my wealth, <j>supporting those who depend on me; 
I’ve overcome losses; 
I’ve given uplifting religious donations; 
and made the five spirit-offerings. 
I have served the ethical and 
disciplined spiritual practitioners. 
I’ve achieved the purpose 
for which an astute layperson 
wishes to gain wealth. 
I don’t regret what I’ve done.’ 
A mortal man who recollects this 
stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones. 
They’re praised in this life, 
and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.62 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Debtlessness 
Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him: 
“Householder, these four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion. 
What four? 
The happiness of ownership, using wealth, debtlessness, and blamelessness. 
And what is the happiness of ownership? 
It’s when a gentleman owns legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. 
When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. 
This is called ‘the happiness of ownership’. 
And what is the happiness of using wealth? 
It’s when a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth, and makes merit with it. 
When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. 
This is called ‘the happiness of using wealth’. 
And what is the happiness of debtlessness? 
It’s when a gentleman owes no debt, large or small, to anyone. 
When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. 
This is called ‘the happiness of debtlessness’. 
And what is the happiness of blamelessness? 
It’s when a noble disciple has blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When he reflects on this, he’s filled with pleasure and happiness. 
This is called ‘the happiness of blamelessness’. 
These four kinds of happiness can be earned by a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion. 
Knowing the happiness of debtlessness, 
and the extra happiness of possession, 
a mortal enjoying the happiness of using wealth, 
then discerns clearly with wisdom. 
Discerning clearly, a clever person knows 
both kinds of happiness: 
the other kind is not worth a sixteenth part 
of the happiness of blamelessness.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.63 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Living with Divinity 
“Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with divinity. 
A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors. 
A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the elder gods. 
A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods. 
‘Divinity’ is a term for your parents. 
‘First tutors’ is a term for your parents. 
‘Elder gods’ is a term for your parents. 
‘Worthy of an offering dedicated to the gods’ is a term for your parents. 
Why is that? 
Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world. 
Parents are said to be ‘Divinity’ 
and ‘first tutors’. 
They’re worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods <j>from their children, 
for they love their offspring. 
Therefore an astute person 
would revere them and honor them 
with food and drink, 
clothes and bedding, 
by anointing and bathing, 
and by washing their feet. 
Because they look after 
their parents like this, 
they’re praised in this life by the astute, 
and they depart to rejoice in heaven.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.64 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Hell 
“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Killing, stealing, 
telling lies, 
and visiting others’ wives: 
astute people don’t praise these things.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.65 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Appearance 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
There are those whose estimation of and confidence in others is based on their appearance, on their voice, on their mortification, and on principle. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
Those who judge on appearance, 
and those swayed by a voice, 
are full of desire and greed; 
those people just don’t understand. 
Not knowing what’s inside, 
nor seeing what’s outside, 
the fool shut in on every side, 
gets carried away by a voice. 
Not knowing what’s inside, 
but discerning what’s outside, 
seeing the fruit outside, 
they’re also carried away by a voice. 
Understanding what’s inside, 
and discerning what’s outside, 
seeing without hindrances, 
they don’t get carried away by a voice.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.66 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Greedy 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The greedy, the hateful, the delusional, and the conceited. 
These are the four individuals found in the world. 
Full of desire for desirable things, 
enjoying things that seem pleasant, 
beings veiled by delusion 
only tighten their bonds. 
Born of greed, born of hate, 
born of delusion: the ignorant 
do unskillful deeds 
that afflict and produce pain. 
If you act out of these qualities, <j>that’s what you become. 
But men shrouded by ignorance, 
are blind, with no eyes to see, 
and they never imagine that this could be so.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.67 
7. Fitting Deeds 
The Snake King 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. 
Now, at that time a monk in Sāvatthī passed away due to a snake bite. 
Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, 
“Sir, a monk in Sāvatthī has passed away due to a snake bite.” 
“Mendicants, that monk mustn’t have spread a mind of love to the four royal snake families. 
If he had, he wouldn’t have died due to a snake bite. 
What four? 
The royal snake families of Virūpakkha, Erāpatha, Chabyāputta, and Kaṇhāgotamaka. … 

Mendicants, I urge you to spread a mind of love to the four royal snake families, for your own safety, security, and protection. 
I love the Virūpakkhas, 
the Erāpathas I love, 
I love the Chabyāputtas, 
the Kaṇhāgotamakas I love. 
I love the footless creatures, 
the two-footed I love, 
I love the four-footed, 
the many-footed I love. 
May the footless not harm me! 
May I not be harmed by the two-footed! 
May the four-footed not harm me! 
May I not be harmed by the many-footed! 
All sentient beings, all living things, 
all creatures, every one: 
may they see only nice things, 
may bad not come to anyone. 
The Buddha is immeasurable, 
the teaching is immeasurable, 
the Saṅgha is immeasurable. 
But limited are crawling things, 
snakes and scorpions, centipedes, 
spiders and lizards and mice. 
I’ve made this safeguard, I’ve made this protection: 
go away, creatures! 
And so I revere the Blessed One, 
I revere the seven perfectly awakened Buddhas.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.68 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Devadatta 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain, not long after Devadatta had left. 
There the Buddha spoke to the mendicants about Devadatta: 
“Possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta for his own ruin and downfall. 

It’s like a banana plant, 

or a bamboo, 

or a reed, all of which bear fruit to their own ruin and downfall … 

It’s like a mule, which becomes pregnant to its own ruin and downfall. 
In the same way, possessions, honor, and popularity came to Devadatta for his own ruin and downfall. 
The banana plant is destroyed by its own fruit, 
as are the bamboo and the reed. 
Honor destroys a reprobate, 
as pregnancy destroys a mule.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.69 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Effort 
“Mendicants, there are these four efforts. 
What four? 
The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to preserve. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to restrain? 
It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don’t arise. 
This is called the effort to restrain. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to give up? 
It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities are given up. 
This is called the effort to give up. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to develop? 
It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise. 
This is called the effort to develop. 
And what, mendicants, is the effort to preserve? 
It’s when you generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. 
This is called the effort to preserve. 
These are the four efforts. 
Restraint and giving up, 
development and preservation: 
these are the four efforts 
taught by the Kinsman of the Sun. 
Any mendicant who keenly applies these 
may attain the ending of suffering.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.70 
7. Fitting Deeds 
Unprincipled 
“At a time when kings are unprincipled, royal officials become unprincipled. 
When royal officials are unprincipled, brahmins and householders become unprincipled. 
When brahmins and householders are unprincipled, the people of town and country become unprincipled. 
When the people of town and country are unprincipled, the courses of the moon and sun become erratic. 
… the courses of the stars and constellations … 
the days and nights … 
the months and fortnights … 
the seasons and years become erratic. 
… the blowing of the winds becomes erratic and chaotic. 
… the deities are angered. 
… the heavens don’t provide enough rain. 
… the crops ripen erratically. 
When people eat crops that have ripened erratically, they become short-lived, ugly, weak, and sickly. 
At a time when kings are principled, royal officials become principled. 
… brahmins and householders … 
people of town and country become principled. 
When the people of town and country are principled, the courses of the sun and moon become regular. 
… the stars and constellations … 
the days and nights … 
the months and fortnights … 
the seasons and years become regular. 
… the blowing of the winds becomes regular and orderly. 
… the deities are not angered … 
… the heavens provide plenty of rain. 
When the heavens provide plenty of rain, the crops ripen well. 
When people eat crops that have ripened well, they become long-lived, beautiful, strong, and healthy. 
When cattle cross a river, 
if the bull goes off course, 
they all go off course, 
because their leader is off course. 
So it is for humans: 
when the one deemed chief 
behaves badly, 
what do you expect the rest to do? 
The whole country sleeps badly, 
when the king is unprincipled. 
When cattle cross a river, 
if the bull goes straight, 
they all go straight, 
because their leader is straight. 
So it is for humans: 
when the one deemed chief 
does the right thing, 
what do you expect the rest to do? 
The whole country sleeps at ease, 
when the king is just.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.71 
8. Sure Bet 
Effort 
“Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements. 
What four? 
It’s when a mendicant is ethical, learned, energetic, and wise. 
When a mendicant possesses these four things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.72 
8. Sure Bet 
Right View 
“Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements. 
What four? 
Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and right view. 
When a mendicant possesses these four things their practice is a sure bet, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.73 
8. Sure Bet 
A True Person 
“Mendicants, an untrue person can be known by four qualities. 
What four? 
To start with, an untrue person speaks ill of another even when not asked, let alone when asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak ill of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. 
That’s how to know that this is an untrue person. 
Furthermore, an untrue person doesn’t speak well of another even when asked, let alone when not asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak well of another without giving the full details, leaving many things out. 
That’s how to know that this is an untrue person. 
Furthermore, an untrue person doesn’t speak ill of themselves even when asked, let alone when not asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak ill of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many things out. 
That’s how to know that this is an untrue person. 
Furthermore, an untrue person speaks well of themselves even when not asked, let alone when asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak well of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. 
That’s how to know that this is an untrue person. 
An untrue person can be known by these four qualities. 
A true person can be known by four qualities. 
What four? 
To start with, a true person doesn’t speak ill of another even when asked, let alone when not asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak ill of another without giving the full details, leaving many things out. 
That’s how to know that this is a true person. 
Furthermore, a true person speaks well of another even when not asked, let alone when asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak well of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. 
That’s how to know that this is a true person. 
Furthermore, a true person speaks ill of themselves even when not asked, let alone when asked. 
But when led on by questions they speak ill of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. 
That’s how to know that this is a true person. 
Furthermore, a true person doesn’t speak well of themselves even when asked, let alone when not asked. 
But when summoned for questioning they speak well of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many things out. 
That’s how to know that this is a true person. 
A true person can be known by these four qualities. 
It’s like a bride on the day or night she’s first brought to her husband’s home. Right away she sets up a keen sense of conscience and prudence for her mother and father in law, her husband, and even the bondservants, workers, and staff. 
But after some time, because of living together and familiarity, she’ll even say to her mother and father in law, or to her husband: 
‘Go away! What would you know?’ 
In the same way, on the day or night a mendicant first goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, right away they set up a keen sense of conscience and prudence for the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and even the monastery workers and novices. 
But after some time, because of living together and familiarity, they’ll even say to their tutor or mentor: 
‘Go away! What would you know?’ 
So you should train like this: 
‘We will live with hearts like that of a newly wedded bride.’ 
That’s how you should train.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.74 
8. Sure Bet 
Best (1st) 
“Mendicants, these four things are the best. 
What four? 
The best ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. 
These are the four things that are the best.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.75 
8. Sure Bet 
Best (2nd) 
“Mendicants, these four things are the best. 
What four? 
The best form, feeling, perception, and existence. 
These are the four things that are the best.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.76 
8. Sure Bet 
At Kusinārā 
At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of sal trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the time of his full extinguishment. 
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, 
“Mendicants!” 
“Venerable sir,” they replied. 
The Buddha said this: 
“Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. So ask, mendicants! Don’t regret it later, thinking: 
‘We were in the Teacher’s presence and we weren’t able to ask the Buddha a question.’” 
When this was said, the mendicants kept silent. 
For a second time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: … 

For a second time, the mendicants kept silent. 
For a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: … 

For a third time, the mendicants kept silent. 
Then the Buddha said to the mendicants: 
“Mendicants, perhaps you don’t ask out of respect for the Teacher. So let a friend tell a friend.” 
When this was said, the mendicants kept silent. 
Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha: 
“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing! 
I am quite confident that there’s not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice.” 
“Ānanda, you speak from faith. But the Realized One knows that there’s not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the practice. 
Even the last of these five hundred mendicants is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, destined for awakening.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.77 
8. Sure Bet 
Unthinkable 
“Mendicants, these four things are unthinkable. They should not be thought about, and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or get frustrated. 
What four? 
The domain of the Buddhas … 

The domain of one in absorption … 

The results of deeds … 

Speculation about the world … 

These are the four unthinkable things. They should not be thought about, and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or get frustrated.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.78 
8. Sure Bet 
A Religious Donation 
“Mendicants, there are these four ways of purifying a religious donation. 
What four? 
There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the giver, not the recipient. 
There’s a religious donation that’s purified by the recipient, not the giver. 
There’s a religious donation that’s purified by neither the giver nor the recipient. 
There’s a religious donation that’s purified by both the giver and the recipient. 
And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the recipient? 
It’s when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the recipient is unethical, of bad character. 

And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the giver? 
It’s when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the recipient is ethical, of good character. 

And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the recipient? 
It’s when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of bad character. 

And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the recipient? 
It’s when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of good character. 

These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.79 
8. Sure Bet 
Business 
Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why for different people the same kind of business undertaking might fail, 
while another doesn’t meet expectations, 
another meets expectations, 
and another exceeds expectations?” 
“Sāriputta, take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. But they fail to give what’s requested. 
When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this place, whatever business they undertake fails. 
Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, but don’t meet expectations. 
When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this place, whatever business they undertake doesn’t meet expectations. 
Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, meeting expectations. 
When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this place, whatever business they undertake meets expectations. 
Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. They give what’s requested, exceeding expectations. 
When they’ve passed away from that life, if they’re reborn in this place, whatever business they undertake exceeds expectations. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why for different people the same kind of business undertaking might fail, 
while another doesn’t meet expectations, 
another meets expectations, 
and another exceeds expectations.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.80 
8. Sure Bet 
Persia 
At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery. 
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him: 
“Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why ladies don’t attend council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia?” 
“Ānanda, ladies are irritable, 
jealous, 
stingy, 
and unintelligent. 
This is the cause, this is the reason why ladies don’t attend council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.81 
9. Confirmed 
Killing Living Creatures 
“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They don’t kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.82 
9. Confirmed 
Lying 
“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They don’t use speech that’s false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.83 
9. Confirmed 
Where Criticism Takes You 
“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism, 
and they criticize those deserving of praise. 
They arouse faith in things that are dubious, and they don’t arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What four? 
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism, 
and they praise those deserving of praise. 
They don’t arouse faith in things that are dubious, 
and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.84 
9. Confirmed 
Valuing Anger 
“Mendicants, someone with four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They value anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor rather than the true teaching. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in hell as if delivered there. 
Someone with four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there. 
What four? 
They value the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor. 
Someone with these four qualities is placed in heaven as if delivered there.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.85 
9. Confirmed 
From Darkness to Darkness 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The dark bound for darkness, 
the dark bound for light, 
the light bound for darkness, and 
the light bound for light. 
And how is an individual dark and bound for darkness? 
It’s when an individual is reborn in a low family—a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters, chariot-makers, or scavengers—poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. 
And they’re ugly, unsightly, deformed, sickly—one-eyed, crippled, lame, or half-paralyzed. They don’t get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting. 
And they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
That’s how an individual is dark and bound for darkness. 
And how is an individual dark and bound for light? 
It’s when an individual is reborn in a low family … 

But they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
That’s how an individual is dark and bound for light. 
And how is an individual light and bound for darkness? 
It’s when an individual is reborn in an eminent family—a well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders—rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain. 
And they’re attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. They get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. 
But they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. 
That’s how an individual is light and bound for darkness. 
And how is an individual light and bound for light? 
It’s when an individual is reborn in an eminent family … 

And they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. 
When their body breaks up, after death, they’re reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. 
That’s how an individual is light and bound for light. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.86 
9. Confirmed 
Sunk Low 
“These four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
One sunk low who sinks lower, 
one sunk low who rises high, 
one risen high who sinks low, and 
one risen high who rises higher. 
… These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.87 
9. Confirmed 
The Son 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and the delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
And how is an individual a confirmed ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant is a practicing trainee, 
who lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. 
It’s like the eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has not yet been anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the succession. 
In the same way, a mendicant is a practicing trainee, who lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. 
That’s how an individual is a confirmed ascetic. 
And how is an individual a white lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. But they don’t have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a white lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a pink lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. … And they have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a pink lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a delicate ascetic of ascetics? 
It’s when a mendicant usually uses only what they’ve been invited to accept—robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick—rarely using them without invitation. 
When living with other spiritual practitioners, they usually find themselves treated agreeably by them by way of body, speech, and mind, and rarely disagreeably. 
And they are usually presented with agreeable things by them, rarely with disagreeable ones. 
They’re healthy, so the various unpleasant feelings—stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their conjunction; or caused by change in weather, by not taking care of yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past deeds—usually don’t come up. 
They get the four absorptions—blissful meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind—when they want, without trouble or difficulty. 
And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. … 
That’s how an individual is a delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
And if anyone should be rightly called a delicate ascetic of ascetics, it’s me. 
For I usually use only what I’ve been invited to accept … 
When living with other mendicants, I am usually treated agreeably by them. … 
I’m healthy … 
I get the four absorptions when I want, without trouble or difficulty. 
And I’ve realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. … 
So if anyone should be rightly called a delicate ascetic of ascetics, it’s me. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.88 
9. Confirmed 
Fetters 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and the delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
And how is an individual a confirmed ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant—with the ending of three fetters—is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, destined for awakening. 
That’s how an individual is a confirmed ascetic. 
And how is an individual a white lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant—with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion—is a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. 
That’s how an individual is a white lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a pink lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant—with the ending of the five lower fetters—is reborn spontaneously. They’re extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 
That’s how an individual is a pink lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a delicate ascetic of ascetics? 
It’s when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. 
That’s how an individual is a delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.89 
9. Confirmed 
Right View 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and the delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
And how is an individual a confirmed ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant has right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. 
That’s how an individual is a confirmed ascetic. 
And how is an individual a white lotus ascetic? 
It’s when they have right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. But they don’t have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a white lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a pink lotus ascetic? 
It’s when they have right view … and right freedom. And they do have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a pink lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a delicate ascetic of ascetics? 
It’s when a mendicant usually uses only what they’ve been invited to accept … And if anyone should be rightly called a delicate ascetic of ascetics, it’s me. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.90 
9. Confirmed 
Aggregates 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
The confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and the delicate ascetic of ascetics. 
And how is an individual a confirmed ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant is a trainee who hasn’t achieved their heart’s desire, but lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. 
That’s how an individual is a confirmed ascetic. 
And how is an individual a white lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 
‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. 
Such is feeling … 
Such is perception … 
Such are choices … 
Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ 
But they don’t have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a white lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a pink lotus ascetic? 
It’s when a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 
‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. 
Such is feeling … 
Such is perception … 
Such are choices … 
Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.’ 
And they have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations. 
That’s how an individual is a pink lotus ascetic. 
And how is an individual a delicate ascetic of ascetics? 
It’s when a mendicant usually uses only what they’ve been invited to accept … And if anyone should be rightly called a delicate ascetic of ascetics, it’s me. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.91 
10. Titans 
Titans 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
A titan surrounded by titans, 
a titan surrounded by gods, 
a god surrounded by titans, and 
a god surrounded by gods. 
And how is an individual a titan surrounded by titans? 
It’s when an individual is unethical, of bad character, and their followers are the same. 
That’s how an individual is a titan surrounded by titans. 
And how is an individual a titan surrounded by gods? 
It’s when an individual is unethical, of bad character, but their followers are ethical, of good character. 
That’s how an individual is a titan surrounded by gods. 
And how is an individual a god surrounded by titans? 
It’s when an individual is ethical, of good character, but their followers are unethical, of bad character. 
That’s how an individual is a god surrounded by titans. 
And how is an individual a god surrounded by gods? 
It’s when an individual is ethical, of good character, and their followers are the same. 
That’s how an individual is a god surrounded by gods. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.” 

Numbered Discourses 4.92 
10. Titans 
Immersion (1st) 
“Mendicants, these four individuals are found in the world. 
What four? 
One individual has internal serenity of heart, but not the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. 
One individual has the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, but not internal serenity of heart. 
One individual has neither internal serenity of heart, nor the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. 
One individual has both internal serenity of heart, and the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. 
These are the four individuals found in the world.”