Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 

WASHINGTON, DO. C. 20301 

~ TRANSLATION 

REQUESTER TRANSLATOR'’S INITIALS TRANSLATION NUMBER 
DT=-S PDm LN198-91 
LANGUAGE GEOGRAPHIC AREA (If different from place of publication) 
Chinese China 
ENGLISH TITLE OF TRANSLATION : PAGE NOS, TRANSLATED FROM ORIG DOC. 

Chinese Qigong Medicine:PResent and Future 26 

FOREIGN TITLE OF TRANSLATION 

AUTHOR(S) FOREIGN TITLE OF DOCUMENT (Compiler only if dilferent from title of 
translation) 

Medical School Tecahing Material 

PUBLISHER DATE AND PLACE OF PUBLICATION 
Bejing China Immunonlogy Study Cente 

COMMENTS 

TRANSLATION 

bia Form ANproaved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/08/07 8 -ClA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Teaching Material: Qigong Medical School 

Chinese Qigong Medicine: Present and Future 

Beijing China Immunology Study Center 

et 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, ; CJA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Macroscopic Immunology 
Macroscopic Qigong Immunology 

Scientific and technological modernization is the 
linkage of the Four Modernizations. As natural, technical 
and social sciences increasingly permeate eacn other, modern 
science more and more shows its dual characteristics of 
being natural and social. Or putting it in another way, in a 
broad sense, modern science and technology include the 
content of social science. Generally speaking, the study and 
disposition of natural and technical sciences constitute the 
interrelationship between man and nature, whereas what 
social science considers is interrelationship between 
humans. Now, the two in many respects are being fused into 
an integral topic. Technical economics, management sciences, 
systems science and systems engineering - these many fields 
are intersections of natural science and technology with 
social science, particularly in the speedy developing of new 
technical science groups (computer, space and nuclear 
science technologies and biological engineering technology, 
etc.). As a result, many scientific experts and engineering 

technicians now face a rigorous tasking of their knowledge. 

Today, what people call modern science and technology 
primarily refers to that at the end of the 19th and the 
beginning of the oO0th centuries. Some roughly estimate that 
the obsolescence cycle of scientific knowledge where the two 
centuries border on each other 4s about thirty years, but at 
present this cycle has shrunk to half of that. The cycle for 
rapidly acquired knowledge in some disciplines has been 
reduced to ten or even five years. It has been learned 
statistically that the indexed growth pattern of increased 
documented science and technology averages a major turnover 
every ten to fifteen years. In the 1980's, the annual rate 
of increase in scientific and technological knowledge 
reached a high of 13%. If Engels felt long ago that the rate 
of scientific development in his time was so fast that he 
had trouble keeping track, then today's rate of increase in 
scientific and technological knowledge is even harder to 
Cat Cn. 

World economic and social competition today among 
different nations with different systems in reality is 
competition in science and technology and ultimately 

2 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07,..CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

competition for knowledge. Man's science and technology seek 
economic gain, demanding the knowledge to acquire such and 
social progress. Science and technology are productive 
forces. In a certain sense, knowledge is also a productive 
force. Science and technology are knowledge, but knowledge 
has a broader face, for all the spiritual wealth created by 
mankind falls into the category of knowledge. In broadening 
the meaning of science and technology,,the meaning of the 
concept of knowledge is also broadened. 

The farther away people are from scientific 
achievements that arouse their excitement, the better able 
they are to gauge the actual magnitude. Time is an excellent 
measurement of the value of a certain scientific discovery. 
Aristotle was a great philosopher of ancient Greece, the man 
who originated formal logic. His syllogism even today is 
still the basic principle of logical reasoning. In the last 
two hundred years, by which time study of logic had been 
stagnant for about a thousand years, there has been dazzling 
progress. Boolean algebra, mathematical logic, etc. 
established new milestone after milestone in the study of 
logic. Even so, from where we stand two thousand years after 
the fact, Aristotle's contribution remains a tall mountain 
in the history of the development of logic. | 

Scientific theory is built on logical thought and 
reasoning. Any scientific theory is a neat and orderly 
mansion built by logic. This is especially true with 
mathematics, the most stringent and mobile of the sciences. 
After Aristotle produced formal logic, geometry was the 
first to become such a mansion. The foundation stones of 
this mansion are the geometry laws acknowledged to be 
true without having to be proven, but the bricks that are 
joined together to form the structure are made of logic. 
Mathematicians can start off with a small number of 
acknowledged truths and, after logical reasoning, lead to 
all the geometric theorems; this was the greatest scientific 
achievement of the time --- the Euclid geometry system. This 
theoretical system exerted a massive influence upon 
scientific theory that followed; after the 16th - 17th 
centuries, scientists gradually came to recognize and 
utilize Euclid's geometric structure to build similar 
theory systems of extraordinary clarity and foresight. 
Concerning scientists, the purpose of establishing this kind 
of system was to use hypotheses that resembled generally 
acknowledged truth and included the discipline's current 
knowledge to forecast into the future; thus we would gain 
even more systemic and deeper understanding of the natural 
world. 

In 1930, Austrian mathematician Kurt Godel published an 
article, "On Formally Undecidable Propositions." This thesis 
held that there could not be a completely non-contradictory 
logical system, i.e., even concerning some very simple 

3 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/0% ; CJ/A-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

formal systems (such as elementary mathematical theory), 
after arriving at acknowledged truths and logical reason, 
even if the system has no contradictions, there are still 
questions that cannot be proven (ij.e., decided). Since we 
cannot use common truth or logical reason to determine 
whether they are real, nor can we prove them to be false, 
then they are undecidable! As when previously we had to try 
to prove such undecidable questions, then we must add to the 
acknowledged truth, but after the new truth is brought in, 
the whole system still has no contradictions, then new new 
undecidable questions will emerge, otherwise the entire 
system's consistency will be broken. This is the content of 
the "Godel Theorem of Imperfection," that a logical system 
without contradictions cannot be perfect. 

Because Godel belongs in the new era of the computer 
and artificial intelligence. In this era, man became deeply 
interested in the profound mysteries of thought, and changed 
tremendously in how he looked at the world. In 1936, the 
famous British mathematician Alan Turing brought out an 
ideal calculator, the "Turing machine." He ingeniously 
proved mathematically that an omniscient and omnipotent 
calculator could not exist. This way of thinking resembled 
that in Godel's topic. Turing proved that there were a 
number of problems that a calculator would not be able to 
solve; for example the Turing machine could not determine 
whether it itself was in operation; later, some new 
undecidable problems gradually were discovered. Today, or 
perhaps before the fact, Godel's theorem has become one of 
the foundations of man's search for the mysteries of 
thought, planning of the computer and the study of 
artificial intelligence. 

Study of the history of science has shown that within 
the entire domain of science, the development of scientific 
theory has not become a perfect and closed system after its 
presentation. The task of scientists is to start from this 
theory and explain those problems that were presented. 
Godel's theorem proved that a theoretical system's 
perfection and lack of contradiction were mutually exclusive 
of each other. The history of science also shows that the 
major reason for the near majority of theoretical systems' 
self-contradiction and dissolution was the result of 
pursuing perfection relentlessly. Actually, any type of 
theory in the scientific domain, in chasing after 
perfection, trying to solve all problems proposed by the 
system, often is forced to invoke new hypotheses, new 
foundations. This new truth has the capability to destroy 
the consistency of the original theory system, ultimately 
affecting and changing the entire theory. Godel's theorem 
started out from a general basis, proved that any 
theoretical system's lack of perfection was not only normal 
with respect to physics, chemistry and other natural 
scientific theories, but also applied to the more 

4 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, . CJA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

The concept that has most deeply influenced traditional 
Chinese scientific theory possibly is the Ying and Yang 
(negative-positive) doctrine of Passage of the Five Natural 
Elements. Possibly, the birth of this doctrine was closely 
related to the astronomy observations in ancient China, to 
agriculture, treatment of illnesses and other such practical 
production and science. In the primitive version of this 
doctrine, the idea of Ying and Yang can be found in the Zhou 
period's I ding, or Book of Changes. The I Jing was a method 
of divination in the time of the Zhou dynasty. What remains 

I Jing (around 

sprouted. 

I Zhuan stressed the pattern of "constant change" of 
"I" or change, but the cause of all formulations and changes 
are attributed to the effects of Ying vs. Yang, hardness vs. 
softness, movement vs. stillness, all opposing each other 
and pushing each other so that one or the other grows or 
shrinks. One of the diagrams describes it as the “two Qi of 
Ying and Yang respond to each other...Heaven and Earth feel 
7t and a million things are created." In the last stages of 

(203 B.C.) that were connected to the two-Qi theory, and 
consolidated the two Qi into a substantive primeval vitality 
or Yuan Qi, and then claimed it to be the original source of 

5 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 9 £'A;RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

all things in the cosmos. From this was established the 
system of Qi as the primeval entity. Wang Chong in "On 
Equilibrium" stated that "Man would not have been born in a 
dead primeval Qi; in an agitated or unclear primeval Qi, 
Man's Qi will exist." Wang Chong not only considered the two 
Qi of Ying and Yang that gave birth to all things to be 
combined into a substantive primeval Qi, but speculated over 
the indestructability of material things and the world's 
timelessness. At the time, this was a precious scientific 
hypothesis. 

The Doctrine of the Five Passages reached its 
flourishing highest during the Western Han period, and 
gradually declined after that. But those of its factors that 
seemed reasonable, particularly the "Qi as one primeval 
power theory" of Wang Chong and such let its influence 
permeate through almost every scientific territory. China's 
famous ancient scientists such as Zhang Heng, Yi Xing and 
Shen Kuo all were experts in the Five Passages theory. Shen 
Kuo's famed "Penned Comments of Dreamed Streams" devoted 
seven sections especially to describe and comment on. I Ching 
and the Ying-Yang Five Passages. To a certain extent, the 
Five Passages is the summation of ancient China's natural 
science in practice, which then exerted its influence in 
encouraging and guiding the formulation and development of 
Chinese traditional natural science theories. The Five 
Passages doctrine to a certain degree has broadly affected 
all of ancient China's natural sciences, and in particular 
clearly and deeply influenced ancient Chinese astronomy, 
chemistry and medical science. And its influences in these 
sciences caused man to form clear concepts concerning 
mankind, biology and non-living matter and their 
jnterrelationships withn the cosmos such as regarding 
astronomy, cosmic science; mentioned were the union of 
Heaven and Earth's essence (harmonious Qi) as Ying and Yang, 
the special essence (pure Qi) of Ying and Yang as the four 
seasons, and the dissipation of the four seasons (scattered 
Qi) as all things. Or, such as scientist Zhang Dai (Song 
dynasty) explained that the cosmos’ myriad beings included 
Heaven, Earth, Sun, Moon and the stars. They assemble and 
disperse, are created or destroyed, a definite pattern: "Qi 
gathers and scatters, it has no birth nor death;" the Great 
Void cannot be without Qi, Qi cannot avoid gathering to be 
all beings, the beings cannot avoid scattering into the 
Great Void, so entering or leaving are not by one's own 
will." To understand the theory above, it may be necessary 
to break down to separate disciplines for study and proof, 
so that its effects, capabilities and theoretical 
foundations may be discussed from different angles. 

6 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, ,, CJA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Reference Documents 

1. die Qiang Book of Knowledge p. 2, February 1985 

>. Jin Guantao "Godel's Theorem and the Meaning of Its 
Profound Methodolgy" op. cit. p. 7 

3. Wu Baihui and Wang Pian, op. cit. p. le. 

Fi 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/93/07 5 CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Chinese Qigong and Modern Medical Science 

Feng Lida 
November 1986 

Because the new technological revolution, 
especially in biological technology and the life sciences, 
is now being widely applied in the domain of medical 
science, control of the procedures in their various branches 
dealing with life has aroused extreme social concern. 
Strength of public feeling extending into non-human areas 
has presented newissues for us.°The new technological 
revolution has created a tremendous impact upon medical 
science, The changing pattern of medicine has also deeply 
influenced medical science. Therefore, the breadth and depth 
of medical knowledge now has a greatly different intrinsic 
quality from that of the past. The composition of its basic 
knowledge now includes the natural and social sciences. 
Scientific development and the increasingly evident 
interflow among the various disciplines that hitherto had 
not been closely aligned to medicine are getting closer and 
closer. As the basic knowledge that: medical science relates 
to is expanded evermore, the expansion of basic knowledge 
extends horizontally leading to massive changes to the 
structure of knowledge. 

In view of these changes, a current discipline puts on 
a new face because of the interflow of different 
disciplines. We must understand its most important models 
which can be roughly divided into six: 1. peripheral 
disciplines, the most important of which come from the 
interflow of two or three different disciplines, permeating 
into each other but forming into a discipline on the 
periphery; 2. transverse or cross-sectional, material of 
different structural arrangement forming a discipline and 
becoming a common study subject; 3. composite discipline, a 
specially designated problem or subject for study; the 
complexity of the problem precludes the possibility that any 
one discipline could complete the study task and so it needs 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/04 3 C4A-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

a combination of the theories, methodology and technological 
procedures of many disciplines before the problem can be 
solved; 4. soft science, referring to a number of higher 
disciplines that have a high degree of intelligence and 
capability for synthesis; the objects of study not only 
include natural phenomena, science and technology, but also 
the various interrelationships and effects of social 
phenomena concerning man and social factors; 5. comparative 
science, the overall term for various comparative 
disciplines; and 6. all other new disciplines. 

According to the above and the development of science, 
the composition of professional medical knowledge follows 
the patterns of change in biology, psychology, sociology and 
medicine, changing the composition of the original 
professional knowledge. The utilization of new technology 
also has brought many problems, such as how to cope with new 
situations, requiring the medical world not only to 
understand and be familiar with basic and utilitarian 
medical science, but concurrently to understand 
technological knowledge. 

science upon science and technology has become even more 
apparent; each such transplantation of science and 
technology into medicine evokes modernization of diagnostic 
and healing measures, thus was born X-ray fault scanning by 
computer, nuclear-magnetic resonance, B-type supersonic and 
other diagnostic equipment. 

In the formulation of. the new technological revolution, 
the medical world must also establish a proper view of 
nature, be concerned with theories on information, 
systemics, control, structural dissolution, solar harmony, 

mutation and other theories related to social sciences as 

well as the various relationships between the whole and the 
part in the study of the human body, and that between high 
and low orders, including human physiology, psychology. The 
links between man and the environment all have great 
significance. We can see from the circumstances described 
above the appearance of shapes that can appropriately react 
to the new science and technology. 

Today is the day of the new scientific and 
technological revolution. In the face of new nappenings 
every day in this revolution, productive force develops 
quickly. One by one, old concepts are discarded; people's 
trains of thought and fields of vision also undergo. many 
changes. After having been tested and applied, new theories 
and disciplines make their appearance one after the other. 
The appearance of these disciplines occurs in the face of 
mankind's constant development of the science and 
technological revolution; their points of view and thought 
9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/93/07 ; CLA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

gradually extend farther and wider and gradually become 
globally familiar. Viewed from a combined cosmic and human 
angle, space (two dimensions or even three dimensions) and 
earth, even the interrelationship among the particles inside 
the human body have a definite connection to microcosmic 
psychology and thought. Under these circumstances, one can 
gradually become aware of the existence of the individual 
and of the group, immunization, health, recovery and their 
close connection and relationship to all within the social 
domain such as productive forces, education and human 
talent. 

Now that the time of the new science and technological 
revolution is here, it cannot be separated from the 
development of the history of science. Reflecting back on 
another aspect of the history of scientific development we 
can categorically consider mathematics as the foundation and 
instrument of development of physics, astronomy as well 
as engineering technology; and mathematics has been able to 
follow technological needs and further develop itself. For 
example, the methodology of the innate laws of classical 
mathematics, that of probability statistics in statistical 
mathematics, indistinct mathematics’ blurred methodology, 
planning in biological mathematics, etc. all-have been 
developed in the midst of studying practical problems in 
science and technotogy. Their common pattern is: "actual 
problem -- mathematicization (quantitative analysis) -- 
mathematical model (qualitative analysis) -- feedback and 
revision (practical tests) -- determine theory." 

Medical science is no exception, when Blair studied 
nervous excitation problems, he used mathematical physics 
methods to establish differential equations that led to the 
medically famous nervous stimulation theoretical formula; 
without mathematics there would have been no such theory. 

The pattern of modern mathematicization is going 
through even greater development pushed by the waves of the 
new scientific and technological revolution. The title of 
Nobel prize winner for medicine, was "The Theory of the 
Immunization Network," in which he proposed a new matrix for 
modern medical academic disciplines: 

"Medical immunity problems -- mathematicization 
(knowledge expressed through technology) -- computers 
complete calculations and proofs (mechanization infers 
technology) -- feedback and revision (practical testing) -- 
Immunization Network Theory (system builds technology)." 

This modernized matrix for study disciplines combined 
profession, mathematics and computer into one body and would 
push modern science and technology progress snarply. Marx 
long ago said, “a kind of science can really reach a stage 

10 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 5 £1AyRDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

of perfection only when it has successfully applied 
mathematics." 

Mathematics has yet to acquire importance in our 
country's medical circles. In the 1950's when institutions 
and departments underwent realignment, medical schools were 
split out to be independent of the consolidated type of 
university, but conversely, the science cepartments were 
weakened and few studied mathematics. In 1981, class hours 
of higher mathematics began to be returned to that in 1954, 
only enough to talk a bit about calculus. The Western 
nations were learning modern mathematics, such as biological 
mathematics, indistinct mathematics, mutation theories, 
programming, networking analysis, prioritization theory, 
etc. Our country's medical science must urgently work hard 
to catch up in these areas; otherwise, we may be as some 
experts in our country have said, "Our medical authorities 
today cannot understand the theses in one-fifth to one-third 
of the world's major medical journals because they contain 
large quantities of mathematics." Comparatively few of our 
own medical journals have used higher mathematics to 
express formulae. Historically, our country had been a king 
in medicine and also in mathematics; in the widespread 
interflow of different disciplines of today, if we would 
apply mathematics to our country's unique medical science, 
there could be even greater developments, and in terms of 
application to the various disciplines, could make an even 
greater contribution to the sum total of disease prevention 
and world medicine. 

Medicine is an applied discipline. In the areas of 
basic theory and clinical application, correct evaluation of 
disease causes, transmission, treatment results are key to 
applied science, and are also among the most important 
factors to point applied science in the correct direction. 
This kind of correct evaluation requires applying different 
modern sciences including mathematics that can synthesize 
the analysis of problems in order to extract true material 
after separating false from true. 

Elements that cause sickness or recovery in organisms 
are very complex. They take form influenced by the synthesis 
of many different elements. Clinical symptoms, body 
condition and laboratory data can be the synthetical 
expression of physical and chemical phenomena, or joint 
presentation of the two. Thus, our immediate task is to 
search for laws of immunity physics and immunity chemistry 
by first considering the connection between physical and 
chemical phenomena (including biophysical and biochemical 
phenomena), the principles and methods of applied physics, 
study of chemical change and study in depth the connection 
between the laws of chemical and physical changes. The idea 
of immunity chemistry, a new branch of immunolgy, is already 
in initial formation. It affords a definite explanation and 

11 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, , CJA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

proof that organism immunity, antigens and antibodies 
interact upon each other. But it is not enough just to use 
chemistry to explain and offer as proof, for it is unclear 
on the mechanics of immunity. To study scientific progress 
of further physiological and pathological changes in 
organisms, we must begin using new concepts in one of the 
basic modern sciences, physics, and new technology including 
electronics to study the physiology and pathology of 
organisms gradually form one or more kinds of peripheral 
disciplines and move into brand-new territory. 

In recent years, many Chinese as well as foreign 
scholars and medical personnel have adopted new electronic 
technology and test measures in scientific search for 
certain phenomena and mechanics of Chinese Qigong. They 
submit that three billion years ago the most primitive 
living things first appeared on our planet. Upon birth, they 
continued to multiply selectively. In the lengthy time 
since, they became biologically varied, applying the basic 
principle of moving forward to produce myriads of breeds and 
varieties, performing the various functions of life: 

1. Mimcroorganisms: some varieties could withstand 
temperatures below 0°C or above 100°C or flourish in 
oxygen-lacking environments. 

2, Plants: Aside from using chlorophyl1 in 
photosynthesis common to all, some could move far away or 
react quickly to certain stimulations. 

3. Animals: Some are luminescent, others emit electric 
waves, still others use electric waves, magnetic fields 
infrared or supersonics to shake off predators and enemies. 
These functions are general within the Species, but can be 
said to be a kind of "special function." 

In the evolution of living things, about four hundred 
million years elapsed for ancestral man to go from the 
lowest order to the highest. In this time, man like other 
animals, was subjected to various rays, particles, energy 
fields in nature and physical, chemical as well other 
stimuli, forging an ability to defend against various 
incursions and calamities and provided various functions 
common to living things, extracted information from sound 
and light, electromagnetics, heat, vibrations and radiations 
and all kinds of pollutants. If man could hear the vibration 
of a microsound 1/10 of the diameter of the atom hydrogen, 
he also could bear an amplification 1,012 times louder than 
that. Man's ear could deal with changes of sound of 
different amplitudes; objectively ten times the emanation 
and subjectively only two times; subjectively increase to 
four times that which is one hundred times louder and thus 
preserve man's hearing from damage. 

1 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved F : - - 
pprov or Release 2001/03/07 3 GIA RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

In the billions of people, human functional ability is 
uneven and can more or less be divided into "recessive" and 
"dominant" groups. Dominant functions include those that are 
the normal functions of the various organs. 

13 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07,,.ClA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Chinese Qigong: Present and Future 

Feng Lida 
December 1987 

The reason the technological revolution that is 
currently flourishing world-wide can be called a new 
technological revolution stems from consideration of those 
that have already happened. It is world-wide because of its 
deep and wide effects”. The history of human civilization 
is actually that of science and technology. The first 
scientific technological revolution was when man invented, 
studied and used steam engines after the Iron Age. Its 
productive force surpassed the sum total of all tnat nad 
been created in the past. The second was signified by a 
breakthrough in the study of electromagnetism and wide use 
and application of electric power”. The third such global 
revolution, compared to the first two and whose 
characteristic is in the foundation laid by rich natural 
science theoretical study, such as this century's 
outstanding theory of relativity, quantum mechanics of the 
1920's, atomic structure and basic particles of the 30's and 
40's, molecular studies in the 50's, recent electronics, 
particle biology and other breakthroughs in basic sciences. 
They made firm the technological and theoretical science 
bases for such new technologies as computers and micro- 
electronics, biology, information, etc. Or in other words, 
these would not be here without such basic scientific break- 
throughs. Its second characteristic is that these were not 
sndividual entities but technology groups, €.g-; those that 
affect economics, society and national defense the most are 
information, biology, new materiel, new energy sources, 
space, oceanic and space navigation technology. These 
mutually support and act upon each other forming great 
productive power objectively in the world. The third point 
js technological changes greatly reduce the cycles of 
products and property. They require a certain time for 

14 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/06 5 GIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

product to be property but the cyclical duration generally 
is determined by the technology and its advancement stage, 
social needs and material needs for social change. Past 
technology often needed decades or longer to go from 
emergence to transformation; technological and social 
improvements shortened the time greatly. Some quickly became 
products and then property. The fourth point is development 
speed affects depth. Some new technology in the past needed 
decades or longer to form a newer one. Now, one seems to 
follow the other. For example, 1942 saw the first nuclear 
reactor pile, 1946 the electronic computer, 1947 the 
semiconductor transistor, 1957 launched the first man-made 
satellite, the integrated circuit in 1959, lasers in 1960 
and hereditary genes splicing and reforming in 1973. 
Computers are now in its fifth generation. One can see the 
speed. Its deep and wide influence not only affected the 
production process of matter, the scope of spiritual 
products, but economic, political and military strategy. It 
also hit the home and changed man's traditional birth 
methods. 

China's Qigong's coming into being and growth, like 
other scientific knowledge, summarizes the long-term 
exercise of man's struggle with nature and environment 
(macroscopic and microscopic world views). As a discipline, 
its contents are wide in scope, its basic study direction is 
limited to subjective sensation, and clinical examination 
developing to applied modern biology, electronics, electro- 
chemistry, magnetics, microwaves, mathematics and other 
singular disciplines interacting and blending with each 
other in in-depth study of the possibilities of relationship 
and effect between "Qi" and the macro-microscoic world. 

In human body sciences, Chinese Qigong is regarded as 
the dooropener to study. What is the concept of Qigong 
functionability and what is the functionability of the human 
body (produced from Qigong) is something needing careful 
consideration. 

Human body functions are those basic characteristics 
expressed under a standard timetable,-an objective 
existence. Looking at it from modern systemics, the human 
body is a huge, complex system. It includes many subsystems, 
such as systems, organizations, cells, molecules and other 

system. He stressed the penness of systems, i.e., 
quantitative and material exchanges (including information). 
When the orderly nature of living things and that of 

15 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/90 . GIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

life phenomena merge with the stable structure of systems, 
the orderliness stabilizes the system structure. Immunology 
js the discipline studying immunity functions of the human 
body, and thus also studies human body functinability and 
now to keep it stable and orderly. This requires deep 
understanding of systems, thermodynamics, harmonies, quantum 
and other theories. Under temporary or different 
circumstances, stability may be lost resulting in abnormal 
functions (immunity functions become abnormal). After such a 
correct explanation, this will spur recognition of organism 
Functions (immunity) and human body functionability (modern 
immunology). This new understanding will get good results in 
efforts to recover the stability of the (large) system. 

Some scholars feel that man, animals, plants, even 
rocks and minerals as well as all organic and inorganic 

matter radiate a sort of ray into space that the naked eye 

cannot see. In the atmosphere, even nature or a vacuum is 

full of this unobserved radiation, though there may be one 
or two in tens of thousands that can directly see its color 
or brightness. Thus, for long, few believed the myth of tne 

rays. 

Many scientists and technical experts have sought to 
unravel this mystery from different angles trying to explain 
its nature via bioelectricity, static electricity, 
electromagnetic waves, neutrons, atmospheric electricity, 

quantitative change of man's body rays into electric. 
current, the rays and the special nature of electricity at 

into space ionizing the surrounding air which forms into 
static fields, and then emanates rays not seen by the naked 
eye. 

After long testing, some scholars concluded that the 
mechanics of the rays resembled that of fluoresent matter, 
jts energy source is heat energy expressed by temperature, 
biological current, atmospheric charges and the electro- 

magnetic quantity in cosmic fields. These are connected with 

andividual conditions, but all have fixed wave Tengths. Each 

has its own quantitative reception zone, when stimulated by 
energy, it creates a radiation of a secondary energy. THIS 

is the radiated wave, scholars call it "aural" radiation. 

This secondary radiation ionizes the air into a_ static 

field which can be examined. We now come upon wave length 

differences, one kind can be seen and is fluorescent. 

16 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, ; CJ/A-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Another cannot be seen, but within the scope of sensitized 

film, can be photographed. 

People have comparatively observed Scorpio with Mars 
using the naked eye and test equipment and determined that 
objectively speaking, "auras" no doubt exist. In considering 
auras as heavenly bodies, they called it "hard aura.” We use 

hard radiation wave. Those of the human body that follow. 

environmental changes might be called “soft,” or soft 
radiation waves. 

proved that such rays exist objectively. Also, it determined 

that humans and other material in the living environment all 

have such "aura® waves. As they are related to the number of 

magnetic fields, the “auras” have a quantitative area of 1 

square meter (not plane, but spherical) with effective value 
of 1 ampere current (whether direct or alternate) as 1 

"aura." Where there is general health, the magnetic field 
energy can be measured_in terms of a negative charge, 

a te mt 

whereas those sick or tired can be done as a positive 
charge. Thus it éxplains one ste further that the air in a 

or all material rec 

Tiving environment or all ma ye Mi This | 
aura" ties closely in with our health. These scholars 
believe the scope of relationship depends on environmental 
conditions. Adults differ from children; in general, using 
adult faces as index, the scope ranges from horizontally of 
tens of centimeters to 1 meter, but when the atmosphere is 
unpolluted and the body is healthy, it can increase 
considerably. It is either round or oval. In rain, when the 
air is unclean or body is sick, it can reduce to a fraction 
and change shape. Active organism have been seen to change 
from positive to negative "auras" 10 - 20% in value. Those 
measured at the head or limbs can go up or down several 
times the dimensions of the original, it can also be changed 
by deep breathing. 

eive “auras”. This. 

In tests, scholars paid attention to effects of 
clothing and, after many tests, proved that clothed bodies 
and those with gold, silver and other minerals had effects 
little different from those not wearing them. But those sick 
or tired showed unusual positive "aura." Also showing 
positive was when food with a positive charge was eaten! 
A cup of coffee showed positive through the alimentary 
canal, throat, gsophagus to the stomach; dusty areas also 
showed pgsitive and when tired (long nights up or 
worried)”, it showed weak positive. In head cases such as 
cerebral hemorrhage or ringing ears, aside from unusual 
waves, a strong positive "aura" projected from the head’. 
Hypersensitives emanated a very stpong positive wave from 
the head and neck down to the back”. 

Also, pregnancies nad separate negative waves from the 

17 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

He Re oe 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07,.,CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

head and abdomen, but a positive one of several centimeters 
near the eyes. Extensive tests showed such radiation started 
at conception. Positive waves showed in these areas after an 
operation or after anesthesia, and a negative-charge film 
that was hole shaped. Lastly, tests showed that during 
public exhibits or when there was disorder or much arguing, 
even when it occurred during testing (while the face was 
smiling), certain facial expressions or the sides of the 
face harbored wide-angle positive rays. 

Miscarriages showed positive, spherical waves measuring 
15-20 centimeters shaped like small balloons if they could 
ever have been seen by the naked eye. 

Scholars scientifically explaining all this feel that 
this is the fourth new world’s mystery. There is a definite 

life, no consciousness about self-conduct and morality, in- 
sensitivity to troubles of others, 

Tost. We feel that we can catch a disease easily because of 

mental or physical distortions, a “susceptible person.” 
Conversely, if we are satisfied and have stron confidence 

Fn Tife, thén the radiation layers are thick and more 

resistant to externa 

ability to résist external harassment (including factors: 

conducive to sickness), and distortions of mind and 

body can be avoided. From another angle, it might be asked 
whether the thick-layered ones did entirely escapy external 
magnetic effects, but had greater resistance and so had no 
distortions. Concurrently they had a small amount of 
external (environmental) magnetic influence or tempering. 
Qigong uses external electromagnetic power, such as in 
Qigong exercises and thus strengthens its original 
functions, use external Qi to treat sickness and act on 
other things and different endeavors (agriculture, physical 
training, mining, etc.) as potential functions. It - 

stimulates the vitality of factors inside the body with 

different antibody elements to increase and use the- 

organism's intelligence and physical ability. 

From the above, we can see the mechanics of the fourth 
new world. Where inside the body does the source of the 
auras man launches lie? Some scientists feel the body has 
very short magnetic waves, infrared and ultraviolet rays, 
X-rays and other invisible Tight and magnetic waves 
radiating into the surrounding area which lead to very weak 
continuous ionization of the air, or cause the air to make a 
secondary radiation, but generally this is not considered a 
good explanation of the functional mechanics. 

Any good explanation no doubt would be linked to the 

18 
Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07, C4/A-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9 

exercise of man's potential function, its categorization, 
scope and strength. Some made tests, as they, of course, did 
not know the functions of internal and external Qi and the 
effects of stimulating the latent functions; they thus 
measured the special “auras” of some super sensitive and 
super capable individuals. The results of 19 tested were: 

1. Position: Mostly center of the frontal eminence 
(resulting from the testing, but because individuals 
varied). This is near the Heavenly Eye point, the diameter 
was several centimeters and round or oval (not identical); 
angle was of a searchlight projecting forward at a 30 to 60 
degree angle, a definite relationship between the radiation 
distance and the level of Qigong, or the radiation layer of 
the individual with effort spent. Many tests showed 
generally the human body's slack distance was about 1 meter. 
Diameter of scope of sensitivity was 1 to 2 centimeters, 
such as in lasers radiating in three-dimension. The 
supercapable people (we mean those that could exercise their 
latent functions after qigong training) had a much wider 
scope, and strong aural rays frontward, especially near the 
Heavenly Eye treating veins (Second Eye); next came the 
throat, pit of the stomach and the belly button area and in 
the male sex organs in a vertical line bisecting the body, 
and rather strong "aural" rays along the veins. 

Tests showed that each person contained a special 
series of radiation fields not too different from eacn 
other, but the whole body is not a negative radiation field 
but positive. They considered this a special physique and 
those with this physique could feel the cold breath from the 
point of infection of the sick. 

Characteristic of the "aura" of an infant who had just 
learned to walk is a negative charge and a hemispheric 
shape, different from radiation fields in general. 

Also, scholars feel that people's life environment is 
full of public menaces from polluted air, so that the "aura" 
(negative) daily receives serious frenzied attacks, the 
utensils constantly used in daily life such as electrical 
products, appliances, daily tools, construction material, 
etc. all can radiate substances different from that of the 
body, all are public menace substances. Their radiation 
field can also be measured. Concurrently, scholars urge that 
attention be paid to substances that bring harm and 
harassment to the body's radiation field, and which also 
distort the body's acupuncture points or electric charge. 
Yet the charge (changing negative to positive) and the 
functions of the internal organs have a close relationship. 
Therefore, the results hint at possibly affecting the health 
of the human body. 

The recognitions and phenomena described above are 
thought by scholars to be the most serious of difficult 
19 

au 

Approved For Release 2001/03/07 : CIA-RDP96-00792R000200650024-9